International Journal of Scientific Research and Management (IJSRM)  
||Volume||0 6||Issue||06||Pages||EC -2018 -17-25||2018||  
Website: www.ijsrm.in ISSN (e): 2321 -3418  
Index Copernicus value (2015): 57.47, (2016):93.6 7, DOI: 10.18535/ijsrm/v6i6.ec02  
 
 
Regin a Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]   EC-2018 -17 Analysis of Electronic Payment System s in Ghana - A Case Study of Mobile  
Payment System  
Regina Kafui Adzroe  (Mrs)1   Dr. Michael Asante2  Francis Kwadzo Agbenyegah3 
1Head  of Department (Information Communication Technology ) 
Hohoe E.P senior High School  
2 Senior Lecturer, Department of computer Science,  
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi Ghana  
3Lecturer, Faculty of Computing and Information Systems  
Ghana Technology University Colle ge, Accra Ghana  
 
Keywords: Transactions, mobile money, traceability
 
Introduction   
The world all over is witnessing an increase in 
electronic payment instruments to enhance the 
efficiency in business cycles (Abor, 2004). 
Bankers, technology special ists and entrepreneurs 
and many others over the years have continually 
advocated for the replacement of physical cash 
and the introduction of more efficient, flexible and 
cost effective retail payment solutions (Bank for 
Internat ional Settlement, 1998).  With the 
introduction of electronic payment, all bank 
transactions can easily be done without going to 
the banking hall (Abor, 2004). To this effect, 
electronic payment has therefore been designed to 
assist all the stakeholders in  minimizing problems related to payment processes (Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York, 1996)  
Mobile payment service (MPS) comprises the use 
of mobile devices such as Mobile Phone, PDA, 
and Wireless Tablet, connected to a Mobile 
Telecommunication Network, to begin a 
transaction; such as a purchase request, and ends a 
transaction by authorizing payments for the 
exchange of goods and services.  
The use of mobile phones in such transactions 
makes MPS a form of electronic payment, with 
the exception that the transa ctions are carried out 
on the mobile phone. The vision of MPS is to 
transform the mobile phone into a “future wallet” 
holding credit card, debit account information and Abstract:  
Mobile payment is an electronic payment made through a mobile device . As the number of mobile phone 
subscribers in Ghana increases, so does the market for mobile money services. The majority of Ghanaians 
lack any formal bank account. An estimated 80 percent of Ghanaians are “unbanked” – meaning they 
conduct their transactions outside the banking sector with no access to financial services. Products like 
“mobile money,” that enable safe and secure money transfers without the use of a ba nk account, could 
have a major impact on this unserved segment of the population. Mobile money gives anyone with a 
mobile phone the ability to transfer money, make cash payments and conduct other financial transactions 
over the phone. Currently, there are four mobile money payment systems in Ghana, namely, MTN mobile 
money, Vodafone (VF) cash, Tigo cash and Airtel money. For an effective operation of these systems, 
Privacy, Traceability, Cost of Transaction, and Simplicity of the Processes involved are of m uch interest. 
The study examined the loopholes in the current mobile payment systems and proposed a framework to 
address the loopholes such as: Entering of information on next of kin into the system during registration, 
acceptance of year of birth as PIN, transactional PIN decrypted, no entering of a Valid ID number into the 
system, no provision for security word during token cash out, no provision for guarantor information, no 
provision for BoG permit number, no provision for police clearance number, and d ata in transit not 
encrypte d  
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -18 mobile “cash” for transactions ( Bolt, W, et. al; 
2008)  
Electronic retail payments cont inuous to emerge 
in Ghana to substitute or decrease paper -based 
payments and banks in Ghana are striving hard to 
catch up with the new emergence  
Fundamentally, these new and emerging payment 
systems are based on technical innovations such 
as card, telephon e and Internet (Abor, 2004). 
Some of these payments services in Ghana are 
Tigo cash, MTN money, Vodafone (VF) cash and 
Airtel money. The study therefore seeks to 
analyze  these mobile payment systems from the 
viewpoints of privacy, effectiveness, processes 
involved, traceability and transaction cost. We 
shall also empirically examine the loopholes in the 
existing mobile payment systems in Ghana and 
design a framework to address the identified 
loopholes in the existing system. It will bring to 
bear the proble ms customers and service 
providers‟ face in the use of the payment systems 
in the country for prompt measures to be taken by 
authorities and other stakeholders in making 
Ghana a cashless society.  
Problem Statement  
In Ghana, there has been the introduction of 
various payment systems which is to facilitate the 
exchange of transactions of either goods or 
services. Each payment system that has been 
introduced has its own benefits that it accrues to 
its users as well as the burdens that it poses on the 
customer,  the merchant and the service providers 
of that payment system. In Ghana, the cash 
payment system which forms the bulk of the 
payments in the country involves carrying 
physical cash to make payments. Though, cash 
gives people instant purchasing power, whic h 
makes them rely on its use for their transactions, 
also has a carriage burden.  
For instance, in order to complete a transaction 
involving a large sum of money the buyer needs to 
carry a large sum of money to the point of sales, 
queue up as well as spend a lot of productive 
hours in order to make a transaction. These bottle 
necks and inconveniences discourage most 
people, waste productive hours, and put life and 
resources at risk. Furthermore, the awareness of 
insufficient security of existing mobile payme nt 
systems owing to improper protocol design 
resulting in lack of vital transaction security properties discourages merchant and th eir 
customers from using the electronic payment 
systems.  
The study therefore seeks to analyse the mobile 
payment systems from  the viewpoints of privacy, 
effectiveness, processes involved, traceability and 
transaction cost. It will also empirically examine 
the loopholes in the existing mobile payment 
systems in Ghana and design a framework to 
address the identified loopholes in t he existing 
system.  
 
Related Work  
(Vassiliou, 2004), defines electronic payment as a 
form of financial exchanges that takes place 
between the buyer and seller facilitated by means 
of electronic communication. (Cobb, 2004) posits 
that the value of electronic payments goes way 
beyond the immediate convenience and safety of 
cards to a greater sphere of contributing to overall 
economic development. (Humphrey et al., 2001), 
on the other hand defines electronic payment as 
cash and related activities exec uted electronically. 
(Pariwat and Hataiseere, 2004) postulate that 
considerations should be given to expediency, 
dependability and safety of the payment method.  
According to (Peirce, 2001) debit and credit cards 
are the most fast increasing mode of payment s in 
any electronic transactions. (Balachandher et al., 
2001) also said Telephone banking also known as 
telebanking is a form of artificial banking which 
provides financial services with the help of 
telecommunication devices. With this device, the 
customer  is able to do business by dialling  
telephone which is linked to the bank‟s system 
and aid ed by Automated Voice Response 
Technology. According to the authors, this speeds 
up productivity and the customer has an expanded 
access and also saves time used to v isit the bank 
or an ATM. To (Leow, 1999) the customer gets 
services at their work places and in the comfort of 
their homes. “In Ghana, telephone banking is 
gaining control as most banks such as Barclays 
Bank, S ociete General (SG)  Bank all provides 
telephon e banking. For instance “Sikatel” or SG  
call centre telephone banking makes it possible for 
clients to make enquiry relating to the bank‟s 
products and services and also lodge complaints” 
(Abor, 2004).  
Mobile money or mobile payment is a service in 
which the mobile phone is use d to access financial 
services .  
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -19 According( www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopmen
t/wp) mobile money  is a convenient way for 
customers to establish an electronic account and 
maintain a „stored value‟, accessible from their 
mobile phone, which can be used for a broad 
range of financial transactions. According to 
(Zika , 2005), a mobile payment is an electronic 
payment which is done with the aid of mobile 
device (e.g. a cell phon e or a Personal Digital 
Assistant, PDA). Mobile payment uses a mobile 
device to commence and validate payment. 
Presently, most Banks provides active mobile 
banking services known as SMS Banking. SMS 
banking allows customers to do some banking 
enquires on t heir mobile phones without going to 
their banking halls.  Four main components come 
to focus as far as mobile money is concerned. 
These are: Issuers (can be banks or non -bank 
institutions), Customers/subscribers; referred to as 
users who spend mobile . M oney Merchant or 
Agents: are vendors who receive or carry out 
mobile money. Regulation: are defined as related 
authority.  
Experts are of the opinion that many hurdles still 
needed to be cleared to progress the mobile 
payment system into the mainstream of elec tronic 
payment. According to (Bound J. et al., 2001) 
these hurdles include technology challenges as 
well as high up -front costs, security and enough of 
the right type of phone. According to researchers, 
security of mobile payment systems requirement 
can be  tailored around Confidentiality (privacy), 
Integrity, Authorisation and Non Repudiation. 
According to (Bounie, and Francois, 2006) the 
wide acceptance of MPS is closely related to 
security, thus, how low the fraud rate is.  
(Bound, et. Al., 2001) postulate s challenges in 
technological advancement and the high cost of 
adoption to both consumers and service providers, 
are other challenges facing MPS as well. 
According to the authors, acceptance is another 
challenge facing MPS. Other issues according to 
the au thors are that of compliance procedures 
between the banks, operators and regulatory 
authorities, and interoperability of the system.  
According to Ghana Chamber of 
Telecommunications, mobile money operators in 
Ghana have recorded 388 mobile money fraud 
cases in the year 2016 as against 278 in the year 
2015. This therefore represents 28.35% increase 
in mobile money fraud cases, an indication that 
mobile money fraud is on the ascendancy in 
Ghana. Notable among the fraud cases are Anonymous calls from fraudster s, false 
promotion, Cash out fraud, Scam, False 
promotion al SMS, False Cash out SMS, and 
Unauthorized PIN Access.  
Methodology   
The main objective of this research is to resolve 
the security loopholes in the current electronic 
payment systems i.e. mobile pa yment systems in 
Ghana. To model  the electronic payment systems 
(mobile money systems), we design a payment 
platform systems using the following development 
resources: netbeans, JSF, Primefaces, xampp and 
sqlyol.  We use cisco packet tracer to track data i n 
transit in the mobile money payment platforms. 
To get the perception of Ghanaian community 
about the Mobile money payment process, a 
survey design is used to establish the perception 
of respondents in reference to mobile payment 
processing systems from t he viewpoints of 
privacy, effectiveness, processes involved, 
traceability and transaction cost. The research 
incorporates all the mobile money services 
providers, thus, MTN, Tigo, Airtel and Vodafone 
as the study population. The study therefore 
targeted of ficers directly in charge of the mobile 
money transaction. According to the Bank of 
Ghana, there are currently four (4) mobile money 
service providers, thus informing our choice of a 
population size.  
The researchers observed that the total population 
of fo ur (4) mobile money service providers was 
all within reach and can conveniently be studied 
without necessarily making further selection. 
Purposive sampling was then used to select one 
respondent from each of the service providers 
sampled for the study.  
Primary and secondary data constituted the 
sources of information for this research. 
Observations and interviews are used to collect 
the primary data. Data collected from this source 
focused on privacy, effectiveness, processes 
involved, traceability and tran saction cost of the 
mobile money services. Secondary data on the 
other hand focused on registration documents and 
transaction charts. The tool employed for the data 
collection was interview. This was used to collect 
primary data from the officers in charge . The 
interview was conducted on one -on - one basis. 
This provided the respondents the opportunity to 
give a more adequate account of a peculiar 
phenomenon.   
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -20 Microsoft office excel was then used to analyse 
the transaction cost vis a vis the transaction 
amounts. This was done in order to determine the 
most cost effective payment system.  
Validity and Reliability of the Research 
Instrument  
The designed framework was run several times to 
ensure all loopholes identified were resolved. This 
was done to ensure validity and reliability of the 
data before processing the results. Also, the 
researchers registered for the four mobile money 
services and had used them to undertake the 
various mobile money transactions and this gave 
them the first hand information throu gh 
observation.  
 
Results and Discussion  
This section discussed the results of the 
experiment by examining the existing mobile 
payment processing systems and comparing it to 
the researcher‟s framework  
Privacy  
Analysis of the processes involved in any 
transa ction revealed that all the four mobile 
payment systems make use of PIN to safeguard 
the subscriber‟s privacy and  to link a subscriber or 
an agent to his or her account. , the use of the PIN 
has a deficiency in that the transaction PIN 
appears in plain fig ures which could be easily 
identified by a third party and thereby poses a 
threat to one‟s privacy.  
Traceability  
It was revealed that the mobile payment systems 
make use of mobile phone number, transaction ID 
and a valid national ID card number to track or  
trace transaction. It was revealed that apart from 
token or voucher transactions, the use of a valid 
ID card is not enforced by the agents. This in 
effect could pose a difficulty during tracking or 
tracing of any wrong transaction for which a valid 
ID car d number is to be used which was earlier 
not registered or recorded.  
Analysis of both the existing mobile payment 
systems and the designed framework  
Registration of agents  
The existing mobile payment systems in Ghana 
lack vital security requirements. These  loopholes 
are: No guarantor information is provided in the 
existing system: The designed framework 
however included the information on guarantors 
in order to serve as surety for the agent. This 
surety is expected to stand in and accepts liability 
in case of fraud on the part of the agents.  
Figure 4.1 shows an interface of the proposed 
system indicating guarantors information as a 
mandatory field during registration by a merchant. 
This is mandatory as it provides an added security 
and reliability of informa tion for the subcriber. 
The guarantor stands as a surety for the agent and 
therefore stands in and accepts liability in case of 
fraud on the part of agents  
 
 
Fig. 4.1 Guarantor mandatory form  
BoG permit number is not a requirement in the 
existing system: The designed framework 
resolved this lapses by ensuring BoG permit 
number is provided before an agent can operate 
any mobile money service. . Figure 4.2 displays 
an interface of the proposed or  designed 
framework indicating a mandatory entering of 
BoG permit number by the agent. This boosts the 
credibility of the agent as an accredited institution 
whose activities are being monitored by the 
central bank.  
 
 
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -21 
 
Fig. 4.2 Mandatory BoG form  
Police per mit number is not required in the 
existing system: The police permit number has 
been included in the designed framework. This is 
to serve as a clearance for the agent from any 
criminal record and therefore enhances the 
credibility of the agent. Further, it  puts the 
operations of the agent under th e watch of the 
security agency.  
Subscriber‟s information during transaction  
A study of the subscriber‟s or customers 
transactional processes of the existing mobile 
payment systems in Ghana revealed the following 
loopholes in the existing system.  
Information on next of kin is not mandatory in the 
existing mobile money systems.  
The current system does not ensure information 
on next of kin is mandatory. This is a loophole 
which may lead to loss of funds in the event of the 
death of a subscriber. A study of the existing 
system shows that if the next of kin information is 
not provided, the transaction/registration process 
goes on. Since the mobile money is a financial 
transaction, information on next of kin is vital to 
ensure that funds are not lost in the event of a 
death of a mobile account holder. The researcher 
therefore designed a framework to make 
information on next of kin a mandatory field as a 
prerequi site as provided in figure 4.3 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fig.4.3 mandatory Next  of Kin Forms  
PIN is not encrypted in the existing system  
The PIN number entered during the transaction 
process was not encrypted thereby compromising 
the security of the payment platform. The 
captured PIN could therefore be used to the 
subscriber‟s disadvantage and leading to payment 
fraud  
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.4 unencrypted PIN  
The designed framework encrypts the transaction 
PIN in order to protect the privacy of the 
subscriber as well as not exposing the confidential 
details to a third party.  
PIN encrypted : Entering of secret word is not 
available in the current system  
The existing system does not make provision for a 
secret word to be asked and properly answered 
before token cash out transaction is accessed. This 
therefore  
could make it possible for anyon e who 
accidentally gets accessed to the token code to 
effect a transaction even though the token is not 
being intended for him. The designed framework 
makes it mandatory for a secret word to be 
provided by a subscriber or a non -subscriber and 
properly answ ered by a person making token cash 
out. This prevents fraudulent cash out, and also 
ensures that the right person makes out the cash 
out. Th is is illustrated in figure shown below , an 
interface of the proposed framework.  
 
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -22  
Fig 4.5 proposed framework  
 
Interception of data in transit  
Data can be intercepted in transit by any adversary 
who monitors the transaction processes of a 
mobile merchant. In the event of such 
interception, data is lost leading to loss of funds 
and loss of confidence and thereby posing serious 
transactional threat, credibility and traceability 
problems. There is therefore the need for the data 
in transit to be encrypted until a confirmation or 
feedback is received that the data reaches the 
intended destination. Figure 4.6  shows direct 
message generated by the existing system without 
encryption.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 4.6 non – encrypted message  
No encryption of data  
This is evident in the fact that, when a sender 
makes mobile money transaction, no feedback is 
received by the sender to confirm whether the 
transaction is for the intended recipient before the 
message is finally delivered.  
Figure 4.7  is an interface of the proposed 
framework that encrypted the data in transit such 
that even if the data is intercepted by a third party, 
no meaning co uld b e made of it. In the figure 4.7 , 
an amount of GH¢50.00 is to be transferred from 
the recipient to the sender. The virtual account of the sender contains an amount of GH¢400.00 
whilst that of the recipient contains no amount, 
thus GH¢0.00.  Before the transaction is effected, 
the senders details are being verified and both the 
senders and recipients accounts are being 
encrypted (arrowed black and green respectively) 
to ensure data in transit is not intercepted. After 
the sender confirms and is certain o f the intended 
recipient, both the senders as well as the recipient 
accounts are being decrypted (arrowed blue and 
red respectively) to allow the data to be accessed. 
Even though the current systems prompts a sender 
of the intended person to  send the data  to, sending 
the data at that instant could pose serious security 
threat to the data since between the time of 
identifying the recipient and sending the data, 
interception could take place. It is therefore 
expedient and safer to encrypt the data before 
sending to the recipient and a feedback or 
message is resend to the sender to further confirm 
the recipient before final approval for the data to 
be decrypted. This is to ensure that even if the 
data in transit is intercepted, no meaning could be 
made out of it. The recipient now receives a plain 
message of the amount sent after the sender 
decrypts the data. In effect, the senders virtual 
account is debited with GH¢50.00 (arrowed black) 
leaving the real account to be GH¢350.00. On the 
other hand, the real acco unt of the recipient is 
credited with the GH¢50.00 (arrowed green) being 
transferred and the transaction is completed.  
 
Fig 4.7 Encryption of Data in transit  
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
A mobile payment is an electronic payment made 
through a mob ile device . Mobile money gives 
anyone with a mobile phone the ability to transfer 
 
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -23 money, make cash payments and conduct other 
financial transactions over the phone. Currently, 
there are four mobile money service providers in 
Ghana, namely, MTN mobile money , VF cash, 
Tigo cash and Airtel money. For an effective 
operation of these systems, Privacy, traceability, 
cost of transaction, and simplicity of the processes 
involved are of much interest. The study therefore 
examined the loopholes in the current mobile 
money systems and a framework has been 
designed to resolve the loopholes.  
The following loopholes have been identified, 
thus, Entering of information on next of kin into 
the system during registration is not mandatory, 
the current system accepts year of bi rth as PIN, 
transactional PIN is decrypted, entering of a Valid 
ID number into the system is not mandatory, the 
system does not make provision for security word 
or question during token cash out.  
 Recommendations from the study  
The following recommendation s from the study 
are worthwhile and this is expected to strengthen 
the mobile payment system in Ghana and also 
help to secure the funds of customers.  
 The current mobile payment system should 
makes it mandatory for information on next 
of kin to be entered d uring registration.  
 The current mobile payment system should 
not accept year of birth as PIN.  
 The current mobile payment system should 
make the transactional PIN encrypted.  
 The current mobile payment system should 
make it mandatory for a valid ID number to  
be entered during withdrawals.  
 The current mobile payment system should 
make provision for a security word during 
token cash out.  
 The mobile money operators should improve 
on the efficiency of their networks to ensure 
reliability and also serve their cust omers 
better.  
 Training should be encouraged in risk 
management and mobile phones security in 
mobile money.  
 
References  
[1] Abor, J. (2004). Technological Innovation 
and Banking in Ghana, An Evaluation of 
Customers' Perspective. American 
Academy of Financial Managment, 1(3), 
338-356.  [2] Akpaka Bruno, (2006), Beyond the Bank: 
The Rise of Mobile Money in Ghana  
[3] Annon, D. (1999). Sur vey of Retail 
Payments Systems: Consumer Payment 
Options Grow. ABI/INFORM Global, 
5(4A – 13A).  
[4] Balachandher, K. G., Santha, V., Norazlin, 
I., & Prasad, R. (2001). Electronic 
Banking in Malaysia: A Note of Evolution 
of Services and Consumer Relations. 
Journal of Internet Banking and 
Commerce, 5(1), 23 -37.  
[5] Bank for International Settlements, (1998), 
Managing change and payment systems, 
Monetary and Economic Department, no. 
4, Basle  
 
[6] Birch, D. (1998). Purse Wars - What does 
the front line look like? JIBC.  
[7] Bolt, W., Humphrey, D. and 
Uittenbogaard, R. (2008). Transaction 
pricing and the adoption of electronic 
payments: A cross -country comparison, 
International Journal of Central Banking 4: 
89–123. 
[8] Bound, J., Brown, C. and Mathiowetz, N. 
(2001). Measurement err or in survey data, 
in J.  
[9] Heckman and E. Leamer (eds), Handbook 
of Econo - metrics, Elsevier Science, 
Amsterdam, pp. 3705 –3843.  
[10] Bounie, D. and Fran  cois, A. ( 00  . Cash, 
check or bank card? The ef - fects of 
transaction characteristics on the use of 
paymen t instruments, Working Paper in 
Economics and Social Sciences ESS -06-
05, Telecom Paris.  
[11] Brambor, T., Clark, W. R. and Golder, M. 
(2006). Understanding interac - tion 
models:  
[12] Improvingempirical analyses, Political 
Analysis 14: 63 – 82. 
[13] Brits, J. H. and Winde r, C. (2005). 
Payments are no free lunch, DNB 
Occasional Studies, De Nederlandsche 
Bank.  
[14] Carow, K. A., & Staten, M. E. (1999). 
Debit, Credit , or Cash: Evidence on 
Gasoline Purchases. Journal of economics 
and Business, 409 -421.   
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -24 [15] Chandran. (2004). Research Methods with 
illustrations from Christian Ministries. 
Nairobi:    Daystar University. (n.d.).  
[16] Chorafas, D. S. (1988). Implementing 
Networks in Banking and Financial 
services. Houndmilss: Macmillan Press.  
[17] Cobb Anne, (2004), 
http://www.ameinfo.com/50050.html  
[18] Costello,D.(2003.,June)."Micropayment 
and Mobility," 
http://www.epaynews.com/downloads  
[19] Crede, A. (2004). Electronic Commerce 
and the Banking Industry: The 
Requirement and Opportunities for New 
Payment Systems Using the Internet. 
Retrieved August 25, 2011,  from 
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol1/issue3/crede.h
tml: http://jcmc.indiana.edu  
 
[20] Duncan, T. (1998). Success of Electronic 
Commerce (2 nd ed.). New Jersey: John 
Murray Limted.  
[21] FederalReserveBoard. (2001). E -Payments 
in Industrial Financing. Chigago: Federal  
Reserve Board.  
[22] Ferguson, J. W. (2000). Electronic 
Commerce, Bank and Payments. 36th 
Annual Conference on Bank Structure 
Competition. Chicago, USA.  
[23] Heinrich, G., & Srinivas, G. (2001, 
November). 
http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss48.pdf. 
Retrieved September 20,  2011, from 
www.bis.org: http://www.bis.org  
[24] Humphrey, D. B., & Hancock, D. (1997). 
Payment Transactions, Instruments and 
Systems: A Survey. Journal of Banking 
and Finance, 21, 1573 -1624.  
[25] Humphrey, D. B., Kim, M., & Vale, B. 
(2001). Realizing the Gains fr om 
Electronic Payments, Cost, Pricing and 
Payment Choice. Journal of Money, Credit 
. and Banking, 33(2), 216 -234. 66  
[26] Hunter, W. C., & Stephen, G. T. (1991). 
Technological Change in Large 
Commercial Banks. Journal of Business, 
64(3), 331 -362.  
[27] Jenkins, Bet h, 2008, Developing Mobile 
Money Ecosystems, Washinton DC: IFC 
and Harvard  
a. Kennedy School  [28] Kenya School of Monetary Studies 
(KSMS), USAID, and Booz -Allen 
Hamilton (BAH), 2010  
a. Mobile Money Transfer Services: 
The next phase in Evolution. 
Federal Reserve Bank  
b. white paper.  
[29] Kichenham, B.A., Pfleeger, S.L., Pickard, 
L.M., Jones, P.W., Hoaglim, D.C., El 
Emam,  
a. K., and Rosenberg, J. (2002), 
Preliminary Guidelines for 
empirical research in  
b. Software Engineering, IEE 
Transaction on software 
engineering, 28,8,721 -34 
[30]  http://www.computer.org/portal/we
b/csdl/transactions/tse;jsessiond=95acbeb0
1 
[31] Kwast, Myron, Kennickell, A., (1997). 
Who uses electronic banking? Results 
from the 199 5 survey of consumer 
finances, Mineo. Division of research and 
statistics, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC, 
(also forthcoming in Technology, 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference 
on Bank Structure and Competition)  
[32] Leow,  H. B. (1999). New Distribution 
Channels in Banking Services. Banker's 
Journal of Malaysia, 48 -56.  
[33] Malek, M. (2001). E -Commerce 
Technologies - Electronic Payment 
Systems. Oslo, Norway: Steven Institute 
of Technology, Telecommunication 
Management Department .  
[34] Managing Ghana (2007), Fraud Alert 
Warning: Mobile Money fraud on the rise 
in Ghana. 
(http://managingghana,com/fraud -alert-
warning -mobile -money -fraud -rise-ghana/  
[35] Mantel, B. (2000). Why do Consumers pay 
Bills Electronically; An Emperical 
Analysis, Economic Perspective. Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chigago. Chigago, USA: 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chigago.  
[36] Metser, L. J. (2000). The Changing Nature 
of the Payment System: Sh ould New 
Players mean New Rules? Business 
Review, 3 -26.  
[37] Nanor, D; 2009, MTN Ghana introduces 
MTN mobile money. Retrieved from;   
Regina Kafui Adzroe , IJSRM Volume 06 Issue 06 June  2018 [www.ijsrm.in]  EC-2018 -25 [38]  https://techbaron.com/mtn -ghana -
launches -mtn-mobile -money/   
[39] Neuman, B. C., & Medvinsky, G. (1996). 
NetCheque,NetCash and the 
Characteristics of Internet Payments 
Services. Journal of Electronic Publishing, 
2(1), 23 -47.  
[40] Pariwat, S., & Hataiseree, R. (2004). The 
Use of Cash, Cheques and Electronic 
Payment Se rvices in Thailand;Changes 
and Challenges for Efficiency 
Enhancement. Payments Systems Group, 
73-87.  
[41] Pierce, M. (2001). Payment mechanism 
designed for the Internet. Retrieved 11 02, 
2011, from 
http://ganges.cs.tcd.ie/mepeirce/Project/oni
nternet.html: http ://ganges.cs.tcd  
[42] Smart card overview. (2006). Towards 
electronic money and banking: the role of 
Government. An introduction to electronic 
money issue. (1996). United States 
Department of the Treasury Conference. 
Washington DC.: United States 
Department of  the Treasury.  
[43] Smith,C.D.(2014).Using both qualitative 
and quantitative research methods 
promotes   Effectiveness.21March. 
Available at: EzineArticles.com <http:// 
ezinearticles.com/?  Using Both 
Qualitative and Quantitative Research 
Methods Promotes Effe ctiveness  &id= 
1061205 (accessed on 11/06/2014).  
[44] Vartanian, P. T. (2000). The future of 
electronic payments: Roadblocks and 
emerging practices. London: Macmillan 
Press Ltd.  
[45] Vassilliou, Charalampas. (2004). 
Electronic Payment system and Marketing: 
A liter ature review. Available 
at:http://mis.uoa.gr/Portals/57ad 7180 -
c5e7 -49f5-b282 -c6475cdb7ee7/Temple -
Payment7020systems_Full%20Review/rep
orts. 
[46] Yasuharu, U. (2003). The Effects of 
Information System Investment in 
Banking Industry. Kansai University.: 
Research Center of Socionetwork 
Strategies, Institute of Economic and 
Political Studies. Zika, J. (2005). Retail 
electronic money and prepaid payment instruments. Prague: Institute of Economic 
Studies, Charles University,   
 
 
 
 
 
 