PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION (2021) 58( 1): 86-91             ISSN:00333077  
 
86 
www.psychologyandeducation.net  Approaches Of Increa sing Financial Literacy Of The Population During 
The Economic Digitalization  In Uzbekistan  
 
1Farkhod Ozodovich Abdullaev, 2Nurulla Bakhromovich Fayzullaev   
1Director of  the Urgench branch of the Academy of Public Administration under the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan.  
2Head of the Department of Accounting and Auditing, Faculty of Tourism and Economics, Uzbekistan.  
 
ABSTRACT  
This article analyzes the importance  of financial literacy of the population in the process of transition to the digital economy. The 
article also analyzes people's behavior with financial activities and processes, the level of financial literacy in developin g and 
developed countries and giv es recommendations and proposals which are directing at increasing the financial literacy level within 
the country.  
 
Keywords:  
finance, development, budget, income,  economic digitalization, market institutions.  
Article Received: 18 October 2020, Revised: 3  November 2020, Accepted: 24 December 2020  
 
Introduction  
Nowadays, one of the most important tasks 
for the further development of Uzbekistan is to 
achieve economic digitalization in the country. 
This further development, in turn, requires both 
economic and social measures to carry out within 
the country. That is to say, economic developm ent 
is not only physical changes of nations 
environment but also changes in the way people 
think and behave. Thus during the process of 
digital transformation of market institutions the 
literacy level of the population, to be more 
precisely, increasing the  level of financial literacy 
will be the objective character due to wide range 
of online transactions in the digitalized world.  
In his address, the President of the Republic 
of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev for the first 
time put forward the concept of poverty in 
Uzbekistan [1].  President also said “the greatest 
poverty is the lack of knowledge” . It can also be 
assumed that he  emphasizes the level of financial 
literacy. Previously, the concept of poverty level 
in the country was almost never used.  At o ne of 
the meetings, President Shavkat Mirziyoyev noted 
that 12 -15% of the population of Uzbekistan, or 4 -
5 million people, live in poverty. This means that 
their daily income does not exceed 10 -13 
thousand soums (about 0,95 -1.25 US dollars).  On August 17, 2018, the Board of the 
Central Bank of Uzbekistan decided to join the 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion. The alliance was 
established in 2008 to help member countries 
develop and implement fiscal policy, establish and 
train working groups on topical issues of banking 
services, create a platform for exchange of 
experience, protect consumer rights and finance 
small business.  
In Uzbekistan, only  two methods are used 
to measure poverty. The results of the nutrition -
based method show that the poverty rate is 11. 4%. 
Based on the results of the second approach, the 
poverty rate is 36.6% at $ 5.5 per day and 9.6% at 
$ 3.6. According to the World Bank, by regions of 
Uzbeksitan  high levels of poverty are observed in 
Samarkand, Surkhandarya, Syrdarya, Andijan 
regions an d the Republic of Karakalpakstan [2]. 
In recent years, significant progress has been 
made in creating a publicly accessible database 
that can be used to study poverty levels. They 
allow us to describe poverty, its factors, as well as 
test many hypotheses about the impact of specific 
programs and political reforms on poverty. For 
example, by comparing the characteristics of poor 
and non -poor people or households, it is possible 
to identify the cause of poverty and set clear 
parameters to combat it. In this case, the 
PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION (2021) 58( 1): 86-91             ISSN:00333077  
 
87 
www.psychologyandeducation.net  information can be analyzed in the following areas  
[table 1] : 
Materials and methods  
These results confirm the importance of 
quality of education, employment rate, housing 
opportunities and living conditions in most regions of the country in addressing the problem 
of poverty.  The quality of education can also be 
attributed to financial literacy. The lower the level 
of financial literacy of the population, especially 
the youth, the higher the level of poverty in the 
count ry.
 
Table 1. Indirect factors influencing the measurement of poverty.  
 
Low level of financial literacy is not only 
associated with developing countries but also with 
developed countries so that both of them always 
take actions  to make their population financially 
literate because of unprecedented benefits to both 
individuals and the economy as a whole.  Most 
countries such as USA, Canada, and The United 
Kingdom, along with international organi zations 
like the OECD ( The Organizat ion for Economic 
Co-operation and Development)  are concerned 
with particular measures to improve financial 
literacy level in the countries and have launched 
various programs aimed at tackling problems the 
governments face. For instance, the OECD started 
the International Gateway for Financial Education 
which  focuses to perform as a clearinghouse for 
financial education programs, information and 
research worldwide  [1].There is a national non -
profit organization on financial literacy  - 
the JumpS tart Coalition  for Personal Financial 
Literacy  in the U.S., consists  of corporate, 
academic, non -profit, and government organizations . The mission of this organization is 
to help young people develop lifelong financial 
decision -making skills.  The UK also has a special 
body – the Money Advice Service which develops 
and coordinates national strategies to develop the 
financial capability of the population. The process 
of raising financial literacy in Singapore is slightly 
different from other countries. The country has the 
inaugural Financial Literacy Hub for Teachers 
established by the National Institute of Education 
Singapore and government -funded the Institute for 
Financial Literacy  [2]. The aim of these 
organizations is to provide free and effective 
education -oriented fin ancial programs to the 
population in order to build financial capability in 
the country . 
Improving the level of financial literacy of 
the population is usually carried out by special 
government departments or organizations funded 
by the state. For example,  in the United States, 
this responsibility is vested in the Financial 
Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC). •age, 
•gender
•nationality
•education
•health status.
Characteristics of 
family members•village
•city, region
•district.Location:
•distance to markets,
•road infrastructure,
•access to financial 
services, etc.
Market access and 
private services:PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION (2021) 58( 1): 86-91             ISSN:00333077  
 
88 
www.psychologyandeducation.net  Australia has a Financial Information Service 
(FIS), Canada has a Financial Consumer 
Protection Service (FCAC), and the UK has a 
Financial Servi ces Authority (FSA).  
As for the experience of the United States  
in this regard , then they, being a state with the 
largest financial center in the world - New York, 
have a wealth of experience in improving the 
financial literacy of the population.  The Financial 
Literacy and Eduction Commission (FLEC) was 
formed in collaboration with the US Congress. In 
2006, the National Financial Literacy Strategy 
was developed. But do not forget that since 1995 
the "JumpStart" Coalition for Individual Financial 
Literacy has been operating in the United States, 
which provides assistance to young people under 
the age of 19 [3].  
In general, in the United States, there is 
almost the same vector of measures to ensure 
financial literacy as in other developed countries:  
- emphasis on an individual approach;  
- creation of telephone lines for financial 
matters;  
- instilling financial skills in children in 
schools.  
But the United States has achieved more 
significant results: financial literacy in the country 
is at a high lev el. Here, children can receive a 
bank card at the age of 10, in most states the 
turnover of cash is minimized, there is a greater 
integration of the population into the financial 
sphere of society. A 2010 study by the 
“Jump Start” Coalition found that only 21 states 
need specific financial education. This is a big 
breakthrough, since in 2008 a significant part of 
the country's young population needed additional 
financial education. In the United States, it is also 
customary to set up so -called financial cent ers at 
universities, where students can obtain the 
information they need for financial transactions 
both during their studies and after graduation.  
China recognizes the leading role of the 
state in raising the level of the financial culture of 
the populati on. However, the PRC currently lacks 
a unified state program aimed at improving 
financial literacy. We can only note the efforts of individual authorities in this area. These include 
the development of the Student Financial Literacy 
Program (CIEFR) [4]. 
This program was developed jointly by the 
Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Finance 
of China. Its purpose is to disseminate information 
among schoolchildren and students about the 
possibility of obtaining educational loans, as well 
as help those stude nts who have difficulties in 
paying off educational loans. In addition, the 
Ministry of Finance, together with the Ministry of 
Education, established an educational institution 
based at Peking University, which combines the 
functions of a national research  center in the field 
of economics and finance, as well as an 
educational center that develops programs to 
improve financial literacy of the population. This 
allows this educational institution to conduct its 
courses on improving the financial culture of th e 
population in accordance with global trends in this 
area, as well as the main socio -economic goals of 
the country.  
In Brazil , the National Strategy for 
Improving the Quality of Financial Education 
(ENEF) is currently in place at the state level. It 
was developed by the committee for the regulation 
of financial markets, the ministries of education, 
finance, justice, social protection, as well as 
largest banks and credit organizations in the 
country[5].  
When developing the ENEF program, the 
authors took in to account that about 82% of 
citizens of the country did not know the exact 
percentage of their loans, and 87% had no savings 
or had little or no savings. Therefore, the goals 
were to increase the involvement of the population 
in the activities of financia l markets, as well as to 
increase the financial literacy of all segments of 
the population.  
A feature of this program is the coverage of 
a large part of society, and not a specific category 
of citizens. For example, ENEF includes measures 
to improve the fi nancial literacy of students. These 
include: teacher training based on materials and 
curricula developed by the Central Bank of Brazil; 
development of textbooks and multimedia PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION (2021) 58( 1): 86-91             ISSN:00333077  
 
89 
www.psychologyandeducation.net  programs on this topic for different age categories 
of students. The pilot proje ct, launched in 2010, 
reached 30,000 students across the country. This 
project was recognized as successful at the 
government level.     
 As for the possibility of applying these 
measures in Uzbekistan, some of them have rather 
good prospects, which is expl ained by the 
similarity of China and Brazil in terms of the level 
of financial literacy of the population.  
   The importance of financial 
literacy comes from its numerous benefits to the 
population of the country [6].  
When we say about basic financial 
know ledge, it means being aware of the 
followings:  
- Insurance;  
- Credit;  
- Budgeting;  
- Saving;  
- Debt;  
- Interest;  
- Risk and etc.  
Having basic financial knowledge is so 
important for a person to achieve financial 
stability. The individual is able to manage his  or 
her current budget properly, use his /her income 
wisely to meet his current and future needs, and 
make effective financial decisions in the socio -
economic processes throughout life , that is  to say , 
he or she  develops the ability to manage mo ney 
and become accu stomed to control it wisely . In 
short, under the scarce resources in the economy, 
people will learn to use their income to maximize 
their needs by increasing their financial 
knowledge . Unfortunately, in many cases, 
individuals face problems in managing the ir 
available money income (incorrect spending) due 
to lack of sufficient financial skills and 
knowledge [7]. Inefficient decisions in spending 
affects people’s mood, causes a stress andmaybe  
the reason for other help problem s occur.  
Alessandro Antoniette, B orsette Adrea 
describe financial literacy as "the process by 
which people improve their understanding of 
financial products and concepts and, through information, instruction and advice, develop the 
skills and confidence to become more aware of 
financial r isks and opportunities, to make 
informed choices, to know where to go for help, 
and take other effective actions to improve their 
financial well -being”  [8]. 
Thomas Retzmann and Gunther Seeber 
consider financial literacy as the application of 
skills in dealing with routine money and financial 
matters, such as making a withdrawal or filling 
out a transfer order  [9].  
According to the research results of 
Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia Mitchell, financial 
literacy determines how well people make and 
execute f inancial decisions, including saving, 
investing, borrowing from one's retirement 
account, and planning for retirement [10]. 
Norman King, in his article, defines that 
financial literacy is the  ability to understand 
finance, m ore specifically, it refers to the set of 
skills and knowledge that allow an individual to 
make informed and effective decisions through 
their understanding of finances [11]. 
 
Result and discussion  
Based on world experience, significant 
experience in the development of financial 
educatio n in four regions of Uzbekistan with high 
poverty rates is proposed as following table. It is 
aimed at acquiring the skills of financial literacy 
of more than 1 million people until 2024.  To do 
this, authors proposed to  create a special website 
for financial literacy, on which materials on 
budgeting, savings, the use of bank cards, banking 
services, and debt management are posted; The 
web site also offers a variety of financial games. A 
study of the activities foreseen by this financial 
literacy programs in individual regions will make  
it possible to summarize the main aspects of their 
implementation [table 2] .  
 
 
 
 
 PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION (2021) 58( 1): 86-91             ISSN:00333077  
 
90 
www.psychologyandeducation.net  Table 2. Proposed financial literacy programs in separate regions of Uzbekistan.  
Region of Uzbekistan  
with high levels of 
poverty  Implementation toolkit  For whom  Purpose  
Samarqand region 
(2021 -2022 year)  Elaboration of the concept 
of financial literacy through 
cooperation with 
educational institutions and 
the inclusion of financial 
literacy in the curriculum of 
schools, colleges and 
universities  Educators and 
students  To pay attention to the 
problem of low financial 
literacyamong 
youngpeople; 
teachunderstandingvarious 
aspects of budget 
planning,savings and 
credit management  
Surkhandarya region 
(2020 -2022)  Programs, united by a single 
motto “Financial literacy 
throughout life”: “Youth 
Banking” program, a 
program for educating older 
banking people on new 
banking technologies. With 
the support of business 
structures, a significant 
number of youth websites 
and portals will be created 
that contain tips, successful 
stories in the field of 
personal finance 
management, which use 
modern technology . 
 Different 
layers of the 
region  Reduction of financial 
illiteracy of the population 
of the region  
Syrdaryaregion (2020 -
2022)  Creati ng an independent 
fund and the program “Your 
expenses, your savings, 
your future: a guide for 
beginners”; resources offer 
a large collection of 
educational materials to 
help in organizing and 
conducting the financial 
literacy program.  Various target 
groups  To promote the formation 
of a positive attitude and 
responsible effective 
behavior in relation to 
money at a young age.  
Andijanregion (2020 -
2022)  Conducting demonstration 
events (presentations and 
interactive shows), where 
the audience received basic 
finan cial skills, such as 
budget planning, opening a Local 
companies, 
municipalities, 
universities, 
colleges, high 
school Achieving on  banking 
services understandable 
and afforda ble for people 
in the Andijan region’s 
districts  PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION (2021) 58( 1): 86-91             ISSN:00333077  
 
91 
www.psychologyandeducation.net  bank account, as well as 
information on the security 
of payment systems.  students  
 
So, it can be argued that almost all of the 
above measures are advisable to apply in 
Uzbekistan. At the same time, taking into account 
the peculiarities of activities in this area in 
Uzbekistan, the focus and distribution of priorities 
in each of the areas considered should be slightly 
changed. It is also necessary to know the specifics 
of our economy and financial sphere when writing 
programs, while not forgetting that the ter ritorial, 
cultural and historical traditions of Uzbekistan are 
quite unique.  
 
Conclusion  
Model of proposed financial literacy 
programs in separate regions of Uzbekistan (table 
2) above is the such kind of model which can be 
used in the formation of state p rograms, road 
maps and other concepts aimed at increasing the 
financial literacy of the population.  
Financial literacy of the population is a 
qualitative indicator that ensures that everyone in 
society has sufficient economic knowledge, skills 
and abilitie s, values and the right approach to 
making economic decisions based on them, which 
allows them to ensure their own well -being.  
The level of development of the country's 
economy has a positive impact on the level of 
financial literacy of the population. How ever, this 
does not mean that there are no problems in this 
area in developed countries. Accordingly, 
regardless of the level of development, it is 
important that each country develops regular and 
systematic measures to increase the level of 
financial lite racy of the population, based on the 
characteristics of their economy and population 
mentality.  
The higher the level of financial literacy of 
the population, the higher the level of stability and 
prosperity, first of all, the person, the region in 
which he  lives, and the whole national economy.  
 
REFERENCE  [1] President Shavkat Mirziyoyev’s Address to the 
Oliy Majlis 24.01.2020 
https://president.uz/en/lists/view/3324  
[2] B. Khamidov,  Poverty rate in Uzbekistan. 
What can be done to reduce poverty? Analysis. 
https://review.uz  
[3] Mandell, L. and Klein, L.S., 2007. Motivation 
and financial literacy. Financial services 
review, 16(2).  
[4] 崔颖 and 郭磊 , 2015. 
高职学生理财教育模式研究 . 
湖北经济学院学报  (人文社会科学版 ), 2(2).  
[5] Bruhn, M., de Souza Leão, L., Legovini, A., 
Marchetti, R. and Zia, B., 2013. The impact of 
high school financial education: Experimental 
evidence from Brazil. The World Bank.  
[6] "International Gateway for Financial 
Educa tion Home". www.financial -
education.org  
[7] "The MoneySENSE Singapore Polytechnic 
Institute For Financial Literacy". finlit.sg.  
[8] Antonietti, Alessandro & Andrea, Borsetto & 
Iannello, Paola. (2016). A Metacognitive 
Approach to Financial Literacy. 10.1007/978 -
981-10-0360 -8_5. 
[9] Seeber, Günther & Retzmann, Thomas. 
(2016). Financial Education in General 
Education Schools: A Competence Model. 
10.1007/978 -981-10-0360 -8_2. 
[10] Lusardi, Annamaria and Mitchell, Olivi a S., 
The Outlook for Financial Literacy (May 
2011). NBER Working Paper No. w17077. 
Available at SSRN: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=1848592  
[11] King, Norman. (2010). Importance of financial 
education in making infor med decision on 
spending. Journal of Economics and 
International Finance. 2. 199 -207. 