Executive Summary
Digital financial services (DFS) differ from traditional financial services in several ways that have major 
implications for regulators. The technology enables new operating models that involve a wider range of 
actors in the chain of financial services, from design to delivery. The advent of DFS ushers in new providers 
such as nonbank e-money issuers (EMIs), creates a key role for agents in serving clients, and reaches 
customers who have otherwise been excluded or underserved. This in turn brings new risks and new ways 
to mitigate them.
For many years now, CGAP has been interested in understanding how these new models are regulated, 
and how regulation might have to adapt to enable DFS models that have potential to advance financial 
inclusion. This Focus Note takes a close look at four building blocks in regulation, which we call basic 
regulatory enablers, and how they have been implemented in practice. Each of the enablers addresses a 
specific aspect of creating an enabling and safe regulatory framework for DFS. Our focus is on DFS models 
that specifically target excluded and underserved market segments. We analyze the frameworks adopted 
by 10 countries in Africa and Asia where CGAP has focused its in-country work on supporting a market 
systems approach to DFS.
The four basic enablers are as follows:
1.  Nonbank E-Money Issuance. A basic requirement is to create a specialized licensing window for nonbank 
DFS providers—EMIs—to issue e-money accounts (also called prepaid or stored-value accounts) without 
being subject to the full range of prudential rules applicable to commercial banks and without being 
permitted to intermediate funds.
2.  Use of Agents. DFS providers—both banks and nonbanks—are permitted to use third-party agents such as 
retail shops to provide customers access to their services.
3.  Risk-Based Customer Due Diligence (CDD). A proportionate anti-money laundering framework is adopted, 
allowing simplified CDD for lower-risk accounts and transactions. The latter may include opening and using 
e-money accounts and conducting over-the-counter (OTC) transactions with DFS providers.
4.  Consumer Protection. Consumer protection rules are tailored to the full range of DFS providers and 
products—providing a necessary margin of safety and confidence.
Why the focus on these four elements? They arise consistently in CGAP’s experience working on DFS 
frameworks, and their importance underscored in research and policy discussions. There is wide agreement 
that the four enablers are necessary (though not sufficient) conditions for DFS to flourish. This is not to 
deny that DFS has emerged in some markets where one or more of the enablers are weak or missing. It is 
also not to say that in certain cases other enablers such as healthy competition or interoperability might be 
equally important. But experience strongly suggests that, in any given market, DFS is far more likely to grow 
responsibly and sustainably and achieve its full potential when all four elements are in place. (Empirical 
research confirms some of these correlations.)
Through our research, we aim to understand how a range of countries has addressed the four enablers in 
their regulatory frameworks and to see what lessons can be learned from their experience. The countries 
covered are Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda in East Africa; Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana in West Africa; 
Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan in East Asia; and Myanmar in Southeast Asia.Basic Regulatory Enablers for 
Digital Financial Services
No. 109
May 2018
Stefan Staschen 
and  
Patrick MeagherFOCUS NOTE
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized2
Nonbank e-money issuance
E-money accounts and their issuers use different names across the world, but the basic concept is often 
very similar. The first element in enabling nonbank e-money issuance is to incorporate the concept of 
e-money in the regulatory framework. E-money combines several functions such as facilitating payments 
and storing value electronically. A workable definition must squarely address these payment and deposit-
like aspects.
The second element is allowing nonbanks to issue e-money. This opens the DFS market to new providers 
such as mobile network operators (MNOs) and specialized payment services providers (PSPs), which are 
often more successful in reaching the mass market than are traditional banks. This step also brings such 
nonbanks (or their subsidiaries) under the authority of the financial services regulator—often the central 
bank. However, in some of the 10 countries studied, only banks may issue e-money. Typically, commercial 
banks are not the most efficient providers because of their high costs, which are partly attributable to 
heavy prudential and operational regulations. Nor is it recommended to permit all PSPs licensed under 
general payment regulations to issue stored-value accounts. E-money requires specific rules to protect 
funds collected from clients for future use. There is an essential difference in the risk profiles of pure fund 
transfers versus stored-value accounts. But banks and PSPs may become issuers if the regulations are 
sufficiently nuanced to afford proportionate safeguards and a level playing field.
The third element is to delimit the range of permitted activities for EMIs. In general, EMIs may carry out 
core functions such as issuing e-money accounts, cash-in, cash-out, and domestic payments and transfers—
but not financial intermediation (except, in a few countries, limited investments in government securities).
The fourth element of the regulatory framework is to address the handling of customer funds converted 
into e-money (i.e., e-float), in the absence of a license to intermediate depositary funds. Rules in the 
countries studied require the e-float to be kept in safe, liquid assets. Regulations usually include standards 
that specify protection of the float funds through some combination of diversification, isolation and/or 
ring-fencing (from claims on the issuer), and safeguarding (from claims on the institution holding float 
deposits).
Use of agents
The viability of DFS depends on providers’ ability to outsource functions to agents—thereby extending 
their reach and capturing efficiencies. But this also heightens risks unless some key safeguards are put in 
place.
One such safeguard has to do with relationships between providers and their agents. Allocation of legal 
responsibility is considered essential so as not to overburden the regulator with directly supervising a 
huge number of agents. DFS regulations in the countries studied make the principal (the DFS provider) 
liable for its agents’ actions within the scope of delegated responsibility (expressed or implied). In most 
cases, however, the regulations do not solely rely on this liability provision and set criteria for the form 
and content of the agency agreement. They also specify certain due diligence and risk management steps, 
such as requiring the principal to have appropriate internal controls and agent monitoring systems and to 
carry out ex ante and ongoing (or periodic) assessment of an agent’s risks.
Another issue of concern to regulators is the eligibility of agents—that is, who can become an agent (or 
a certain type of agent). Most countries require all agents to be registered businesses, although this is 
not always followed in practice because it unduly restricts the number of potential agent locations. A few 3
countries allow individuals to serve as agents if they are educated, or if they have experience or businesses 
considered relevant. An issue related to competition, but also one that impacts outreach of agent networks, 
is whether agents can operate on behalf of multiple providers. Most of the countries studied prohibit 
exclusivity clauses in agency agreements that would bind an agent to a sole principal.
Agent regulations also deal with the ongoing obligations of both agents and principals, and the security 
and reporting standards. Security and accuracy of client transactions and the reliability of the technologies 
involved are commonly addressed in agent regulations. Providing confirmation of transactions to the client 
is mandatory. Many countries prohibit agent transactions going forward where there is a communication 
failure.
Regulatory frameworks take different approaches. The treatment of agents depends sometimes on the 
category of institution represented by the agent (e.g., bank or nonbank), sometimes on the type of account 
being handled (e.g., e-money or bank deposits), and sometimes on the activities performed by the agent 
(e.g., account opening or cash handling). Each approach raises distinct challenges in making regulation 
effective.
Risk-based customer due diligence
DFS operate within regulatory contexts shaped by policies on anti-money laundering and countering the 
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). The challenge for financial inclusion is to ensure proportionate treatment 
using risk-based frameworks that protect the integrity of the system while imposing the least burden on 
DFS outreach. In discussing customer due diligence (CDD) standards adopted in the countries studied, we 
consider how effectively they implement Financial Action Task Force (FATF) guidance prescribing the use 
of simplified procedures in lower-risk scenarios. (Often the regulations refer only to the identification [ID] 
component of CDD, i.e., know your customer [KYC].)
A common approach is the definition of risk tiers to which CDD procedures of varying intensity are applied. 
CDD rules typically focus on risks as determined by the features of the accounts or transactions provided, 
the types of clients, and the modalities of account opening and transacting (e.g., in-person or not). Most 
of the countries studied define two or three tiers (e.g., high, medium, and low risk).
A major contextual factor in CDD/KYC is the development of national ID documentation and verification 
systems. Limited availability of official ID documents has constrained financial services outreach, and 
therefore—in line with FATF guidelines—policies have been adopted to adjust ID requirements on a risk 
basis. Parallel to this trend of increasing the range of accepted identification methods is an unrelated trend 
of increasing government investment in universal provision of ID equipped with biometric technology. The 
benefits of advances in ID systems may obviate the need to accept a broad range of identity documents, 
but not necessarily the need for tiered account structures. The latter are still required because of other 
components of CDD.
Consumer protection
Digital channels and the use of agents pose special customer risks because of the potential for 
communication failure, identity theft, lack of price transparency and access to recourse by the client, and 
fraud. Ensuring that DFS have the necessary reliability and public trust to become a pillar of inclusive 
finance means establishing effective consumer protection. Regardless of whether it must be fully in place 
before DFS can spread, such protection is a necessary part of ensuring a sustainable market with long-term 
benefits to financial inclusion. In practice, however, the rules in this area are often unclear and incomplete. 4
The piecemeal extension of consumer protections into specific domains of DFS and DFS providers has 
tended to create a patchwork of regulation.
Transparency and fair dealing are core components of financial consumer protection (FCP) in DFS as in 
other areas. DFS providers are required to disclose fees, commissions, and any other costs to clients. 
Product information is to be posted at all service points and made available electronically. However, few of 
the 10 countries studied stipulate a standard disclosure format. The regulations usually mandate a written 
contract (which may be electronic), and sometimes impose a duty on the provider to explain key terms 
and conditions to the client before contract signing. Also, there are often fairness standards that require 
or prohibit certain contractual provisions.
It is a cornerstone of accountability to customers and regulators, and thus a tenet of good practice, 
to require each provider to set up a system for handling customer complaints. The countries studied 
incorporate this principle into regulation and apply it in some form to DFS providers. Well-developed 
frameworks address issues such as facilitating access to the system and tracking complaints, response 
deadlines, and appeals.
Along with issues common to all financial services, DFS consumer protection must also deal with the 
special risks of electronic transactions. Thus, a majority of the 10 countries impose some standard of 
service availability and/or digital platform reliability. Beyond this, regulation must balance the need for 
certainty of execution—nonrepudiation—against the need to allow for correcting mistaken or unauthorized 
transactions. The regulations may impose a general duty to inform customers of the need to protect ID and 
password information and the risks of mistaken transactions, or to specify how and under what conditions 
customers may demand revocation.
Lessons of experience
Some broad insights arise from the study. The experience of the African countries among the 10 countries 
shows the importance of EMIs—the first enabler. But this needs to be seen in light of a case such as India, 
where issuers (of what equates to e-money) are limited-purpose banks (called payments banks) that are 
subject to lower prudential requirements. Such an approach is certainly preferred to an approach where 
only commercial banks can issue e-money. The second enabler, the use of agents, seems to be the most 
consistently observed in practice. The liability of the principal for its agents’ actions is a key provision that 
allows the regulator to focus its attention on the principal. In most cases, there is substantial flexibility 
(as there should be) regarding who can be an agent. The third enabler, risk-based CDD/KYC, is strongly 
influenced by countries’ desire to strictly follow FATF guidance. The shift toward risk-based rules at global 
and national levels, combined with digital ID system developments, is starting to allow for greater DFS 
outreach, but at differing rates across countries. Consumer protection, the fourth enabler, comes into the 
picture rather late, because it has a more obvious role in ensuring sustainability than in jump-starting DFS 
markets. But its importance as a trust-building element is now widely recognized. Finally, it should be borne 
in mind that other conditions besides these enablers play a role in shaping DFS development, including 
policies in areas such as competition, data protection, and interoperability.
A collective learning process is ongoing among policy makers and regulators, both within and across 
countries, as the frontier of good practice advances. Some of the countries studied (Myanmar) have only 
recently adopted specific regulations for DFS and have been able to learn from earlier experience of 
other countries. Others (Ghana) can look back on many years of experience with DFS regulation and learn 
from past mistakes. Still others (Pakistan) have been able to improve their regulatory framework gradually 
over time.5
Introduction
How can regulation encourage the use of sound, 
technology-driven methods to speed financial 
inclusion? What lessons can we learn from 
experience in countries that have pursued this 
goal?
It has been more than 10 years since CGAP first 
studied newly emerging models that use agents as 
alternative delivery channels and digital technology 
to connect customers to their financial services 
providers. We called this branchless banking and 
referred to those models that directly benefit 
the unbanked or underbanked population as 
transformational branchless banking.1 The 
terminology has changed over the years, especially 
to recognize the developments in relation to 
services provided by nonbanks. Nowadays we 
prefer to use the broader terms digital financial 
services (DFS) and digital financial inclusion. But 
the basic ingredients—agents and technology—
remain the same.
We define DFS as the range of financial services 
accessed through digital devices and delivered 
through digital channels, including payment, credit, 
savings, and remittances.2 DFS can be offered 
by banks and nonbanks such as mobile network 
operators (MNOs) or technology companies that 
specialize in financial services (FinTechs).3 Digital 
channels can be mobile phones, cards combined 
with card readers, ATMs, computers connected to 
the internet, and others. Customers transact through 
branches, but also through agents or remotely 
from their digital devices. They typically use basic 
transaction accounts targeted at the mass market 
(including e-money accounts, also called prepaid or 
stored-value accounts), but also access services over 
the counter (OTC).4Four factors distinguish DFS in a financial inclusion—
or digital financial inclusion—context from 
traditional financial services: (i ) new providers such 
as e-money issuers (EMIs); (ii) heavy reliance on 
digital technology; (iii) agents serving as the principal 
interface with customers; and (iv) use of the services 
by financially excluded and underserved customers.5 
Each of these factors has implications for digital 
financial inclusion—and for regulating DFS.
For many years now, CGAP has been monitoring how 
new DFS models are regulated, and how regulation 
might have to adapt to support or enable DFS models 
with the potential to advance financial inclusion. 
In 2007, CGAP developed a list of “key topics in 
regulating branchless banking” (Lyman et al. 2008). 
Four of these topics are now widely considered the 
core building blocks of DFS regulation. This Focus 
Note takes a close look at these four basic regulatory 
enablers and how they have been implemented in 
practice. We analyze the frameworks adopted by 10 
countries in Africa and Asia where CGAP has focused 
its in-country work on promoting a wider market 
systems approach to DFS.6
The four basic regulatory enablers
The following enablers have guided CGAP’s 
assistance in partner countries in creating 
appropriate regulatory frameworks for DFS:
Enabler 1: Nonbank E-Money Issuance
A basic requirement is to create a specialized 
licensing window for nonbank providers—EMIs. 
These entities accept funds from individuals for 
repayment in the future (an activity normally 
reserved for banks) against the issuance of e-money 
accounts (also variously called prepaid or stored 
value accounts), a type of basic transaction account. 
EMIs may issue such accounts without being subject 
1 The term “branchless banking” was first used in Lyman, Ivatury, and Staschen (2006). Porteous (2006) introduced the term “transformational”.
2 See, e.g., the AFI glossary (AFI 2016). We do not discuss specific issues in offering insurance products digitally.
3 We use the term “bank” to refer to any type of prudentially regulated deposit-taking financial institution unless otherwise indicated.
4 Compare a similar definition of DFS accounts  in Arabehety et al. (2016). Our definition of transaction account is in line with the definition 
in the PAFI Report (CPMI and World Bank Group 2016): “Transaction accounts are defined as accounts (including e-money/prepaid 
accounts) held with banks or authorized and/or regulated PSPs, which can be used to make and receive payments and to store value.”
5 This list draws on GPFI (2016), but leaves out the factor of new products and services and their bundling, because the focus here is on many of the 
same products and services offered before. New products such as digital credit, crowdfunding, and bundled products would require a separate analysis.
6 This approach, described by Burjorjee and Scola (2015), focuses on the core determinants of supply and demand, including regulation and 
supervision as one of the functions supporting the core.6
7 Empirical research confirms some of these correlations. See, e.g. , Rashid and Staschen (2017), who looked at evidence from Pakistan; Evans 
and Pirchio (2015), who researched 22 developing countries and concluded that: “Heavy regulation, and in particular an insistence that banks 
play a central role in the schemes, together with burdensome KYC and agent restrictions, is generally fatal to igniting mobile money schemes.”to the full range of prudential rules applicable to 
traditional banks—under the condition that they 
do not intermediate the funds collected from their 
clients. This opens space to nonbanks that can 
provide basic financial services, potentially with 
lower costs and greater efficiency.
Enabler 2: Use of Agents
Next, DFS providers—both banks and nonbanks—are 
permitted to use third-party agents such as retail 
shops to provide customers access to their services. 
This allows the use of existing third-party infrastructure 
to create much wider access at relatively low cost.
Enabler 3: Risk-based Customer Due Diligence
A proportionate anti-money laundering and 
countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) 
framework allows simplified customer due diligence 
(CDD) for lower-risk accounts and transactions, such 
as opening and using basic transaction accounts or 
conducting low-value OTC transactions with DFS 
providers. This eases providers’ costs of customer 
acquisition, while making more people eligible to 
access and use formal financial services.Enabler 4: Consumer Protection
Financial consumer protection (FCP) rules are tailored 
to the full range of DFS providers and products. It 
might be argued that such FCP rules are not necessary 
for the emergence of a DFS market. It is nonetheless 
clear that basic rules in areas such as transparency, 
fair treatment, effective recourse, and service delivery 
standards are needed to build consumer trust and 
create a safe and sound DFS sector in the longer term.
Why the focus on these four elements? They arise 
consistently in CGAP’s experience working on DFS 
frameworks, and their importance is underscored 
in research and policy discussions. There is wide 
agreement that the four enablers are necessary (though 
not sufficient) conditions for DFS to flourish. This is not 
to deny that DFS has emerged in some markets where 
one or more of the enablers are weak or missing, nor 
that other enablers, such as healthy competition or 
interoperability, might be equally important in some 
settings. But experience strongly suggests that, 
in any given market, DFS is far more likely to grow 
responsibly and sustainably to its full potential when 
all four elements are in place.7 (See Box 1.)
Following a seven-country study in 2007 (Lyman 
et al. 2008), CGAP identified (i) the authorization to 
use retail agents and (ii) risk-based AML/CFT rules 
as necessary, but not sufficient, preconditions for 
inclusive DFS, and classified several others as “next 
generation” issues, including (iii) regulatory space for 
the issuance of e-money particularly by nonbanks; 
(iv) effective consumer protection; and (v ) policies 
governing competition.a
GSMA characterizes countries’ regulatory frameworks 
on mobile money as “enabling” or “nonenabling” 
according to criteria including the following: 
(i) nonbanks are permitted to issue e-money; (ii) capital requirements are proportional to the risks of the 
e-money business; and (iii) mobile money providers 
may use agents for cash-in and cash-out operations. 
Furthermore, GSMA lists CDD requirements as one 
of the major obstacles to mobile money uptake. It 
also stresses the importance of customer protection 
measures such as transparency, customer recourse, 
and privacy and data protection (Di Castri 2013).b
The Regulatory Handbook by researchers from the 
University of New South Wales (Malady et al. 2015) 
considers four factors relevant to creating an enabling 
regulatory environment that are like those presented 
in this Focus Note.c
a The study also mentioned inclusive payment system regulation and effective payment system oversight. The creation of a competitive 
ecosystem can be regarded as a cross-cutting issue that is not only—and not even primarily—a matter of financial sector regulation. 
See Mazer and Rowan (2016), who looked at competition in MFS in Kenya and Tanzania. The competition issue most clearly overlaps 
with our basic enablers 1 and 2. In a recent report, the Center for Global Development makes a distinction between promoting 
competition and leveling the playing field, with the former addressing market failures and the latter distortions derived from 
regulations. The report considers these two and KYC rules as the three regulatory topics that matter most for financial inclusion (see 
CGD 2016).
b But GSMA does not cite consumer protection as a necessary  regulatory condition for DFS development. See also GSMA (2016).
c They are ( i) the protection of customers’ funds, ( ii) the use of agents, ( iii) consumer protection, and ( iv) proportionate AML/CFT 
measures.Box 1. The emerging consensus on regulatory enablers7
 8 E.g., India adopted regulations on agents (referred to as business correspondents ) in 2006, but has since enacted several amendments to 
mitigate some of the constraints under the early model.
 9 As laws and regulations frequently change, this paper does not include a list of all legal texts consulted. To the best of our knowledge, we 
considered the state of laws and regulation as of January 2018. For a comprehensive library of DFS-related laws, regulations, and policies, see 
www.dfsobservatory.com.
10 Unless otherwise indicated, general statements in this paper apply to these 10 countries only.
11 According to the GSMA Mobile Money Tracker, all of them have five or more live mobile money deployments (keeping in mind that DFS is 
a broader concept than just mobile money).While there is broad agreement that these 
four enablers comprise the core of an enabling 
regulatory framework, the detailed content and 
sequence of specific policy changes are much 
less clear. Nor are the four enablers equivalent 
in terms of the type or scope of key regulatory 
decisions that need to be taken under each to 
make them effective. Enabler 1 is about creating 
room for new players that might be better placed 
to serve the lower end of the market than existing 
banks. Enabler 2 permits the use of a new channel 
(by old and new players) that leverages third-party 
infrastructure. Enabler 3 addresses the specific 
challenges in serving new customer segments that 
might previously not have been eligible or were 
too costly to serve. Enabler 4 stresses the changing 
nature of consumer protection issues with new 
players and new delivery channels that have to be 
taken into account for healthy market development. 
Even where an enabler is already incorporated into 
a country’s legal framework, there may be need for 
improving its effectiveness, by continuously fine-
tuning regulations,8 and/or improving compliance 
and enforcement through supervision.Approach and objective
The objective of our research was to understand 
how a range of countries have addressed the four 
enablers in their regulatory frameworks and to see 
what lessons can be learned from this experience. 
For this purpose, a granular analysis is required—
of both policy and practice—that makes use of 
CGAP’s understanding not only of regulatory 
issues across the 10 countries, but also of market 
structure, provider dynamics, and demand-side 
issues.
The analysis is based on a review of relevant laws 
and regulations from all 10 countries where CGAP 
has focused its in-country work (see Figure 1).9 The 
countries covered are Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, 
and Uganda in East Africa, Côte d’Ivoire and 
Ghana in West Africa, Bangladesh, India, and 
Pakistan in East Asia, and Myanmar in Southeast 
Asia.10 They figure among the most advanced 
DFS markets (with the exception of Myanmar),11 
and all but two (Rwanda and Côte d’Ivoire) are 
former British colonies that share the common law 
Figure 1. Countries covered in the research
Bangladesh
Côte d’Ivoire
Ghana
India
Kenya
Myanmar
Pakistan
Rwanda
Tanzania
Uganda8
12 In several cases, financial authorities have enabled e-money issuance without defining the concept in legislation (instead, issuing guidelines 
or no-objection letters).
13 In several countries, the acceptance of repayable funds (even without intermediation) fits the legal definition of banking activity, which 
prevents the emergence of EMIs. This was the case in Mexico until the adoption of its FinTech law in February 2018.tradition. While the group is hardly representative 
of DFS markets in the developing world, it includes 
diverse countries in terms of size, population, and 
economic structure. Our intent is to analyze the 
experience of these 10 markets, and to share the 
lessons.
Based on legal analysis and our familiarity with the 
wider ecosystem, we distilled the most pertinent 
issues relevant to each of the enablers. The 
objective was not to come up with a complete 
description of the regulatory framework in each 
of the 10 countries (this would quickly become 
outdated), but to explore commonalities and 
differences, highlighting the most interesting cases 
for each issue.
1  Enabler 1: Nonbank 
e-money issuance
Our first basic regulatory enabler is a framework 
that allows nonbanks to issue a type of basic (digital) 
transaction account—an “e-money account.” 
Allowing nonbanks to become licensed EMIs is 
key to unleashing the DFS market and enabling it 
to achieve scale. Chief among nonbank providers 
in emerging markets and developing economies 
(EMDE) are MNOs, who have large networks of 
agents and own the communication infrastructure 
that is key to delivering financial services. Absent a 
framework permitting EMIs, DFS would continue to 
rely on banks, which usually face heavy prudential 
and operating requirements, have high costs and 
complex organizational structures and IT systems, 
and limited outreach. Banks may also focus on 
higher-income market segments, to offset high 
operational costs.
The following are essential components of the first 
enabler:
• Setting basic parameters for the e-money account 
and EMIs.
• Establishing licensing criteria and range of 
permitted activities for EMIs.• Protecting customer funds converted into e-money 
(i.e., e-float).
1.1  The legal basis for nonbank 
e-money issuance
The first step in enabling nonbank e-money issuance 
is to incorporate the concept in law or regulation.12 
Banking laws are sometimes a bar to nonbank 
e-money issuance, due to the legal definition of 
banking business; hence, a specialized definition 
of e-money as being distinct from deposit-taking is 
essential.13 E-money accounts and their issuers have 
different names and regulatory headings across the 
world. This can create problems of comparability, 
but the basic concepts are largely the same 
everywhere. E-money combines functions such as 
facilitating payments and storing value electronically. 
A workable legal definition must squarely address 
these payment- and deposit-like aspects. For clarity, 
we use a common definition of e-money based on 
that used in the European Union for all 10 countries—
even if the terminology used in local law differs (see 
Box 2). In fact, in some countries, the term “e-money” 
is not used at all.
The second step is to allow nonbanks to issue 
e-money. The countries analyzed exhibit several 
approaches to determining who may be authorized 
to issue e-money (see Table 1). The most 
common approach is to recognize e-money as a 
product offered exclusively by payment service 
providers (PSPs), which generally include banks. 
Kenya, Rwanda, and Tanzania, for instance, permit 
only PSPs to apply to become EMIs. Having a 
Box 2. E-money definition
According to the European Union (Directive 
2009/110/EC, Art. 1.3) e-money is defined as:
(i) electronically stored monetary value as 
represented by a claim on the issuer, (ii) issued 
on receipt of funds for the purpose of making 
payment transactions, and (iii) accepted by a 
natural or legal person other than the electronic 
money issuer.9
Table 1. E-money issuancea 
CountryInstitutions that may  
issue e-moneyBanks: requirements for 
e-money authorizationEMIs (nonbanks): further 
requirements & limitsb
Bangladesh “Mobile accounts” can only 
be issued by banks or their 
subsidiaries. (EMIs allowed by 
law but not in practice.)Banks to seek prior approval 
for MFS; must submit full 
details of services, contracts, 
agents, etc.Only bank subsidiaries are 
permitted (under the same rules 
as banks). (EMIs allowed by law 
but not in practice.)
Côte 
d’Ivoire 
(WAEMU)Commercial banks and PSPs 
may issue but must notify 
regulator. MNOs must establish 
dedicated subsidiary and apply 
for license as EMI.Commercial banks required 
only to notify regulator.EMIs must be dedicated 
companies and meet capital 
requirements: minimum 3% of 
outstanding e-money, and at 
least equal to their minimum 
share capital requirements.
Ghana Banks are authorized as EMIs, 
nonbanks licensed as dedicated 
EMIs (DEMIs).Submit plan for proposed 
operations, business plan, 
geographical coverageIf engaged in other activities, 
nonbank must create separate 
dedicated legal entity for DEMI. 
Min. 25% local ownership
India Issuance (open-loop PPIs) 
limited to banks and payments 
banks.Banks/payments banks to 
get RBI approval for open-
loop PPIs.No issuance by nonbanks.
Kenya Banks, PSPs, and other financial 
institutions authorized to issue 
e-money. PSP can be telecom 
company or a nonbank.None MNOs must present telecom 
license. PSPs to keep records 
and accounts for e-money 
activities.
Myanmar Banks and nonbank financial 
institutions including MNOs can 
apply to provide MFSRegulations do not specify, 
only mention that they 
require product approval.Dedicated company required to 
set up mobile financial services 
provider. Nonbanks need letter 
of no-objection from primary 
(e.g., telecom) regulator.
Pakistan Branchless banking accounts: 
Only Banks (Islamic, 
Microfinance, Commercial 
Banks).Application: specify 
services and strategy, risk 
management, security, 
business continuity, etc.Provision for nonbank e-money 
issuance under payments law, 
but no implementing regulations 
issued
Rwanda Nonbanks must get license as 
PSP . Commercial banks and 
deposit-taking MFIs (supervised 
financial institutions), must be 
approved as payment services 
providers to apply to issue 
e-money.Supervised financial 
institutions approved as 
PSPs are exempt from 
licensing, but must obtain 
further approval to issue 
e-money.Application: describe services, 
governance, risk management, 
IT infrastructure, consumer 
policies, trustees, directors.
Tanzania Only PSPs can issue e-money. 
Nonbank PSPs must obtain 
license. PSPs that are financial 
institutions require regulator’s 
approval.Financial institutions need 
PSP license to be eligible. 
Application: information on 
services, governance, fund 
protection.Nonbank PSPs require separate 
dedicated entity. Application: 
like financial institution, also, 
minimum capital, process/ 
system architecture, etc.
Uganda Nonbank can become mobile 
money services provider (MMSP) 
as partner of bank. Regulator 
approves partner bank; mobile 
money is product of the bank.Partner bank must apply for 
approval to issue mobile 
money on behalf of the 
MMSP .Limited company; submit 
financials, risk management, IT 
systems. The MMSPs (nonbanks) 
manage mobile money platform.
a. Some countries separately list banking institutions that are not commercial banks. These distinctions are indicated where relevant.
b. EMI licensing requirements are often in addition to the requirements applied to banks seeking e-money authorization.10
14 The West African Economic and Monetary Union is a regional jurisdiction that provides for, among other things, common financial services 
laws and regulations across member countries. Where this paper addresses Côte d’Ivoire, the main regulations discussed are W AEMU-wide 
and are overseen by the regional central bank, BCEAO. Other W AEMU members are Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, 
Senegal, and Togo.
15 See the caveat with respect to Bangladesh.
16 Limited-purpose banks are also the current approach in Mexico, where there are “niche banks” limited to payment services.
17 Payments banks are also subject to ownership rules, including a minimum share (40 percent) for the promoter in the initial years, followed 
by diversification requirements and restrictions on equity and voting rights concentration.
18 BRAC Bank owns 51 percent of bKash, with the remaining shares owned by Money in Motion, IFC, and the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation. Bangladesh (as well as Pakistan) in practice does not permit a nonbank-based model, despite having regulatory provisions 
allowing nonbanks to issue e-money. Bangladesh’s Payments and Settlement Systems Regulations (2014) define e-money issuance as a 
payment service (only PSPs qualify)—but no license has been issued to nonbank EMIs to date. Also, Pakistan’s Payment Systems and 
Electronic Fund Transfer Act (2007) provides sufficient room for the direct licensing of nonbank providers as EMIs, but the State Bank of 
Pakistan never issued implementing regulations to this effect.PSP certificate is a prior condition for obtaining 
an e-money license (or authorization). Another 
approach is for the financial regulator to license EMIs 
as a separate, stand-alone category of institution. In 
Myanmar, for example, becoming a mobile financial 
services (MFS) provider (functionally equivalent to 
an EMI) requires a registration certificate (e.g., a 
license) issued under the broad authority of the 
banking law. Côte d’Ivoire, as a WAEMU member, 
also offers a stand-alone EMI license.14 In the 
approaches cited, policy makers create a regulatory 
niche, or adapt an existing one, to accommodate 
the distinct features of e-money.
Some of the 10 countries, however, fall short 
of this second step by allowing only banks to 
issue e-money. In all 10 countries, banks may  
become issuers, but as they are already licensed 
and supervised, they require approval only by 
the central bank to offer e-money accounts as 
an additional product. However, three of the 
countries (India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh)15 have 
generally treated e-money issuance as analogous 
to offering deposit accounts, and thus limited it 
to banks.
The bank-only approach has a few variants, which 
is evidence that nonbanks still play a leading role in 
the DFS space, subject to a few limitations.
• In India, the equivalent of e-money accounts—
prepaid payment instruments (PPIs) that are 
open loop (i.e., can be used outside a restricted 
network and redeemed for cash)—can be issued 
only by banks. In addition, the central bank has 
created the new category of payments bank  
specializing in small savings and payments 
services. This “differentiated” or special-purpose bank can accept limited deposits, issue e-money, 
and provide remittance services—but cannot 
extend credit.16 Payments banks are subject to 
less onerous licensing and prudential standards 
than commercial banks (though more onerous 
than the typical EMI in other markets).17 Among 
the promoters of the 11 entities that received “in 
principle” approval for a license from the central 
bank were MNOs, the India Post, and other 
nonbanks such as agent companies and prepaid 
payment issuers.
• In Pakistan, a nonbank e-money model has not 
been permitted either. However, MNOs have 
either bought majority stakes in banks or set up 
greenfield banks to offer MFS in a de jure bank-
based model. Further, these services can be 
provided through microfinance banks, which 
benefit from lighter requirements such as lower 
minimum initial capital.
• Bangladesh follows what is called a “bank-led 
model.” However, the fact that not only banks, but 
also bank subsidiaries are permitted to offer so-
called “mobile accounts” has permitted the largest 
DFS provider in Bangladesh, bKash, to operate as 
a nonbank (but bank subsidiary), and thus follow 
a de facto e-money model.18 This is a case of 
reality overtaking the original regulatory intent 
of restricting e-money issuance to the banking 
system.
In yet another configuration, Uganda requires 
EMIs to be tightly linked to banks—but not to 
be banks. Ugandan EMIs (referred to as mobile 
money services providers [MMSPs]) offer e-money 
services in partnership with a bank as the licensed 
entity. The EMI itself is not a licensed institution, 
but is responsible for managing the mobile 
money platform and agent network, and for 11
19 This arrangement came into being not by design but because of Bank of Uganda’s lack of legal authority to authorize or regulate nonbank 
PSPs (in the absence of a dedicated payments law).
20 For this reason, in certain jurisdictions e-money is subject to both payments regulation and a specialized e-money regulation. In the 
European Union, e-money is subject to the general rules of the Payments Directive, which are applicable to all types of payments, and to the 
rules of the E-Money Directive, which focus on the deposit-like functions of e-money.
21 See relevant sections of National Payment System Act and Regulations (Kenya); and Tanzanian National Payment System Act, 2015 and 
Electronic-Money Regulations 2015, Third Schedule (Tanzania).
22 Myanmar falls into the same category, although the regulations lack clarity on how exactly they apply to banks when they want to launch 
MFS.
23 E.g., dedicated EMI (DEMI) in Ghana, etablissement de monnaie electronique  in Côte d’Ivoire (for issuers that are not banks, PSPs, or 
MFIs), and MFSP in Myanmar.issuing “mobile wallets,” (i.e., e-money accounts), 
under some basic rules established in regulatory 
guidance.19
In the countries studied, but also in many other 
EMDE, full-fledged traditional banks have not 
been efficient DFS providers because of their high 
costs and their heavy prudential and operational 
regulations. In Bangladesh, for example, while 
more than 20 banks have been licensed to provide 
MFS, none of them comes close to bKash, the only 
nonbank provider. Bank regulations include a wide 
range of prudential norms that are not required 
for EMIs that do not intermediate public funds. 
These rules are too burdensome for banks focused 
on e-money issuance to flourish—except in those 
cases where limited purpose banks are exempt 
from many of the requirements. While commercial 
bank regulations are too heavy, generic PSP 
regulations are typically too light for purposes of 
e-money issuance, given the different risk profiles 
of fund transfers versus stored-value accounts.
E-money is a distinct product with similarities 
to both deposits and payments, and should be 
regulated accordingly. This is why e-money is 
increasingly treated as a kind of payments-plus  
activity.20 Thus, Kenya and Tanzania require 
providers to have a PSP authorization but also 
(with the exception of banks) to submit to more 
rigorous further scrutiny to gain an e-money 
license.21 Ghana and WAEMU allow banks to 
become authorized EMIs through a relatively 
simple process, while nonbanks must obtain an 
EMI license.22 A variety of regulated institutions in 
these two jurisdictions may seek authorization to 
issue e-money, including PSPs and microfinance 
institutions (MFIs), and nonbanks such as MNOs 
may apply for an EMI license.1.2  Licensing requirements, permitted 
activities, and reporting
Once a policy of nonbank e-money issuance is 
in place, further steps are required to define 
licensing criteria and to delimit the range of 
permitted activities for EMIs. Limiting the range 
of permitted activities is important for lowering 
the risk profile of EMIs, which in turn allows 
them to take advantage of relaxed entry and 
ongoing requirements (i.e., less stringent than for 
commercial banks). The most important limitation 
for EMIs is the prohibition on intermediating funds 
collected from their clients.
Where e-money is conceived as being not a deposit-
like but rather a payment-like or payment-plus  
product, there is a straightforward policy basis for 
licensing nonbanks as EMIs and regulating them 
accordingly. For institutions already engaged 
in other types of business, licensing (or lighter-
touch authorization) often requires the applicant 
to establish either a unit (Kenya) or a subsidiary 
dedicated to e-money issuance (in Côte d’Ivoire and 
Ghana for all types of nonbanks, and in Myanmar for 
MNOs). The separation of e-money operations (and 
finances) from those of a parent nonbank company is 
considered essential for effective supervision (BCBS 
2016, p. 11). The other option is to set up a new, 
free-standing EMI. The legal term for licensed EMIs 
differs across countries.23
Allowing nonbanks to issue e-money entails 
bringing them under the direct authority of the 
financial services regulator—in the 10 countries, 
the central bank. In some countries, where an MNO 
seeks to become an EMI, it must provide supporting 
evidence from the telecom regulator—for example, 
a certified copy of its telecommunication license 12
24 Kenya also offers a small e-money issuer  license with lower minimum capital, but restricts issuance to closed and semi-closed loop 
instruments. Several other countries including India and Pakistan also provide a sliding scale of requirements for issuers of closed-, 
semi-closed, and open-loop instruments, but only the latter are considered here as having the functionality of e-money.
25 Strictly speaking, it is the intermediation of deposits in the form of loans that is prohibited. Some jurisdictions, including W AEMU and 
Rwanda, permit placement of funds in approved investment and debt instruments.(Kenya) or a no-objection letter (Myanmar). 
Minimum initial capital for EMIs is lower than for 
banks, ranging from just under US$200,000 for 
an EMI in Kenya to US$2.2 million for a mobile 
financial services provider (MFSP) in Myanmar. In 
comparison, payments banks in India need more 
than US$15 million in capital (see Table 2).24 Other 
requirements deal with matters such as the business 
plan, risk management, settlement of customer 
claims, and IT systems. EMIs are generally required 
to be limited liability corporations, and some 
countries impose ownership requirements (see 
Table 1). In Ghana, for example, a dedicated EMI 
must have at least 25 percent indigenous ownership.
The range of EMIs’ activities is often restricted to 
core functions such as issuing e-money accounts, 
cash-in/cash-out, and domestic payments and 
transfers. Payments could include utility bills, 
merchant payments, salary disbursements, elderly 
allowances, and tax payments (as in Bangladesh). 
Other related services are treated differently across 
countries. For example, OTC transfers are expressly 
permitted in Ghana and prohibited in Uganda, 
while other countries (Tanzania) do not address the 
issue directly. Inbound international remittances 
are also subject to varied, sometimes unclear, 
treatment. For example, in Ghana and Myanmar, 
such remittances are expressly permitted, while 
in other countries (Uganda) there is no explicit rule. In such cases (Kenya), general rules on money 
remittance services might apply.
Most importantly, financial intermediation by 
EMIs is not allowed.25 These EMIs cannot provide 
services such as credit, investments, insurance, or 
savings on their own account, but in some cases, 
may provide access to them in partnership with 
a licensed financial institution. Further, e-money 
accounts are generally subject to quantitative 
ceilings (e.g., maximum e-money outstanding per 
issuer or maximum balance per customer).
In addition to the licensing requirements, EMIs are 
subject to ongoing reporting requirements that are 
relatively light (see Box 3).Table 2. Capital requirements and authorization fees (US$)
CountryLicensed EMI 
(nonbank) Minimum initial capital: EMIEMI authorization / 
application feesMinimum initial 
capital: Bank
Côte d’Ivoire EMI 490,000 Information not available. 16.36 million
Ghana DEMI 1.2 million 2,200 14.25 million
India Payments bank 15.4 million Information not available. 77.2 million
Kenya EMI 193,000 Authorization fee: 9,700
Application fee: 509.7 million
Myanmar MFSP 2.2 million Information not available. 14.8 million
Rwanda EMI 121,000 Financial institutions: 1,200
Nonfinancial institutions: 6,0003.6 million
Tanzania EMI 224,000 900 6.7 million
Uganda MMSP n.a. [must partner with a bank] Information not available. 6.9 million
Box 3. Reporting and access to data
EMIs must submit regular reports to the central 
bank. The rules generally demand monthly 
reporting on, for example, the number of accounts, 
volume and value transacted, agents, incidents 
of fraud, complaints, scope of services, and loss 
of data. There is also annual reporting in the 
form of audited financial statements and reports 
on risk management and IT practices (in some 
cases, including an external system audit, as in 
Bangladesh). The regulator is generally allowed to 
access all databases and registries of transactions 
from EMIs and agents. Records of electronic 
transactions are to be kept for a period of years 
(e.g., five years in Myanmar, seven in Kenya).13
26 This discussion draws on Tarazi and Breloff (2010).
27 This is the case, e.g., in Myanmar, Tanzania, Rwanda, and Ghana (See Table 3).
28 E.g., in Côte d’Ivoire, the rules restrict the use of the funds to e-money reimbursement. This provides a measure of protection, but it is not 
clear whether this would be effective, e.g., in the case of the EMI’s bankruptcy.
29 The European Union has a similar provision. See Oliveros and Pacheco (2016). This in effect means that the e-float funds should not appear 
on the issuer’s balance sheet and not be available to meet any other obligations of the issuer.
30 Trusts are better known in common law than in civil law countries; however, the law in this area has been evolving.
31 Although the relevant law differs in detail across countries, escrow is designed to place assets beyond the legal control of the issuer, which 
protects them from many third-party claims. In comparison, a trust is a more formalized structure and is usually deemed to be a stronger 
protection to the assets in it.
32 The central bank may specify or approve certain banks for this purpose (e.g., in Kenya, those meeting strength criteria).
33 For Côte d’Ivoire, see Instruction N°008-05-2015 Régissant les Conditions et Modalités d’Exercice des Activités des Émetteurs de Monnaie 
Électronique dans les Etats Membres de l’Union Monétaire Ouest Africaine (UMOA)  (2015), arts. 32-35. For the EU, see Directive 2009/  
110/EC, art. 12.1.3 Treatment of e-float
The last key component of the framework for 
nonbank e-money issuance is the protection of 
funds collected from customers and converted into 
e-money (i.e., the e-float).26 Upon receipt of funds 
from the customer, the rules generally require the 
prompt deposit of those funds in bank accounts or 
placement in other safe, liquid assets. The rules may 
specify a time limit for the funds to be deposited or 
reconciled with the e-float, or simply state that the 
funds in the e-float account may never be less than 
the aggregate e-money issued.27
The first concern arising here is whether and how 
customer funds are protected from any claims and 
risks to which the EMI is subject. A third-party claim 
on the EMI (e.g., due to default or bankruptcy) could 
attach to funds in the e-float account. The e-money 
rules do not always address this issue directly,28 
but some countries require the isolation and ring-
fencing of e-float funds from claims on the EMI. In 
Ghana, the regulations require e-float deposits to be 
separately identified, and prohibit any commingling 
with funds that have a different source or purpose.29 
In contrast, the rules in Uganda stipulate that e-float 
funds are the property of the customer and not of 
the EMI. It is important that these countries have set 
up such protections, but whether they are effective 
against other legal claims will need to be confirmed 
in practice.
Some countries protect the e-float (once deposited 
in a bank) by specifying that it should be placed 
in a special type of account. One approach is 
to require such deposits to be placed in a trust  
account administered by a trustee on behalf of the e-money customer (as in Kenya, Myanmar, 
Tanzania) (Greenacre and Buckley 2014).30 A 
similar arrangement is an escrow account. This is 
an account managed by a third party, where funds 
are released upon the occurrence of conditions 
stated in the escrow agreement (e.g., authorized 
payment, settlement).31 An escrow account is 
required for EMIs in Uganda.
The second question is what prudential safeguards 
apply to the e-float. In most of the 10 countries, 
regulations mandate that all customer funds 
(100 percent of all e-money outstanding) be 
deposited with commercial banks.32 Partial 
exceptions to this rule are WAEMU and Rwanda, 
where a portion of the funds—up to 25 percent and 
20 percent, respectively—may be placed in other 
types of safe investments. Further, concern about 
concentration risks on the part of the investor (the 
EMI) or the investee (the bank holding the e-float) 
has resulted in diversification rules. Some countries 
place ceilings on the proportion of an issuer’s 
e-float funds deposited in any single bank (e.g., in 
Tanzania the maximum is 25 percent), while others 
set a limit on the value of e-float deposits as a 
percentage of the recipient bank’s net worth (e.g., 
15 percent in Ghana, and 25 percent in Rwanda). 
(See Table 3.)
There are a variety of approaches to interest 
accrued on e-float accounts. Some jurisdictions 
such as WAEMU and the EU do not permit any 
interest to be paid to e-money customers for the 
funds deposited.33 Alternatively, several countries 
(such as Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania, and Myanmar) 
prescribe the allocation of any such interest accrued 
(Tsang et al. 2017). Tanzania, for example, requires 14
34 Some customers in Ghana have reportedly asked that no interest be paid to them for e-float, which raises the question of what alternative 
arrangements (e.g., Shari’a -compliant vehicles) might be made to enable such customers to share equitably in the earnings.
35 Very few countries, including the United States, have pass-through deposit insurance provisions in place.interest accrued in the trust account to be used 
for the direct benefit of customers and held in a 
separate account until it is paid out. Bangladesh 
and Myanmar have a similar rule. Ghana requires 
80 percent of the interest accrued on e-float 
accounts to be paid to e-money customers.34 
In Kenya, by contrast, income generated from 
e-money trust funds must be donated to a public 
charitable organization in accordance with trust 
legislation and in consultation with the central bank.
How are e-money accounts and e-float accounts 
treated under existing deposit insurance systems? 
Often, this issue is not explicitly addressed in the 
law or regulation. In that case, e-float accounts would, in principle, fall within the deposit guarantee 
system—that is, if accounts from legal persons 
are covered. But the simple application of this 
guarantee would pose problems, since e-float 
accounts exceed the per-account ceiling. In India, 
payments banks issue e-money against deposits, 
which are covered by the deposit insurance and 
credit guarantee corporation. Ghana’s e-money 
regulations require e-money accounts to be granted 
the same protection as deposit accounts. In Kenya, 
a pass-through deposit insurance policy covering 
individual customer account balances held in the 
trust accounts has been adopted but not yet put 
into operation (Izaguirre et al. 2016; Oliveros and 
Pacheco 2016).35Table 3. Regulations on e-float
Country Fund safeguarding rulesDiversification 
requirement Interest payment Reconciliation
Côte d’Ivoire Placed in a bank. At least 
75% in sight/demand 
deposits, the balance in 
time deposits, T-bills, or 
corporate securities.Not specified. No interest paid to 
e-money customers.Daily
Ghana Hold as liquid assets in 
banks.Not to exceed 15% of 
net worth of bank.80% of income from 
pooled account to be 
paid to EMI clients.Daily
Kenya Trust Fund Once float exceeds 
US$950,000, max 25% 
of float may be kept 
in a single bank and 
2 of the banks must be 
strong-rated.Income from trust 
account to be used 
according to trust 
legislation or donated 
to public charity, but not 
paid out to customers.Daily
Myanmar Trust Account Central bank may set 
a limit on number of 
accounts in pooled 
account.Interest from trust 
should go to clients.Daily
Rwanda Trust Account or special 
account. Up to 20% in short-
term government securities; 
up to 10% in term deposits 
(max 3 months).Not specified. Pass through at least 
80% of interest earned 
on float account.Daily
Tanzania Trust Account If float exceeds 
US$45,000, max 25% of 
float may be kept in a 
single bank. Each single 
bank cannot hold trust 
float funds exceeding 
50% of its core capital.Interest from trust 
shall be used for direct 
benefit of e-money 
customers.—
Uganda Escrow Account Bank of Uganda may 
require.Not specified. Daily15
1.4 Summary of experience
The following general patterns emerge from the 
10 countries’ experience in this area:
• In all 10 countries, nonbanks are playing a leading 
role in offering basic transaction accounts to the 
mass market.36 This was accomplished by the 
countries generally abstaining from imposing 
the full range of requirements applicable to 
commercial banks in exchange for limiting their 
range of activities and prohibiting intermediation 
of funds. Seven of the 10 countries have opened 
space for nonbank e-money issuance by creating a 
separate regulatory niche for EMIs.
• The three largest countries among the 10 
countries—all from South Asia—did not create 
a separate licensing window for EMIs, choosing 
to restrict e-money issuance to banks (and bank 
subsidiaries in the case of Bangladesh). In India, 
limited-purpose banks with lighter requirements 
than full-fledged banks were introduced by 
regulation, allowing nonbanks to establish separate 
entities to obtain a license and issue e-money. The 
approach is different in Pakistan, where nonbanks 
need to acquire stakes in existing or newly founded 
banks (though the latter can be microfinance banks). 
In Bangladesh, the dominant EMI is a nonbank 
that is not directly licensed by the regulator and 
operates under the auspices of its parent bank.
• In the case of EMIs, there is convergence on 
prudential safeguarding of e-float funds in bank 
accounts, and isolation of the funds from third-
party claims through trusts or similar structures.
• Other questions remain open to divergent 
approaches, including whether and how e-float 
funds are to be protected by deposit insurance 
systems or whether customers should benefit from 
interest earned on the e-float account.
2 Enabler 2. Use of Agents
Inclusive DFS depends on providers’ ability to 
outsource customer-facing functions to agents—
thereby extending their reach and capturing 
efficiencies. Traditional service channels, especially “brick-and-mortar” branches, cannot solve the 
distribution problem in a cost-effective manner. 
Ideally the full range of providers—banks and 
nonbanks such as EMIs—should be permitted to 
distribute their products and services cheaply through 
a wide range of agent types. But this heightens 
agent risks that may affect customers or providers. A 
balance must be struck between inclusion and safety.
In this part, we discuss the following critical 
dimensions of the second enabler:
• Establishing a basic framework for the use of 
agents in DFS, in which the responsibilities of 
agents and principals are clearly delineated.
• Fixing criteria for the form and content of the 
agency agreement, including the type and scope 
of the agency.
• Setting standards of eligibility and procedures for 
authorization of agents.
• Providing for ongoing obligations of both parties, 
including security and reporting standards.
Our analysis of these areas identifies a few distinct 
approaches that the different countries follow in 
regulating agents used by DFS providers. These 
reflect policy decisions such as categorizing agents 
by the types of providers they represent or by the 
kinds of activities in which the agents are engaged.
2.1 Basic framework for DFS agency
Agency arrangements are familiar across many 
sectors of the economy and can be adapted to 
the needs of financial services, including DFS. 
Agency contracts are usually governed by a well-
developed set of legal standards. Depending 
on the context, these may include common law 
principles, provisions of the civil or commercial 
code, legislation on certain types of agents (e.g., 
broker, distributor, trustee), or general outsourcing 
rules for financial institutions.
In the DFS context, heightened risks arise not 
only from the differing interests of principals 
and agents, but also due to intervening factors 
36 Most, but not all, of these are e-money accounts.16
37 Bangladesh, Kenya, Myanmar, and Tanzania apply this rule (in Tanzania it includes acts of omission), reasoning that the principal bank is the 
party best able to monitor agents’ behavior and to deter misconduct.
38 Bangladesh, Kenya, Pakistan, Rwanda, and Tanzania.
39 An exception is India, where the central bank has instructed the principal bank to consider the cash handled by the agent as its own cash 
and lower the agent’s prefunding levels as it gains experience over time with the agent. RBI Circular on Issues in Cash Management—
RPCD.FID.BC.No. 96/12.01.011/ 2013-14.
40 Kenya distinguishes between cash merchants and full agents in its National Payment System Regulations (Arts. 14–18), but imposes identical 
standards on them.
41 This is the case in, e.g., Kenya and Tanzania, where banks have partnered with EMIs to offer bank accounts to e-money customers. 
Customers can access their bank accounts only by moving money in and out of the mobile wallet offered by the EMI partner. Examples for 
this are M-Shwari in Kenya and M-Pawa in Tanzania.linked to technology platforms, remote access, 
and the complexity inherent to financial services. 
Regulators have identified operational, consumer, 
and money laundering/terrorist financing risks as 
the major agent-related risks (Dias et al. 2015). In 
response, the countries studied have developed 
specific regulations to govern agency relations and 
their inherent risks.
Where agents are permitted, allocation of legal 
responsibility is essential. Every agent acts on behalf 
of a responsible principal. Agency regulations 
generally stipulate the principal’s liability for its 
agent’s actions within the scope of delegated 
responsibility (whether expressly or clearly implied). 
Regulations in the countries studied make this 
principal liability explicit, sometimes requiring it 
to be stated in the agency agreement. In several 
countries, the laws expand the liability of banks 
to include any improper actions of the agent (this 
applies only where a bank is the principal).37
However, the regulations do not solely rely on this 
liability provision. They also specify due diligence and 
risk management steps to be taken by principals with 
respect to their agents. Regulations generally require 
the principal to carry out ex ante and ongoing (or 
periodic) assessment of an agent’s risks and to have 
appropriate internal controls and risk management 
systems. In half of the 10 countries,38 the rules require 
principals to provide agents with training on their 
role in financial services delivery. Some countries 
such as Bangladesh, India, and Rwanda have detailed 
risk management frameworks (e.g., IT requirements) 
for the use of agents by licensed institutions as well 
as rules for agents’ liquidity.
A few experts have questioned the need for 
financial institutions to assume liability for and 
oversight of the activities of all agents (e.g., Mas 2015). They argue that most agents are simple 
“cash merchants” transacting against their own 
money. In the real-time, prefunded environment of 
DFS as it is seen in most of the 10 countries, cash-in 
and cash-out transactions, unlike bank deposits, do 
not increase bank liabilities but only transfer values 
between account-holders.39 This limits agent risk 
essentially to consumer protection and AML/CFT 
issues. When outsourcing goes beyond this level, 
for example, when agents are involved in account 
opening or credit assessments, the risks increase.40
Several countries distinguish between nonbank and 
banking agents across the board, imposing stricter 
requirements on the latter. Few countries have 
implemented a truly risk-based approach and have 
instead imposed differential treatment on agents 
that basically offer the same standard services. An 
activity-based approach applying uniform rules to 
all types of providers and all types of accounts for a 
given type of activity (e.g., cash-in/cash-out versus 
loan disbursement) seems optimal for creating a 
level playing field. This is particularly the case with 
increased agent sharing and models where bank 
accounts are served through EMI agents, as is the 
case in many digital credit models.41 (See Box 4.)
2.2 Terms of the agency agreement
Beyond establishing the basic framework for DFS 
agency, policy makers are concerned about the 
form and content of the agency agreement (i.e., 
what an agent may be hired to do and how the 
agent is bound to the principal). We first take up 
the how question.
In all 10 countries, a written contract is required for 
retaining an agent, and model agreements may be 
inspected by the regulator. In some countries, the 
regulations prescribe contractual language, such as 17
a statement of the principal’s liability (e.g., for rapid 
transfer agents in Côte d’Ivoire, banking agents in 
Tanzania, PSP agents in Rwanda). Other mandatory 
clauses may address the principal’s authority to 
monitor and inspect the agent (banking agents 
in India) or the agent’s duty to retain pertinent 
records and make them available for inspection by 
the regulator (India, Rwanda).
Another common feature in this area is the 
prohibition of exclusivity clauses in agency agreements. The majority of the 10 countries 
prohibit agency agreements that bind an agent to 
a sole principal. Pakistan, Rwanda, and Bangladesh 
take a slightly different approach, stipulating that 
an agent may serve several institutions, thus leaving 
open the possibility (at least in principle) that 
an agent and provider could choose to enter an 
exclusive agreement. Such regulations are aimed 
at protecting competition by limiting vertical tie-
ups and at promoting access to the services of 
more than one issuer at the agent point of service. The countries studied illustrate divergent approaches 
to agent regulation, of which we have identified 
three. The institution-based approach defines agent 
rules within the regulatory framework for different 
types of financial institutions that are permitted 
to use agents. The focus here is on who may use 
agents, and what conditions apply to each category 
of provider—with the requirements depending on 
the type of principal doing the outsourcing. An 
alternative approach is the account-based  approach, 
where the rules depend on whether agents serve bank 
accounts (savings or credit) or e-money accounts. An 
activity-based approach defines different rules for 
agents depending on the types of services being 
outsourced regardless of the type of principal or the 
type of account served.
Most agent regulation is institution-based (see 
Table 4). This approach is straightforward in a 
country like Pakistan, where only banks—including 
microfinance banks and Islamic banks—can offer DFS. 
Similarly, in India, the regulations for different types of 
banks, including the recently launched payments banks 
as well as banks issuing PPIs, all refer to the same set 
of rules for agents (business correspondents).a The 
different categories of banks are subject to the same 
agent rules. However, the institution-based approach 
leads to fragmentation in a country like Kenya, where 
banking agents, deposit-taking MFI agents, and 
PSP agents have their separate regulations.b While 
this approach might reflect a risk-based regulatory 
design, more often the differences stem from the fact 
that different types of agents are regulated under 
different laws (e.g., banking law vs. payments law 
vs. microfinance law). Account-based and especially 
activity-based approaches are usually closer to a true 
risk-based model.The account-based approach comes into the picture 
when, for example, banks offer not only deposit 
and credit accounts, but also e-money accounts, 
through agents. In Bangladesh, only banks (and 
bank subsidiaries as in the case of bKash) can use 
agents. Bangladesh has banking regulations dealing 
with banking agents as well as distinct, overlapping 
MFS rules applicable to banks (and bank subsidiaries) 
authorized to offer MFS. In Tanzania, banks can be 
EMIs, in which case their e-money agents follow the 
rules for EMI agents rather than for agency banking. In 
these two examples, different departments supervise 
agent activities, depending on the type of account 
offered by the principal regardless of the type of 
activity undertaken by the agent (which could be 
the same standard cash-in and cash-out operations). 
Payment, MFS and e-money accounts come within 
the authority of the payments department, while bank 
accounts are under banking supervision.
There are two examples of activity-based approaches 
in the countries studied. Ghana and Rwanda 
apply a common set of agent outsourcing rules to 
different types of institutions. In Ghana, banking 
and e-money agent activities come under a single, 
common framework (though handled by different 
departments of the Bank of Ghana), just as Rwanda 
applies the same set of agency rules to banks, MFIs, 
PSPs, remittance services providers, and EMIs. 
Differentiated treatment can then be applied to 
the various activities carried out by the agents. This 
treatment is defined in part by the rules generally 
applicable in areas of activity such as e-money 
issuance, remittances, and deposits. Also, Ghana and 
Rwanda permit a wider range of activities to agents 
that are companies (in Ghana, companies meeting a 
size threshold) than to individual agents.c
a PPI issuers that are not banks are permitted to use other agents, but not for open-loop payment instruments.
b The same holds true for banking agents, PSP agents, and EMI agents in Tanzania. But Tanzania’s Electronic Money Regulations (2015) 
take an account-based approach that does not differentiate among the types of institutions approved to issue e-money—thus making it 
a hybrid.
c Also, in Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Paraguay, and Peru, a single regulation applies to all regulated providers allowed to hire agents. This 
includes EMIs that were introduced by laws issued after the agent regulation was already in place (Dias et al. 2015).Box 4. Contrasting approaches to agent regulation18
42 Mobile money agents have in some instances been allowed to be exclusive. This was formerly the case in Kenya and Uganda. Where 
exclusivity is not prohibited—as has been the case in several countries such as Tanzania for e-money agents and in Brazil (Dias et al. 2015, 
p. 25)—one could argue that such an approach is justified on several grounds. Exclusivity, among other things, could help maintain clearer 
accountability and liability by the principal as compared to nonexclusivity. It also incentivizes providers to expand outreach by recruiting 
new agents and to be the first to build an agent network.
43 Framework for Branchless Banking Agent Acquisition and Management, sec. 9.9 (b).
44 W AEMU provides for separate authorization of agents for rapid funds transfer, i.e., OTC services.Most of the sample countries also require providers 
to facilitate interoperability, including at the level 
of their agents, which has a similar effect on 
competition and access. In a few cases (India), by 
contrast, exclusivity is allowed or even mandated 
at the subagent or retail outlet level.42 In Pakistan, 
the central bank retains the authority to impose 
limits on agent sharing with the aim of encouraging 
providers to open new agent locations.43
Agency scope
There remains the question of what agents may 
be authorized to do on the principal’s behalf. DFS 
regulatory frameworks identify activities for which 
the use of agents is permitted and prohibited. The 
range of permitted activities may vary with the type 
of principal represented (bank or nonbank agent 
such as a PSP or EMI agent). In Ghana, for example, 
banks are permitted to deploy agents for a wider 
range of services—marketing and sale of credit, 
savings, insurance, and investment products—than 
are EMIs.
The basic functions that can be outsourced to 
agents include cash-in and cash-out, payments 
services, and information collection and document 
completion for account opening. On this last point, 
the actual opening of accounts is generally handled 
by the principal. In Ghana and Pakistan, however, 
lower-level accounts can be opened at an agent 
or (in Pakistan) even remotely by phone (with a 
biometrically verified SIM). The countries studied 
include some where OTC is prohibited (Bangladesh, 
Uganda), where it is explicitly permitted (Ghana, 
Pakistan), and where the regulations are silent.44 In 
addition, banking agents can handle regular banking 
functions, such as disbursing (usually small) loans, 
accepting deposits, and collecting loan payments, 
on behalf of the principal bank. In a few cases (Ghana 
and Bangladesh), they may receive and/or send 
international remittances. The prohibitions, especially 
for agents of nonbank issuers, are many and usually include dealing in foreign currency, opening accounts, 
cashing checks, providing cash advances, and others.
Types of agents
The question of the possible scope of a DFS 
agency is often answered by setting up rules that 
differentiate among categories of agents. In the 
DFS context there are a variety of types of agents 
serving a wide range of principals. The varieties 
of agents can be categorized in different ways, 
including by the type of principal institution they 
represent (see Box 4).
Agents may, alternatively, be distinguished based 
on the type of contractual relationship they have 
with the principal. They can be directly contracted 
by the principal or subcontracted by another agent 
who in turn holds a contract with the principal. 
In the latter case, they are typically referred to 
as subagents and their principals are called 
master agents. In some cases, several levels of 
outsourcing (creating long principal-agent chains) 
are permitted, which makes it more difficult for 
the principal to ensure regulatory compliance and 
manage risks.
Further, agents can be described as wholesale or 
super-agents if they provide cash management 
services to other agents who may themselves 
have a direct agency contract with the principal 
(and thus are not subagents). Similarly, agent 
network managers can be hired by the principal to 
provide support services to agents. Agent network 
managers (e.g., under Ghana’s regulations) are 
concerned with recruitment, training, compliance 
monitoring, liquidity management, and general 
support. They are typically not agents themselves 
(although they could be). The agents they manage 
are directly contracted by the principal. In some 
cases (e.g., Selcom in Tanzania), these agent 
network managers are aggregators, offering 
facilities such as payment integration services.19
45 Rwanda, e.g., provides for super-agents and basic agents; Ghana authorizes agents and master agents; and Kenya provides for wholesale and 
retail agents.These diverse types of agents respond to 
providers’ need for a wide range of service points 
along with mechanisms to support and monitor 
them. Thus, the use of master agents or agent 
network managers becomes critical. Using agents 
properly means identifying, training, monitoring, 
and managing agents while ensuring their liquidity, 
risk management, and compliance with regulatory 
and customer service standards. Providers may 
outsource some or all these functions to master 
agents or agent network managers.In practice, the terms used for the different 
types of specialized agents—master agents, 
super agents, agent network managers—are not 
consistent across countries.45 (See Table 4 for 
examples.)
2.3  Agent eligibility and authorization
The next concern that regulation must address is to 
determine who is eligible to become an agent (or 
a certain type of agent) and what kind of approval Table 4. Agent regulation overview
Regulatory 
approach Types of agentsRole in account 
opening (examples) Types of specialized agents
Bangladesh Account-based Banking, MFS Receive account 
opening documents.Not specified.
Côte d’Ivoire Institution-based Banking, e-money, 
rapid transfersSign agreements with 
clients.Primary (master) agent: 
contract subagents.
Ghana Activity-based Banking, e-money E-money: Open 
minimum or medium 
KYC accounts on behalf 
of issuer.Agent network manager 
for banking and e-money 
agents: recruitment, training, 
compliance monitoring, 
liquidity management.
India Institution-based Business 
correspondent 
(bank, incl. 
payments bank)Identify customers.
Process & submit 
applications.Not specified.
Kenya Institution-based Banking, MFI, PSP MFI: Collect documents 
for account opening.Wholesale agent/wholesale 
cash merchant: Distribute 
money to retail agents.
Myanmar Institution-based Mobile banking, 
MFSPMobile banking: Cash 
deposits.Not specified.
Pakistan Institution-based Branchless banking Open and maintain 
branchless banking 
accounts.Super-agent (established 
retail outlet or distribution 
setup); Agent Network 
Manager/Aggregator: 
Training and monitoring 
agents, reporting to 
financial institutions, liquidity 
management.
Rwanda Activity-based Banking, e-money, 
PSPCustomer identification 
(2-factor).
Collect account 
opening info from 
clients (only if agent 
registered as company).Agent network managers/
super-agents: Management 
and coordination of basic 
agents’ activities.
Tanzania Account-based for 
e-money accounts, 
otherwise 
institution-basedBanking, e-money, 
PSPBanking: Collect 
documents for loan 
applications.Wholesale agent (company): 
e-money distribution, retail 
management.
Uganda Institution-based Banking, mobile 
moneyBanking: Collect 
documents and info for 
account opening.Not specified.20
46 Most admit businesses, generally, in addition to specific groups such as MFIs, the Post, or cooperatives. Others (including India, Bangladesh, 
and Ghana), have a longer list of eligible entities, e.g., retailers, petrol stations, local government offices, nongovernment organizations, and 
courier services.
47 Guideline on Agent Banking (CBK/PG/15 [Kenya], art. 4.4).
48 The Helix Institute’s Agent Network Accelerator Survey, Kenya Country Report 2014 notes that 36 percent of Kenyan agents at that time 
were dedicated, i.e., did not offer a separate line of business.
49 Guideline on Agent Banking (CBK/PG/15 [Kenya], part II).
50 National Payment System Regulations (Kenya) 2014; CGAP (2015, 15).
51 Bank of Ghana Agent Guidelines (2015), arts. 10, 11, 15.
52 The threshold is moderate, including compliance with minimum capital standards and “fair” CAMEL rating (State Bank of Pakistan, 
Branchless Banking Regulations, art. 9.2 [2016]).(if any) is required by the regulator. The rules 
seem to vary greatly in the effectiveness of their 
implementation and the burdens they impose.
Most of the 10 countries require agents to be 
registered businesses, whether companies or 
individuals.46 In several countries, the eligibility 
standards state that an agent must be an enterprise 
with its own independent (and viable) line of 
business. This is clearest in Kenya, where one is 
prohibited from continuing to provide services as 
an agent if the separate line of business is not 
commercially viable.47
These kinds of requirements appear designed to 
mitigate risk—but their cost-effectiveness is not 
always clear. First, such rules may not be well-
targeted. It is worth asking whether someone 
who has specialized in agency services should 
be ineligible purely due to failure to meet a 
registration or “line of business” standard. Second, 
the burden of these requirements may undercut 
the objective. Providers sometimes have difficulty 
recruiting new agents because of such standards. 
Third, the extent of compliance with these rules 
is open to question, especially in countries with 
rapid e-money uptake and thus urgent demand 
for agents.48
A few countries (India, Bangladesh, Ghana) allow 
individuals to serve as agents if they are educated, 
or if they have experience or businesses considered 
relevant (e.g., insurance agents, retired bankers, 
heads of self-help groups, mobile agents). 
Qualifications of a potential agent may include 
having a good credit history, character references, 
IT capacities, and a minimum level of experience 
in operating a business—as well as an account in a 
licensed financial institution.Policy makers and regulators face a choice 
between ex ante enforcement of eligibility rules 
(prior approval) or ex post  (inspection). In some 
cases, as a first step, general approval for the 
use of agents or for a network of agents may be 
required. This may need to be followed by the 
provider obtaining authorization for individual 
agents or groups of agents—as is the case for 
banking agents in Kenya and Uganda (bulk 
authorization).49 Different standards may apply 
to agents of different scale (e.g., master agents 
and subagents that operate on their behalf) or 
function (bank versus nonbank agents). Banking 
agents are most rigorously controlled in WAEMU, 
where individual agent approval is required along 
with financial guarantees and other conditions not 
applied to EMI agents. In Kenya, when PSPs recruit 
agents, PSPs simply need to notify the central 
bank 14 days before the commencement of the 
agent’s operation and report basic information 
periodically.50 Master agents and agent network 
managers may be subject to stricter standards, as 
in Ghana, where providers must apply much more 
comprehensive due diligence.51
Regulations may apply eligibility requirements not 
only to agents but also to providers themselves 
when they seek to outsource. Pakistan, for example, 
requires financial institutions to meet minimum 
prudential thresholds to contract branchless 
banking agents.52
2.4  Ongoing duties of agents 
and principals
A DFS provider’s use of agents imposes 
ongoing regulatory obligations on both parties. 
Among these are the kinds of risk management 
requirements discussed previously as well as duties 21
53 For a more detailed description of reporting requirements, see Dias and Staschen (2017).
54 Ghana is in the process of setting up a similar agent registry.
55 Rwanda’s new system should help address the common problem of over-counting agents and access points, which can give a misleading 
picture and hence the proximity that consumers enjoy. E.g., 98 percent of agents are counted twice in Colombia, as each bank reports shared 
agents as its own (Arabahety 2016). In addition, large numbers of inactive agents are often included in such counts.
56 E.g., in India, agents (business correspondents) that work for multiple institutions must maintain separate data for each of their principals, 
and avoid commingling data.of disclosure, which is addressed in Section 4.2, as 
it relates to consumer protection. Other obligations 
include record-keeping, reporting, and ensuring 
the certainty and security of transactions.
Security and technology
Regulators are concerned with ensuring the security 
and accuracy of agent-assisted transactions and 
the reliability of the technological platform. 
Requirements in this area overlap with consumer 
protection (see Section 4.2). In the countries 
studied, it is mandatory to provide confirmation of 
transactions to the client (in some cases, including 
fees). The implication, made explicit in the case of 
Tanzania (for banking agents), is that a provider or 
agent must not complete a transaction if a receipt 
or acknowledgment cannot be generated.
A related rule prohibits agent transactions going 
forward where there is a communication failure. In 
Kenya and Rwanda, for example, all transactions 
must be processed in real time. The regulations in 
several countries (Côte d’Ivoire and Tanzania) hold 
the principal issuer responsible for ensuring the 
reliability and security of their systems, as well as 
the confidentiality and traceability of transactions.
The countries studied require providers to have 
approved plans in place for contingency and 
disaster recovery, including for technology-
related interruption of services. In some countries, 
these plans are to be stipulated in the agency 
agreement and assessed as part of the licensing 
and supervision processes.
Reporting and records
Agents are not required to report directly to the 
regulator. But principals do need to identify their 
agents to the regulator either by periodic reporting 
(e.g., monthly in Bangladesh) or by the maintenance 
of updated rosters (e.g., on the provider’s website) 
with names, addresses, and in some cases (Ghana and Tanzania), geographic information system 
coordinates.53 Regulators may also demand 
aggregate data on clients, transaction value/
volume, fraud incidents, consumer complaints, 
and remedial measures. Pakistan has introduced 
a web-based agent registry system through which 
it collects and maintains disaggregated data on 
individual agents (Dias et al. 2015).54 Rwanda 
is in the process of rolling out a data collection 
system that will pull data directly from the EMI’s 
operational system (Dias and Staschen 2017).55
Regulations also impose record-keeping 
requirements and establish the authority’s right 
to conduct inspections at both the principal and 
the agent. The provider/principal ensures that the 
agent keeps necessary records and keeps data from 
the agents in the principal’s own system. Providers 
must keep records for several years (requirements 
vary from five to 12 years), and consistent with 
the regulator’s standards for organizing records.56 
Further, in most countries, the regulator has 
the authority to inspect the premises, books of 
account, and records—not only of the principal but 
also of its agents and, in some cases (Myanmar and 
Ghana), other partners and services providers used 
in the provision of DFS.
2.5 Summary of experience
The following general patterns emerge from the 
10 countries’ experience in this area:
• There has been some convergence on the regulation 
of agents. The principal’s liability is a core tenet 
in all 10 countries. Most regulators have taken a 
flexible approach as to the kinds of organizations 
and individuals that can be agents. Further, norms 
of nonexclusivity and interoperability are prevalent, 
though there are differences in application.
• Certain divergences remain on the general approach 
toward agent regulation. While the institution-based 22
57 FATF has published extensively on the risk-based approach and its application, e.g., to the banking sector (FATF 2014), to prepaid cards, to 
mobile payments and internet-based payment services (FATF 2013), and to money and value-transfer services (FATF 2016).approach is still most prevalent (e.g., different 
treatment of bank and nonbank agents), a few 
countries follow an account-based approach (rules 
are defined for certain types of accounts that can 
be accessed through agents regardless of the 
issuer) and two countries (Ghana and Rwanda) have 
implemented an activity-based approach (same 
rules for same activity). Whereas institution- and 
account-based approaches might not have posed 
a problem in the past, trends such as increased 
sharing of agents and partnerships between banks 
and nonbanks make these approaches less tenable.
• In general, the countries’ regulatory approaches 
are not fully risk-based or proportionate. This is 
partly because of the continuing use of institution-
based approaches and partly because of 
differences across countries in support for multiple 
types of agents, such as simple cash merchants, 
who present lower risks if operating against a 
prefunded account and in a real-time environment.
3  Enabler 3. Risk-Based 
Customer Due Diligence
DFS operate within regulatory contexts shaped by 
policies on AML/CFT. The challenge for financial 
inclusion is to ensure proportionate treatment 
using risk-based frameworks that protect system 
integrity while imposing the least burden on DFS 
outreach.
The essential components of the third enabler 
include the following:
• Adopting the principle of simplified CDD in lower-
risk scenarios.
• Translating this principle into risk-based tiers for 
different kinds of accounts, transactions, clients, 
and methods of account opening and transacting 
(remote or in-person).
• Addressing constraints on customer identity 
documentation by recognizing a wider range 
of ID types and making use of new methods of 
identification for lower-risk transactions, which are 
made possible by advances in ID systems (wider 
coverage, better accessibility).3.1  Simplified customer due diligence
AML/CFT rules are held to international standards 
set by FATF. The FATF Recommendations (2012) 
and related guidance set forth CDD methods 
and risk criteria that take financial inclusion into 
account, allowing for simplified procedures for 
lower-risk scenarios (FATF 2017) (see Box 5).57
The FATF language simply may be incorporated 
into financial sector regulation, offering providers a 
basis for adapting their procedures. However, most 
of the 10 countries translate that guidance into 
more specific rules that define lower-risk scenarios 
and the corresponding simplified methods. 
Providers appear generally reluctant to implement 
Box 5. Customer due diligence and the 
scope for simplification
Standard CDD has four elements, according to the 
FATF Recommendations (no. 10), and each of the 
elements can be simplified where risks are assessed 
as lower (2012, INR 10, para 21):
• Identifying the customer and using independent 
sources to verify the identity. Simplification can 
be done by, for example, reducing the extent 
of ID information required or postponing the 
verification.
• Identifying the beneficial owner and taking 
reasonable steps to verify that identity and 
understand the customer’s ownership and 
control structure (in the case of a legal person). 
These checks are required to ensure that the 
account holder and anyone represented by that 
holder are identified (including any “politically 
exposed persons”). A simplified process could, 
for example, use information provided by the 
customer without verifying it.
• Obtaining information on the purpose and 
nature of the business relationship between the 
customer and the financial services provider. 
Simplified CDD can infer this from the type of 
transaction or the relationships.
• Conducting ongoing monitoring and due 
diligence as needed to ensure that all transactions 
are consistent with the institution’s knowledge of 
the customer, its business and risk profile, and its 
source of funds. This means keeping the client 
profile sufficiently up to date to identify anomalous 
transactions. The degree of monitoring could be 
reduced based on a reasonable threshold.23
a risk-based approach without this kind of specific 
regulation (de Koker and Symington 2011). Thus, 
while FATF’s concept of risk-based CDD does not 
require explicit definitions of risk scenarios and 
procedural adjustments, such definitions appear to 
be more effective in ensuring the use of risk-based 
CDD in practice.
Regulatory provisions on risk-based CDD emphasize 
the first element of customer identification and 
verification, which is often called Know Your 
Customer (KYC). But there are also examples of 
simplification of the other elements. Pakistan, for 
example, permits reduced frequency of customer 
ID updates and less intensive on-going monitoring 
for accounts with a limited monthly turnover.58 
Bangladesh provides such an allowance for low-
risk customers,59 as does Myanmar (for banks).60
3.2 Tiered approaches
A common regulatory approach to risk-based 
CDD is the definition of risk tiers to which due 
diligence procedures of varying intensity are 
applied. This is in line with FATF guidelines that 
suggest countries should consider such a tiered 
approach to implement simplified CDD measures 
in lower-risk scenarios (FATF 2017, para. 74). 
Such risk tiers are determined by the features 
of the accounts or transactions permitted, the 
types of clients, and the modalities of account 
opening and transacting (e.g., in-person or not). 
Most of the 10 countries define two or three tiers 
(e.g., high, medium, and low risk). In some cases, 
however, the rules are different for DFS (e.g., 
tiered structures applying only to transactions 
via agents and/or only to EMIs) as compared to 
general rules applying to bank accounts and/or 
branch-based transactions. One reason for this 
is that DFS rules were introduced more recently 
and with a clear focus on reaching previously unserved customers, while legacy CDD rules for 
banks continue to coexist (see Table 5).
Account, transaction, and client restrictions
Several countries define at least one differentiated 
type of account with lower CDD requirements.61 
These accounts are subject to lower balance and 
transaction limits than regular or enhanced CDD 
(i.e., higher risk) accounts. Other restrictions may 
apply (Ghana), such as prohibiting a client from 
having more than one such account or considering 
the account dormant after 12 months of inactivity. 
In like manner, one-off transactions (e.g., OTC 
transfers) may have lower ceilings to qualify for 
simplified CDD (Ghana and Pakistan). A further 
complication arises in some countries (Ghana, 
Myanmar, Tanzania) where tiered KYC is available 
only to EMIs or to mobile money providers. In 
Pakistan, only branchless banking accounts are 
subject to the tiered structure.
In several cases, e-money accounts have three 
versions or tiers:
• A basic account with minimal opening requirements 
and correspondingly low ceilings for transactions.
• A mid-range account allowing for bigger 
transactions and more stringent requirements, but 
less than a full KYC procedure.
• A higher-limit, full-KYC account. This tier may 
include special accounts designed specifically for 
businesses. The business accounts have much 
higher limits than individual accounts.62
Differentiated KYC requirements for businesses 
provide higher quantitative transaction ceilings in 
exchange for more rigorous procedures for account 
opening. Such business accounts are mostly used by 
agents and merchants, who regularly handle larger 
amounts of cash and higher transaction volumes 
than the regular clientele. Account opening in such 
58 State Bank of Pakistan, AML/CFT Guidelines on Risk Based Approach for Banks & DFIs (updated 31 March 2015), arts. 7–8. This applied to 
accounts with a monthly turnover up to PKR 25,000 (US$226) such as basic bank accounts and Level 0 branchless banking accounts until 
monthly limits were raised to PKR 40,000 (US$328) in 2016.
59 Bangladesh Bank (BFIU), Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment Guidelines for Banking Sector, sec. 6.3, 6.11.
60 Central Bank of Myanmar Directive No. 21 /2015, arts.14, 16, 22.
61 E.g., Ghana, India, Tanzania, Myanmar, and Pakistan.
62 E.g., Myanmar sets a daily MFS transaction limit for businesses of 1 million kyats (US$723) compared to 50,000 kyats (US$36) for the 
lowest individual tier, a monthly transaction limit of 50 million kyats (US$36,000) compared to 1 million for the lowest tier, and a balance 
limit of 10 million (US$7,223) compared to 200,000 kyats (US$145) for the lowest tier (Central Bank of Myanmar, Regulation on Mobile 
Financial Services [FIL/R/01/03-2016], sec.17). This tiering scheme applies to EMIs, but not to banks that provide MFS.24
63 In Myanmar, this highest MFS tier requires a registration certificate, which can be a problem for agents that are informal businesses.
64 Retail agents require only the basic documents (e.g., business registration and tax ID number) required to conduct commercial activities, 
while wholesale agents must be registered corporates and are permitted to distribute e-money and manage retail agents (Electronic Money 
Regulations, 2015 [Tanzania], Third Schedule). This tiering scheme applies only to mobile money. For card-based e-money, the general rules 
contained in the AML/CFT legislation (2013) and regulations (2015) apply.cases may require the client to visit a bank branch, 
to provide additional documents such as a business 
registration, and to comply with the full KYC 
procedure (as required for regular bank accounts).63 
For example, Tanzania provides four risk-based 
KYC tiers for EMIs, including one for retail agents 
and one for wholesale agents.64 Similarly, the KYC 
rules applied to e-money in Ghana provide higher ceilings for agents and separate treatment for 
merchant accounts.
In India, CDD requirements for payments banks are 
the same as for banks. Thus, uniform standards on 
account opening apply across institutions, including 
simplified CDD for opening small-value accounts. 
Also, India classifies certain customers as low risk Table 5. Selected KYC requirements for e-money accounts
CDD/KYC coverage and tiers Quantitative limits for low KYC Illustrative KYC requirements
Ghana
Tiered KYC schemes apply only 
to EMIs. E-money KYC tiers: 
minimum, medium, enhanced.Limits for minimum KYC:
•  Maximum balance: GHC 1000 
(US$226)
•  Daily transactions: GHC 300 (US$68)
•  Aggregate monthly transactions: 
GHC 3000 (US$677)•  Minimum KYC: Any type of 
photo identification
•  Medium KYC: Official ID 
documentation listed as 
acceptablea
•  Enhanced KYC: Same 
requirements as that of 
opening bank account.
Myanmar
MFSP covered.
Three levels of MFS accounts: 
Level 1 (lowest level) and Level 2 
for individuals; Level 3 for legal 
entities.Limits for level 1 accounts:
•  Transactions: MMK 50,000 (US$37) 
per day; MMK 1 million (US$736) 
per month.
•  Maximum balance: MMK 200,000 
(US$147)• Level 1: National ID document.
•  Level 2: National ID document 
and SIM registration.
•  Other KYC requirements: 
Permanent and mailing 
address, date of birth, 
nationality.
Pakistan
Applicable to branchless banking 
accounts (being full banking 
accounts).
Three levels of accounts: Level 0 
(lowest), Level 1, and Level 2.Limits for Level 0:
•  Transactions: PKR 25,000 (US$226) 
per day, PKR 40,000 (US$362) per 
month, and PKR 200,000 (US$1,811) 
per year.
•  Maximum balance: PKR 200,000 
(US$1,811)Level 0 requires:
•  Capturing the image of the 
customer national ID document
• A digital photo of the customer
•  Verification of customer data 
against NADRA system.
Account opening can be through 
physical or digital means.
Rwanda
All EMIs covered.
Tiers: Individuals, individual 
customers with higher levels, legal 
entities, basic agents, etc.Limits for Tier 1 (Individuals):
•  Single transaction: RWF 500,000 
(US$592)Customers can be electronically 
registered or follow e-KYC 
procedures.
Tanzania
Tiered KYC applies to mobile 
money issuers. Tiers: Electronically 
registered (lowest level); 
electronically and physically 
registered; SME accounts.
No tiering for card-based e-money.Limits for electronically registered 
mobile money accounts:
•  Single transaction limit = TZS 
1 million (US$446)
•  Maximum balance = TZS 2 million 
(US$892) (stated as “daily” balance, 
i.e., average not to exceed threshold)Alternative IDs: Employment ID, 
social security ID, or a letter from 
the ward/village executive.
a. National ID, voter identification, driver’s license, passport, and other government documents, such as the National Health Insurance Scheme 
identification.25
65 RBI Master Direction—Know Your Customer (KYC) Direction, 2016, DBR.AML.BC.No.81/14.01.001/2015-16, sec. 3, 16, 22–24; 
RBI Master Circular—Policy Guidelines on Issuance and Operation of Pre-paid Payment Instruments in India, DPSS.CO.PD.PPI. 
No.01/02.14.006/2016-17, sec. 6–7.
66 Only open-loop instruments have the full functionality of e-money and, thus, they fall under our definition of DFS.
67 Policy Guidelines on Issuance and Operation of Pre-Paid Payment Instruments in India, 2016, DPSS.CO.PD.PPI.No.01/02.14.006/2016-17, 
sec. 7.3.
68 An agent completing documents and conducting CDD on behalf of a principal is not the same as opening an account for the client at the 
principal institution—an authority that often cannot be delegated.
69 FATF 2012, INR 10, para 15; and FATF 2013, ch. IV , para 40, 69.
70 Bank of Tanzania, Electronic Money Regulations, 2015, Third Schedule, Form F .
71 A Level 1 account, which may be opened remotely with a biometric SIM card, has transaction and balance ceilings that are two to four times 
higher than the Level 0 limits (SBP , Branchless Banking Regulations 2016, art. 4.1)—reflecting increased confidence in the biometric system.(thus eligible for simplified CDD), including members 
of self-help groups and foreign students.65 Where 
simplified CDD applies, customers may be issued 
closed and semi-closed loop PPIs. However, when 
issuing e-money (open-loop PPIs),66 banks must 
apply standard CDD, and the simplified CDD rules 
provided in the banking regulations do not apply.67
Face-to-face versus remote transactions
In most DFS models it is essential that customers 
have the option to be identified either at an agent 
or remotely (electronically). Accordingly, another 
basis on which to define tiered KYC treatment is 
whether the business is done in person  between 
the provider and the client. Where accounts are 
opened or transactions are carried out through an 
agent, CDD performed by such agents is treated 
as if conducted by the principal, and the ultimate 
responsibility rests with the principal (FATF 2017, 
para 118f). The provider must properly analyze 
the capacity of its agent and supervise the agent’s 
application of the CDD rules and procedures—but 
those rules and procedures do not change. The 
standards to be used in overseeing third-party CDD 
are somewhat demanding, since money laundering 
is a high-priority area of risk. Thus, for example, 
banks in India and MMSPs in Uganda must ensure 
that their agents are licensed or registered, and that 
they have AML/CFT policies and systems in place 
that are effectively implemented and monitored and 
are regularly updated.68 In any case, the principal 
remains liable for the proper completion of KYC and 
the agent performs only a clerical or conduit rule.
FATF considers nonface-to-face scenarios—
accounts opened electronically without visiting an 
agent—as potentially posing higher risks.69 Some 
countries have special KYC rules for accounts 
opened remotely. Tanzania, for example, provides 
for differentiated accounts based on whether the accounts are registered physically or electronically 
by mobile phone. These accounts have tiered 
transaction limits along with differentiated CDD/
KYC requirements, and they impose special risk 
management (governance and MIS) responsibilities 
on the provider.70 Also, Pakistan recently permitted 
lower-tier mobile wallets to be opened remotely 
from the customer’s mobile handset, taking 
advantage of the fact that all SIM cards in Pakistan 
are now biometrically verified against the central 
ID database.71 As a result, account openings have 
sharply increased (Rashid and Staschen 2017).
3.3  Loosening the ID constraint: 
Risk-based rules and 
evolving ID systems
A major contextual factor in CDD is the 
development of national ID documentation and 
verification systems. ID systems need to integrate 
all relevant information so that each ID document 
is matched with a single client and with the relevant 
account. Until recently in most of the 10 countries, 
limited availability of official ID documents seriously 
constrained financial services outreach, and 
therefore—in line with FATF guidelines—policies 
were adopted to adjust ID requirements on a risk 
basis. The reasoning was that widening the range 
of acceptable ID documents should facilitate access 
to financial services.
The countries studied include several that recognize 
alternative forms of ID in lower-risk settings, and 
several others that do not. India is an example of the 
former. Where India’s regulations allow simplified 
measures for verification of customer identity, 
alternative documentation may be accepted in 
lieu of a national ID card, including photo ID cards 
issued by banks (public and private) and by central 
regulatory authorities. Another alternative is a letter 26
72 Small-value accounts have a balance ceiling of Rs. 50,000 (US$774). The bank accounts thus established can be used for PPIs, but only of 
the semi-closed-loop type (i.e., not equivalent to e-money) (RBI Master Direction, KYC [2016], sec. 3, 16, 22–24; RBI Master Circular, Pre-
paid Payment Instruments [2016], sec. 6–7).
73 Bank of Ghana, Guidelines for E-Money Issuers in Ghana (2015), sec. 15.
74 Otherwise, reporting entities for AML/CFT purposes (e.g., regulated institutions and public companies) may use a simplified CDD process 
for customers in low-risk categories. Reglement n° 08/2016 DU 01 /12 / 2016 Régissant Les Émetteurs de Monnaie Électronique, art. 11.
75 In practice, many clients (e.g., in Tanzania) have managed to open e-money accounts with virtually any document.
76 The switch relates to MFS, thus affecting DFS, but not other financial services. The deadline was later extended to August 2017 to give 
providers sufficient time to re-register clients. Many people still needed ID documents at the time. Allowance was made for refugees, who 
could use an official ID from the Office of the Prime Minister.issued by a gazetted officer, with a duly attested 
photograph of the customer. These officially valid 
documents are sufficient for small-value accounts 
and some semi-closed loop PPIs. But open-loop 
instruments equivalent to e-money require full KYC 
measures.72 In Ghana, in addition to risk-tiered ID 
requirements for e-money accounts, OTC clients 
are subject to reduced quantitative ceilings if 
they do not have existing e-money accounts or 
cannot present “acceptable” ID documentation 
(as required for medium KYC measures).73
Other countries (Myanmar, Tanzania, Côte d’Ivoire) 
recognize only a few forms of official identification for KYC 
purposes, such as the national ID document, passport, 
and driver’s license. In Rwanda, EMIs must identify their 
clients by means of a national ID document or passport, 
which is verified through the national ID database—the 
only stated exception is the identification of a minor 
by her/his duly identified parent.74 But limitations on 
acceptable ID documentation need not eliminate risk-
tiering. In Myanmar, ID requirements are graduated, but 
acceptable ID documentation is limited for all tiers to 
the national ID document, driver’s license, passport, or 
SIM registration. In CDD as in other domains discussed 
in this paper, the extent to which requirements are 
followed in practice is open to question.75 Enforcement 
capacity should be an important element to consider 
when determining CDD rules.
The quality and ubiquity of the ID system is also 
important. Governments are increasingly investing in 
universal ID documents, databases, and biometrics 
as the practice of checking databases (eKYC) rather 
than hardcopy documents grows (see Box 6). Some 
new systems (India and Pakistan) cover the great 
majority of the population and are approaching 
universal coverage. In Uganda, the enhancement of 
ID systems has coincided with a toughening of ID 
requirements for KYC. In 2013, the Mobile Financial 
Services Guidelines allowed for seven different types of ID documentation. However, this was reduced 
to two (the national ID document and passports for 
foreigners) by the Ugandan telecoms regulator in 
early 2017 because of security concerns and the wider 
availability of ID documentation.76 Several challenges 
remain with the reliance on universal biometric 
identification, including the reach of the technology 
to unbanked populations and underserved areas, 
the accessibility of ID databases to financial services 
providers, and the costs of using these systems 
(unless provided at very low cost, as in India).
The benefits of advances in ID systems may 
obviate the need to accept a broad range of ID 
documentation, but not necessarily the need 
for tiered account structures. The latter are still 
required in many countries because of other 
requirements applicable to standard CDD, such as 
residential address verification.Box 6. eKYC in India
India has established a KYC compliance option 
for use in electronic account opening: e-KYC. This 
service, provided by the Unique Identification 
Authority of India (UIDAI), uses biometric 
authentication to confirm the customer’s identity. 
Under e-KYC, the customer’s identity is verified 
when the UIDAI confirms that the biometric data 
provided by the customer match the biometric 
data recorded against that person’s name. 
The customer may consent to the ID authority 
electronically transferring the data, including the 
individual’s name, age, gender, and photograph, to 
the financial institutions and their agents (business 
correspondents). The AML/CFT Rules stipulate that 
e-KYC is to be accepted as a valid KYC process, 
provided that the financial institutions and their 
agents obtain express authorization from the 
customer for release of her or his ID information.a
a. T wo recent events—judicial recognition of a constitutional 
right to privacy and a major data breach—are expected 
to usher in limits to data collection and access through 
the UIDAI (Aadhaar) system. RBI Master Direction, KYC 
(2016), sec. 17.27
3.4 Summary of experience
The following general patterns emerge from the 
countries’ experience with risk-based CDD:
• The countries simplify CDD for lower-risk transactions, 
per FATF guidance, but vary in their approaches. The 
most common approach is to implement tiered CDD/
KYC requirements for different types and scales of 
clients, accounts, and transactions. However, in some 
countries the tiered account structure applies only 
to a special type of DFS account (e.g., branchless 
banking accounts in Pakistan), which risks creating 
an uneven playing field between different types of 
channels or accounts used.
• Several countries have translated FATF standards on 
risk-based CDD into specific regulatory requirements 
and tiers. Others have simply incorporated the FATF 
standards into regulation without providing more 
guidance. In the latter situation, providers sometimes 
hesitate to use the allowed flexibility, and instead 
follow a risk-averse, cautious approach.
• While there has been a trend of increasing the range 
of accepted ID documentation for lower-tier accounts 
to reduce barriers for people without identification, 
the extent to which this wider acceptance is still 
needed depends on the quality and ubiquity of the 
ID system and the accessibility of ID databases.
• The countries diverge notably in their 
accommodation of account opening at agents or 
remotely/electronically (nonface-to-face), both 
of which are subject to specific FATF guidance. 
A few countries make use of advanced biometric 
ID systems to allow for e-KYC (India and Pakistan 
stand out in this regard) and have thus been able 
to make remote account opening much simpler 
despite the potentially higher AML/CFT risks.
4  Enabler 4: Consumer 
protection
Effective consumer protection is key to the 
credibility of DFS as a pillar of inclusive finance. 
Regardless of whether FCP must be fully in place 
before DFS can spread, it is a necessary ingredient 
in a sustainable, well-governed market.
Three characteristics of DFS models affect consumer 
risks (McKee, Kaffenberger, and Zimmerman 2015). First, the use of agents provides a first 
line of defense in case any problems occur. But 
they sometimes misinform or defraud customers. 
Second, technological interfaces make convenient 
access possible. Yet this comes at the cost of 
increasing dependence on their reliability and on 
users’ understanding of technology—factors that 
can pose special challenges for less experienced 
customers. Third, longer and more complex value 
chains increase the number of entities involved in 
serving customers. This can create confusion about 
who is ultimately accountable and where customers 
can seek recourse. These factors underline the 
importance of consumer protection in DFS markets.
In this section, we cover the following essential 
components of the fourth enabler:
• Consistent, comprehensive, targeted consumer 
protection rules for DFS. Frequently, only general 
or patchwork rules exist without clear adaptation 
to DFS needs.
• Rules on transparency and market conduct in 
providers’—and their agents’—dealings with 
customers.
• Requirements for providers to establish systems for 
handling customer complaints.
• Standards of service availability and/or digital 
platform reliability that balance protection of 
customers and irrevocability of transactions.
4.1  Scope and consistency of 
consumer protection rules
The complexity of DFS poses a challenge for 
financial consumer protection. Several bodies 
of law and regulation intersect. But for FCP to 
be effective for DFS clients, the legal/regulatory 
framework must cover all relevant providers, 
channels, and products—and do so consistently.
Although the countries in our study have not 
achieved this goal yet, they are making inroads. 
To address the priority of getting the DFS market 
on its feet, regulators in these countries have been 
focusing on issues related to the first three enablers. 
Meanwhile, regulators have relied on existing FCP 
norms. Typically, limited (and often belated) attention 
has been given to FCP issues specific to DFS. Where 28
Table 6. Consumer protections in DFS
Rules, coverage Disclosure rules: Key terms, forms Complaints
Bangladesh
General and institution-
specific: Banks and regulated 
financial institutions, PSPs, 
electronic fund transfers 
(EFTs), agents-  Customers must be notified of charges 
and fees, changes of terms and 
conditions, value-added services
-  Transparency in all terms and 
conditions relating to all banking 
products and services
-  All regulated financial institutions 
must have a Customer Charter in each 
branch
-  Dispute resolution mechanisms should 
be part of the contract agreement-  Banks/financial institutions and 
PSPs shall establish formalized 
complaint procedures; the same 
applies for EFTs
-  All financial institutions: Zonal 
customer service and complaints 
management cells deal with all 
complaints received directly from 
customers
-  Customer can register complaint 
with central bank
Ghana
Activity-specific rules: EMIs 
and agents- Display fees and service charges
-  Bank of Ghana provides standard 
summary sheet
-  Risk information provided to customers
-  Specify minimum contract content and 
written agreement-  EMI to have a functional dispute 
and complaints resolution desk
- Right of appeal to Bank of Ghana
-  40 days to file complaint; 
resolution within 5 days
India
Institution-specific rules: 
Banks, payment banks, 
PPI issuers, mobile 
banking, agents (business 
correspondents)-  Interest rates, fees, and charges to be 
disclosed via website, branches, help-
line or help desk
-  Contracts should be easily understood; 
product price, risks, terms, and 
conditions to be clearly disclosed-  Grievance machinery required for 
banks, payment banks, PPI issuers
-  Option to appeal to Banking 
Ombudsman
Pakistan
Activity- and institution-
specific: General rules for all 
banks (commercial, Islamic, 
and microfinance banks) 
and specific rules for banks 
offering branchless banking; 
agents-  Banks required to publish their 
schedule of charges for branchless 
banking activities quarterly
-  All contracts shall clearly specify that 
the bank is responsible for agents’ acts 
or omissions-  Banks must have a consumer 
redress cell and centralized 
complaint management system
-  Receiving and processing a 
complaint should not take more 
than 7–10 days (depending on its 
nature)
Rwanda
General and institution-
specific: EFT providers, 
EMIs, PSPs, banks and other 
financial institutions, agents-  Institutions shall define standards for 
responsible pricing, transparency; 
disclosure is duty of financial institution 
and agent
-  EMI must submit a copy of the 
standard customer service agreement 
to the National Bank of Rwanda-  Financial institutions, EFT 
providers, PSPs, and EMIs to have 
complaint procedures
-  Right of appeal to senior 
management of the institution or 
the National Bank of Rwanda, or 
other body authorized.
Tanzania
Institution-specific rules: 
PSPs, agents-  Full disclosure of relevant information 
such as pricing, charges, and fees
-  Terms and conditions should be fair, 
legible, and understood by the client-  PSP to establish consumer redress 
plan with adequate resources
-  Appeal to competition commission 
or communication authority
-  Redress within a reasonable time 
and no later than 30 days
Uganda
General rules: All regulated 
financial institutions and their 
agents
Specific rules for mobile 
money providers-  Fees, charges, penalties, and any other 
consumer liability or obligation to be 
disclosed
-  Customers should be able to access 
fees through their phones
- Written contract is mandated-  Mobile money providers: Effective 
procedures to be in place
-  Banks to train agents in complaint 
handling
- Response within 60 days29
77 The Charter of Customer Rights provides model principles to be incorporated by banks into their board-approved policies and monitored 
by the central bank (https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/content/pdfs/CCSR03122014_1.pdf). The Charter applies to payments banks in the 
absence of specific regulatory provisions for the latter.such rules have been adopted, they usually have 
been activity- or institution-specific rather than 
comprehensive and uniform. Despite this, the majority 
of DFS markets in the countries studied have thrived. 
Our assumption in presenting FCP as an enabler is 
that, as in other financial services markets, the lack of 
effective consumer protections poses significant risks 
to vulnerable consumers as well as to the medium- to 
long-term stability and integrity of the DFS market.
FCP rules relevant for DFS may be embedded 
in general consumer laws, FCP legislation or 
guidelines, banking regulations, or regulations on 
payments or e-money. The result tends to be an 
uneven patchwork of regulation. (See Table 6 for an 
overview of DFS consumer protection frameworks.)
General FCP rules are set in banking laws and 
regulations in several of the countries studied. These 
apply in some form (that may not always be clear) to 
DFS providers that are licensed or authorized by the 
banking regulator or that handle banking products. 
Usually, there are also specific rules by institution or 
function, such as those applying to EMIs or the use 
of agents. For example, Uganda applies its Financial 
Consumer Protection Guidelines to all types of 
regulated financial services providers and their agents, 
and additional FCP provisions are incorporated into 
its Mobile Money Guidelines. Bangladesh takes a 
similar approach, providing general guidelines for 
all regulated financial institutions and more specific 
rules for MFS.
In other cases, there is no comprehensive FCP 
framework. Kenya, for example, has incorporated 
consumer guidelines in the prudential standards for 
banks, but these do not apply to PSPs. Rwanda does 
not have a general FCP law, but DFS-specific FCP rules 
are incorporated in the regulations on EMIs (2016). 
Similarly, in Tanzania, there is no FCP regulatory 
framework that covers the whole financial sector, but 
specific rules are included in the National Payments 
System Act and in regulations on e-money (2015) and 
agent banking (2017). Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana follow 
a similar fragmented approach (see Box 7).Separate FCP rules for different providers or services 
may produce gaps, loopholes, and regulatory arbitrage. 
This situation may pose less of a risk in markets where 
banks dominate the DFS sector. (However, this 
approach may not be preferred for other reasons). 
India, for example, has a consumer charter that states 
broad FCP principles that apply to the banking sector, 
including payments banks.77 In general, however, there 
is a clear case for a harmonized approach to defining 
FCP rules for DFS. The first step in achieving this is to 
ensure that the financial regulator exercises authority 
over FCP. A second goal is to adapt general FCP 
standards to the specific needs of DFS customers and 
ensure that all types of providers and channels are 
covered. It is also critical to require, as many of the 10 
countries do, that financial services providers ensure 
compliance with FCP standards when they deliver their 
services through agents.Box 7. The lag between DFS 
development and FCP reform
The speed of DFS development, along with reforms 
to the first three enablers, tends to leave in its wake a 
range of “catch-up” work to fill in and harmonize FCP 
standards. In Côte d’Ivoire, for example, disparate 
consumer protection rules are embedded in banking, 
microfinance, payments, e-money, and e-commerce 
legislation.a The same agent may handle mobile 
money accounts (for bank and nonbank issuers), bill 
payments (for PSPs), and OTC transfers (for banks)—
each of which is subject to different FCP rules. 
Similar issues arise in Ghana, where a comprehensive 
framework for consumer recourse applies to all 
financial services providers (including EMIs).b But 
the framework for disclosure is more fragmented, 
with a specific regulation on credit products 
(other than credit cards)c and disclosure provisions 
included in the e-money guidelines (but no rules 
specified for savings products). Protections against 
error and fraud in payments services are insufficient. 
There is a significant push underway in Ghana to 
address these issues, and both WAEMU and Côte 
d’Ivoire are reforming their FCP framework.
a. The financial services regulations are issued by W AEMU, 
which is also encouraging member countries to set up 
financial sector ombudsman institutions. See Meagher (2017).
b. The Consumer Recourse Mechanism Guidelines for 
Financial Service Providers (2017).
c. The Disclosure and Product Transparency Rules for Credit 
Products and Services (2017).30
78 India: Policy Guidelines on Operation of Prepaid Payment Instruments, sec. 14; Model Customer Rights Policy, art 2; Business 
Correspondent Guidelines, art. 9. Bangladesh: Guidelines for Consumer Services and Complaint Management, arts. 2.05 and 2.09.
79 Kenya: National Payment System Regulation 2014, art. 37. Tanzania: National Payment System Act 2015, art. 51; Electronic Money 
Regulations 2015, art.44.
80 Mobile Money Guidelines, Part II. 12.b.
81 Uganda: Mobile Money Guidelines, Part II. 12.b. Ghana: E-money Guidelines sec. VI.27
82 Payments Regulation 2002, art. 15. Côte d’Ivoire’s national E-Commerce Law (2013) provides standards on advertising, offers, contract 
provisions, transparency of prices, and disclosure of identifying information on the seller of goods and services.
83 Mobile Money Guidelines, Part II. 12.b.FCP rules are mostly concerned with transparency, 
recourse and complaints handling, and service delivery 
standards. Each of these will be discussed in turn. As 
discussed in Section 1, fund safeguarding rules are 
another important measure to protect customers.
4.2 Transparency
Transparency rules relate to the disclosure of 
terms, use (and content) of consumer agreements, 
and application of these standards at points of 
service, including agents.
Disclosure includes general information about 
services and products, and specific information 
about individual transactions. These requirements 
appear in regulations specific to payment services 
and e-money/mobile money—and in most cases, they 
also appear in general FCP rules.
The countries studied require providers to post general 
information on products, including fees, commissions, 
and other costs. Several countries (Ghana, Kenya, 
Pakistan) require this information to be displayed 
physically in main offices and at branches and agent 
locations. Alternatively (or additionally), the rules may 
require such information to be published through 
widely used media such as the internet or newspapers 
with broad circulation. Internet disclosure, for example, 
is required in India and Bangladesh.78 While this will 
become more relevant with increased smartphone 
adoption, many consumers either (i ) are unable to 
access terms posted on the web through their mobile or 
computers or (ii) find it inconvenient to do so (because 
they would have to switch to another device to find 
the information). Providing summary terms through 
commonly used channels such as SMS would address 
the latter point (Mazer and Fiorillo 2015).
In addition, some of the countries studied require 
providers to take positive steps to ensure that customers 
are informed of specific terms and conditions. Thus, in Kenya and Tanzania, the provider has an affirmative duty 
to notify the customer of the terms of an impending 
transaction.79 Kenya reinforced this duty in 2016, 
when its Competition Authority ruled that all financial 
services providers that use digital channels must present 
consumers full information on costs, before they use the 
service, on the same screen on which the consumer is 
transacting (Mazer 2016). Uganda requires providers to 
disclose charges to clients via mobile phone (without 
specifying how this would be done on a feature phone), 
and to provide a copy of the agreement being entered 
at the time a mobile money account is opened.80 
Post-transaction notifications may also be mandated. 
Several countries (Ghana, Uganda, Myanmar) require 
the financial services provider or its agent to provide a 
confirmation notice to clients for each transaction. These 
must include information such as the type and amount 
of the transaction, the fees charged, the transaction 
reference, and details of the recipient of an outbound 
transfer or the sender of an inbound transfer.
A minority of the 10 countries (Uganda and Ghana) 
require providers to explain key terms and conditions 
to the client before the client signs a contract.81 In 
Côte d’Ivoire, WAEMU regulations require that the 
conditions for the use of payment instruments and 
accounts be clearly explained to the customer at the 
time the account is opened, and that they also be 
incorporated into the agreement.82
DFS regulations in most of the countries studied 
do not stipulate a standard disclosure format. An 
exception is the Bank of Ghana’s issuance of a 
standard summary sheet for use in disclosure of 
e-money account terms. A related requirement has 
to do with the predictability of terms and conditions, 
including charges. Some of the countries address 
this in regulation—Uganda, for example, requires a 
minimum of 30 days’ notice of any changes.83
Often, the minimum content of general disclosure 
is defined. Typically, this includes at least a list of 31
84 Ghana: E-money Guidelines VI.27, Agent Guidelines V .21 and 22. Uganda: Mobile Money Guidelines, Part II. 12.a and 12.b.
85 W AEMU member countries such as Côte d’Ivoire are committed to establishing comprehensive financial ombudsman institutions based on a 
regional model—a step in the direction of harmonization across the financial sector.fees and charges, but it may also include other 
information such as the principal’s liability related 
to the service (Pakistan), the terms and conditions 
of the service (India and Tanzania), the customer 
charter (Bangladesh), and general information on 
the risks of products and services (Ghana and India).
Most of the 10 countries studied apply some form of 
contract standards to DFS providers. Several require 
a written contract (which may be electronic, e.g., in 
Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Myanmar), and some also 
mandate (or prohibit) certain contractual provisions. 
There are a few countries (including India and 
Tanzania) that require contracts to be in clear, simple 
language. In a few other countries, the customer must 
be given a copy of the draft contract to review (Côte 
d’Ivoire) or a copy of the signed contract to keep 
(Uganda). Standard customer agreements may need 
regulatory approval (Rwanda), although this does not 
appear to be formally required in most countries.
All the countries studied have rules on the display of 
the agent’s identification, name (and often the phone 
number) of the principal, and charges and fees for 
different products and services. Most countries forbid the 
agent to alter the principal’s fee schedule or to charge 
additional fees, and many require agents to post written 
notice that they are not allowed to charge extra fees. 
Ghana and Uganda, moreover, expressly prohibit the 
agents’ conducting transactions on behalf of the client (in effect, representing both sides of the transaction) 
and require agents to post a statement to that effect.84 
In some cases, agents must post information on where 
to file complaints (see Section 4.3).
Although this analysis focuses on the foundations 
of FCP in the DFS field, it is clear that regulations 
on transparency also touch on “next generation” 
issues of market conduct—for example, requiring 
prior disclosure of certain actions. Two further 
aspects of market conduct are nevertheless worth 
mentioning here, given their importance for FCP 
and the overall credibility of DFS: data protection 
and fraud mitigation rules (see Box 8).
4.3  Customer recourse and 
complaints handling
Increasingly, financial sector regulators are requiring 
providers to establish a mechanism for receipt and 
handling of customer complaints. All 10 countries studied 
incorporate this principle into regulation and apply it in 
some form to DFS. As with other FCP components, this 
one is covered in different legislative texts, whether on 
banking, e-money, payments, or consumer protection. 
The treatment of this issue appears consistent across 
most of the 10 countries studied, but the potential for 
gaps and conflicts does arise. WAEMU, for example, has 
such a provision in its e-money regulation but not in its 
banking or payments legislation.85
Data protection and fraud mitigation could be 
considered “next generation” FCP issues, but they 
are becoming increasingly salient as DFS markets 
develop. In both areas, controls are being developed, 
but are often not (yet) consistent or comprehensive.
Collection, storage, and analysis of client data are 
critical to the evolution of DFS models, especially 
those involving credit. Most countries require 
financial services providers to keep client information 
confidential and, in some cases, to ensure that their 
agents do so as well. Uganda, for example, requires 
the provider to disclose to the client (before entering 
into the agreement) the conditions under which client 
data are kept Some countries, but not all, require prior 
customer consent for the use of such data. Recent 
breaches of financial data security raise questions as to how much confidence should be placed in the 
protections adopted.
DFS regulation must address DFS’s susceptibilities to 
fraud. Providers are generally held liable for loss or 
harm from fraud (unless due to the negligence of the 
customer), and some countries require active steps 
to mitigate fraud. Bangladesh, for example, shields 
customers from liability for losses caused by the fraud or 
negligence of PSP officers or agents, companies involved 
in networking arrangements, and merchants linked 
to the card or other communication system. WAEMU 
requires that such a liability provision be written into an 
e-money account agreement. In Pakistan, branchless 
banking providers must institute customer awareness 
programs about fraud, and prevention must include the 
blacklisting of agents that have been involved in fraud.Box 8. Protecting client data and controlling fraud32
86 This requirement is stated in the BCEAO e-money instruction (art. 30), but not in the rules on OTC transfers.
87 Ghana: E-Money Guidelines VI.27. Tanzania: Mobile Banking Transactions, Annex III.
88 In addition, the courts might be another option for appeals, but their usefulness and effectiveness to the consumer varies widely.
89 Ghana: E-money Guidelines VI.27; Uganda: Mobile Money Guidelines, Part II. 6.a.iv.
90 Rwanda: Electronic Transactions Law. Art. 51. Bangladesh: Regulations on Electronic Fund Transfer 2014. Arts. 5, 8–12. Kenya: National 
Payment System Regulation 2014. Part II.15, 28The content of regulations dealing with complaints 
varies. Several countries (India, Myanmar, Kenya, 
Tanzania) require providers to have effective or adequate 
complaint mechanisms. Many specify that the procedures 
should be easy to use and the information for customers 
easy to understand. Most of the countries require 
DFS providers to accept complaints in person, on the 
phone, or by email—and to provide customers with the 
appropriate contact information. WAEMU regulations 
state that complaints systems must be accessible through 
multiple communication channels—to both customers 
and merchants/payees.86 Given the importance of agents 
for customer-facing interaction, most of the countries 
direct agents to provide information about complaints 
handling. Ideally, consumers should be able to access 
the redress system through a toll-free phone number, in 
person, and by written communication, as well as through 
the channels available for the product in question (e.g., 
SMS, USSD, and web).
The internal details of how the complaints unit 
responds to complaints received are not addressed by 
regulation in most of the 10 countries studied (except 
in Ghana and India). In most of the countries, the 
regulator has fixed a maximum turnaround deadline 
for provider responses in each stage of the complaint 
process. In Ghana and Tanzania, complaints must 
be tracked, with receipts (complete with reference 
numbers) issued to the complainant.87
In addition, all 10 countries designate an appeal route 
for complainants, either to the financial regulator (the 
majority), to the competition or telecom regulators 
(sometimes as an alternative to the financial regulator, as 
in Tanzania and Rwanda), or to an ombudsman.88 India 
adopted a Banking Ombudsman Scheme (2006), under 
which complaints and appeals are received. Pakistan did 
so as well, but its scheme covers only microfinance and 
Islamic banks. An ombudsman scheme is also being set 
up in WAEMU (where national financial ombudsman 
institutions are called observatoires).
Most countries require providers to keep track of 
complaints, retain complaints documentation for a minimum period (often six years, as in Ghana), and 
report data on complaints and resolutions to the 
regulatory authority.
4.4 Service delivery standards
DFS operates on the premise that access to digital 
connections and transaction services should be 
continuous and largely free of interruption. Thus, a 
majority of the 10 countries studied have a general 
requirement of service availability. Only a few countries 
specify a threshold—for example, Ghana requires 
EMIs to ensure 99.5 percent service availability, 
with any disruption (actual or anticipated) promptly 
communicated to customers, while Uganda sets a floor 
of 95 percent system uptime.89 Côte d’Ivoire and Pakistan 
have a general requirement of consistent availability. 
There is little evidence as to how these requirements 
have been implemented and enforced in practice.
Regulators wish to ensure speed and reliability. Thus, 
several countries require providers to have a digital 
platform that meets minimum quality and security 
standards. Rwanda, for example, expressly states 
the provider’s liability for any damages suffered by 
a consumer due to the provider’s failure to comply 
with reliability standards. Similarly, in Bangladesh, a 
PSP is liable to its customer for a loss caused by the 
failure of an electronic funds transfer (EFT) system 
to complete a transaction accepted by a terminal in 
accordance with the customer’s instruction. Kenya 
exempts the provider from liability for nonexecution 
of payments in limited circumstances and, otherwise, 
requires it to correct any such failure without delay.90 
Such provisions are typically found in regulations on 
payments or on electronic transactions/EFT.
DFS regulation must balance the need for certainty—
irrevocability—in transactions against the need to 
allow for correction of mistaken or unauthorized 
transactions. A component of this is for providers to 
ensure speedy resolution of such mistakes (ideally 
before recipients withdraw funds) by directing 
queries to a call center team dedicated to this task.33
91 First, whether any one of the enablers is in place is not a binary, yes-no question, as each of them comprises a range of key regulatory 
decisions. Second, regulation is only one, albeit important, element of the DFS ecosystem (and perhaps more readily identified as a 
contributor to failure than to success). Third, our sample of countries is too small and idiosyncratic to measure or attribute outcomes with 
any rigor. Last, regulatory changes are in many cases too new to have had full effect, and the absence of other sufficient conditions poses a 
constraint. For examples of an approach to build an index of the regulatory environment for financial inclusion and derive overall country 
scores, see EIU (2016) and Rojas-Suarez and Pacheco (2017). Such an approach comes with its own challenges, which are not discussed here.A majority of the 10 counties studied have regulatory 
provisions in this area. In some cases (Myanmar), 
providers have a general duty to inform customers of the 
risks of mistake or loss, and to notify them of their rights 
and responsibilities. In other countries, the rules specify 
how and under what conditions customers may demand 
the revocation of a transaction. For example, in India, 
banks that offer mobile banking services must notify 
customers of the timeframe and the circumstances in 
which any stop-payment instructions can be accepted. 
Kenya has a similar rule for PSPs that provides that a 
transfer can be revoked only in line with the dispute 
resolution protocols formally established by the PSP. 
(Bangladesh follows a comparable approach.) Pakistan 
requires these issues to be stated in the customer 
agreement, along with the contact information for 
customers to report unauthorized transfers. In case 
of dispute, both Pakistan and Bangladesh place the 
burden of proof on the provider to show that a disputed 
transfer was authorized by the customer.
In the countries studied, regulators have established that 
digital payments are irrevocable unless the receiving 
party consents to the return of the money. Irrevocability 
sometimes depends on the availability of a validation 
protocol that allows senders to confirm the recipient 
before sending a transfer. Clear prior disclosure of the 
parties’ rights and responsibilities is critical in any case.
4.5 Summary of experience
The following general patterns emerge from the 
10 countries’ experience in this area:
• Convergence exists on regulations governing matters 
such as required disclosures, complaint handling, and 
irrevocability of transactions, although details vary and 
there is still substantial room for adopting international 
standards or good practices from other countries.
• Remaining areas of divergence exist with respect 
to establishing standard disclosure formats and 
financial ombudsman institutions.
• Piecemeal regulatory development produces 
inefficiencies and other challenges. Most countries have institution- or product-specific FCP rules 
rather than comprehensive rules. The framework 
of rules ideally should cover all relevant channels 
and providers in a consistent manner. DFS should 
be subject to general FCP rules and more specific 
rules targeted to DFS (e.g., e-money, payments, 
delivery via agents). To date, the countries studied 
have fallen short of this standard.
Conclusion
We have analyzed how the countries in the 
study have addressed the basic enablers in their 
regulatory frameworks for DFS. What are the 
lessons of their experience?
The importance of the four basic regulatory enablers is 
consistently established in research and policy discussions. 
There is wide agreement that the enablers are necessary 
(but not sufficient) for DFS to reach its potential and 
achieve long-term sustainability. Experience indicates 
that uptake is greater when at least three of the basic 
enablers are in place than in their absence, but showing 
a strict causal relationship is difficult for several reasons.91 
There is less evidence that the fourth enabler—consumer 
protection—is a necessary condition for markets to take 
off. However, consumer protection issues need to be 
addressed to guarantee the healthy development of 
markets as they mature.
This research provides comparative case study analyses 
that can serve to inform discussion and guide policy 
development. The country experiences show that 
each country has used its own approach to set up 
the enablers. They demonstrate the ways in which 
an activity that is at least superficially simple for the 
user must be engineered through detailed regulatory 
measures that take into consideration each country’s 
contextual foundation. That context is formed by the 
influences of the market, the political economy, the 
broader regulatory system, the level of technological 
development and innovation, and cultural and historical 
experiences. In the end, the rules that govern DFS often 
inhabit different bodies of legislation and reflect the 34
92 The Indian experience of awarding a limited purpose banking license (a payments bank license) is still relatively recent and it remains to be 
seen whether the fact that payments banks are a type of bank allows for similar flexibility and market take-off as an EMI license.historical evolution of financial sector legislation. Going 
forward, there needs to be a clearer and more consistent 
set of rules that govern each of the four enablers.
Our research shows patterns that help explain results. 
Few areas in a regulated economy can truly be 
described as “build it and they will come.” This appears 
especially true of DFS. The spectacular successes in 
a country such as Kenya probably owe more to an 
aggressive first mover dragging the market and the 
regulators along with it than to a systematic process of 
a priori framing. Regulatory frameworks in some other 
countries considered here reflect a similar dynamic. 
Often, as with regulation permitting nonbank e-money 
issuance, there is a build-up of pressure by prospective 
players, but the market cannot operate until either 
the rules are in place or the regulator issues a “no 
objection.” In other areas, such as FCP, rapid market 
development leaves gaps that allow risks to accumulate 
until policy makers and regulators can provide a 
patch—or craft a more comprehensive solution.
As for the individual enablers, some broad insights arise 
from the study. Experience from the African countries 
shows the importance of EMIs in the first enabler. Even in 
those countries that have not set up a separate licensing 
framework for e-money issuance, nonbanks have found 
other ways to play a leading role in DFS by acquiring 
or setting up banks (Pakistan) or taking advantage of 
the license of their parent bank (Bangladesh).92 The 
second enabler, the use of agents, seems to be the most 
consistently observed in practice. In all 10 countries, the 
liability of the principal for its agents’ actions is a key 
tenet that allows the regulator to focus its attention on 
the principal. In most cases, there is substantial flexibility 
(as there should be) regarding who can be an agent. The 
third enabler, risk-based CDD/KYC, is strongly influenced 
by the desire to comply with FATF guidance. The shift 
toward risk-based rules at global and national levels, 
combined with ID system developments, is starting 
to allow for more flexible DFS outreach. Consumer 
protection, the fourth enabler, comes into the picture 
rather late, and has a less obvious role in jump-starting 
DFS markets. But its importance for safety and trust-
building, which are crucial for long-term sustainability of 
DFS, is increasingly recognized. In all this, one must bear 
in mind that other conditions besides these enablers, including policies in such areas as competition and 
interoperability, play a role in shaping DFS access.
Ultimately, the quality of the regulatory framework 
depends at least as much on the capacity of policy 
makers and regulators as on the content of the rules. 
The demands on regulators have grown. The rise of 
cryptocurrencies and FinTech innovations pose new 
questions that regulators are struggling to answer. 
With these other priorities claiming attention, policy 
makers and regulators are not always tightly focused 
on enabling digital financial inclusion.
Yet there does appear to be a collective learning 
process. This happens both within and across countries 
as the frontier of good practice moves outward and 
demand grows for peer countries to share the lessons of 
experience. Some of the 10 countries studied (Myanmar) 
have only recently adopted specific regulations for DFS 
and have been able to learn from the earlier experience 
of other countries. Others (Ghana) can look back on 
many years of experience with DFS regulation and learn 
from past mistakes. Still others (Pakistan) have been able 
to improve their regulatory framework gradually over 
time. In general, piecemeal approaches have yielded 
patchwork regulation, but recent years have seen more 
consistent, systematic approaches. Thus, as we have 
tried to show here, evidence is at hand to guide policy 
makers in creating a framework that truly enables DFS 
and allows regulators to focus their attention on the 
areas of highest risk.
References
Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI). 2016. “Digital 
Financial Services: Basic Terminology.” Guideline Note 
No. 19. Kuala Lumpur: AFI, August.
Arabehety, Pablo Garcia, Gregory Chen, William 
Cook, and Claudia McKay. 2016. “Digital Finance 
Interoperability & Financial Inclusion: A 20-Country Scan.” 
Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: CGAP, December.
BCBS (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision). 2016. 
“Guidance on the Application of the Core Principles 
for Effective Banking Supervision to the Regulation and 
Supervision of Institutions Relevant to Financial Inclusion.” 
Basel: BCBS, September.
Burjorjee, Deena, and Barbara Scola. 2015. “A Market 
Systems Approach to Financial Inclusion: Guidelines for 
Funders.” Washington, D.C.: CGAP, September.35
CGD (Center for Global Development). 2016. “Financial 
Regulations for Improving Financial Inclusion: A CGD Task 
Force Report.” Washington, D.C.: CGD.
CPMI (Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure) 
and World Bank Group. 2016. “Payments Aspects of Financial 
Inclusion.” Basel: CPMI and World Bank Group, April.
Dias, Denise, and Stefan Staschen. 2017. “Data Collection 
by Supervisors of Digital Financial Services.” Working 
Paper. Washington, D.C.: CGAP.
Dias, Denise, Stefan Staschen, and Wameek Noor. 2015. 
“Supervision of Banks and Nonbanks Operating through 
Agents: Practice in Nine Countries and Insights for Supervisors.” 
Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: CGAP, August.
de Koker, Louis, and John Symington. 2011. “Conservative 
Compliance Behavior: Drivers of Conservative Compliance 
Responses in the South African Financial Services Industry.” 
Cape Town: CENFRI. http://dro.deakin.edu.au/view  
/DU:30039928
di Castri, Simone. 2013. “Mobile Money: Enabling 
Regulatory Solutions.” London: GSMA, February.
EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit). 2016. “Global 
Microscope 2016: The Enabling Environment for Financial 
Inclusion.” New York, NY: EIU.
Evans, David, and Alexis Pirchio. 2015. “An Empirical 
Examination of Why Mobile Money Schemes Ignite in 
Some Developing Countries but Flounder in Most.” 
Chicago: University of Chicago Coase-Sandor Institute 
for Law and Economics.
FATF (Financial Action Task Force). 2012. “International 
Standards on Countering Money Laundering and the 
Financing of Terrorism & Proliferation—The FATF 
Recommendations.” Paris: FATF, February.
———. 2013. “Guidance for a Risk-Based Approach: 
Prepaid Cards, Mobile Payments and Internet-Based 
Payment Services.” Paris: FATF, June.
———. 2014. “Guidance for a Risk-Based Approach: The 
Banking Sector.” Paris: FATF, October.
———. 2016. “Guidance for a Risk-Based Approach: Money 
or Value Transfer Services. Paris: FATF, February.
———. 2017. “FATF Guidance: Anti-Money Laundering 
and Terrorist Financing Measures and Financial Inclusion 
with a Supplement on Customer Due Diligence.” Paris: 
FATF, November.
Garcia Arabehety, Pablo, Juliana Fontal Díaz, and Nidia 
Ruth Reyes Salomón. 2016. “Colombia’s Recipe for 100% 
Agent Coverage: Aggregation & Sharing.” Blog post, 9 
May. http://www.cgap.org/blog/colombia%E2%80%99s-
recipe-100-agent-coverage-aggregation-sharing
GPFI (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion). 2016. 
“Global Standard-Setting Bodies and Financial Inclusion: 
The Evolving Landscape.” Washington, D.C.: GPFI, March.
Greenacre, Jonathan, and Ross Buckley. 2014. “Using 
Trusts to Protect Mobile Money Customers.” Singapore 
Journal of Legal Studies, 59–78.ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2017. 
“ITU-T Focus Group on Digital Financial Services: Main 
Recommendations.” Geneva: ITU, March.
Izaguirre, Juan Carlos, Tim Lyman, Claire McGuire, and 
Dave Grace. 2016. “Deposit Insurance and Digital Financial 
Inclusion.” Brief. Washington, D.C.: CGAP, October.
Lyman, Timothy R., Gautam Ivatury, and Stefan Staschen. 
2006. “Use of Agents in Branchless Banking for the 
Poor: Rewards, Risks, and Regulation.” Focus Note 38. 
Washington, D.C.: CGAP, October.
Lyman, Timothy R., Mark Pickens, and David Porteous. 2008. 
“Regulating Transformational Branchless Banking: Mobile 
Phones and Other Technology to Increase Access to Finance.” 
Focus Note 43. Washington, D.C.: CGAP, January.
Malady, Louise, Ross Buckley, and Cheng-Yun Tsang. 
2015. “Regulatory Handbook: The Enabling Regulation of 
Digital Financial Services.” UNSW, December.
Mas, Ignacio. 2015. “Shifting Branchless Banking 
Regulation from Enabling to Fostering Competition.” 
Banking & Finance Law Review, Vol. 30, No. 2.
Mazer, Rafe. 2016. “Kenya Ends Hidden Costs for 
Digital Financial Services.” Blog post, 2 November. 
http://www.cgap.org/blog/kenya-ends-hidden  
-costs-digital-financial-services
Mazer, Rafe, and Alexandra Fiorillo. 2015. “Digital Credit: 
Consumer Protection for M-Shwari and M-Pawa Users.” 
Blog post, 21 April. http://www.cgap.org/blog/digital-
credit-consumer-protection-m-shwari-and-m-pawa-users
Mazer, Rafe, and Philip Rowan. 2016. “Competition 
in Mobile Financial Services: Lessons from Kenya and 
Tanzania.” Washington, D.C.: CGAP, January.
McKee, Katharine, Michelle Kaffenberger, and Jamie M. 
Zimmerman. 2015. “Doing Digital Finance Right: The 
Case for Stronger Mitigation on Customer Risks.” Focus 
Note 103. Washington, D.C.: CGAP.
Meagher, Patrick. 2017. “Regulatory Framework for 
Digital Financial Services in Côte d’Ivoire: A Diagnostic 
Study.” Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: CGAP.
Porteous, David. 2006. “The Enabling Environment for 
Mobile Banking in Africa.” Boston: BFA, May.
Rashid, Naeha, and Stefan Staschen. 2017. “Applying 
the RIA Lite Methodology: An Example from Pakistan.” 
Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: CGAP, October.
Rojas-Suarez, Liliana, and Lucía Pacheco. 2017. “An Index 
of Regulatory Practices for Financial Inclusion in Latin 
America: Enablers, Promoters and Preventers.” Working 
Paper 17/15. Madrid: BBVA Research.
Tarazi, Michael, and Paul Breloff. 2010. “Nonbank E-money 
Issuers: Regulatory Approaches to Protect Customer 
Funds.” Focus Note 63. Washington, D.C.: CGAP.
Tsang, Cheng-Yun, Louise Malady, and Ross Buckley. 2017. 
“Promoting Financial Inclusion by Encouraging the Payment 
of the Interest on E-Money.” UNSW Law Journal 40 (4).No. 109
May 2018
Please share this
Focus Note with your
colleagues or request
extra copies of this
paper or others in
this series.
CGAP welcomes
your comments on
this paper.
All CGAP publications
are available on the
CGAP Web site at
www.cgap.org.
CGAP
1818 H Street, NW
MSN P157-700
Washington, DC
20433 USA
Tel: 202-473-9594
Fax: 202-522-3744
Email:
cgap@worldbank.org
© CGAP, 2018
The authors of this Focus Note are Stefan Staschen, who 
leads CGAP’s work on DFS regulation and supervision, and 
Patrick Meagher, a CGAP consultant. The authors wish to thank Veronica Trujillo for extensive research support and Denise Dias, 
Xavier Faz, Jeremiah Grossman, and Juan Carlos Izaguirre for 
reviewing this paper.
Suggested citation:
Staschen, Stefan, and Patrick Meagher. 2018. “Basic Regulatory Enablers for Digital Financial Services.” Focus Note 109. Washington, 
D.C.: CGAP.
ISBN: 978-1-62696-081-7
Global Affairs
Canada
Foundation
