sustainability
Comment
Comment on Apiors, E.K.; Suzuki, A. Mobile Money,
Individuals’ Payments, Remittances, and Investments:
Evidence from the Ashanti Region, Ghana.
Sustainability 2018, 10, 1409
Leo Van HoveID
Department of Applied Economics (APEC), Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium;
Leo.Van.Hove@vub.be; Tel.: +32-2-6292125
Received: 2 July 2018; Accepted: 3 August 2018; Published: 6 August 2018
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Using primary, individual-level survey data for Ghana, Apiors and Suzuki ﬁnd, among
other things, that mobile money use is not dependent on ﬁnancial status and that mobile money
users save more. This note argues that both conclusions have validity issues.
Keywords: mobile money; ﬁnancial inclusion; saving; Ghana
1. Introduction
In a recent article, Apiors and Suzuki [ 1] examine, ﬁrst, the socio-economic characteristics of
mobile money users in Ghana and, second, the impact of mobile money use on a range of ﬁnancial
transactions conducted by individuals, including the amount that they save. In doing so, Apiors and
Suzuki use primary survey data obtained from 577 respondents (338 users and 169 non-users) in the
Ashanti region.
Unfortunately, for two of Apiors and Suzuki’s research questions there is a clash between the
hypothesis and the way it is tested, so that the conclusion is, in fact, incorrect. I discuss each question
in turn.
2. Financial Status and Mobile Money Use
Apiors and Suzuki’s Hypothesis 1 reads [ 1] (p. 3): “Higher ﬁnancial assets contribute to
participation in mobile money” and is justiﬁed as follows: “Mobile money as a ﬁnancial inclusion
tool may enable people to increase their participation in the formal economy and thereby help them
improve their lives. However, one needs to be able to afford a phone and a SIM card . . .” [1] (p. 3; emphasis
added).
This gives the impression that the hypothesis applies to and will be tested for, the general
population of Ghana; that is, with a sample that includes individuals who do not own a phone.
However, in their survey Apiors and Suzuki ﬁlter on mobile phone ownership [ 1] (p. 6): “Our target
was adults who were at least 18 years of age and owned a mobile phone. This approach was taken
because having a mobile phone is a requirement to have access to mobile money, . . . .”
Apiors and Suzuki then determine, by means of probit and logit regressions, “the kind of people
using mobile money” [ 1] (p. 7) and ﬁnd, in Table 3 on p. 12, that ln(Financial assets) has no signiﬁcant
impact on mobile money use (0/1). They therefore reject H1 and conclude that “participation in mobile
money is not dependent on the ﬁnancial status of an individual” [ 1] (p. 12). This conclusion appears in
more or less the same wording in the Abstract, in the Introduction (on p.-3) and in the Conclusions (on
p. 21) and is even more strongly worded in the Discussion: “there is equal access to mobile money by all
segments of society with respect to ﬁnancial assets” [1] (p. 20; emphasis added).
Sustainability 2018 ,10, 2784; doi:10.3390/su10082784 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2018 ,10, 2784 2 of 4
Clearly, this conclusion is too strong, as it overlooks that individuals who do not own a mobile
phone have been excluded from the sample and as there is strong evidence in the literature that the
poor are less likely to own a mobile phone; see, for example, [ 2] for the case of Kenya. The conclusion
should have read: ‘ among mobile phone owners , participation in mobile money is not dependent on the
ﬁnancial status of an individual.’
To sum up my ﬁrst criticism, Apiors and Suzuki’s H1 is on the level of the total population, their
test is on the level of the subset of mobile phone owners but their conclusion is again on the level of
the total population.
3. Mobile Money Use and Savings
As mentioned, Apiors and Suzuki also examine how mobile money use impacts individuals’
ﬁnancial behaviour. In particular, they hypothesise that mobile money users send and receive
greater volumes of domestic payments and remittances (H3) and invest more in business and capital
assets (H4).
Where savings are concerned, H4 is justiﬁed by referring to the TBILL4ALL product launched in
2016 by Ecobank Capital Advisors together with Mobile Telecommunications Network (MTN), the
largest mobile network operator in the country [ 3]. Apiors and Suzuki [ 1] (p. 4) explain that, with this
service, starting from as little as 5 cedis (USD 1.30) “a mobile money user could purchase a government
security bond that could earn interest of 13–17% per year.” Later in the article, when presenting their
results, they also proffer a more general argument: “Since mobile money provides easy access to a
savings device and easy savings in general, it is possible that mobile money has provided access to an
easy savings mechanism for users and hence they are saving more” [1] (p. 18).
To test H4 (and H3), Apiors and Suzuki estimate a regression of the following form [1] (p. 7):
Yi=a0+b1MM i+Xi0d+ui (1)
where Yiis the outcome (in our case: lnSavings, with savings deﬁned as “total value of money saved
in the last 12 months”), MM iis a dummy that equals 1 if an individual “has ever used mobile money
to undertake any transaction”, Xiis a vector of individual-level control variables and uiis the error
term [ 1] (p. 23). The test then consists in examining whether b1is signiﬁcantly different from 0.
Because MM imay be endogenous, Apiors and Suzuki employ propensity-score matching and inverse
propensity-score weighted regressions. In line with H4, they ﬁnd a signiﬁcant and positive relationship
between mobile money usage and Total Savings; see model (4) in Table 8.
However, unfortunately, there is again no 1-1 correspondence between the hypothesis and the
test. The essence is that the MM dummy, which looks at mobile money use, does not measure what it
is supposed to, namely ‘having access (1/0) to a savings device on one’s mobile phone.’ Being a user of
mobile money, as deﬁned by Apiors and Suzuki, is not enough for such access; one needs to own a
mobile money account .
Indeed, while it is possible to send money to a person who does not have a mobile money account
(albeit at a higher cost), in order to be able to save on the phone—and earn interest—one needs to
register one’s SIM card as a mobile wallet [ 1] (p. 3) [ 4] (p. 64–65). Paragraph 10(5) of the Electronic
Money Issuers Guidelines issued by the Bank of Ghana [ 5] requires mobile money operators to pass
on, each quarter, the bulk of the interest accrued on the pooled e-money ﬂoat to customers but only to
holders of a mobile money account [1] (p. 6).
A similar remark can be made concerning the ability to purchase Treasury Bills with the
TBILL4ALL service. Stronger still, for this service one not only needs a mobile money account,
one needs an MTN account, as Ecobank currently only offers TBILL4ALL on the MTN platform [ 4].
(Note that MTN, together with Fidelity Bank, also offers a Y’ello Save Account that earns 12 percent.
But this was only just launched at the time when Apiors and Suzuki collected their data. For this
product, too, one needs an MTN mobile money wallet).Sustainability 2018 ,10, 2784 3 of 4
In other words, the MM dummy—which, to repeat, captures whether an individual has ever
used mobile money—substantially overestimates the number of respondents who have access to a
mobile savings device. As can be seen in Apiors and Suzuki’s Table 2, only 54 percent of the mobile
money users in their sample actually own a mobile money account [ 1] (p. 10). Apiors and Suzuki
do not mention just how many have an MTN mobile wallet (and could thus buy Treasury Bills) but
Bank of Ghana data show that at end-2017 the total number of TBILL4ALL clients was a mere 7676 for
the entire country [ 4] (p. 59). Bank of Ghana data also show that at end-2017 only 46 percent of the
registered mobile money accounts were active—with ‘active’ deﬁned as an account that “transacted at
least once in the 90 days prior to reporting” [4] (p. 59).
The bottom line is that a substantial share of the ‘mobile money users’ in Apiors and Suzuki’s
sample did not, in fact, have access to a mobile savings device. An even larger share was not in a
position to purchase Treasury Bills on their phone. For these respondents, the higher Total Savings
relative to non-users can thus not possibly have come from such ﬁnancial behaviour, contrary to what
Apiors and Suzuki suggest in their justiﬁcation of H4 (see above) and reiterate in the Discussion: “ . . .,
an active user with a higher ﬁnancial asset is also more likely to [ . . .] put more money on the mobile
wallet to earn more quarterly interest, or invest in treasury bills” [ 1] (p. 20; emphasis added); and also:
“The higher total savings by users could be explained by participating in mobile money providing
access to a convenient saving mechanism. Hence, mobile-money users can save on phones easily and
have easy access to the liquidity of savings and more ﬂexible control over their ﬁnances” [ 1] (p. 21;
emphasis added).
There are several (non-exclusive) alternative explanations for the positive relationship between
mobile money usage and Total Savings in model (4) in Table 8. There could be reverse causality, the
result could be driven by the mobile money account holders among the users, or perhaps the link is of
a more indirect nature, in that users without a mobile money wallet may have been able to save more
because they received greater volumes of remittances, as model (4) in Table 7 would seem to suggest.
It would be interesting for future research to disentangle these explanations. To that end, Apiors and
Suzuki could replace their dummy for mobile money use in model (4) of Table 8 by a dummy for
mobile account ownership; or, if possible, for ownership of an active account. In addition, in model (4)
of Table 7 they could use a variable with three categories (does not use mobile money; uses mobile
money but does not have an account; owns a mobile money account) in order to see whether there is
also a signiﬁcant positive impact on the volume of remittances received for the middle category.
4. Conclusions
Apiors and Suzuki’s answers to two of their research questions have a validity problem. For
Hypothesis 1 there is an issue of external validity: a result for the subset of mobile phone owners is
incorrectly generalised to the total population. For the savings part of Hypothesis 4, the problem is one
of internal validity: the dummy for mobile money use does not correctly capture access to a mobile
savings device.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: I would like to thank Emmanuel Apiors for the e-mail exchange.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Apiors, E.K.; Suzuki, A. Mobile Money, Individuals’ Payments, Remittances, and Investments: Evidence
from the Ashanti Region, Ghana. Sustainability 2018 ,10, 1049. [CrossRef]
2. Murphy, L.; Priebe, A.E. My co-Wife can Borrow my Mobile Phone! Gendered Geographies of Cell Phone
Usage and Signiﬁcance for Rural Kenyans. Gend. Technol. Dev. 2011 ,15, 1–23. [CrossRef]
3. National Communications Authority—Voice Statistics. Available online: https://www.nca.org.gh/industry-
data-2/market-share-statistics-2/voice-2/ (accessed on 26 June 2018).Sustainability 2018 ,10, 2784 4 of 4
4. Bank of Ghana. Payments Systems Oversight Annual Report. 2017. Available online: http://bog.gov.gh/
public-notices/3597-payment-systems-oversight-annual-report-2017 (accessed on 27 June 2018).
5. Bank of Ghana. Guidelines for E-money Issuers in Ghana. 2015. Available online: http://bog.gov.gh/
payment-systems/guidelines-for-e-money-issuers-in-ghana (accessed on 27 June 2018).
©2018 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).