Control of fraud on mobile money
services in Ghana: an
exploratory study
Isaac Akomea-Frimpong ,Charles Andoh and
Agnes Akomea-Frimpong
Department of Finance, University of Ghana, Accre, Ghana, and
Yvonne Dwomoh-Okudzeto
Department of Economics and Law, University of Macerata, Macerata, Italy
Abstract
Purpose –Fraud is a global economic menace which threatens the survival of individuals, ﬁrms, industries
and economies, and the mobile money service is no exception. This paper aims to explore the main causes offraud in the mobile money services in Ghana and the measures to combat the menace by the key stakeholdersconnected to the mobile money services. The paper is motivated by recent reports of numerous fraudulent
transactions on the mobile money platform, and the need to clamp down these nefarious transactions with
effective and practical measures to sustain the service.
Design/methodology/approach –A thorough review of existing studies on fraud risk relating to
mobile money services was done revealing a paucity of literature on the subject. Primary data were gathered
using an interview guide to explore the magnitude of the problem based on the views of employees of mobilemoney operators, mobile money agents, banking supervisors from Bank of Ghana, employees of partneringbanks, employees of National Communications Authority and mobile money subscribers.
Findings –The study revealed that fraud in mobile money services is caused by weak internal controls and
systems, lack of sophisticated information technology tools to detect the menace, inadequate education and
training and the poor remuneration of employees. These factors disrupt the growth, and the smooth-runningof the services. To curb this menace, a detailed legal code and internal fraud policy should be developed andused by mobile money operators and partner banks. Adequate training for mobile money agents should be
encouraged coupled with public awareness campaigns to educate stakeholders especially the mobile money
subscribers on the tricks of the fraudsters.
Research limitations/implications –With the chosen research methodology and limited sample size,
theﬁndings may not re ﬂect the views of all the stakeholders connected to the mobile money services.
Therefore, future studies on this subject are entreated to use research methods which embrace larger samples
to get more details about this menace.
Practical implications –The study will assist in tackling the mobile money fraud to sustain the service
in the foreseeable future.
Originality/value –This paper contributes to scanty literature on fraud relating to the mobile money
services by drawing lessons from a middle-income country.
Keywords Control, Ghana, Service, Money, Mobile, Fraud, Services, Supervision
Paper type Research paper
1. Introduction
Mobile money service has become extremely popular in emerging markets around the world(
Chauhan, 2015 ;Osei-Assibey, 2015 ;Markovich and Snyder, 2017 ). In countries like India,
Uganda, Argentina, Tanzania, Zambia, Nigeria, Ghana and Kenya, where the number ofunbanked is very high, mobile money is the most convenient and easy-to-use alternative forJMLC
22,2
300
Journal of Money Laundering
Control
Vol. 22 No. 2, 2019
pp. 300-317
© Emerald Publishing Limited
1368-5201DOI 10.1108/JMLC-03-2018-0023The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/1368-5201.htmﬁnancial transactions, instead of traditional banks. In Kenya, 43 per cent of the country ’s
gross domestic product ﬂowed through M-Pesa (its mobile money platform) in 2013, 45
per cent in 2015 and 49 per cent in 2016 ( Deloitte, 2015 ;Markovich and Snyder, 2017 ).
In Ghana, the total cellular/mobile voice subscribers as at March 2015 stood at
31,154,420. Mobile Telecommunications Network (MTN) leads with a subscriber base of
14,207,778, representing 46 per cent, followe d by Vodafone with a subscriber base of 7,159,566,
representing 23 per cent, and Tigo with a subscr iber base of 4,315,719, representing 14 per cent
(National Communications Authority, 2015 ). Airtel, GLO and Expresso recorded 12, 5 and 1 per
cent market share, respectively. Four out of these operators are into mobile money transfer
service: MTN mobile money, Vodafone Cash, TIGO Cash and Airtel Money.
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2011) stated that over 80 per cent of the adult population in
Ghana do not have account in the recognized ﬁnancial institutions. The number of Ghana ’s
population keeps on increasing with increasing number of mobile phone users, but as theﬁgure quoted above indicates, many Ghanaians are not part of the formal banking systems.
The mobile money operations is seen as the channel through which many unbanked in
Ghana can join the formal banking systems ( Akomea-Frimpong, 2017 ).
The mobile money service was ﬁrst introduced in Ghana by the telecom company MTN
in 2009, and it was followed by Tigo and Airtel in 2011, and today, all the mobile moneyoperators are involved in this service (
Fintech Africa, 2017 ). The estimated value of the
mobile money transactions in 2014 was GHC11bn with 2.3 million active users; it shot up to
GHC31 million in 2015 with 10.4 million active users, and as at July 2016, the estimatedvalue is GHC37.07bn, representing 118 per cent growth over the previous year ’sﬁgures with
active users of 17.2 million ( Akomea-Frimpong, 2017 ). Airtel, MTN, TIGO and Vodafone are
the mobile phone operators that are driving this service in Ghana ( Roberts, 2016 ). This
momentum looks set to continue, with the mobile money market estimated to be worth of$129.29bn by 2021 all over the world ( Deloitte, 2015 ).
But the success story of this service has come with a threat to the operators because
unscrupulous persons continue to use the mobile money service as a conduit to scam others(
Chatain et al. ,2 0 1 1 ). The sustainability of the service is being threatened by these
fraudsters, who when left unchecked can bring abrupt end to the operations. In 2015, the
number of mobile money fraud cases stood at 53 per cent of the entire mobile money
transactions in Uganda, 42 per cent in Tanzania, 12 per cent in Kenya and 23 per cent inGhana ( Busuulwa, 2016 ;Laryea, 2016 ), afﬁrming that Ghana is a prime target for mobile
money scammers.
The relatively high mobile money fraud rates recorded are hard to trace, and devices and
legislations available on the mobile money operations are lax to apprehend the perpetrators.This is a salient economic problem but a careful review of literature indicates that little onfraudulent transactions on the mobile money services has been captured in the literature.
This can be attributed to inappropriate fraud indicators to detect, measure and prevent
the menace. Also, few research studies on the mobile money operations have made mentionof the menace (
Osei-Assibey, 2015 ;Mas and Radcliffe, 2011 ) with no or little mention of the
measures to combat the menace.
Some of the victims of mobile money scammers lost monies ranging from GHC200 ($45)
to GHC3,500 ($800)[ 1] per transaction. According to victims, the scammers call to inform
them that they mistakenly sent money into mobile money wallet and so they should resend
it back to them. This is later on determined as untrue and calculated scheme to steal their
money ( Provencal, 2017 ). According to Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications, mobile
money services in Ghana such as MTN Mobile Money, Tigo Cash, Airtel Money andVodafone Cash have recorded 388 money fraud cases in 2016 as against 278 in 2015[
2].Control of
fraud
301Another revealing story that rocked the airwaves and sounded the alarm for players in the
mobile money industry to be cautious and take practical steps to ﬁght the problem was
reported as:
Two persons have been arrested at Assin Daaman in the Central Region for alleged mobile money
scams. The suspects, Stephen Appiah and Eric Aboagye, were arrested upon a tip-o ﬀabout
suspicious activities of a group based in Assin Daaman. The two are said to have allegedly
sent scam messages to MTN mobile money subscribers with the intention of tricking them
into sending funds to a designated number. A statement issued by MTN Ghana on Monday saidthe arrest was made possible through a joint e ﬀort with the Ghana Police Service. The statement
said nine SIM cards and ﬁve mobile phones were retrieved from one of the suspects. Stephen
Appiah is alleged to have duped his victims to a tune of GH¢3,130. The suspects have since beenarraigned before court and remanded in police custody[ 3
].
This shows the damming trend of the menace that needs to be checked and booted out from the
service. The aim of this study is to identify the causes of mobile money fraud in Ghana, and themeasures to combat it. The rest of this paper is divided into four sections. Section 2 discussesthe basic concepts on mobile money services and mobile money and various fraudulent
practices with theories and rece nt empirical studies. Sections 3 and 4 present data analysis and
discussions. Sections 5 and 6 state conclusi ons and recommendations, respectively.
2. Literature review
2.1 General overview of the mobile money services
The concept of mobile money has become well-known among mobile phone users, mobile
telecommunication networks, technology experts and academia in recent years (
Narteh et al.,
2017;Asongu and Asongu, 2018 ). It gained much attention across the world as a payment
system after the ﬁrst two “Mobile Money Summits ”in 2008 and 2009 ( Suri and Jack, 2016 ;
Maurer, 2015 ;Gosavi, 2017 ). Some scholars also attribute the genesis of the mobile money
service to M-PESA, which originated in Kenya and it has spread to many developingcountries across the earth ( Markovich and Snyder, 2017 ). The service can be accessed via
mobile phone ( Etim, 2014 ).Jenkins (2008) proposed that services such as bill payment,
salary payment and local and international remittances should be added to the mobile
money platform, and these products have been embedded into the service recently. These
added features and services are equated in the same category of banking by ﬁnancial
analysts. The mobile money service also helps in paying other bills on electricity and water,digital television, parking fees and several other services. This is a rising trend among manyconsumers especially those in urban settings. This phenomenon is rampant among wealthy-urban mobile phone users ( Nyaga, 2013 ).
2.2 Mobile money fraud
2.2.1 Forms and causes of mobile money fraud. Since its inception, the mobile money
service has been saddled by many fraudulent activities from scammers with the prime aimof derailing the good of the service to the populace. Mobile money fraud is an intentional act
perpetuated by scammers or fraudsters to gain undue advantage over the mobile money
subscribers, mobile money operators and mobile money agents (
Subex, 2017 ;Merritt, 2011 ).
It is a well-taught through act by the scammers to take advantage of the stakeholders of theservice. The scammers take a very long time to plan about it and sometimes get resourcesand technical assistance from cartels that pounce on the weaknesses in the system to enrichthemselves ( Maurer, 2012 ). In this study, fraud in the mobile money services has been
classi ﬁed into three, namely:JMLC
22,2
302(1) Subscribers ’fraud : Mobile money services are patronized by mobile subscribers
who go through many steps before they are registered. Unfortunately, some of thesubscribers register with the aim of using deceptive means to transact businessesand steal money from other subscribers and the mobile money operators. Theactivities of fraudulent subscribers affect the unwitting people with estimated 50per cent of mobile money subscribers and mobile money operators being subjectedto the whims and caprices of the fraudulent subscribers. They steal the mobilemoney codes, SIM cards, PINs and other relevant information to advance andmanipulate the transactions to their favor.
(2) Employee and agents ’fraud : There are honest, ethical, trustworthy and business-
minded mobile money agents who are burnt on helping the mobile money serviceto succeed. But there are some who have lined themselves up to dupe andmanipulate the transaction processes and pro ﬁt from it with the employees of the
mobile money operators. These scammers create multiple dummy accounts andpasswords to siphon money into accounts and use these funds for their own good.For instance, 3,000 mobile money agents were caught in conniving with mobilemoney subscribers to defraud the mobile money operators in Ghana in 2017, andthese agents were sanctioned[
4]. Also, employees of mobile money operators have
been accused for helping the mobile money agents to steal money from the mobilemoney subscribers[
5]. These incidences can be attributed to poor and porous
internal controls instituted by the mobile money operators that allow employeesand agents to get away with their crimes
(3) Systems ’fraud : Many sophisticated algorithms have been invented to help the
activities of telecommunication operators to accomplish different purposes butsome of the operators do not have some of these information technology (IT)systems designed purposely for the mobile money operations. Some of the systemshave become obsolete and cannot compete with the increasing challengesassociated with mobile money operations ( Vlcek, 2011 ). Due to these weaknesses,
scammers go round the system and use it to dupe others of their money.Fraudulent technology experts also maneuver the IT systems to dupe others andcover them up.
2.2.2 Mobile money fraud in Ghana. The following are the common fraud cases on mobile
money service that have been reported in Ghana[ 6]:
/C15Anonymous calls and text messages from fraudsters : Fraudsters call mobile money
subscribers that they have deposited money into their accounts mistakenly andtherefore they should transfer them back to them. These are normally detected asfalse claims after the mobile money account balances are checked.
/C15False promotion : Some mobile money subscribers are deceived to transfer money to
fraudsters after they have been told to authorize cash out transactions because theyhave won mobile money promotion. Fraudulent mobile money subscribers sendfake messages to their agents either from their own handsets or generated fromcomputers as genuine messages by the recipients; they pay the money fraudstersbut later on detect that they were fake ( Provencal, 2017 ).
/C15Scam : Fraudsters call to deceive subscribers that they are to deliver goods from
abroad or from a close relative under false pretext. Some fraudsters call and ask forspeciﬁed amounts to be deposited into a mobile money account in exchange for
goods from relatives or friends from abroadControl of
fraud
303/C15False cash out SMS : Fraudsters send false cash out messages to merchants for
authorization of which the physical cash is issued by the merchant to the fraudsterwithout the equivalent e-cash ( Provencal, 2017 ).
2.3 Mechanisms to combat mobile money fraud by the key stakeholders
Mechanisms are being put in place to manage the risks associated with the mobile money
service ( Singh, 2012 ;Merritt, 2011 ;Gilman and Joyce, 2012 ). In this section, the contributions
of four key players to the ﬁght against fraud in the mobile money industry are considered:
(1) Central banks : Central banks are responsible for laying out measures that control
the activities of the mobile money service ( Maurer, 2012 ). Central banks undertake
exercise based on the comments by various industry players on some lapses inexisting laws which guide the service. Central banks call for all the views of thekey stakeholders on the service, and these views are analyzed thoroughly before apaper will be put out to assist in arriving at a policy document. Mobile moneyoperators over the years have argued that these policy documents are not enoughto help them address the numerous risk associated with the service ( Mas and
Radcliffe, 2011 ). Central banks clarify these issues in their updated policy
documents they design to facilitate the process to further ﬁnancial inclusion on
yearly basis. Central banks educate mobile money operators on various digital
ﬁnancing and e-business transactions, as well as on money laundering, mobile
money fraud and the measures to combat them ( Suárez, 2016 ). Central banks also
connect the mobile money operators to the various security agencies and thegovernment.
(2) Partnering banks and fund managers : For years now, banks have always played
many roles at the same time: serving as ﬁnancial intermediaries, managing funds and
assisting customers in ﬁnancial transactions ( Bara, 2013 ). But these transactions come
with a lot of risks. The mobile money service is one of the ﬁnancial innovation
products the banks have added to their portfolio ( Markovich and Snyder, 2017 ). In
countries where the mobile money servic e was generated by the banks, they tend to
have more control over the operations of the service ( Singh, 2012 ) but in some
countries like Ghana, banks serve as fund ma nagers for the mobile money operators.
These banks assist the MNOs to diversify their investments and revenue to avoid total
cash-out in future to manage their operations. The banks manage the funds of the
mobile money operators with the directives from the central bank. The banks put forthtight requirements for the mobile money operators and they also train them and givethem guidelines on cash limits to their s ubscribers. Know Your Customer (KYC) is
ensured by the banks to do away with fra udulent transactions. Nowadays, banks
operate with sophisticated software which are capable of detecting and safeguardingfunds from the mobile money operators against fraudsters and hacks ( Narteh et al.,
2017).
(3) Mobile money operators and their agents : To facilitate ﬁnancial inclusion and
attract the unbanked to be part of the formal banking systems, the central banksstarting from Kenya (through M-PESA) has encouraged telecommunicationcompanies to be involved ( Merritt, 2011 ). Cooperation among telecommunication
companies and their stakeholders have been identi ﬁed to be key in driving out
fraudsters and sustaining the service ( Klein and Mayer, 2011 ). According to
Gilman and Joyce (2012) , collaboration of the mobile money operators and theirJMLC
22,2
304agents with security agencies is the next major key that will help to regulate the
service and root out fraudsters. Institution of effective internal controls is a prime
priority of the mobile money operators, and they are guided religiously by industrystandards and guidelines from the central banks. Regular in-house training on the
mobile money services with improved remuneration packages are used to boost the
morale of their employees and agents to cut out fraudulent activities. Mobile money
operators also apply KYC procedures strictly and regularize the review of subscribers ’
accounts, passwords and other information ( Sorooshian, 2018 ).
(4) Mobile money subscribers : It is the responsibility of the mobile money subscribers
to help the mobile money operators and security agencies to identify fraudsters
(Gilman and Joyce, 2012 ). They report the cases of scam and assist in investigations to
unravel fraudulent transactions ( Suárez, 2016 ).
2.4 Theoretical review
In this study, two theories are considered, one for the causes of mobile money fraud and the
other one for the control of mobile money fraud.
(1) Fraud triangle, fraud diamond and fraud pentagon (Causes of fraud) : There is no
speciﬁc theory dedicated to fraud on the mobile money services but the causes of
f r a u di ni t se n t i r e t yw a ss u m m a r i z e di na na x i o mk n o w na st h ef r a u dt r i a n g l e
developed from the work of Donald Cressey in 1986 ( Cressey, 1986 ). The three
elements of the fraud triangle are: pressure or motive, opportunity and rationalization.
Cressey concluded in his study that individuals commit fraud when the three factors
are present to satisfy a ﬁnancial need that cannot be shared (motive) for a perceived
opportunity for illicit gain or gain improper access to a fund (opportunity) and a
personal justi ﬁcation of the act to these illicit acts (rationalization). Fraud triangle
theory was expanded to fraud diamond theory in the study by Wolfe and Hermanson
(2004) in which another variable known as “capabilities ”w a sa d d e dt ot h ef r a u d
triangle ( Figure 1 ). According to Wolfe and Hermanson (2004) ,a n d Kassem and
Higson (2012) many fraudulent transactions would not have occurred without the
right person with right capabilities making use of the variables in fraud triangle.
A further expansion to these fraud theories was done in a study conducted by
Figure 1.
Evolution of fraud
theories
Control of
fraud
305Marks (2009) w h e r et h eC r o w eH o r w a t h ’s Fraud Pentagon was constructed with
“arrogance ”as a ﬁfth variable. Marks (2009) posited that the arrogance of an
individual relates to his or her lack of conscience which encourages the person to
commit fraud.
(2) The general deterrence theory (GDT; control of fraud) : The GDT is one of the
deterrence theories which has been chosen to explain the suitable measures to
control mobile money fraud. The components of GDT provide a theoreticalframework to investigate the deterrence, detection, prevention, and remedy of
online fraud. It enables an examination of the countermeasures and the effects on
online fraud ( Alanezi and Brooks, 2014 ). Theories such as criminological theory,
information systems security effectiveness theory and situational crime prevention
theory were designed to address the issues on security environment and physicalsecurity. GDT theory look further into the countermeasure activities and
interrelationships that exist among these measures and their effects on fraud. The
four tenets of GDT are deterrence, prevention, detection and remedy, which is
based on the assumption that a fraudster can be deterred and corrected through
countermeasures ( Straub and Welke, 1998 ). GDT assumes that deterrence is
capable of in ﬂuencing the factors that encourage a fraudster to commit an illicit act
(D’Arcy et al. , 2009 ). Deterrence is meant to suppress the criminal behavior of the
fraudster through fear of punishment and ﬁnes. Thus, deterrence aims to
discourage fraudsters before they develop a desire to commit an act. GDT helps
facilitate detection, prevention and remedial activities through public educationand other awareness programs with the assistance of the key stakeholders in
mobile money service industry.
2.5 Review of empirical literature
Mudiri (2013) conducted a study on the mobile money services in India, Indonesia,
Philippines, Argentina, Kenya, Papua New Guinea and Uganda. The study was conductedusing exploratory research design with interviews, and it was concluded that mobile money
fraud risks must be tackled holistically with capacity building and ﬁnancial education.
Rieke et al. (2013) assessed the risks on the ﬁeld of services which support transactions with
electronic money or mobile money service. Speci ﬁcally, they applied a tool for predictive
security analysis at runtime which observes process behavior with respect to transactionswithin a money transfer service and tries to match it with expected behavior given by a
process model. They analyzed deviations from the given behavior speci ﬁcation for
anomalies that indicate a possible misuse of the service related to money laundering
activities. They evaluated the applicability of the proposed approach and provided
measurements on computational and recognition performance of the tool –predictive
security analyser –produced using real operational and simulated logs. The goal of the
experiments was to detect misuse patterns re ﬂecting a given money laundering scheme in
synthetic process behavior based on properties captured from real world transaction events.
Adedoyin et al. (2017) proposed an improved case-based reasoning (CBR) approach in the
identi ﬁcation of fraud in the mobile money service. They posited that standard CBR
capability is enhanced by using machine learning to assess the sample size of cases leading
to the detection of abnormal and fraudulent activities. They categorized the behavior of
subscriber into ﬁve contexts and then combine them into single dimension instead of using
the traditional dimensions of time and transaction amounts. They also proposed that it isJMLC
22,2
306better to use simulation data in the CBR approach. Their results showed that combined and
weighted dimensions outperform the individual dimensions assessed separately.
Kanobe et al. (2017) asserted that the introduction of mobile money service has helped the
unbanked in the emerging economies to be part of the formal ﬁnancial services. They stated
that this phenomenon has occurred with light-touch regulatory framework, which has
allowed fraudulent transactions to thrive. They used interpretive qualitative approachbased on Activity Theory (AT) to assess the management of mobile money service withmuch emphasis on information security policies, regulatory documents and procedures.Their ﬁndings portrayed the reasons why there are gaps in the information security
management concerning mobile money service in emerging economies. They also gave out
the roles played by employees of mobile money operators in protecting the informationsecurity of the service.
3. Research methodology
In this paper, qualitative research design w as adopted to help understand perspectives
of the social economic contexts of the mobile money fraud. This research approach
allowed the experiences of the people in this study to be examined in detail from their
perspectives, making it easier to achieve an understanding of the meanings andinterpretations of the issues raised. Qua litative research has been explained as the
process of exploring and understanding the contexts and meanings of individuals orgroups to solve social and human problems (
Creswell and Creswell, 2017 ). The
qualitative research highlights the social constructs of relationships and actions
forming social life and the source of information about issues that affect the society andindividual reasoning ( Myers, 2013 ;Yin, 2011 ). Therefore, the realities of life are made
and explained in relation to a phenomenon.
In total, 43 interviews were carried out for the key stakeholders involved in the mobile
money industry in Ghana. The participants were selected based on their functions in themobile money industry in Ghana and the roles they play in combating mobile money fraud(
Table I ). Four categories of participants were involved in this study. Industry regulators are
institutions responsible for regulating the mobile money industry, which include the Bank of
Ghana and the National Communications Authority (NCA). The mobile money operatorsinclude telecommunication companies such as MTN, TiGo, Vodafone and Airtel. Theiremployees were interviewed together with their agents or merchants. The third category
was the partnering banks that are responsible for managing the mobile money funds from
the mobile money operators. The last category was the mobile money subscribers, who arethe customers of the service.
Table I.
Participants and
their positions in the
mobile money
industry in GhanaParticipants Position/Function No. interviewed
Industry regulators Banking Supervisor 2
IT supervisor 3
Mobile money operator Employee 8
Agent/Merchant 11
Partnering banks Bank Manager 5Mobile money subscribers Customer 14
Total 43
Source: Field data (2018)Control of
fraud
307The type of questions asked with semi-structured interview guide were about the existing
measures to combat mobile money fraud in Ghana coupled with questions on causes of
mobile money fraud. Questions were asked on regulation, the level of awareness, transaction
limits, reporting systems, punitive measures, supervision and monitoring, as well as
technological applications for combating mobile money fraud.
Gathering textual data through the semi-structured interview involves a scienti ﬁc and an
artful qualitative analysis approach ( Corbin and Strauss, 2008 ;Yin, 2011 ).Creswell and
Creswell (2017) proposes that using well-accepted methodological procedures and
techniques, qualitative analysis can be a rigorous and scienti ﬁc approach to develop useful
explanations to the data collected. This is in support of the interpretative nature of
qualitative data analysis underscored by Yin (2011) . Qualitative data analysis comes in the
following forms: discourse analysis, narrative analysis, content analysis, thematic analysis
and grounded theory ( Klassen et al. ,2 0 1 2 ). They all adopt similar procedures but deliver
useful results depending on the context in which they are used. In this study, the thematic
analytical method was chosen for the data analysis. This method is ﬂexible and independent
in its usage built upon theories and epistemology. Its ability to re ﬂect reality and also pick or
unravel the surface of reality makes it a useful method for this study ( Braun et al. ,2 0 1 9 ).
Thematic data analysis helps the researcher to ﬁnd and classify patterns referred to as
themes in describing a data set ( Yin, 2011 ). The reality of a phenomenon and any hidden
truth around it is unraveled ( Braun et al.,2 0 1 6 ).
In total, 43 interviews were recorded and transcribed with the aim of retaining suf ﬁcient
in depth information for data analysis. The process of transcribing the interviews involved
replaying the recorded interview together with the comparing notes taken during the
interview process ( Yin, 2011 ). This assist in getting the details of the issues discussed during
the interview and enhanced the familiarity of the data set and development of ideas and
meanings of the data ( Lapadat and Lindsay, 1999 ).
The understanding of the ideas and issues discussed at the interview session led to the
generation of codes bases on the features and meanings obtained. This process ensured thatall the statements were coded to cover all the data set. The codes statements were regrouped
according to the interests and the pattern of connections they have with the objectives of the
study. These regrouped codes were checked and re-examined to avoid errors, duplications,
appropriateness and omissions. Some of the codes were merged and some were ignored at
this stage to produce the third or ﬁnal sets of codes. This set of codes was examined for
relationship and was grouped into themes. These sub-themes are discussed accordingly to
address the research questions.
4. Data analysis and discussion
The detailed ﬁndings from the transcription of the data highlight key themes of the ﬁndings
which are centered on causes of mobile money fraud and measures to combat the mobile
money fraud, with each of them having sub-themes, which are discussed below.
4.1 Causes of mobile money fraud
4.1.1 Poor employees and agents ’conditions of service. It was observed that majority of the
participants (almost 60 per cent) placed the cause of mobile money fraud at the feet of poor
remuneration of employees and mobile money agents. They complained that the salaries
and commissions given to them are not enough, thus, to survive the hardships in the
economy, they dabble in illicit acts to supplement what they are paid. The Ghanaian
economy struggled greatly between 2012 and 2016, leaving untold hardships to the citizenry
(
Ile and Boadu, 2018 ). This condition resulted in increasing the cost of living in Ghana andJMLC
22,2
308thereby proliferating ﬁnancial crimes in the country. Some of the mobile money agents and
employees of the mobile money operators deliberately conspire to defraud the mobile moneysubscribers by diverting the money transacted or deducting money from accounts withoutsubscribers ’approval. Some of the mobile money agents and employees of the mobile money
operators give fraudsters insider information and security codes that help them tomanipulate the system to bene ﬁt from it. They do all these things to cushion up their meagre
salaries given to them by the mobile money operators.
4.1.2 Weak internal systems. Some of the participants posited that mobile money fraud is
caused by weak internal controls on the mobile money service. It was recounted that some ofthe mobile money operators and their agents operate with very lax control systems, whichstart from the top management to the lowest rank. Employees and managers of the mobilemoney operator can authorize transactions which are not approved by their superiors, andsome go beyond the transaction limits without seeking the approval from the operator. Someof agents transact money to subscribers without keeping proper records of the money theysend. Some of the mobile money agents operate under trees and umbrellas in the open where
thieves and robbers can easily attack them and take away the money they have made. Some
of the agents who operate in the buildings have weak locks, no safes to keep the money andno security gadgets; thus, fraudsters get easy access to the buildings and steal physical cashfrom them. Poor internal supervision and review of transactions, double counting andtransposition of ﬁgures are not checked.
4.1.3 Porous information technology systems. The participants of this study were of the
view that the mobile money fraudulent practices have been thriving because of porous ITsystems used to provide the mobile money service. Some of the subscribers and externalcartel of IT fraudsters are able to hack into the system and steal money. This is because thesystems are not well properly protected. Employees can easily get access to passwords ofsubscribers. There are times the IT systems will be off, sometimes it is jammed, sometimesthe IT system is very slow, etc. These were recounted by one participant as:
[...] the telcos sometimes fail to back up the numerous transactions on daily basis and many
times they lose a lot of information which the fraudsters chance on to defraud the mobile money
subscribers. Anti-virus and other protective mechanisms are not available to handle the
fraudsters, thus, they easily manipulate the transactions [ ...] some of the telecommunication
gadgets are outmoded and they are frequently interrupted by long power outages and disruptions
which a ﬀects the smooth running of the mobile money service [ ...] most of the telcos don ’t have
sophisticated software to track and report fraudsters [ ...] only one of them has invested in ultra-
modern IT software [ ...]
4.1.4 Inadequate training and public awareness. Participants pointed out that poor
knowledge as a result of inadequate training on the fraudulent practices on the mobilemoney services have augmented the menace. It was recounted by one mobile money agent
that:
[...] few training programs are organized for us (agents) [ ...] the last time I attended a training
program on mobile money services is about eight (8) months ago. Little emphasis was placed on
fraud during the training programs so I don ’t know much about the fraudulent practices in the
operations [ ...] we (agents) attend the training in trenches because the operators (telcos) complain
of limited resources and training materials, sometimes they want us to pay for the training so
many agents stay back and few of them attend the training programs.
Some of the mobile money subscribers posited that until recently, they had no idea about
some news items that were aired on the various media platforms on mobile money fraud. Infact, they stated that they have little idea about how the menace evolved. Public awarenessControl of
fraud
309is still low, and this has empowered more fraudsters to get on board to dupe subscribers. On
the part of the employees of the mobile money operators, they stated categorically that thetraining given to them on mobile money fraud is simply inadequate from the regulators,Bank of Ghana and NCA.
4.1.5 Lax regulatory measures. The NCA is mandated to ensure telecommunication
companies in Ghana provide quality services to consumers, but they have little to do withthe mobile money service. This means that the mobile money service is not exactly under
the purview of the NCA but rather under the Bank of Ghana. Bank of Ghana has issued
Electronic Money Issuers (EMI)[ 7
] guidelines to assist mobile money operators and the
agents but these guidelines are limited and very lax for any fraudster to go around it. Properlegislative regulations with legal backing are lacking on the mobile money service. TheEMIs are just administrative regulation from Bank of Ghana which is not extensive enough
to detect and prevent illegalities taking place in the mobile money service. Some of the
participants said that the Central Bank has failed in many instances to sanction the mobilemoney operators for failing to comply with their regulations because the bank does not havethe mandate by laws of Ghana to have total control over what the operators do.
4.2 Measures to combat mobile money fraud
4.2.1 Comprehensive legal document to guide mobile money service. There must be a policy
document to regulate the operations of the mobile money operators. Bank of Ghana has anadministrative guide which assists in running the service, but it will be better if all the keystakeholders in the mobile money service industry, including the government and
parliament, will be drawn into the discussion and the design of a broader legal framework to
assist in clamping down the menace. All the managers interviewed agreed to this statement.One of them posited that initially, there were two regulations, i.e. EMIs for telecommunicationcompanies and agents, but these two regulations were merged into payment and serviceregulations, which has been found to be inadequate. A more detailed legal document
designed by Bank of Ghana, National Communications authority and the Parliament of
Ghana will be better to manage the situation.
Key stakeholders such as Bank of Ghana, the mobile money operators and the partnering
banks must have their own internal documents framed purposively for the mobile money
service. A participant from Bank of Ghana recounted that the bank requests all partnering
banks to make input in putting together banking supervisory documents for guide theservice and also take cue from best practices in Kenya and other countries where the servicehas worked out.
Partner banks have designed an internal policy documents to follow to manage the funds
at their disposal from the mobile money operators. One bank manger stated that:
[...] the banks have standard operating procedures that help them in daily operations which are
found in their policy documents [ ...] First Atlantic Bank follows the guidelines (E-Money
Issuance License) set by BOG. They pay interests on Float they earn (1.5-7 per cent). Negotiate
with the Mobile Network operators on interest percentage to pay on the ﬂoat (80-20 per cent on
ﬂoat). 80 per cent goes to the Wallet Holders and 20 per cent goes to the Mobile Operators and in
cases where the mobile money operator is suspected in money laundering, these interests are not
paid and severe ties with such operators if the fraud is huge [ ...] but these cases of money
laundering are not common to happen
Mobile money operators have their own documents designed internally to assist the smooth
operations of the mobile money services. The documents are extended to the mobile moneymerchants or agents. An employee recounted that:JMLC
22,2
310[...] Airtel for example, has a group policy which was designed in line with what is stipulated in the
EMI guidelines provided by BOG. The group policy covers Sales and Distribution, Customer
Management, IT and Operations, Finance Reconciliation and Settlement, Revenue planning,
Business Analysis, etc. Risk and Compliance, AML and KYC. IT and Operations-Infrastructure, ISOcertiﬁcation, information security, PCI DSS [ ...] Global System for Mobile communications
Association (GSMA) Best Practices[ 8
], Payment Card Industry-Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS)[ 9],
Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Best Practices[ 10] and ISO 27001[ 11] are some of the international
guidelines the telcos adhere to. On the part of local standards, the telcos go by what is set by BOG inrelation to the EMI guidelines. Data Protection Act, Payment Systems Act 2003, and KYC principles
are applied to validate subscribers [ ...]
4.2.2 E ﬀective internal and information technology systems. It was found that Bank of
Ghana has assigned their Payment Systems Department (PSD) to deal with all issuesconcerning mobile money supervision. PSD is equipped with tools to function, but it was
observed that these tools are not adequate to help the department to do an extensive
supervision of the mobile money service. The main function of PSD is:
[...] among other things is to ensure that partner banks do not exceed their ﬂoat threshold, ensure
strict adherence to KYC by mobile money operators, and to ensure that mobile money operators
also pay interest on mobile money ﬂoat.
Partner banks have segregated their treasury divisions into sub-departments to manage the
funds of the mobile money operators. Mobile money operators have departments fortransferring and letting out electronic money to mobile money subscribers. Another
department cater for marketing. This unit assist the telcos to detect fake promotions and
other marketing packages put out by fraudsters. This department seeks to make sure thereis daily reconciliation of the accounts of the mobile money operators with the branches of the
operators and their partner banks. This department also supervises payments of bills,
money transfer, account deposit and savings from the mobile money operators and agents.Other services rendered include value added services, implant tellers to create convenience
and cash pick-ups. They prompt the operators of ﬁshy dealings and fake transactions which
are related to the funds they have deposited with them. This department ensures that themobile money operators follow rules and regulations set up by the Bank of Ghana in
managing the funds on mobile money services. They comply with the rules and the
employees who refuse to operate these directives are punished. They have instituted internalaudit teams who go round to audit the accounts and transactions undertaken by the
employees and agents of the company. Internal securities are being beefed to detect the
fraudsters. Routine check up on the functionality of the IT systems has become a priority forall the operators. Some of the operators have invested in sophisticated software to boost the
quality of service they render to subscribers. MTN Ghana, for instance, has announced the
reintroduction of the “Allow Cash-Out ”feature on its mobile money platform to enhance
customer security for withdrawal transactions.
4.2.3 Strict punitive measures against fraudsters. Punitive measures devoid of
favoritism are underway on the various mobile money platforms in Ghana to detect and
punish fraudsters. Mobile money operators and their agents that involve in fraudulentactivities should be ﬁned and punished accordingly. This was supported by the
participants:
[...] Mobile money operators who engage in money laundering transactions risk losing their E-
Money Issuers License (EMI). Agents on the other hand would be disbanded ...Report to the
mobile money operators (MMO), and if there is no action taken, the report is forwarded to BOG. Incase, the MMO is responsible for supervision of their customers. The compliance unit alerts the
unit upon irregularities spotted and they are punished.Control of
fraud
311In addition, the mobile money operators have punitive measures or policies for mobile
money subscribers and agents who dabble in money laundering and other ﬁnancial fraud.
These measures include barring the customer from the mobile money platform; report
fraudsters to Economic and Organized Crime Organization within 48 hours for further
investigations to take place and set alerts on customers account to auto-debit them.
4.2.4 Reporting on mobile money fraud to regulators and security agencies. Mobile
money operators and their agents use three mediums to report their activities andtransactions to Bank of Ghana and the partner banks through Reporting Portal provided by
Bank of Ghana. Payment Systems Data Submission Module is a pre-determined format for
data submission authorized by Bank of Ghana to assist in prompt reporting to the bank andthe various security agencies in Ghana. These reporting systems help the state security
apparatus and the Central Bank to detect fraudsters and punish them according to the laws
of Ghana.
4.2.5 Transaction limits. There are transaction limits as to the amount the agents can
receive or withdraw from a bank daily, weekly and monthly. These limits are instituted bythe telcos with assistance from the partner banks and Bank of Ghana to limit the amount of
money subscribers and agents can get access to. It was recounted that:
[...] there are limits that pertain to customers based on the transactions they perform. These
limits are speci ﬁed in the EMI guidelines. The limits are for control purposes and a means of
controlling the activities of fraudsters. Agents are regulated by these limits as to the amount theycan issue to subscribers [ ...]
5. Conclusion and implications
From the study, it was found that fraud in the mobile money services is caused by poorremuneration of employees and their managers. The respondents were of the view that someof the employees deliberately connived with the subscribers and other employees to steal
money from the mobile money operators. Employees of mobile money operators work with
the mobile money operators to manipulate the systems to bene ﬁt from it (
Maurer, 2012 ;
Merritt, 2011 ). Some of the mobile money operators and their agents operate with very lax
internal systems and weak ﬁnancial controls with poor supervision from the top
management level to the lowest ranked employee. Fraudulent practices in the service arethriving due to poor and archaic IT systems used to manage the mobile money transactions.
The IT systems are hacked and jammed by fraudsters to pounce on stakeholders with their
dubious activities ( Etim, 2014 ). Some respondents attributed this menace to poor knowledge
on the fraudulent practices in the services and this can be a result of inadequate training on
this menace to the key stakeholders in the industry. Practically, these fraudulent activities
have derailed the key stakeholders of their money and resources. These illegal activitieshave brought the reputation of the once revered service in Ghana to public ridicule and
scrutiny. It has increased the cost of training and protecting the service from cybercrime
crooks. It has heightened the checks and balances within the mobile money service, and it isdrawing potential subscribers from signing on to the service with fear that they will be
duped.
The results of the study show that to combat mobile money fraud, the Bank of Ghana has
issued EMI guidelines to assist mobile money operators and agents. The Bank of Ghanakeeps on updating this policy document based on what is happening in Ghana, global
ﬁnancial market and lessons from countries that are currently undertaking mobile money
operations supported by the government to clamp down any nefarious activities that may begoing on in the mobile money operations. Bank of Ghana ’s PSD deals with all issuesJMLC
22,2
312concerning mobile money supervision and they are equipped with tools to function. It was
revealed that commercial banks serve as fund managers for the mobile money operators.
These fund managers have policy documents they have designed to assist them manage themoney in their custody. The mobile money operators have internal systems to assist them to
ﬁght the menace, as well as transaction limits for agents and subscribers on withdrawal and
deposits. A collaboration between the key stakeholders has resulted in punitive measuresandﬁnes for mobile money subscribers and agents who dabble in money laundering and
other ﬁnancial frauds through the mobile money service. These combative measures are in
place to repose con ﬁdence in the service to attract more subscribers to attain Ghana ’s
ﬁnancial inclusion drive. These measures are to detect and punish culprits appropriately to
ensure the growth of the service into the future.
6. Recommendations
A legislative instrument or an Act of Parliament should be enacted specially to guide the
mobile money service excluding it from laws guiding other cashless electronic ﬁnancial
services. This should be done by drawing the views of all the stakeholders in the mobile
money industry. Information and knowledge sharing among cross-functional departments
at Bank of Ghana should be encouraged to assist the telcos. Robust internal controls shouldbe ensured to monitor the transactions and bring out the dubious ones. The perspectives ofthe mobile money agents or merchants on the supervision of the mobile money services is an
area that can be further researched. Anti-malware application on mobile phones should be
encouraged, and collaboration between the mobile money operators and the e-crime bureauof the government should be strengthened to arrest and deal with the menace.
Moreover, mobile money operators should educate their subscribers and agents. They
must build capacity for the Police Service and other security agencies so they will be able to
understand the modus operandi of the fraudsters. Subscribers should be educated to verify
any banking app they are using. They should be assisted to protect their phones/tabletswith a strong password and a set up SIM card PIN so that it cannot be used in another
device. The public should be cautioned to be careful when returning a call from an unknown
number. These could be potentially unwanted and costly schemes, spam and scam voiceand text messages. A subscriber could be charged premium rates for these calls. Subscribers
should not use automatic call acceptance feature which could be used by cyber crooks to
establish a connection without a subscriber ’s information. Mobile money operators must
keep on educating their customers and merchants on personal security on the mobile money
platform. Strict rules for merchant identi ﬁcation must be ensured so that recalcitrant
merchants could be traced easily and arrested when they engage in fraud. A subscribermust also be educated to never disclose their secret pin to anybody, including agents. PINmust be periodically updated to avoid being hacked. Keep the mobile money account
secret. Money must be transferred into wallet before sending to a third party. A call to verify
if money has been received when using the services of agents must be done. A subscribermust not download a suspicious apps. Double check to con ﬁrm if indeed money has been
mistakenly sent into a wallet of a subscriber before it will be resent. Do not open a Facebook
account with a mobile money number; it can easily be pro ﬁled by fraudsters. Ignore
suspicious text messages asking for money to release a package or prize, especially if you
have not been engaged in any draw or raf ﬂe. Conduct checks on people you employ to
operate mobile money service. Also, there must be training for selected judges and legalpractitioners in Ghana on how fraudsters take advantage of the mobile money transactions
to defraud unsuspecting customer.Control of
fraud
313Notes
1. $1 = GHC4.374 ( www.bog.gov.gh/markets/daily-interbank-fx-rates as at 11/08/17).
2.https://managingghana.com/fraud-alert-warning-mobile-money-fraud-rise-ghana/
3.www.graphic.com.gh/news/general-news/two-arrested-for-alleged-mobile-money-scam.html
4.www.graphic.com.gh/news/general-news/mtn-sanctions-3-000-agents-for-mobile-money-fraud.html
5.www.myjoyonline.com/opinion/2017/October-23rd/mtn-mobile-money-fraud-an-inside-job.php
6.www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/business/Avoiding-fraud-due-to-Mobile-Money-588682
7.www.bog.gov.gh/privatecontent/Banking/E-MO NEY%20GUIDELINES-29-06-2015-UPDATED5.pdf
8.www.gsma.com/spectrum/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/spec_best_practice_ENG.pdf
9.https://pcicompliance.stanford.edu/sites/default/ ﬁles/pci_dss_v3-2.pdf
10.www.fatf-ga ﬁ.org/media/fatf/content/images/AML%20CFT%20measures%20and%20 ﬁnancial%
20inclusion.pdf
11.http://bcc.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/ ﬁles/ﬁles/bcc.portal.gov.bd/page/adeaf3e5_cc55_4222_8767_
f26bcaec3f70/ISO_IEC_27001.pdf
References
Adedoyin, A., Kapetanakis, S., Samakovitis, G. and Petridis, M. (2017), “Predicting fraud in mobile
money transfer using case-based reasoning ”,International Conference on Innovative Techniques
and Applications of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence , Springer, Cham, pp. 325-337.
Akomea-Frimpong, I. (2017), “How mobile money operators can minimize fraud ”, available at: http://
gheconomy.com/mobile-money-operators-can-minimize-fraud/ (accessed 7 May 2017).
Alanezi, F. and Brooks, L. (2014), “Combatting online fraud in Saudi Arabia using general deterrence
theory (GDT) ”, available at: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.932.5751&
rep=rep1&type=pdf
Asongu, S. and Asongu, N. (2018), “The comparative exploration of mobile money services in inclusive
development ”,International Journal of Social Economics , Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 124-139.
Bara, A. (2013), “Mobile money for ﬁnancial inclusion: policy and regulatory perspective in
Zimbabwe ”,African Journal of Science, Technology, Innovation and Development ,V o l .5
No. 5, pp. 345-354.
Braun, V., Clarke, V. and Weate, P. (2016), “Using thematic analysis in sport and exercise research ”,i n
Routledge Handbook of Qualitative Research in Sport and Exercise , Routledge, pp. 213-227.
Braun, V., Clarke, V., Hay ﬁeld, N. and Terry, G. (2019), “Thematic analysis ”,Handbook of Research
Methods in Health Social Sciences , pp. 843-860.
Busuulwa, B. (2016), “Mobile money fraud, crime rate increase in Uganda ”, available at: www.
theeastafrican.co.ke/busin ess/Mobile-money-fraud -and-crime-rate-incr ease-in-Uganda-/2560-
3415786-quaydf/index.html/ (accessed 12 June 2017).
Chatain, P.L., Zerzan, A., Noor, W., Dannaoui, N. and De Koker, L. (2011), “Protecting Mobile Money against
Financial Crimes: Global Policy Challenges and Solutions , World Bank Publicat i o n s ,N e wY o r k ,N Y .
Chauhan, S. (2015), “Acceptance of mobile money by poor citizens of India: integrating trust into the
technology acceptance model ”,info, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 58-68.
Corbin, J. and Strauss, A. (2008), “Strategies for qualitative data analysis ”,Basics of Qualitative
Research, Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory , Vol. 3.
Cressey, D.R. (1986), “Why managers commit fraud ”,Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Criminology , Vol. 19 No. 4, pp. 195-209.JMLC
22,2
314Creswell, J.W. and Creswell, J.D. (2017), Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods
Approaches , Sage Publications.
D’Arcy, J., Hovav, A. and Galletta, D. (2009), “User awareness of security countermeasures and its
impact on information systems misuse: a deterrence approach ”,Information Systems Research ,
Vol. 20 No. 1, pp. 79-98.
Deloitte (2015), “Mobile money ”, available at: https://www2.deloitte.com /content/dam/Deloitte/lu/
Documents/ ﬁnancial-services/Banking/lu-mobile-money-payment-industry-marketing-distribution.
pdf(accessed 6 June 2017).
Etim, A.S. (2014), “Mobile banking and mobile money adoption for ﬁnancial inclusion ”,Research in
Business and Economics Journal , Vol. 9, p. 1.
Fintech Africa (2017), available at: www. ﬁnancialtechnologyafrica.com/2017/08/15/13-years-of-mtn-
mobile-money/ (accessed 15 December 2017).
Gilman, L. and Joyce, M. (2012), “Managing the risk of fraud in mobile money ”,GSMA: Mobile Money
for Unbanked (MMU) , available at: www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/
2012/10/2012_MMU_Managing-the-risk-of-fraud-in-mobile-money.pdf
Gosavi, A. (2017), “Can mobile money help ﬁrms mitigate the problem of access to ﬁnance in Eastern
sub-Saharan Africa? ”,Journal of African Business , Vol. 19, pp. 1-18.
Ile, I. and Boadu, E.S. (2018), “The paradox of youth empowerment: exploring youth intervention
programme in Ghana ”,Cogent Social Sciences , Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 1-15.
Jenkins, B. (2008), Developing Mobile Money Ecosystems , International Finance Corporation and
Harvard Kennedy School, Washington, DC.
Kanobe, F., Alexander, P.M. and Bwalya, K.J. (2017), “Policies, regulations and procedures and their
effects on mobile money systems in Uganda ”,The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in
Developing Countries , Vol. 83 No. 1, pp. 1-15.
Kassem, R. and Higson, A. (2012), “The new fraud triangle model ”,Journal of Emerging Trends in
Economics and Management Sciences , Vol. 3 No. 3, pp. 191-195.
Klassen, A.C., Creswell, J., Clark, V.L.P., Smith, K.C. and Meissner, H.I. (2012), “Best practices in mixed
methods for quality of life research ”,Quality of Life Research , Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 377-380.
Klein, M. and Mayer, C. (2011), “Mobile banking and ﬁnancial inclusion: the regulatory lessons ”,The
World Bank .
Lapadat, J.C. and Lindsay, A.C. (1999), “Transcription in research and practice: from standardization of
technique to interpretive positionings ”,Qualitative Inquiry , Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 64-86.
Laryea, D. (2016), “Mobile money fraudsters very cunning-Telcos Chamber warns ”, available at: http://
ghananewsonline.com.gh/mobile-money-frauds ters-very-cunning-telcos-chamber-warns/ (accessed
10 August 2017).
Markovich, S. and Snyder, C. (2017), “M-Pesa and mobile money in Kenya: pricing for success ”,Kellogg
School of Management Cases , Vol. 1, pp. 1-17.
Marks, J. (2009), Playing Offense in A High-Risk Environment , Crowe Horwath, New York, NY.
Mas, I. and Radcliffe, D. (2011), “Scaling mobile money ”,Journal of Payments Strategy and Systems ,
Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 298-315.
Maurer, B. (2012), “Mobile money: communication, consumption and change in the payments space ”,
Journal of Development Studies , Vol. 48 No. 5, pp. 589-604.
Maurer, B. (2015), How Would You like to Pay? How Technology Is Changing the Future of Money , Duke
University Press, Durham.
Merritt, C. (2011), “Mobile money transfer services: the next phase in the evolution of person-to-person
payments ”,Journal of Payments Strategy and Systems , Vol. 5 No. 2, pp. 143-160.
Mudiri, J.L. (2013), “Fraud in mobile ﬁnancial services ”,Rapport Technique, MicroSave , Vol. 30Control of
fraud
315Myers, M.D. (2013), Qualitative Research in Business and Management , Sage.
Narteh, B., Mahmoud, M.A. and Amoh, S. (2017), “Customer behavioural intentions towards
mobile money services adoption in Ghana ”,The Service Industries Journal , Vol. 37 Nos 7/8,
pp. 426-447.
National Communications Authority (2015), available at: www.nca.org.gh/assets/Uploads/Telecom-
Voice-Subscription-Jan.-to-Dec.-2015.pdf
Nyaga, K.M. (2013), “The impact of mobile money services on the performance of small and medium
enterprises in an urban town in Kenya ”, Unpublished MBA Project work. University of
Nairobi.
Osei-Assibey, E. (2015), “What drives behavioural intention of mobile money adoption? the case of
ancient susu saving operations in Ghana ”,International Journal of Social Economics , Vol. 42
No. 11, pp. 962-979.
PricewaterhouseCoopers (2011), available at: www.pwc.com/gh/en/pdf/ghana-banking-survey-2011.
pdf(accessed 11 October 2017).
Provencal, R.O. (2017), “Mobile money fraud on the rise in Ghana: victims share their stories ”, available
at: http://rainbowradioonline.com/index.php/general-news/item/9324-mobile-money-fraud-on-
the-rise-in-ghana-victims-shares-their-stories (accessed 2 August 2017).
Rieke, R., Zhdanova, M., Repp, J., Giot, R. and Gaber, C. (2013), “Fraud detection in mobile payments
utilizing process behavior analysis ”,Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES) , Vol. 1,
pp. 662-669.
Roberts, P. (2016), “Mobile money sees 118% growth ”, available at: http://thebftonline.com/business/
economy/21586/mobile-money-sees-118-growth.html (accessed 7 March 2017).
Singh, A.B. (2012), “Mobile banking based money order for India post: feasible model and assessing
demand potential ”,Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences , Vol. 37, pp. 466-481.
Sorooshian, S. (2018), “Business ethics for mobile network operators ”,Science and Engineering Ethics ,
Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 333-334.
Straub, D.W. and Welke, R.J. (1998), “Coping with systems risk: security planning models for
management decision making ”,MIS Quarterly , Vol. 22 No. 4, pp. 441-469.
Suárez, S.L. (2016), “Poor people ’s money: the politics of mobile money in Mexico and Kenya ”,
Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 40 Nos 10/11, pp. 945-955.
Subex (2017), “Service providers combat mobile money frauds ”, available at: www.subex.com/subex-
helps-service-providers-combat-mobile-money-frauds/ (accessed 4 May 2017).
Suri, T. and Jack, W. (2016), “The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money ”,Science (New
York, N.Y.) , Vol. 354 No. 6317, pp. 1288-1292.
Vlcek, W. (2011), “Global anti-money laundering standards and developing economies: the regulation of
mobile money ”,Development Policy Review , Vol. 29 No. 4, pp. 415-431.
Wolfe, D.T. and Hermanson, D.R. (2004), “The fraud diamond: considering the four elements of fraud ”,
The CPA Journal , Vol. 74 No. 12, pp. 38.
Yin, R.K. (2011), Applications of Case Study Research , Sage, New York, NY.
Further reading
Anyasi, F.I. and Otubu, P.A. (2009), “Mobile phone technology in banking system: its economic effect ”,
Research Journal of Information Technology , Vol. 1 No. 1, pp. 1-5.
Bank of Ghana (2015), “EMI guidelines ”, available at: www.bog.gov.gh/privatecontent/Banking/E-
MONEY%20GUIDELINES-29-06-2015-UPDATED5.pdf (accessed 6 July 2017).
Chen, Y., Ramamurthy, K. and Wen, K.W. (2012), “Organizations ’information security policy
compliance: stick or carrot approach? ”,Journal of Management Information Systems , Vol. 29
No. 3, pp. 157-188.JMLC
22,2
316Dellaportas, S. (2013), “Conversations with inmate accountants: motivation, opportunity and the fraud
triangle ”,Accounting Forum , Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 29-39.
Donovan, K. (2012), “Mobile money for ﬁnancial inclusion ”,Information and Communications for
Development , Vol. 61 No. 1, pp. 61-73.
Gibson, J.W. (2010), “A winning combination for business researchers: a review of qualitative methods
in business research ”,The Qualitative Report , Vol. 15 No. 4, pp. 1012-1015.
Lopez-Rojas, E., Elmir, A. and Axelsson, S. (2016), “PaySim: a ﬁnancial mobile money simulator for
fraud detection ”,28th European Modeling and Simulation Symposium, Dime University of
Genoa ,EMSS, Larnaca , pp. 249-255.
Mansor, N. (2015), “Fraud triangle theory and fraud diamond theory. Understanding the convergent
and divergent for future research ”,International Journal of Academic Research in Accounting,
Finance and Management Sciences , Vol. 5 No. 4, pp. 38-45.
Mishra, V. and Bisht, S.S. (2013), “Mobile banking in a developing economy: a customer-centric model
for policy formulation ”,Telecommunications Policy , Vol. 37 Nos 6/7, pp. 503-514.
Myers, M.D. and Newman, M. (2007), “The qualitative interview in IS research: examining the craft ”,
Information and Organization , Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 2-26.
Raphael, G. (2016), “Risks and barriers associated with mobile money transactions in Tanzania ”,
Business Management and Strategy , Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 121-139.
Tugas, F.C. (2012), “Exploring a new element of fraud: a study on selected ﬁnancial accounting fraud
cases in the world ”,American International Journal of Contemporary Research , Vol. 2 No. 6,
pp. 112-121.
Whitman, M.E. (2004), “In defense of the realm: understanding the threats to information security ”,
International Journal of Information Management , Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 43-57.
Corresponding author
Isaac Akomea-Frimpong can be contacted at: iakomeaf2012@gmail.com
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htmOr contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comControl of
fraud
317