DIGITAL
STRATEGY
2020–2024TRACK 3: SHIFT TO DIGITAL BY DEFAULT: CONSIDERATIONS FOR COVID-19 RESPONSE
WHAT ARE DIGITAL PAYMENTS? 
Digital payments are transfers of money enabled by, or delivered through, digital technology. For example, digital payments 
can be made through mobile money, mobile wallets, digital bank accounts, QR codes, credit/debit cards, or online payments. 
Under the right conditions, digital payments offer benefits over cash: they are faster, cheaper1, more convenient to use and 
process, more secure, can build a user’s financial profile, and can be a foundation for other financial services (savings, credit, 
insurance, etc.). 
Alongside other methods for cash-transfer programs, digital payment channels can support more rapid, transparent, cost-effective 
distribution of funds as long as certain factors are accounted for, including: mechanisms for enrollment, agent-level cash-out, and 
merchant-level digital payments (so recipients can avoid reverting to cash). 
DIGITAL PAYMENTS IN THE CONTEXT OF COVID-19 AND DEVELOPMENT 
Broadly, digital payments have factored into COVID-19 responses in two primary areas. The first area is social safety net 
programming. While often managed by NGOs, the largest of these programs involve Government-to-Person (G2P) payments to 
individuals and households impacted by the crisis, particularly the poorest and most vulnerable who are being disproportionately 
affected. As of July 10:DIGITAL  
PAYMENTS
USAID’s first-ever Digital Strategy outlines a path to strengthen 
open, inclusive, and secure digital ecosystems in all partner 
countries, and calls on the Agency to “make digital payments the 
default method of payment under all our awards.”
● A total of 200 countries and territories have planned or put in place 1,055 social protection measures in response to 
COVID-19. Social assistance accounts for 60% of the social protection response or 638 measures.
● With 298 cash transfer programs in 139 countries (6 of which are universal transfers), cash-based transfers account for 
nearly half of those safety net measures, and about 30% of global measures.
● The size of cash transfers more than doubled in five countries (Mongolia, Trinidad and T obago, Egypt, South Korea and 
Brazil). Overall, transfers represent 29% of average monthly GDP per capita.
● Using the sole metric of horizontal coverage expansion for cash transfers, then such scale-up covered almost 1.1 billion 
people or 14% of the world’s population.2
1. Because the payment is done digitally, there’s no need to hire people to make the transfer manually, recipients don’t need to wait in line to receive their payment 
thus saving the monetary value of their time, there is more transparency and therefore less costly corruption (“losses”) and bribes that can happen, etc.
2. World Bank, “Social Protection and Jobs Responses to COVID-19: A Real-Time Review of Country Measures,” July 10, 2020, World Bank Group, http://
documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/454671594649637530/pdf/Social-Protection-and-Jobs-Responses-to-COVID-19-A-Real-Time-Review-of-Country-
Measures.pdfResources and contact information
For more information on digital payments, please contact digitaldevelopment@usaid.gov .CONSIDERATIONS FOR COVID-19 RESPONSE  
DIGITAL PAYMENTS
The second major area that digital payments factor into is operational support. Here, as shown by the Ebola crisis , digital channels 
can ensure continued payments to health workers, contact tracers and frontline workers, often operating in informal settings with 
no access to a bank account or even a national ID.
Despite widespread efforts by governments to utilize digital payment platforms, countries may face a number of challenges and 
risks. Below is a chart of emerging issues in deploying responsible payments in response to COVID-19, and where USAID Missions 
and implementing partners can focus their effort. Among the issues and mitigation approaches listed below, it’s important to 
consider taking a gender intentional approach to each.
ISSUE MITIGATION APPROACH
TARGETING - Whom do you include 
that is not already receiving social 
benefits?Engage local leaders, private sector service providers, and influencers to assist in product design 
and enrollment programs that target individuals that have the greatest need. 
Support peer exchanges between governments and experts from different regions who have 
successfully targeted vulnerable households in their respective countries.
ONBOARDING - How do you 
rapidly onboard a large number of 
low income and rural people onto 
digital platforms to receive payments?Assist governments with implementing appropriately relaxed regulatory measures that may 
include adoption of tiered Know-Your-Customer (KYC) policies or developing legal frameworks 
to enable both bank and non-bank providers to offer basic transaction accounts that are plugged 
into formal payments infrastructure. 
LIQUIDITY - How do you ensure 
sufficient, reliable financial liquidity 
in the financial sector and at cash-in/
cash-out points? With the deployment of social benefit transfers or salary payments, recipients will need to 
either cash out or purchase goods and services digitally. This requires sufficient cash within agent 
networks or merchant acceptance of digital payments.
Facilitate dialogue between governments and the private sector to identify policies or 
programming that facilitate the safe mobilization of agent networks or introduce solutions that 
promote merchant acceptance of digital payments and Person-to-Person (P2P) transactions. 
Help support country mapping of financial access points to analyze distribution and explore 
different incentive / subsidy models that ensure the viability of Cash-In-Cash-Out (CICO) points. 
EXCLUSION - Is the intervention 
inclusive of marginalized populations? 
Gender, age, social groups, race, etc.? 
What does that mean in terms of 
access? Does the end user understand 
digital products and would they be 
willing to use it over cash? Advise governments on the use of multiple data sources that can ensure targeting is inclusive. 
Assist in developing monitoring systems that track benefits and use among marginalized 
populations. Ensure that providers have processes and resources that ensure all beneficiaries are 
treated appropriately.
Work with providers to prioritize women and other underrepresented populations in workforce 
development, both at the corporate, merchant, and agent level. Ensure gender sensitivity and 
inclusion is embedded in all aspects of these trainings. Support digital readiness programming 
that ensures customers understand the benefits and responsible use of digitally enabled financial 
services and don’t fall prey to fraud or errors.
MONITORING - How can you 
monitor programs to make sure they 
are working effectively? How do you 
diagnose issues?Support digital monitoring systems that communicate with intended beneficiaries or frontline 
workers to identify issues early and often. Ensure there’s a system in place, such as a centralized 
“help center” for effective recourse and to minimize cases of fraud. 