WORKING PAPERDigitizing Agricultural 
Payments
Lessons from Uganda’s Coffee Value Chain
Amani M’Bale, Rashmi Pillai, and Nathan Were
June 2018
This paper is a collaboration between CGAP and the United Nations Capital Development Fund.III
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACRONYMS AND INITIALIZATIONS  ........................................................... IV
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ......................................................................... 1
II. CONTEXT  .............................................................................................. 3
III. THE KYAGALANYI COFFEE V ALUE CHAIN  ........................................... 8
IV. DIGITIZATION PLAN  ........................................................................... 12
V. PARTNER ROLES AND INCENTIVES  ................................................... 15
VI. PROJECT RESULTS AND CONTINUOUS ITERA TION  ........................... 24
Season 1: November 2015-February 2016  ....................................................................... 24
Season 2: July 2016-February 2017  ..................................................................................... 27
Season 3: Introducing Human-Centered Design  ............................................................. 29
VII. LESSONS LEARNED: HINDSIGHT IS 20/20  ......................................... 33
VIII. CONCLUSION  ..................................................................................... 36
IX. REFERENCES  ...................................................................................... 37
X. ANNEX  ................................................................................................ 38IV
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsACRONYMS AND INITIALIZATIONS
ARPU  Average Revenue Per User
BTCA  Better Than Cash Alliance
BTS  Base Tr ansceiver Station
CI Cash-In
CO Cash-Out
DFS  Digital Financial Services
FSPs  Financial Services Pro viders
GDP  Gross Domestic Pr oduct
KCL  Kyagalanyi Coffee Limited
KYC  Know Y our Customer
MM4P  Mobile Money f or the Poor
P2P  Peer-to-Peer
PAYGo  Pay-As-You-Go
UNCDF  United Nations Capital De velopment Fund1
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsI. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Coffee is an important cash crop for 
Uganda. It accounts for 20 percent of the country’s export earnings and is a source of income for 2.8 million farmers (14 percent of the adult population).
1 
In 2015, the United Nations Capital Development Fund’s (UNCDF’s) Mobile Money for the Poor (MM4P) team part-nered with Kyagalanyi Coffee Limited (KCL), one of the largest coffee export -
ers in the country, to digitize payments to KCL’s 6,000 certified farmers over the next two years (2016 and 2017). Three coffee cycles later,
2 KCL has yet to achieve 
50 percent digital payment adoption across its farmers. Yet, KCL, MM4P , and MTN Uganda consider this project a big success because lessons learned from the project led MM4P , MTN, and other mobile network operators to invest in digitizing multiple agriculture value chains in the country, which, in turn, has led to financial inclusion for numerous rural, low-income populations.
MM4P learned that agriculture value 
chains are a long-term investment and may not necessarily fit typical project cycles. For example, a two- to three-year time frame is not likely to be long enough to digitize an agriculture value chain, es -
pecially if the value chain being target -
ed is in a rural and underserved area. It also learned that appropriate partner-ships are critical components of the in -
vestment. Initially, there were only two 
partners—  MTN and KC L. By the end of 
2016, MM4P management realized that multiple partners were needed to make the initiative seamless. Today there are seven partners, including payment aggregator Yo! Uganda, solar company Fenix International, consulting firm Vital Wave, agent network manager Potbell Limited, and design firm IDEO.org.Despite the initial skepticism, MTN Ugan-da’s management came onboard as a partner mainly to test rural service pene -
tration by digitizing the agriculture value chain. Once the telecom infrastructure challenges in the pilot sites of Kapchorwa and Manafwa were fixed, MTN  manage-ment was surprised to learn that the base station in the area was not only making money, but that the GSM to mobile finan -
cial services conversion ratio (the rate at which subscribers opened mobile wal -
lets) surpassed the national average by 25 percent. While only 16 percent of the revised target of 4,200 farmers signed up to voluntarily receive partial payments via mobile money, the larger community adopted MTN’s GSM and mobile financial services. Of the targeted 24,108 custom -
ers (community and farmers included), 84 percent registered for MTN’s telecom service, 53 percent of whom were 90-day active mobile money customers.
The success of this targeted rural adop -
tion was achieved through an interven-
tion by a digital financial services Booster Team run by Yo! Uganda. The Booster Team was expected to educate farmers and the larger community on mobile phone and mobile money use. It was also responsible for customer and agent reg -
istration and recruitment. This model resulted in the expansion of MTN’s rural subscriber base in the test areas, which continue to bring in monthly revenues.
The investment needed for agriculture 
value chain digitization and its eventual success depend on context. MM4P in -
vested around $400,000, the majority of which funded the expenses of the Booster Team. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation financed the costs of Vital Wave and IDEO.org’s services.
1 Assuming an adult population of 20 million, based on the year-o ver-year growth projections of the latest census (2014).
2 A coffee production cycle is 4–5 months—typically from November to February.2
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsDonors, agricultural exporters, and 
implementers that are contemplating digitization of agriculture value chains will find “ Section VII. Hindsight Is 
20/20 ” particularly relevant. Along 
with the detailed challenges and solu -
tions that emerged per coffee cycle addressed in this paper, Section VII provides a nonprescriptive framework that these stakeholders can use to de -
termine whether they should invest in digitization and the factors they should consider to help them make this decision.3
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsII. CONTEXT
Formal financial services in Uganda 
grew by 386 percent in 2007–2013. This growth was largely fueled by mobile money.
3 By 2014, 29 percent of the adult 
population actively used mobile money,4 
and over a third had registered mobile wallets (FII 2014). However, growth was skewed toward users who were above the poverty line and who lived in urban areas. In 2014, only 22 percent of regis-tered mobile money adults were in rural areas. Similarly, only 20 percent of users below the poverty line had registered for the service (FII 2014).
In 2014, United Nations Capital Develop-
ment Fund’s (UNCDF’s) Mobile Money for the Poor (MM4P) Uganda program was engaged by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to support the provision of digital financial services (DFS) to rural communities, and especially those who live on less than $2 a day.
Agriculture is the foundation of Ugan -
da’s economy. According to Anderson, 
Learch, and Gardner (2016), agriculture makes up 23 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). Over 80 percent of the population is directly or indirectly in -
volved in agricultural activities. Small -
holder farmers—those with land sizes up to 1.6 hectares—make up 85 percent of the Ugandan farming community.
5 
Seventy percent of these households live below the $2.50 a day poverty line. (See Box 1.) When it comes to formal fi-nancial inclusion, smallholder farmers lag in their exposure to and use of finan-cial services compared to the national average. Even today, eight years after the launch of mobile money in Uganda, smallholder farmers are below the na -
tional average in terms of formal finan-cial inclusion, currently at 38 percent, by 12 percentage points.
Agricultural payment digitization, like 
any bulk payment, has the potential to incorporate large swathes of financially excluded people into the digital econo -
my and provide them with access to an array of financial services. The Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA) (2015) identifies three stages of shifts toward a cash-lite economy. The first shift be -
gins when bulk payers in an economy, such as governments, large employ -
ers, agricultural exporters, and devel-opment aid distributors, decide to pay electronically. Digital payments afford payees electronic currency and create a data trail of formal financial history, which may then be leveraged to access financial services like savings, insur -
ance, and credit.
The opportunity to shift how millions 
of people receive money—from cash to digital—thus bringing them into the for-mal financial fold, is why organizations like UNCDF and CGAP are excited about the potential of bulk digitization, partic -
ularly the digitization of agriculture value chains.
Kyagalanyi Coffee Limited (KCL) was the 
first agricultural company that UNCDF teamed up with to digitize downstream payments to farmers, traders, and staff. UNCDF is using what it learned from coffee value chains to support the digitization of other value chains, including that of diary, tea, and maize. Each value chain is differ -
ent and comes with its own challenges. This paper aims to share the journey of coffee value chain payment digitization in Uganda, which continues today.
3 See also, Finscope.
4 On a 90-day basis (FII 2014).
5 Twelve percent are medium-scale, and 3 percent are large-scale farmers.4
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsDigitizing agriculture value chains is 
extremely complex and replete with challenges.
6,7 This paper focuses on 
a case study that illustrates the com -
plexity and gradual success of digitiz -
ing the coffee value chain in Uganda. It identifies the various actors and their roles in digitizing payments between the buyer (KCL) and sellers (farm -
ers and traders). It also highlights the incentives for each stakeholder and addresses significant barriers to implementation that the MM4P team experienced, resulting in MM4P play -
ing a far more extensive role than orig -
inally envisioned. This paper is written for donors, financial services provid -
ers (FSPs), and agricultural firms that  are looking to digitize payments in the agriculture value chain.BOX 1.  Typical profile of a Kapchorwa coffee farmer
Paul has lived in Kapchorwa in eastern Uganda all his life, farming coffee on the 
land he inherited from his father. Today, he is a certified smallholder farmer that supplies coffee cherries to KCL.
a On a September 2015 trip to drop off his coffee 
cherries at KCL, Paul received approximately UGX16,000 (US$4.60) for the drop-off. In an average year, he is among the 70 percent of Mt. Elgon coffee farmers in eastern Uganda who make less than $2 a day.
Like 90 percent of smallholder farmers in Uganda, Paul does not own a bank 
account (Anderson, Learch, and Gardner 2016).
Certification standards mean Paul does not use harmful fertilizers or child labor in 
coffee production. The coffee Paul produces yields a higher price—both for him and for the coffee company that buys his product. Certified farmers are sought 
after by coffee companies in Uganda, and companies compete to attract and retain these farmers.
To harvest more coffee and make more income, Paul needs to invest in his busi -
ness. Some of Paul’s coffee trees are past their prime, and these trees yield less 
than half the amount that newer trees would produce. Replacing older trees is not financially feasible. Paul would have to give up a year’s harvest from the old trees while the new trees mature and start to bear fruit.
Access to financial services—either the means to save for the investment or access 
to small loans to buy new trees—could help Paul overcome this hurdle. Building a credit history through digital payments could help Paul access the financial ser -
vices he needs. When asked about formal financial services, Paul said he had no interest in opening a bank account—banks are expensive and far away. Despite never having used a phone on his own, Paul said that mobile money was the only way someone like him could hope to access such services.
a.  To be certified, farmers must meet ecological, environmental, and fair work standards as directed by interna -
tional certifying bodies, such as UTZ and the Rainforest Alliance (Perez 2016). 
6 See McKay and Buruk u (2016).
7 See Mattern and Ramirez (2017).5
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsIt presents an analysis of agriculture 
value chain digitization through three lenses:
■■Readiness of the market and the play -
ers involved in payment digitization.
■■The value proposition that enables long-term investments by various private-sector players, including agricultural companies (exporters), FSPs, and others.
■■Farmer uptake of DFS and digital payments.
Digitizing the KCL coffee  value chain
In 2014, MM4P , which aims to increase 
digital financial inclusion in Uganda, undertook market research on the cof -
fee, dairy, and fish value chains to iden -
tify opportunities to digitize payments to farmers. It sought to identify potential partners from the large payers within these sectors. It then offered these part-ners technical and financial support to modernize payments to drive financial inclusion among financially excluded ru-ral poor communities. Large payers have an incentive to digitize payments because digitization drives transparency, increas -
es accountability and efficiency, and re-duces risk. It can also provide significant benefits to payees in terms of financial inclusion. However, because digitizing a payment stream is expensive, donor funding is often needed to bridge the gap even for the most dedicated large payers.
In April 2015, KCL became the first large 
agricultural exporter to partner with MM4P . The goal of this partnership 
was to digitize payments to the compa -
ny’s approximately 6,000 individually certified coffee farmers in the Mount Elgon region of eastern Uganda  and to 
the 800–900 traders who sell coffee to the company. These traders jointly buy coffee from an estimated 45,000–50,000 individual farmers. (See Box 2.) Eventu -
ally, KCL hopes to extend payments to all 11,000 farmers nationwide with whom it has a direct relationship. KCL strives to help these farmers to sustainability im-prove both coffee yields and quality.
Coffee is the largest cash crop in 
the country and generates close to 20 percent of Uganda’s export earnings. It is an important source of income for the 2.8 million farmers. In the coffee sector, over 95 percent of transactions are cash-based (Anderson, Learch, and Gardner 2016). To make payments to their staff and farmers, agriculture companies like KCL transport cash on a regular basis via back packs on taxis or boda-bodas  (motorcycle taxis) across 
hundreds of kilometers. Both the mode of transportation used and the schedule often are widely known, putting those involved at risk of theft and assault.
Digitizing KCL payments via  
mobile money
Uganda is one of 19 markets that have 
more mobile money accounts than bank accounts (GSMA, State of the Industry reports, 2016 and 2017). Mobile mon-ey is the predominant financial service in Uganda, where 53 percent of the adult population has access to mobile money and 38 percent of adults have a registered mobile money account. Phone ownership—a commonly cited barrier to mobile money use—is over 55 percent nationally, and 78 percent of adults have access to phones.
Bank penetration among adults is low 
at 11 percent. Banks have limited reach beyond district and regional capitals and have no presence (i.e., branch or ATM) in some rural areas. While mobile money agent penetration is higher than bank penetration (there are 540 mobile money agents to 2.98 bank branches and 4.53 ATMs for every 100,000 adults), 6
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentsthere are few mobile money agents in 
rural areas, and they are usually located in trading centers, which influences cus -
tomer uptake. Additionally, rural agents that are located away from rebalancing points like banks or a super-agent often struggle with inadequate liquidity and network issues, which deter customers.
Among smallholder farmers in 
Uganda, only 10 percent personally own a bank account while 21 percent own a mobile money account (Anderson, Learch, and Gardner 2016). Given these market charac-teristics, using mobile money as the medium to digitize payments seemed like the most logical option for KCL.
MM4P and KCL identified FSPs to imple -
ment the initiative, and MTN Uganda, 
the largest telecom provider in the country came onboard as a partner.
8 
Yo! Uganda, a payment aggregator,9 BOX 2.  Profile of KCL farmers
Uganda’s coffee is produced by smallholder farmers. Although coffee is one of 
many crops grown, it is often the most important source of income. Average 
yields in Uganda are estimated at about 10–12 bags of green coffee per hect -
are, making Uganda among the countries with the lowest coffee yields in the world. Most Ugandan farmers grow 0.2–0.8 hectares of coffee per annum. Making a good living with such small plots and low yields is difficult.
KCL has over 6,000 certified farmers in the Mt. Elgon area who fit this profile. KCL 
has an active program to support its farmers and increase their earnings by deliv -
ering a range of services that help farmers increase yields and quality sustainably. These KLC programs are verified and certified by the Rain Forest Alliance, UTZ (Utz Kapeh), and 4C.
Despite these efforts to support the coffee farming community, over 70 percent of 
the coffee farmers in the Mt. Elgon area earn less than $2 per day on coffee if the payments are assumed to spread over the full year before accounting for produc -
tion expenses. Roughly 20 percent earn $2–5 per day. Farmers in this area can sell other cash crops, but most report that coffee is their primary source of cash income.
As of the start of the 2016–2017 coffee season, just over half of the coffee farm -
ers in Kapchorwa, the pilot site for coffee digitization, was known to have mobile 
phones. Although the majority of farmers who had phones reported using mobile money, this could not be independently verified.
Approximately 12 percent of KCL’s registered farmers in the 2015–2016 coffee 
season were women. Women’s average earnings are slightly below those of men, and they are more likely to earn less than $2 per day. Where the real disparity lies is in the percentage of land devoted to coffee farming. Women devote over half of their acreage to coffee production while male farmers devote only about a quarter of their land to coffee. However, on average, women also own farms that are slightly less than half the size of their male counterparts, leading to questions about their ability to sustain their families in the off-season.
8 MTN and Airtel ar e the two largest MNOs in the Ugandan market and control over 95 percent of the mobile money market 
share. Unlike MTN, Airtel was not keen on partnering on the project at that time.
9 Aggregators enable the seamless collection, disbursement, and circulation of digital payments across multiple payment 
providers. See McKay and Pillai (2016).7
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentswas chosen through a bidding process. 
At the time of onboarding these finan -
cial services partners, the business case—cost and revenue drivers—for MTN and Yo! Uganda was not entirely clear. The only known was that it was a high-volume, low-margin business (high volume due to the frequency of various payments KCL made to staff, vendors, traders, and farmers and low margin because the largest set of recipients was smallholder farmers who could not afford high fees). MM4P used various instruments—from pro -
viding grants to technical assistance and at one point even setting up a risk assurance facility—to support these partners.8
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsIII. THE KYAGALANYI COFFEE V ALUE CHAIN
Business
KCL was founded in 1992 after the liberal -
ization of the coffee sector. It is a member 
of ED&F MAN Volcafe Coffee Division, an agricultural commodities merchant, and has grown to be one of Uganda’s largest companies in coffee procurement, pro -
cessing, and exporting (Report Company 2015). KCL is responsible for over 16 per -
cent of Uganda’s coffee exports. Its goal is to purchase the best quality coffee and increase its procurement levels to be the preferred Ugandan supplier of medium and large roasters. In recent years Uganda exported approximately 3.5 million bags of coffee per annum; it currently ranks eighth on the list of largest coffee export -
ing nations (Szenthe 2017). KCL seeks to push the country’s exports to 4 million bags, with a focus on increasing sales to its primary markets in the European Union.
Operational structure
Coffee is seasonal; in the Mt. Elgon area, the 
season runs from about July through Feb -
ruary, depending on rainfall. During the season, KCL sources Arabica coffee in the Mt. Elgon area from certified farmers and from traders. KCL’s purchasing process is described in the following and illustrated in Figure 1. See Box 3 for a short list of key terms used in the coffee industry, while Table 1 lists the main actors involved in the traditional mode of payment.
Mt. Elgon certified smallholder 
farmers
10
KCL purchases coffee directly from ap -
proximately 6,000 certified smallholder farmers and pays them in cash upon delivery. The smallholders live in remote rural areas. They deliver coffee, usually by carrying the coffee in bags on foot, to one of six KCL “washing stations.” KCL staff at each washing station weigh the coffee that is brought in, calculate pay -
ment based on the weight and the day’s price, and make the payment. During the high season, the washing stations can get very busy, and farmers wait hours to sell their coffee and get cash payments.
Payment values range from a few thou -
sand shillings up to 10 million shillings.
11 
KCL washing station staff travel up to 
40 km several times a week to get UGX 
50 million to UGX 70 million (approx -
imately US$14,200–20,000) in cash to 
make these payments. Certified small-holders are not obligated to sell their coffee to KCL. They can sell to any of the coffee companies in the area. Given the higher price that certified coffee yields in international markets, exporters are constantly competing for farmer loyalty and produce. KCL strives to provide ser -
vices that are attractive to these farmers; the option of receiving digital payments is intended to benefit the farmers and is part of a strategy to increase their loyalty.
KCL’s loyalty program is a profit-sharing 
scheme. Several months after the end of the season, farmers return to the wash -
ing station with copies of their paper sales receipts, and they receive a bonus based on the number of kilograms of 
coffee sold to the company. The profit-  
sharing payments are timed to coincide with the period between seasons when coffee farmers are typically running short of cash. KCL plans to eventually digitize this profit-sharing program as 
10 Certified f armers are important for coffee companies, particularly companies that sell into markets, such as the European 
Union, where certified product yields a higher price. KCL works closely with these farmers and provides training and access 
to inputs that improve yields and quality. KCL provides training on sound agricultural practices and facilitates access to seedlings and other inputs at wholesale rates. (KCL does not, however, provide input credit to farmers.)
11 1 USD 5 3500 UGX, 2015–2016 rates.9
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsThe terrain is mountainous and rural. 
There are no formal financial 
institutions within about 40km, and there are few mobile money agents.Mount Elgon Farmers
Washing Stations, Staff and ManagersThere are about 6,000 certified smallholder Arabica coffee farmers working in the Mount Elgon area 
for the Kyagalanyi Coffee Factory.  
Farmers walk to the washing station carrying coffee cherries. They’re paid in cash by washing station staff.The washing station staff and managers must go to Mbale for their salary and to fetch cash to pay the farmers. Managers can go to Mbale 2–4 times per week. They travel about 40km and are carrying anywhere from UGX 50M to 70M.
Traders and Transporters
Traders buy coffee cherries from about 50,000 farmers, and they pay those farmers in cash. Traders can be grouped by the number of farmers from which they purchase. Depending on the scale of trader, a few thousand shillings to UGX 50M must be on hand to pay farmers. Values are approximations.
165
large-scale 
traders 165
medium-scale traders500 
small-scale traders
buy from 50–100 farmersbuy from 100–200 farmers
buy from 10–30 farmers
UGX 10M UGX 20M UGX 50MKYAGALANYI COFFEE FACTORY IN MBALE 
KYAGALANYI COFFEE FACTORY IN MBALE Traders deliver coffee to the Kyagalanyi Coffee Factory 
in Mbale and are paid UGX 2M–50M by bank check. They must wait up to a full day for the bank transfer to clear; during this time, they must often sleep in Mbale. From the 
UGX 
factory in Mbale, the coffee is transported to Nairobi for export. Transport staff are paid in cash.FIGURE 1.  KCL business and operational structure10
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsBOX 3.  Key Terms
Cherries. Raw unprocessed coffee where the coffee bean is enveloped by a hulk.
Parchment. A product of a process where the husk is removed from the raw coffee 
fruit of the coffee plant and the coffee bean is dried.
Washing Station. The coffee buyer location where coffee cherries are delivered by 
farmers for inspection and sale to the coffee buyer.
Certified Coffee. To become certified, farmers most meet ecological, environ -
mental, and fair work standards as required by international certifying bodies, such 
as UTZ and the Rainforest Alliance.
TABLE 1.  Key actors in the traditional mode of payment
StakeholderPurpose of paymentPayment method Payer Pain points
KCL Coffee procurementCash/Bank transferKCL
• Accountability of cash
• Risk of cash-in-transit
•  Safety of employee/
farmer/trader
6,000 certified smallholdersCoffee cherry purchaseCash KCL
• Risks of cash-in-transit
•  No access to financial 
services
• No safe place to save
•  No confidentiality of 
funds
Traders (small, medium, and large)Coffee purchaseBank transferKCL
• Risks of cash-in-transit
•  Wait time for bank 
transfers
KCL washing station staffWages, cof-fee purchaseCash KCL
•  Time and cost around 
travel to collect cash (in Mbale)
• Risks of cash-in-transit
•  Accountability for 
KCL funds
Transporters Exporting coffee to NairobiCash KCL
• Risks of cash-in-transit
• Currency exchange
45,000–50,000 noncertified smallholdersCoffee cherry purchaseCash Small, medium, and large traders that source the coffee from these farmers
•  Lack of a safe place 
to save
•  Lack of access to 
financial services
•  Lack of confidentiality 
of funds11
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentswell, so that those who register will not 
have to keep their receipts nor will they have to return to the washing station for their funds—the funds can be automati-cally paid via mobile money.
Payment digitization is voluntary
Farmers opt to receive their payments in 
cash, mobile money, or a combination of the two. Access to mobile money provid -
ers increases safety of funds and access to savings, lending, and other financial services.
Traders
KCL also purchases coffee from 800–900 
traders, who in turn purchase coffee from 45,000–50,000 noncertified smallhold -
ers with whom KCL has no relationship. Coffee produced by noncertified farmers yields a lower price in the international market, and thus secures a lower price in the Ugandan market. Noncertified coffee is delivered in large volume by trucks to the KCL factory in Mbale. When the trad -
ers deliver their coffee, the quality is as -
sessed. Traders are paid a per kilo price based on quality through a bank transfer. The only banks that the traders have ac -
cess to are those in Mbale that are close to KCL offices and those in subregional hubs. They do not have access to banks close to where they purchase coffee from smallholders. Traders must wait up to a full day for the bank transfer to clear. During this time, they often must sleep in Mbale town and return to the field only when the funds have cleared the bank and they can pick up physical cash or transfer it to subregional hubs to cash out and transport it to farms in deeply rural locations. Traders typically sell to whichever coffee company offers the highest price. Like farmers, KCL offers traders the option of mobile money—which would be available immediately and would free them from traveling with large amounts of cash—in the hopes that the traders will see it as a benefit and increase the likelihood that the traders will sell to KCL first.
However, unlike individual farmers, 
traders receive large pay-outs that they further disburse to the farmers they sourced coffee from. The limitation with traders receiving mobile money is mo-bile money wallet size. At the time of this project, individual wallet sizes were capped at 4 million. This has recently changed. To receive large pay-outs via mobile money, individuals are usually required to produce additional docu -
mentation at an MTN service center or are required to batch their transactions.
KCL staff
KCL pays many of its staff in cash as well, 
including washing station staff, drivers and guards who transport the coffee to Nairobi for export. Washing station staff travel in person to Mbale to get paid. This trip can take a half day and cost up to UGX 20,000 ($5.60). Being paid with mobile money is cheaper and faster than traveling for payment. Staff who travel to Nairobi with coffee to be exported carry wads of cash that must then be ex -
changed for Kenyan shillings at the bor-der. Mobile money offers safety, and both dominant mobile network providers in Uganda offer cross-border cash-out and off-network payment options.12
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsIV. DIGITIZATION PLAN
KCL’s primary objectives of digitizing 
payments was to improve the liveli-hoods of its farmers and increase pay -
ment efficiency while lowering the risk of cash-based payments. For MM4P , the financial inclusion of smallholder farmers, traders, and KCL staff at the six washing stations and district head office was the primary driver.
Another priority for KCL was to build a 
stronger connection between its farm -
ers and the formal financial sector. KCL estimates that the majority of its farm-ers are financially excluded and, there-fore, lack access to credit, insurance, and other services that could help them to procure better quality seeds and fertilizers—improving yield in the long run and increasing economic resilience.
Certified smallholders were an important 
target group for the digitization effort. For KCL, building a value proposition—digital payments as the gateway to access addi-tional “desirable” financial services by farmers was key. Moreover, digital pay -
ments also reduced the perceived and real risk around cash. Internally, digital payments enabled KCL to have greater control over funds, increase transparency, and leverage efficiency gains.
Digitization sequence
Digitizing agriculture value chain pay -
ments is a complex and multi-stakeholder 
process. In addition to the infrastructural constraints that exist in a deeply rural en -
vironment, the project also had to grapple with low phone ownership and mobile money use among the target payees. (See Figure 2.)
Season 1—Prepare the digital infra -
structure.  Preparing the ecosystem for 
digital payments happened in the pre-  
pilot phase (November 2015–February 
2016). Tasks included building the right partnerships, installing mobile network infrastructure, launching phone sales, designing the technical platform that facilitated digital payments, training staff on its use, and testing the platform with internal end users (i.e., KCL staff and select vendors). See Table 2.
Season 2—Test with staff and farm -
ers. In the next coffee season (July 
2016–February 2017), KCL and MM4P 
Establishing digital infrastructure
Testing among farmers
Accelerating use
Target washing stations: Kapchorwa and Manafwa• Setting up mobile 
infrastructure (MTN)
• Introducing mobile 
phone sales (Fenix 
International)
• Technical Infrastructure 
(Yo! Uganda)
• Target washing stations1st coffee season: 
November 2015– 
February 2016
• Setting up mobile soft 
launch of digital payments
• Building out agent 
network
• Pricing (MTN)2nd coffee season: July 
2016–February 2017
• DFS Booster Team (Yo! 
Uganda/Potbell)
• Mobile money pricing 
(MTN)
• Human-centered design 
(IDEO)3rd coffee season: July
2017–February 2018FIGURE 2.  The digitization sequence13
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentsintroduced digital payments as an op-
tion to farmers. The goal was to provide famers with the opportunity to take ei-ther part or all their payment via mobile money and to allow for organic market growth. Ultimately, organic growth did not take hold, and KCL and MM4P de -
signed a more robust recruitment cam -
paign to encourage awareness and the uptake of mobile money. See Table 3.
Season 3—Accelerate use.  The third 
phase (July 2017–present) introduced 
an intense approach to spur use. A DFS Booster Team—an operational team whose main objective was customer ac-quisition, the acceleration of phone sales, development and liquidity management of mobile money agents, and merchant acquisition—was created. (See Table 4.) This phase was not planned at the onset of the project; it was developed by the project team based on what it learned from the slow uptake. Thus, the project approach was redesigned to address earlier shortcomings.
Initially, the project included segment-
ing payees and gradually on-boarding farmers and traders over 2–3 years. (This time frame later proved to be in-sufficient. A more realistic period for de-veloping a compelling digital payment value proposition in a deeply rural area would have been closer to four years.) The limited infrastructure in deep rural environments, behavioral changes re-quired among digitally low-literate end users, the need to strengthen financial access points, and the need for the right partner investment strategies impact the timeline.TABLE 2.  Preparing the digital infrastructure
Coffee Season 1, November 2015–February 2016
Mobile infrastructure (MTN) Install network-base stations for mobile 
coverage.
Mobile phone sales through Fenix International, an off-grid solar companyTest phone lease-to-own products with a pay-as-you-go (PAYGo) model.
Technical infrastructure (Yo! Uganda) Build and launch a digital payment platform.
Training and testing Train KCL staff (finance and staff at washing stations) to using the platform.
Test the platform with internal staff.
Target washing stations for the pilot Kapchorwa and Manafwa
TABLE 3.  Testing
Coffee Season 2, July 2016–February 2017
Soft launch of digital payments Offer cash or mobile or both money payment 
options to farmers.
Agent management (MTN) Schedule agency recruitment—the recruitment did not happen, which negatively impacted uptake.
Pricing (MTN) Tailor pricing models—models were not ready until the next coffee season.
Target washing stations for the pilot Kapchorwa and Manafwa14
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsTABLE 4.  DFS Booster Team
Coffee Season 3, July 2017– February 2018
Booster Team (Yo! Uganda/
Potbell Ltd.)Establish MTN commercial agreements that allow Yo! Uganda/Potbell Ltd. to recruit and manage MTN agents.The Booster Team initiates merchant acquisition and manages phone sales.
Mobile money pricing (MTN)Launch a new pricing model nationally (in December 2016), to drive uptake and use in rural areas.
Mobile financial services (MTN)Introduce a savings and lending product nationally (in August 2016).
Human-centric design (IDEO)Start to redesign the payment process at the washing station to improve staff and farmer digital payment experience.
Target washing stations Kapchorwa and Manafwa15
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsV. PARTNER ROLES AND INCENTIVES
Operationalizing digital payments re -
quires a focus on a diverse set of chal -
lenges, including increasing back-end and 
front-end readiness of the bulk payer to process and disburse digital payments; lock in agreements with service providers; and identify, educate, and recruit payees.
Initially, the plan was to include KCL 
(payer), farmers (payees), MTN (digital wallet provider), and MM4P (technical assistance and grant provider)—actors that would play important roles in dig-itizing the agriculture value chain. MTN, KCL, and MM4P were the only partners expected to be a part of this process. However, between the planning phase before the first coffee season and the third coffee season, the number of part -
ners grew to seven and included Yo! Uganda (payment aggregator), Fenix International (solar company), Potbell Limited (mobile money agent manager), Vital Wave (consulting firm supporting MM4P’s technical efforts), and IDEO.org (human-centric design firm).
The number of stakeholders, cost, and 
complexity of the coffee digitization pro -
cess were extensive because users in the targeted areas lacked the technical lit -
eracy required, and the DFS infrastruc -
ture was limited. A similar initiative in an urban or peri-urban setting that has a better payments infrastructure and where mobile money agents are ubiq-uitous and liquid and require less help to support the DFS ecosystem would be less complex and costly, and potentially would have higher up-take and use. De-spite the challenges, the private-sector entities involved in this plan invested in Kapchorwa and Manafwa because of the potential of scale. Over 75 percent of the Ugandan population resides in rural ar -
eas, and urban markets are growing in -
creasingly competitive and are becoming saturated, which limits year-on-year rev -
enue growth rates for service providers.KCL ’s role and incentives
KCL is a large agricultural exporter of 
coffee  —a key cash crop. KCL’s involve -
ment meant that the initiative would have 
access to KCL’s farmers—6,000 certified and more than 45,000 noncertified small -
holder farmers—and its understanding of how payments in the agriculture value chain work and of the dynamics between various actors in the chain and its window into the real-world challenges around digitizing payments. The following high-lights several reasons why KCL wanted to switch to digital payments.
Staff, farmer, trader, and company 
security. Although KCL staff have not re -
ported any theft of cash while in official transit, the ambitious growth projec-tions and growing operations could ex -
pose staff to such risks. KCL also wants to ensure the safety of farmers and traders who may be in transit with considerable amounts of cash. Large cash disburse -
ments by companies like KCL often do not have theft insurance, and if they do, it is extremely expensive. Digitization helps KCL protect itself from cash being stolen during the payment process. Digi -
tization also has the potential to bring in significant efficiency gains for all actors in the value chain.
Financial inclusion for improved 
production.  Digital payments create a 
financial history. Financially included coffee farmers with data trails of their financial inflows and outflows have a greater chance of accessing credit and insurance products, particularly during the off-season (i.e., April to June) when they lack funds to invest in agricultural inputs, particularly new coffee trees that improve yield and quality. KCL’s strategy includes creating an environment that empowers its farmers to bridge their agricultural financing gaps from for -
mal sector providers, and helping in 16
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentsconsumption smoothening by regis-
tering farmers in secure digital savings products.
Farmer/trader loyalty and long-term 
profitability. Coffee farmers and trad-ers are free to sell to any company they choose. KCL, like most agriculture com -
panies, is keen to increase farmer and trader loyalty, which would make year-on-year coffee export quantities and subsequent revenues more predictable. Easy access to financial services that are efficient and help improve the financial lives of farmers and traders has the po -
tential to increase KCL’s stickiness with its sellers.
To increase loyalty, KCL provides ser -
vices that improve the lives of coffee 
farmers and traders. Access to DFS through efficient and easy digital pay -
ments opens the door to follow-on dig -
ital products that can help strengthen farmers’ resilience to financial shocks in the medium to long term.
12 KCL also 
employs other loyalty mechanisms such as profit sharing in exports with farmers between coffee seasons and agriculture extension services by KCL’s corporate social responsibility unit to help in -
crease farm yields. KCL’s goal is to en -
tice coffee farmers—especially certified farmers—to sell their coffee to KCL.Cost savings.  Although KCL is interested 
in cost savings, it is not the primary driver for its participation in the program. Some agriculture companies face large costs around cash payments to farmers and traders (McKay and Buruku 2016). Dig-ital payments can lead to considerable savings. However, in the case of KCL, the burden of making cash payments was 
not a big cost driver and the future cost-  
saving benefits that arose from digitiza -
tion were a bonus. The efficiency gains and reduction in leakage that came with shifting to digital payments was the main motivator for KCL to join the program.
Leveraging the partnership with 
MM4P for technology investments.  
The first step in payment digitization is the “computerization” and digital docu -
mentation of manual processes and in-formation pertaining to payments. This requires investing in hardware such as tablets or computers at washing stations and internet connectivity for data entry. The second step is to create a payment platform. Depending on the needs of the exporter, the payment platform could be an off-the-shelf product or a customized software solution that caters to the needs of the company. For KCL, participation in a donor-funded initiative helped off-set some of these big costs and gain sig -
nificant technical support.  (See Box 4.)
12 In Uganda, greater financial inclusion is the key to unlocking rapid growth (Sebudde 2017).BOX 4.  Cash to 100% digital payments can be a slow transition
During this project, KCL offered its farmers the choice of accepting payments 
in cash, mobile money, or both. This meant that KCL had to maintain two pay -
ment processes that worked in tandem and were reconciled at the end of each day. For any bulk payer, an abrupt movement from one payment mechanism to the other is rarely an option. Digitizing payments is a process, and the transition period between cash to 100 percent digital payments requires maintaining two processes that are expensive in the short term. Efficiencies and cost-savings are realized once all payments are digital and cumbersome manual processes are eliminated.17
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsA key technology expense for the 
project was the design and implemen-tation of a payment platform built to KCL’s specifications (i.e., software development). Bulk payment digitiza -
tion can be undertaken with standard -
ized interfaces available from MNOs (in the case of a mobile money payment op -
tion) and several payment aggregators. However, some agricultural bulk payers may need a specialized interface that cal -
culates payment amounts based on the daily commodity prices paid per kilo and the exact kilos delivered by each farmer. KCL also sought a system that would track both cash and mobile money payments, which required a complete redesign of the payment aggregator’s (Yo! Uganda’s) existing platform; MNOs do not provide these types of modifications. Using a standard platform that provides a means to track the amount of cash transacted does not come with capital expendi -
ture consequences. On the other hand, purchasing a customized platform that tracks, for example, the exact amount of coffee delivered per day, the price paid, and payment outflows both in cash and digital form is more akin to purchasing an inventory and payment tracking sys -
tem. Depending on the level of detail, this can be quite expensive.
Before this experiment, KCL farmers 
were required to keep copies of their pa -
per receipts to claim profit-sharing bo-nuses after the close of the coffee season (usually in May). Farmers were reluc -
tant to trust a system that didn’t provide paper receipts, even when they were as -
sured the receipts were no longer neces -
sary. For that reason, the system had to be designed to provide a paper receipt for an otherwise digital transaction. Specialized rugged, dot-matrix printers were required to ensure that the re -
ceipts would withstand the agrarian en -
vironment in which they were used.
Finally, because KCL finance systems need -
ed to interface with the new platform, Yo! Uganda added a new corporate finance 
module to the platform.
MTN’s role and incentives
MTN was the mobile network and wallet 
provider for this project. MTN Uganda hoped to increase its rural market pene-tration both on mobile money and regu -
lar GSM services (voice, SMS, and data). Although it is the market leader, MTN faces stiff competition in urban markets, especially in the capital city of Kampala, and is pursuing a stake in less developed rural markets.
MTN’s CEO supported the initiative, 
which resulted in faster response times from the heads of different business units within the company, even though the business case was not clear upfront.
Building the MNO business case
MNOs like MTN make a profit based on 
uptake and use of voice, data, and mobile money. With urban markets increas-ingly getting saturated, rural or nonur -
ban markets are the next frontier. This is particularly true in Uganda where 80 percent of the population resides in nonurban and rural settings. However, penetrating rural markets is both more complicated and more expensive than it is in urban markets because of limited mobile phone penetration, marginal pay -
ments infrastructure (bank branches, mobile network towers, mobile money agents, etc.), limited user capability and knowledge (low technological literacy, lack of confidence in technological platforms of service delivery, etc.), and sparse populations.
The Kapchorwa washing station—the 
primary location of the project—did not have good cellphone coverage. To help uptake and create a seamless flow of mobile money, MTN needed to put a cellphone tower at the station.18
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsBOX 5.  Basic telephony became the first success and impact metric of 
this initiative
The Kapchorwa cellphone tower provided telephony to a deeply rural community 
for the first time. Kapchorwa community members later told MM4P staff that the ability to communicate with family members in distant locations and the ability of farmers to access market information and make better-informed business deci -
sions were some of the most impactful early results of the initiative.All new cellular towers are evaluated 
using two main criteria:
■■Tower saturation. Are surround-ing towers oversubscribed, thus signaling high customer demand and the need for additional tower placements?
■■Estimated population density. Is there sufficient population density and potential for uptake resulting in a sizeable addressable market, particularly for the GSM business?
Initially the KCL project site in Kapchorwa did not meet either criterion. The nearest tower was over 15 km away and was not oversubscribed. MTN made conservative estimates of uptake (related to low ru -
ral phone ownership) because it did not believe the population was sufficiently dense. The business case accounted for the costs of creating a permanent infrastructure—a base transceiver sta-tion (BTS)—that would lead to a large capital investment and longer break-even timelines. Despite support from the CEO, MTN’s financial leadership was uncomfortable with the plan and was hesitant to endorse a project that required a large capital expenditure with uncertain returns.
Protecting MTN’s downside
UNCDF’s internal estimates suggested 
that voice uptake would exceed MTN’s conservative projections and forecasted that the site would become commercially sustainable in the near term (i.e., within a year). Based on predictions of poten -
tial tower use, size of local population, current phone ownership rates, and fu-ture phone ownership, UNCDF offered MTN a loss guarantee fund to support tower installation. MTN could call on this loss guarantee fund up to a certain ceiling within a 12-month period. This arrangement protected potential losses MTN could incur early in the project.
In December 2015, MTN Uganda opted 
to deploy a mobile BTS, which required a lower initial investment than would the permanent infrastructure. This tempo-rary set up provided the necessary mo-bile network coverage needed to launch payments.
The tower over performed in the first 
three months and proved to be prof -
itable;  it had a user base of both farm -
ers and non-farmers. The non-farmer users exceeded the number of KCL cof -
fee farmers by a large margin. Based on 
the tower’s consistent performance, in July 2016, MTN Uganda installed a permanent BTS in Kapchorwa . The 
loss guarantee fund was never used. (See Box 5.)
With declining global average revenue 
per user (ARPUs), MNOs are closely guarding their bottom lines. Rural in -
vestments can be risky and eat into al -
ready thin margins. In this case, a donor intervention provided MTN with an op-portunity to learn and invest in a very rural setting, with very little downside.19
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsIncreasing the conversion ratio of 
GSM subscribers to mobile wallet users through bulk payments
Digital agricultural payments, human-
itarian transfers, social welfare pay -
ments, and so forth help MNOs to acquire a large mobile money customer base at once—particularly in frontier areas (i.e., areas not easy to serve). These types of use cases give users a reason to open mobile money accounts and increase the conversion ratio of GSM subscribers that are also mobile wallet owners. During the KCL project, MTN observed a higher rate of GSM to mobile wallet conversion than the national average, currently at 32 percent (FII 2016).
Persuading customers to use mobile 
money is a major challenge for mobile wallet operators. They have found that on-boarding programs for customers are not enough to change their behavior in favor of using mobile money. If custom -
ers do not have a compelling reason to use electronic value, they will either cash out and continue using cash or abandon the wallet altogether. Hence, it was criti -
cal from operators to build an electronic spend economy that has enough digital payment acceptance points (i.e., mer -
chant network) and use cases that com -
pel customers to use their wallets.
Building the mobile money cash-in/
cash-out infrastructure
There were only a few MTN mobile money 
agents in Kapchorwa and Manafwa—the pilot mobile money deployment areas. Those that were in place lacked the li-quidity to cash out farmers during harvest season. UNCDF supported MTN Uganda in building its agent network. However, this effort did not launch in time to sup -
port KCL payees during the July 2015 to February 2016 season. The lack of liq -
uid agents in Kapchorwa and Manafwa diminished the value proposition for KCL farmers and thus uptake during the initial testing period was low.
Yo! Uganda’s roles and incentives
Yo! Uganda is a leading payment aggre -
gator in the mobile money and payments 
sector in Uganda. Aggregators are soft -
ware firms that design payment solutions that facilitate the flow of funds between payers and payees irrespective of the payment instrument or channel used.
13, 14 
When it comes to bulk payments, pay -
ment aggregators facilitate the process of paying numerous recipients across mul-tiple providers; they also design custom-ized platforms for large bulk payers.
Yo! Uganda allows bulk payers like KCL 
to interact with all major MNO mobile money systems through a single platform and without having to open an account and transact separately on each network. Without Yo! Uganda, KCL would have had to map employees, farmers, and traders to the network they subscribed to, open an account with each MNO, and transfer the exact payment amount. By using Yo! Uganda, KCL financial staff could use an interface with a single platform, and Yo! Uganda took on the burden of balancing float and ensuring the payments go to the correct mobile wallet, irrespective of network.
Yo! Uganda designed and built the soft -
ware that enabled KCL to make digital 
payments, record the amount of coffee de -
livered at each purchasing location in real time, and track cash payments. The cost of this software was funded by UNCDF.
Aggregators like Yo! Uganda provide 
enhanced customer service and de-
13 This depends on the number of payment pr oviders and types the aggregator is connected to.
14 See McKay and Pillai (2016).20
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentstailed reporting capabilities that enable 
real-time transaction visibility that is not supported by a paper-based system. MNOs do not typically need to do any customization, nor do they need to pro-vide extended onsite training or signifi -
cant bulk payer customer support. (See Figure 3.)
Yo! Uganda also was responsible for 
recruiting agents, managing liquidity, and acquiring mobile money customers. These are typically MNO responsibilities, but because of MTN’s limited capacity, MM4P hired Yo! Uganda to provide these services. Yo! Uganda added a new service to its business by creating a DFS Booster Team to acquire agents and customers.
Potbell Limited. In June 2016, the proj -
ect team and Yo! Uganda hired Potbell 
Limited to recruit mobile money agents and manage liquidity in target areas to strengthen the mobile money agent network around KCL’s farmers. Subse-quently, Potbell entered into a commer -
cial agreement with MTN Uganda to be a master agent.
Aggregators typically charge a flat fee 
on a per transaction basis for bulk payments and, therefore, have strong in -
centivizes to serve high-volume clients. With several thousand payees, KCL is one of the large payers in the country.
The incentive for Yo! Uganda was not 
limited to immediate monetary com -
pensation. On a more strategic level, Yo! Uganda was interested in entering the agriculture value chain market, particu-larly coffee because it is the largest cash crop in the country. Moreover, partner -
ing on a donor-funded project came with both short-term and long-term technical and financial benefits. The agriculture value chain platform created for KCL was entirely subsidized by MM4P . Yo! Uganda also received technical assis-tance support from MM4P for the du -
ration of the project. The software and implementation experience Yo! Uganda gained working on this initiative makes it an attractive solution provider to other agriculture companies and agriculture bulk payers.
Fenix International’s roles and 
incentives
Fenix International designs, manufactur -
ers, and distributes lease-to-own solar 
home systems that provide lighting, 
FIGURE 3.  Direct-to-MNO payments vs. aggregator-enabled payments
Aggregator
MTN Airtel UTL MTN Airtel UTLBulk
PayerBulk
Payer21
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentsphone charging, TV, and radios. These 
home systems are financed through af-fordable installments and paid via mo-bile money by their customers. Fenix is an exclusive partner to MTN Group, and its customers can pay only via MTN mobile money. Fenix was the phone and charging solution provider in this effort.
Vital Wave’s roles and incentives
Vital Wave provided technical sup-
port to UNCDF.
15 It helped KCL select 
an aggregator, and helped KCL and Yo! Uganda design a platform and approach that would be user friendly for KCL staff. They also assessed connectivity and power availability at payment locations, to design the KCL payment user inter -
face. This work led Vital Wave to pro-duce a step-by-step guide to digitizing bulk payments.
16
Vital Wave also addressed mobile money pricing during the project. Mobile money fees, particularly cash-out fees, can be prohibitive for small-ticket transactions. Unfortunately, MTN Uganda’s platform did not permit closed user group
17 pric -
ing adjustments for cash-out fees, and so cash-out fees ultimately were not addressed as part of this implementa-tion. MTN’s high cash-out fees inhibited uptake and continues to be an issue for both KCL payees and other rural users of mobile money in Uganda.
UNCDF’s roles and incentives
UNCDF’s primary motivation to invest in 
rural agriculture value chain digitization is financial inclusion. Over the course of this initiative until the end of 2017, the MM4P program had invested over $400,000 into the project. A large por -
tion of the investment went to funding the operations of the Booster Team and building the bulk payment platform. MM4P had set aside an undisclosed amount as the loan guarantee toward MTN, in case the BTS ran into losses the first year. MTN never had to call on these funds because the BTS over-performed within the first three months of its installation.
Table 5 provides insight into the direct 
and indirect costs and current and future revenue incurred by the participating entities.
15 Vital Wave is funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
16 http://vitalwave.com/case-study/bulk-payment-implementation-toolkit/
17 Subscribers to a closed or special gr oup that have specialized pricing.22
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsTABLE 5.  Cost and r evenue drivers for each entity
Entity Key costsCurrent and future 
revenue sources Lessons learned
KCL Direct costs
•  Bulk payment transaction fees to Yo! 
Uganda
•  Development of a customized 
payment platform is a direct cost KCL would have incurred. In the case of this project, UNCDF paid for these costs.
Indirect costs
•  Staff costs in payments systems 
training and implementation
•  Indirect staff time cost of maintaining 
both cash and digital payment systemsHigher revenue
•  Higher coffee acquisition 
from existing (brand loyal) and new farmers/traders attracted by KCL’s increased value proposition of financial linkages
Cost savings
•  From reduced risk of cash 
pilfering and theft (adjust-ed insurance coverage)•  KCL realized that back-end and front-end processes 
must be digitized along with payments for optimal efficiency. This is a long-term investment.
•  Digitization increases transpar ency immediately 
and can be used to benefit both the immediate and long term.
•  Payment digitization can be used as a comparative 
advantage—both traders and farmers can be paid immediately and digital payments do not come with the lag time associated with manual cash pay-outs. It consequently helps build loyalty, strengthens ties with current farmers/traders, and attracts new coffee suppliers
•  Scalability: Digital processes and payments can 
be a powerful engine for growth. This initia-tive supports KCL’s ambitions to expand coffee procurement and exports.
MTN Direct costs
•  Mobile network infrastructure 
installation (BTS)
•  Monthly maintenance (rental site and 
generator fuel)
•  Commissions to agents and agent 
managers, namely Portbell
Indirect costs
•  Staff time at corporate headquarters, 
including legal, finance, marketing, mobile money departmentsGSM (voice and data) and mobile money revenue from target communities
•  This donor-funded initiative helped MTN 
understand and refine its rural go-to-market strategy.
•  MTN’s initial business case assumptions on 
consumer uptake were artificially low because MTN heavily discounted the number of community members, apart from the farmers, that would be interested in using regular cellphone service.23
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsFenix 
InternationalDirect costs•
■■Up-front cost of mobile phones and solar solutions
Indirect costs•
■■Staff time at corporate headquarters 
(product development, finance, sales department) and field offices (regional 
sales manager and associates)•■■Sale of mobile phones
•■■Sale of mobile-enabled solar solutions
•
■■Interest from financial productsThe plan was to ride on agriculture value chains to acquire new off-grid solar customers and, if successful, use the pilot to scale via other agriculture value chains.
Yo! Uganda Direct costs•
■■Outsource agent and customer recruitment (Booster Team) to Potbell Ltd. (This was fully subsidized by UNCDF , with technical support by Vital Wave.)
•
■■Develop customized digital bulk payment platform. (For the project, this was entirely subsidized by UNCDF .)
•
■■Redesign payment user interface and user experience based on feedback from the human-centric design team
Indirect costs•
■■Staff time (training KCL staff)•■■Fees from bulk payments and bulk SMS transmission (KCL).
•
■■The cost of the Booster Team. (The initial subsidy from UNCDF included performance-based bonus payments. Subsequent revenue was derived from commercializing the Booster Team for other bulk payers.)
•
■■Commissions paid by MTN on agent acquisition and management•
■■This project provided Yo! Uganda with a detailed understanding of the investments needed to build customized services for agricultural exporters.
•
■■It also helped it to get a sense of the economics of the volume and value of transactions it needs to process to be profitable per value chain across a bulk payment platform.
•
■■The establishment and experience of the Booster Team created a new revenue stream for Yo! Uganda.
UNCDF Direct costs/investment•
■■UNCDF’s direct investment was more than $400,000. This mostly paid for the Booster Team and platform development.
•
■■UNCDF set up a loss guarantee fund for MTN, but these funds were not used.*No financial revenues*Benefit: Financial inclusion for the poor•
■■Funding cycles of 2–3 years may be too short to achieve ecosystem development.
•
■■A neutral broker/donor needs to connect the various providers of the DFS ecosystem.24
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsVI. PROJECT RESULTS AND CONTINUOUS ITERA TION
The effort to digitize KCL coffee pay -
ments and provide financial services to 
farmers and traders is ongoing. Current-ly in the third season of digitization, the project is growing to reach the initial target of 6,000 certified farmers. How -
ever, progress has been slow for a vari-ety of reasons. Chief among them is the perceived high cost of the service by the end-users. The business case for this im-plementation—as for all mobile money bulk payments—is based on scale; slow growth has thus impacted the business case for both the service providers and KCL. Figure 4 illustrates the process over the span of three coffee growing seasons.
Season 1: November 2015–
February 2016
During the first coffee season when mo -
bile payments were first introduced, 
overall uptake by staff was slow. The up-take by farmers—the intended clients for this project—was virtually nonexistent. The primary factors that contributed to disappointing results included:
■■The paucity of mobile money agents.
■■Low awareness by farmers of mobile money payment options.
■■High reluctance, among farmers who were aware, to accept mobile money, which was exacerbated by the reluc-tance of KCL washing station staff to diverge from their routine cash purchasing process.
18
MTN mobile base station transmitter
The project’s commencement was de -
layed because of various constraints as mentioned in earlier sections. In late 
2015, MTN’s management approved the project and erected a mobile base transceiver station (MBTS), a temporary tower in Kapchorwa that provided net -
work coverage.
The project’s first success was the es -
tablishment of a telephone network in 
Kapchorwa, a rural community approx -
imately two hours north from Mbale. MBTS effectively connected community members to the outside world. One community member exclaimed, “For the first time I am able to call my family in Kampala, from my own home!”
Although MTN built the MBTS, commu-
nity members attributed this advance-ment to the KCL initiative, and KCL was praised heavily within the community.
Fenix International mobile  
phone sales
Fenix International launched mobile 
phone sales in December 2015 target-ing all coffee farmers (both men and women) in Kapchorwa and Manafwa. See Table 6 for financing details.
For this initiative, Fenix International de-
coupled solar home systems from sales of phones, and female farmers received uncollateralized loans for phones. Fenix International sold phones to approxi -
mately 230 (31 percent) of the 720 reg-istered female farmers with KCL, with the intention of increasing phone own-ership among women.
Traditionally Fenix International sells 
phones coupled with its lease-to-own solar home systems. The solar home systems function if the client is up to date on his or her payments, which are 
18 KCL washing staff found the digital payment process burdensome because it required a new set of skills to operationalize 
and a new set of processes to learn. In late 2016, this process was redesigned to facilitate staff use.25
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsFIGURE 4.  Digitization results and challenges
Season 1: November 2015–February 2016
Season 2: July 2016–February 2017
Season 3: July 2017–
February 2018
Results• Mobile money payment 
options available
• Digital payments 
implemented among staff and select vendors
• Temporary mobile network 
infrastructure installed providing telephony in Kapchorwa for the first time
• Mobile phone sales 
launched
• Solar solutions that support 
mobile charging sold
• Digital payment technology 
operational
• KCL staff trained on digital 
platform
• Internal user (staff) testing 
completed
Constraints• Mobile money payment 
option introduced halfway through the season.
• Few mobile money agents 
in this phase, and they lacked liquidity.
• Low farmer awareness of 
mobile money.
• Of the farmers who were 
aware, most were reluctant to accept mobile money because of cash out fees and lack of agents.
• Introduction of revised 
mobile money pricing models delayed.
• Washing station payment 
process flow ill-adapted for digital payments disincentivized washing station staff.
• Uncollateralized loans to 
farmers for phones show early signs of delinquency.• Digital payment capabilities 
available at Kapchorwa and Manafwa washing stations
• KCL staff and select 
vendors take up mobile money payments
• Soft launch of digital 
payments at Kapchorwa and Manafwa
Results• Agents recruited• Merchants recruited• Mobile money subscribers’ 
acquisitions increased
• GSM subscribers’ 
acquisitions increased
• Phone sales reactivated 
while phone loans are suspended
• Digital payments 
implemented
• Permanent mobile network 
tower installed by MTN
• DFS Booster Team 
launched and operational
Constraints• Washing station staff user 
experience for recording and administering payments still had challenges.
• Generalized lack of farmer 
awareness persisted.• DFS ecosystem activated 
with the recruitment of more agents and merchants
• GSM and mobile money 
subscriber drives launched
• Revitalized phone sales 
resulting in a sharp increase in mobile money use among target community members and KCL farmers
• Digital payments at 
Kapchorwa and ManafwaResultsPendingHuman-centric design is introduced to improve relevance of services for KCL washing station staff and coffee farmers.26
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentstypically collected via mobile money. If 
payments are not up to date, the systems are disconnected. The phones that Fenix International piloted for KCL female farmers were sold without the solar home system. Fenix International relied on its clients’ interest in maintaining a good credit score with the company to act as an incentive for repayments. A good credit score would translate into female farmers being eligible to receive solar home solutions on a lease-to-own model.
Client interviews indicated that repay -
ment rates were low because customers 
did not know how to pay installments with mobile money. Ultimately, Fenix International opted to discontinue the micropilot. It continues to sell the home solar system bundled with the mobile phone product.
Yo! Uganda—Training and testing
Yo! Uganda manages both mobile 
money and cash payments for KCL. KCL requested the system be tested on a small group before it was presented to farmers. Thus, in the first coffee season and the subsequent months, Yo! Uganda focused on training KCL staff on how to operate the system and on limited testing by paying security guards, cross-border transporters, and a few others via mo -
bile money. This internal testing allowed KCL to understand the functionalities of the digital payment platform.TABLE 6.  Fenix International sales
Phone Loan 
Structure USD
Deposit UGX 6,500 1.85
Daily rate UGX 500 0.14
Duration 85 days
Total Price UGX 49,500 14
USD 5 3500 UGXPreparing for Season 2
In the months leading to Season 2, MTN 
Uganda attempted to address agent net-work quality and liquidity management, as originally agreed in the project’s de-sign phase. Immediate solutions were not found, leaving the Kapchorwa and Manfwa washing stations with weak mobile money agent penetration.
Although the option to receive payments 
digitally was available at the washing stations, the lack of mobile money agents discouraged KCL’s management from ac -
tively encouraging farmers to accept mo-bile money payments out of fear that a negative first-time experience with mo-bile money would do more damage than good. During this time, however, mo-bile money payments among KCL staff grew. For example, although washing station managers were not encouraging farmers to accept mobile money, they themselves were benefitting from the efficiency of digital payments—it saved them the time and money spent trav -
eling to Mbale to collect their monthly salaries in person.
Yo’s Uganda’s digital platform allows a 
farmer to accept a split payment—a com-bination of cash and mobile money of the farmer’s choosing. The hope was that this functionality would encourage farm -
ers to safely save some of their income in a digital wallet. However, the utility of mobile money for farmers—beyond person-to-person (P2P) transactions—was not well defined. The following is a standard refrain heard during field re -
search into methods for scaling payment: “The problem with mobile money is the cash out fees. Cash is free and eas -
ily accepted here—why would we use mobile money?”
For farmers, the perceived value of mo -
bile money is in P2P payments. To farm -
ers, accepting mobile money payments 
for reasons outside of P2P—especially 27
Digitizing Agricultural Paymentsin the absence of a robust agent 
network—is essentially locking money away. Though some farmers did see the value of digital wallets for savings, most of them thought the cash fees were too high to use mobile money as a safe place to save. (See the Annex for details on MTN Uganda’s cash-out fees.)
Although Vital Wave worked with MTN 
to revise its rural cash-out pricing model for P2P fees, the new pricing regime was not launched until the second season. It was clear the issues of pricing, agency, and awareness would hinder the project during the second season, spurring the implementers to seek innovative resolutions.
Season 2: July 2016–February 2017
In the months preceding the second 
season, project implementers rallied to rethink and revise the approach to implementation. The following were among the key changes:
■■The grant for agent management that was initially assigned to MTN was shifted to Yo! Uganda.
■■Yo! Uganda agreed to support agent development in exchange for con -
certed technical assistance, which was not one of its strengths.
■■An agent management and liquidity firm—Potbell Ltd.—was hired to provide the service and train Yo! Uganda staff and management.
19
■■Yo! Uganda through Potbell estab -
lished a DFS Booster Team that supplemented agent recruitment and management with a mobile money subscriber drive, market awareness efforts, and merchant acquisition in partnership with Potbell Ltd.
■■Fenix International agreed to re-turn to the consortium with lockable smart phone solutions, anticipated in 2017. Thus, requiring it to “sit out” the second season.
■■Yo! Uganda would also provide mobile phone sales for this sea -
son, with no financing options—customers would need to buy the phones outright.
These efforts resulted in initial uptake among rural community members and KCL farmers.
Results of the Yo! Uganda DFS 
Booster Team
The UNCDF-funded Yo! Uganda’s DFS 
Booster Team was designed to bolster the MTN subscriber base in the region through a combination of subscriber recruitment and education campaigns on the use of phones and mobile money. It was also intended to substan-tially increase the number of agents serving this area and to develop better liquidity management. It was funded for about eight months, from July 2016 to February 2017, to correspond with the coffee season.
In addition, a program was created to 
bring low-cost phones to farmers with-out financing. The concept of a DFS Booster Team—designed to support up -
take of mobile network services in prox -
imity to a large bulk payment—is new in this industry. 
20
19 Potbell was not yet registered with MTN as a master agent.
20 The DFS Booster Team focused on KCL farmers and nonfarmers who offer GSM and mobile money subscriptions and sup -
port services, such as phone and mobile money literacy and mobile money agency support.28
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsThe Booster Team, which became a 
new division in Yo! Uganda, comprised 24 members who were deployed to the washing stations and surround -
ing communities. Each team member was equipped with the equivalent of an agent line that was used to record know-your-customer (KYC) data and to register customers for SIM cards and mobile money in the field.
Between July and December 2016, the 
Booster Team recruited 17,651 new MTN customers. Of those, 11,500 were active, revenue-generating GSM customers for MTN as of the end of the year. Further -
more, these customers generated almost 10 percent more in monthly ARPU than MTN had estimated. Also, nearly 75 per-cent of the new customers recruited and trained by the Booster Team activated their mobile money wallets. This was exceptional because, typically, only half or slightly more than half of all GSM cus-tomers register their mobile money wal -
lets nationally. See Figure 5.
By the end of the second coffee sea -
son in February 2017, the total of new 
MTN subscribers (GSM) recruited by the Booster Team stood at 20,311. Fifty-three percent of these subscribers were 90-day active mobile money users.
During the second coffee season, mo -
bile money payments to farmers as well 
as mobile money payments to staff in-creased. The Booster Team also focused on increasing the number of agents in the area. More than 129 agents were recruited, well over the 100 targeted. However, liquidity management (re -
balancing of cash and e-float) of the agent network is a constant chal -
lenge. On average, agents need to be rebalanced at least once a day, and re -
balancing points are few and far be -
tween in rural areas.
The new agents are making fewer trans-
actions than the 34 average daily trans -
actions that an established agent makes (Bersudskaya and Kuijpers 2016); how -
ever, this is typical of newer agents.
Recruiting merchants who accept digi -
tal payments is traditionally one of the 
most challenging aspects of deploying digital payments, especially in rural areas. To date, the Booster Team has recruited and on-boarded over a dozen new merchants.
FIGURE 5.  GSM subscriber-to-MFS ratio per agent (cumulative), June–December 2016
29
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsDFS Booster Team:  
Key performance indicators
The team focused on the fundamen -
tals of customer engagement, specifi -
cally on registrations and activations 
of MTN mobile money users and MTN agents, including providing liquidity support services and customer educa-tion (on phone and mobile money use). MTN’s GSM ARPU in the Booster Team’s catchment area grew 34 percent in six months—a high rate for a rural envi-ronment. Likewise, the mobile money average conversion rate (the rate at which GSM users open mobile money wallets) surpassed the national average by 25 percent.
Although MTN and Yo! Uganda gained 
insights on approaches to engage rural communities, the value propo -
sition of mobile money services for rural consumers’ needs to be stronger for it to be truly relevant to household financial inflows and outflows over time (see Table 7).
Booster Team sustainability
One of the central questions around the 
Booster Team is if and how Yo! Uganda stands to make a financial return. The major costs of the Booster Team are its human resources followed by transpor -
tation stipends and logistical expenses related to field work.
Ideally, a Booster Team could earn com -
missions for agent and customer recruit -
ment from the MNO. Since Yo! Uganda was 
not a direct agent manager contracted by MTN, UNCDF’s grant paid the team’s ex -
penses. Yo! Uganda’s strategy is to estab -
lish commercial ties with new, large bulk payers and other MNOs as it sells and expands the Booster Team’s services to reach scale and become profitable.
The sustainability of such an effort 
relies on scale.  The up-front costs are significant, and time is required to reach optimized operations and economies of scale. Irrespective of whether stake -
holders choose the approach of a Boost-er Team or an alternative, this initiative shows that some level of support to con -
sumers, agents, and the bulk payer is necessary.
Pricing and uptake
Mobile money service providers—in 
this case, MNOs—charge a cash-out fee when customers withdraw funds from their wallets. These fees pay for the cost of agent networks and generate a prof -
it for the MNOs. MTN Uganda’s plat -
form lacked the functional capability to change the cash-out fees and corre -
sponding agent commissions.
However, MTN was able to reduce P2P 
fees and did so at the end of 2016. The P2P price change focused on lowering the transaction costs of remittances at the lower bands, to benefit low-income consumers. (See Table 8.)
Season 3: Introducing human-
centered design
In November 2016, UNCDF partnered with 
a human-centric design firm (IDEO.org) to improve the relevance and use of DFS. The goal was to understand how to accelerate the adoption of mobile money payments by KCL farmers. IDEO.org documented several findings, including the following:
■■The bulk payments processes were ill-adapted to the realities of pay -
ments at the washing station.
■■Engaging farmers on financial strat-egies could lead to improved farmer awareness of mobile money services beyond P2P and could inform fol-low-on product development efforts.
■■Merchants provided a key “pull” op-portunity for mobile money.30
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsTABLE 7.  Booster Team key performance indicators results, July 2016–February 2017
Planned Actual
KPIFarmers and 
parchment 
farmers Community Totals Actual% of 
target 
achieved
Subscriber Data: MFS Education and Awareness
# customers educated on phone use 5,608 18,500 24,108 23,702  98
# customers educated on mobile money use 5,608 18,500 24,108 23,702  98
Subscriber Data: Recruitment and Adoption# registered customers 5,608 18,500 24,108 20,311
 84
# active mobile money users (90 days) 4,486  7,400 11,886 10,765  91
# active mobile money users (women) 2,200  3,400 5,600 4,054  72
# of unique farmers receiving payments via mobile money per season 4,200 — 4,200 666  16
# of unique employees paid through mobile money 187 — 187 68  36
Agent Recruitment and ActivityAgents recruited 100 0 100 129 129
Average daily number of transaction per agent 15 0 15 7
 47
Season-on-Season Performance via the Yo! platform
Parameter2015–2016 
(UGX)2015–2016 
(USD 
equivalent)2016–2017 
(UGX)2016–2017 
(USD 
equivalent)
Total value of mobile money paid out to farmers during the season 23,500 6.71  59,744,550 17,070
Total value of cash payments tracked through the system 86,729,100 24,779.74 312,809,450 89,374
Total value of mobile money paid out to staff (February 2016–December 2016) — — 203,129,536 58,03731
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsPayment experience
A great deal of design effort went into 
the technological interface of the pay -
ments system for the washing station staff. However, access to the platform re-quired a laptop. This proved to be cum-bersome for washing station staff.
The digital platform was designed to mim -
ic the steps in the cash payment process. 
All participants involved in user accep -
tance testing, including washing station staff, agreed that the platform accomplish this goal. Despite the detailed design pro-cess, a key component was missed: When the washing station was crowded with farmers awaiting payment, staff had to go into the office to use the laptop to process a mobile money payment, which made processing considerably slower (in part due to slow internet connectivity) than processing cash payments. See Box 6.
Human-centered design research: 
Initial findings
Prototyping the revised digital 
payment processes
IDEO.org designed a new approach 
where farmers are digitally registered TABLE 8.  MTN P2P price reductions for the lower bands
Transaction 
amount (UGX)Original charge 
(UGX)New reduced 
charge (UGX) % Reduction
500–2,500  500  180 64
2,501–5,000  500  350 30
5,001–15,000 1,000  600 40
15,001–30,000 1,000  800 20
30,001–45,000 1,100 1,000  9
BOX 6 . Payment process snapshot: Cash vs. digital
Coffee delivered by farmers is sorted, weighed, priced, and accepted by the washing station. Farmers would then queue anywhere from 20 to 40 minutes to receive cash payments. This system was familiar to both farmers and staff, and ran smoothly. For a farmer to be paid digitally, however, the established flow was disrupted. A staff member would have to stop processing cash payments and go to the manager’s office to use a computer, run the generator for a printed receipt, and log on to the internet to complete a digital payment.
Often, it took time to get a cellular signal strong and consistent enough for the 
server to successfully authenticate with the payments platform—the attempts would sometimes stall or time out. During busy purchasing times, this disruption of the cash process was viewed as a major inconvenience by staff, and thus it was not promoted. Although UNCDF had engaged MTN Uganda to upgrade the Kap -
chorwa tower from 2G to 3G to address internet speeds, the payment process flow of cash versus digital was not well-designed for KCL staff or farmers. This situation led at least one washing station manager to oppose use of mobile money for payments. As the key touch-point for the farmers during the payment process, washing station staff have a tremendous influence on uptake.
Note: Click here to see a video about the cash vs. digital payment process IDEO.org seeks to improve.32
Digitizing Agricultural Payments(using a tablet) upon arrival at the 
washing station. This initiates the dig-ital process, with subsequent data en -
tered in real time at different points of the procurement process (weighing, pricing, etc.), leading to real-time pay -
ment choices. Digital payments would be triggered (and approved) via the tablet, using established checks and bal -
ances processes that eliminates the need to interrupt the cash payment process to log on to a computer in the back of-fice and renders digital payments faster than cash.
Yo! Uganda reconfigured the payments 
platform and incorporated two key pieces of feedback:
■■The payment choice architecture was incorporated into the beginning of the procurement-to-payout chain. In the revised system, washing sta-tion staff ask farmers if they want to be paid in cash, mobile money, or a split payment between both, at the beginning of the process—and this is embedded within the procurement process itself. This configuration allows the payment process to begin early on, despite low bandwidth, in the background rather than at the last stage of the process.
■■Rural connectivity constraints were managed by addressing protocols and existing network strength, for example. Reconfiguring the techno -
logical and payments processes was designed to enable KCL washing sta-tion staff members to integrate dig -
ital payments into the existing and familiar process for cash payments. Farmers who opt for a split payment (partial cash and mobile money pay -
ment), as many are likely to, would wait the standard 20–40 minutes for cash, which allows ample time for the digital transaction to clear and be confirmed on their phones. When tested, both washing station staff and KCL management enthusiastically supported this approach and plan to introduce it in the 2017–2018 season.
Engaging farmers on their financial strategies
A second area of research centered on 
understanding and engaging farmers’ fi-nancial strategies. Individual interviews and initial prototyping showed that farmers responded well to facilitated small group discussions on money man-agement, including savings and plan -
ning mechanisms. This approach helps to inform stakeholders on adjustments to render products and services more relevant to farmers and to encourage behavior change to favor DFS. Various options are being evaluated to support farmer financial awareness and other ideas that could strengthen demand for financial services.
Merchants: Creating a pull for mobile 
money
IDEO.org experimented with creating 
a demand for electronic money by set -
ting up a mobile-money only pop-up shop that offered goods, including agri-cultural inputs, in a rural location. The availability of goods nearby, offered at reasonable prices, prompted people to load and use electronic value to procure goods. While these types of innovations provide insight into merchants support-ing electronic payment growth, issues about scale and sustainability remain unanswered.
IDEO.org will develop these and other 
tests during the third season to support farmer demand and use of DFS.33
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsVII. LESSONS LEARNED: HINDSIGHT IS 20/20
Agricultural payment digitization is 
a long-term investment
The MM4P program initially expected 
the KCL digitization project to run from 2014 to 2016. However, when it comes to agricultural payments a 2–3-year window might be too small. Establish -
ing rural infrastructure, ensuring that different components of the DFS eco -
system exist and are synchronized, and supporting consumer education and be-havior change is a medium-term effort at best. In hindsight, MM4P believes it should have planned for 4–6 years. As a corollary, KCL maintains that it often works with farming communities for at least four years before innovative farm-ing practices are widely adopted. Addi -
tionally, similar efforts in the Colombian coffee value chain, possibly the first at-tempt globally, took seven years to ma -
ture (BFA 2015).
Agriculture value chain digitization re -
quires both time and capital. Depending 
on the agriculture value chain and local context, a donor or agricultural export-er looking to digitize a value chain will need to consider both time and funding. In the process of digitizing the KCL coffee value chain in Kapchorwa and Manafwa, UNCDF invested over $400,000 into the project, most of which was a direct ex -
pense for the Booster Team.
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
contracted consulting firms Vital Wave and IDEO.org separately for this project. While Vital Wave had a multi-year con-tract with the Gates Foundation for this project, IDEO.org was contracted only in the third coffee season.
Strategic partnerships are key in 
agriculture value chain digitization—it is hard to go it alone
At the onset of the project, the MM4P pro -
gram initially expected to partner with two key players: ( i) KCL, the agricultural 
exporter, and (ii) MTN, the digital wallet 
provider. However, as evidence of a poor infrastructure and the need for education of both KCL staff and the farmers emerged, the number of partners in the project grew to seven (KCL, MTN, Yo! Uganda, Fenix, Portbell Ltd., Vital Wave, and IDEO.org).
The rural setting, the low penetration 
of mobile money agents and phones, and poor telephone connectivity re-quired several partnerships to build a foundation that would help make digital payments frictionless. Despite the lack of basic infrastructure, around 16 per-cent of targeted farmers had already signed to receive part of their pay -
ments in mobile money. More farmers are expected to join the initiative by the end of Season 3 in February 2018.
Other lessons learned included under -
standing the motivation of implementing 
partners—for example, KCL sought to drive sustainability and saw increased incomes among its farmers as a key driver to a sustainable quality coffee supply. It invested heavily in improving farmer knowledge and sought to improve access of quality inputs for farmers—thus leading farmers to have access to fi-nancial services. This was an important part of for KCL’s ultimate goals. KCL was patient during this initiative because it was investing in its long-term goals. Not all commodity buyers will have an appetite for this long-term approach to ecosystem sustainability. In these early days of digitization efforts, it is critical to have partners who are invested for the long term and for the right reasons.
Context affects investment and 
outcome
Geography and type of agriculture value 
chain were important aspects to  consider 
in this initiative.34
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsGeography. The KCL project was con -
ducted in the rural communities of 
Kapchorwa and Manfwa. Rural deploy -
ments mean facing greater barriers that need greater financial invest-ment and they experience slower uptake. Poor telecommunication infra-structure and network connectivity, low levels of financial literacy, low consumer awareness, nonexistent financial service access points, and low mobile handset penetration were a few of the challenges this project faced.
Programs committed to rural access and 
uptake of DFS must be prepared to ad-dress myriad constraints. Rural areas are among the most challenging envi-ronments to implement technological solutions. Programs with short time-frames might want to consider focusing on peri-urban populations, which would allow for cost savings, because phone ownership, network connectivity, liter -
acy, and agent networks are relatively stronger in peri-urban areas.
Agriculture value chain type. Not all 
agriculture value chains are the same. For example, a coffee value chain can be very different from that of tea, as MM4P discovered. In the coffee value chain, typically most farmers own their land and live on or close to it. In contrast, most tea plantations hire “tea pickers” who are often migrant laborers who are eager to adopt digital payments because they want to remit money home to their families. Given the otherwise unreliable and expensive alternative methods of sending money home, digital payments offer an immediate and compelling val -
ue proposition to these laborers. The type of agriculture value chain and payee matter (Craib 2017).
Technology is often the easiest part 
of payment digitization
As noted, Yo! Uganda’s payment plat-
form was ready for deployment by the first coffee season. However, the DFS ecosystem, value proposition, and user experience that were needed for mobile money payment uptake and adoption were missing. In the next two iterations of the initiative, MM4P , KCL, and other partners have been building solutions and processes that answer the following questions:
■■Is it easier for KCL staff to disburse digital payments than cash pay -
ments? The initial answer was no. KCL staff had to stop their routine cof -
fee cherry procurement and weighing process and power up computers to access the digital payment platform to make a digital payment, making digital pay-outs much more inconve-nient when compared to making cash disbursements. Because of this, KCL staff did not encourage digital pay -
ments. Today, based on the recom -
mendations by IDEO.org, MM4P and KCL are piloting a more user-friendly 
procurement-  linked pa yment pro -
cess that is convenient for KCL staff.
■■Are farmers able to accept mo-bile money?  This question relates 
to mobile phone and connectivity penetration. While individual mobile phone ownership is still low among KCL’s farmers, the first test site in Kapchorwa has mobile phone con -
nectivity as a direct consequence of this project.
■■Are farmers aware about and do they understand digital payments?  The Booster Team was 
a significant result of this project. During the second coffee season (July 2016–February 2017), the ac -
ceptance of mobile money among KCL farmers grew. This is attributed, in large part, to the Booster Team’s efforts. The team bridged the gap be -
tween agent and customer acquisi-tion, farmer access, registration, and knowledge about mobile money.35
Digitizing Agricultural Payments■■Is there a good quality, liquid cash-
in cash-out network? It is nearly impossible to digitize agricultural payments via mobile money with-out financial access points. Hence, MM4P and MTN worked with Potbell Limited and Yo! Uganda to establish a good quality agent network.
■■Is there a compelling value prop -
osition for digital payments?  If 
the spend economy (payment of everyday goods and services) is cash-based, it is impractical to store money digitally. The Booster Team is working with MTN on merchant acquisition, to digitize the everyday expenditures of KCL farmers, thus eliminating the need to cash-out funds.
■■How should price sensitivity of low-income consumers be ad -
dressed? Traditional mobile money business models use transac-tion-based pricing (i.e., the customer pays for every transaction, except a cash deposit). Additionally, it is extremely expensive to cash out small-value transactions. For exam -
ple, a $4 cash-out costs around 4.7 percent or 19 cents—for a farmer who lives on less than $2 a day, that is nearly 10 percent of his or her daily income.
Digital payments in rural areas may require untraditional business models
Before the KCL project, MTN Uganda 
had not tested the concept of tempo -
rary base stations in rural areas. The traditional modeling technique of accounting for permanent base-station placement, proximity tower saturation, and population density to determine de -
mand and subsequent profits proved in-sufficient in the case of Kapchorwa—the project’s initial test site. Once the tem -
porary BTS was put up, the tower was 
over-  subscribed, which suggest ed that 
MTN was leaving “money on the table” by using a traditional approach.
Additionally, of the 17,000 new MTN 
customers that the Booster Team recruited, 11,500 were active customers who generated almost 10 percent more in ARPU than predicted. This indicates that while a rural setting might require a “high-touch” customer recruitment model, there are potential long-term gains that can offset this up-front investment.
Pre- and post-digitization efforts are 
equally important to success
Rural bulk payment programs should 
prepare target communities—for exam-ple, by strengthening agent networks and mobile money literacy among tar -
get groups, and conducting market research for product development—before launching digital bulk payments. Likewise, program designers should use marketing tactics such as digital am-bassadors, client education, and peer support to generate interest and build confidence in the upcoming digital pay -
ments options. Efforts should focus on identifying, training, and preparing local digital ambassadors who will initially work with Booster Teams, and continue to support community engagement with digital platforms (mobile money and or banking) after the teams are disbanded. Digital ambassadors may also play a key role in providing feedback to service providers on product relevance, positioning, pricing, etc.36
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsVIII. CONCLUSION
KCL’s digital payments program contin-
ues today, with stakeholders introduc-ing improved payment experiences and competitors. KCL farmers are beginning to benefit from improvements in DFS, as are community members surround -
ing the coffee washing stations. Private sector providers such as Yo! Uganda and MTN Uganda have learned from the ini -
tiative and use this knowledge to intro -
duce digital payments in new agriculture value chains. Competitors have taken note, and this has led to greater interest and involvement in serving rural areas with digital payments and financial services.
MM4P Uganda has taken the lessons 
learned from its first attempt at agricul-tural payment digitization and has used them to accelerate payments among other value chains.37
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsIX. REFERENCES
Anderson, Jamie, Colleen Learch, and 
Scott Gardner. 2016. “National Survey and Segmentation of Smallholder Households in Uganda.” Washington, D.C.: CGAP . http://www.cgap.org/publications/national-  
survey-and-segmentation-smallholder  
-households-uganda
Bersudskaya, Vera, and Dorieke Kuijpers. 
2016. “ Agent Network Accelerator Survey: Uganda Country Report 2015.” Nairobi: Helix Institute, 7 September. http://www  
.helix-institute.com/data-and-insights/agent-network-accelerator-survey-uganda-  
country-report-2015
BFA. 2015. “Colombia’s Coffee Growers’ 
Smart ID Card: Successfully Reaching Ru-ral.” New York: Better Than Cash Alliance. https://www.betterthancash.org/tools-  
research/case-studies/colombias- coffee - 
growers-smart-id-card- successfully - 
reaching-rural- communities -with- digital- 
payments
Craib, Anne. 2017. “High Volume Pay -
ments in the Tea Value Chain.” New 
York: UN Capital Development Fund. https://uncdf-cdn.azureedge.net/media-  
manager/79507?sv=2016-05-31&sr=  
b&sig=%2FzD0uxUsW0wmdAQaFWb8xfV  
5upERG5sJGA2QmvViDUE%3D&se=2018-03-13T15%3A43%3A20Z&sp=r
Mattern, Max, and Rossana Ramirez. 
2017. “Digitizing Value Chain Finance for Smallholder Farmers.” Focus Note 106. Washington, D.C.: CGAP . http://www.cgap .org/publications/digitizing-value-chain-  
finance-smallholder-farmersMcKay, Claudia, and Buddy Buruku. 2016. “Digitizing Agriculture Value Chains: The Story So Far.” Blog post, 15 January. http://
www.cgap.org/blog/digitizing-agriculture  
-value-chains-story-so-far
McKay, Claudia, and Rashmi Pillai. 2016. 
“ Aggregators: The Secret Sauce to Digital Financial Expansion.” Blog post, 27 January. http://www.cgap.org/blog/aggregators-  
secret-sauce-digital-financial-expansion
Perez, Sofia. 2016. “On the Path to Farm Sus-
tainability.” Rainforest Alliance, 5 October. https://www.rainforest-alliance.org/  
articles/rainforest-alliance-certified-farms
Report Company, The. 2015. “Interview 
with David Barry, Chairman of Kyagalanyi Coffee Limited.” 13 October. http://www  
.the-report.com/reports/uganda/pearl-of-africa-shines/interview-with-david-barry-  
chairman-of-kyagalanyi-coffee-limited/
Sebudde, Rachel K. 2017. “In Uganda, Great -
er Financial Inclusion Is the Key to Unlock -
ing Rapid Growth.” Blog post, 9 February. 
http://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/  
in-uganda-greater-financial-inclusion-is-the-key-to-unlocking-rapid-growth
Szenthe, Adrianna. 2017. “Top Coffee Pro -
ducing Countries.” World Atlas, 6 October. 
https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/top-coffee-producing-countries.html
Vital Wave. n.d. “Digital Bulk Payments Im-
plementation Toolkit: A Uganda Bulk Payer’s Start-Up Guide.” Palo Alto, Calif.: Vital Wave. http://vitalwave.com/case-study/bulk-  
payment-implementation- toolkit/38
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsX. ANNEXES
1. MTN mobile money P2P and cash-
out fees (1 USD 5 3500 UGX)
2. The role of UNCDF
In this project, UNCDF served as a con-
vener and project advocate. Project stakeholders agreed they were unlikely to have convened, worked together ef -
fectively, and remained together had it 
not been for UNCDF’s coalition-  building 
efforts, technical guidance, financial support, and advocacy.
UNCDF built relationships with each 
partner to understand organization-al incentives as well as the operation-al constraints that may interfere with implementation. UNCDF worked with partners to design a business case, set performance objectives, and provide support where required. For the most part, UNCDF financed innovation in-tended to benefit not only this specif -
ic implementation, but the digitization of agriculture value chains, as a whole. UNCDF invested in KCL’s technological platform to implement digital payments, including functionality-related coffee price per kilograms and payment track -
ing whether digital or cash, underwrote a guarantee fund that led to the estab-lishment of a mobile BTS and spurred innovation around mobile phone own -
ership for women. The Booster Team served not only as a donor facilitator, but also a thought partner and collaborator in designing solutions to implementa-tion bottlenecks.
TABLE A1.  Transaction tiers (in UGX)
Min MaxSending money to
Cash-out FeesMTN mobile 
money usersUnregistered 
users
500 2,500 250 830 330
2,501 5,000 500 940 440
5,001 15,000 1,000 1,880 700
15,001 30,000 1,000 1,880 880
30,001 45,000 1,000 2,310 1,210
45,001 60,000 1,000 2,310 1,500
60,001 125,000 1,600 3,325 1,925
125,001 250,000 1,600 4,975 3,575
250,001 500,000 1,600 7,175 7,000
500,001 1,000,000 2,000 12,650 12,500
1,000,001 2,000,000 2,000 22,000 19,800
2,000,001 4,000,000 2,000 37,400 35,20039
Digitizing Agricultural PaymentsTABLE A2.  Bulk payment decision sequence overviewStepChoose 
payment service provider (PSP)Assess system needsDesign payment systemDetermine infrastructure needsProcure equipmentDesign internal payment procedures Train staffRecruit farmersAssess agent network and recruit agentsDescriptionAnalyze and describe business needs
Run 
competitive bidding process
Negotiate 
pricing and terms of service to complete contract
Finalize 
KYC checks of the payer to enable financial transactionsAssess payer needs (e.g., low-literacy users who need to make payments; offline usability; power needed to run PCs and printers; and need for paper receipts)
Interview 
farmers to assess their use of/needs for the payment systemDesign system and conduct user acceptance testing (e.g., test with low-literacy users)
This step 
can be done only with a payment aggregator; MNOs do not customize their servicesDetermine if mobile network signal is sufficient and address with MNO
Determine 
how much power is needed to run PCs, printers, other equipment (potentially install new source, potentially solar)Based on assessed needs (e.g., rugged printers) procure system- compatible PCs, printers, and internet dongles
Install 
and test software, network connection, power sourceDetermine who can authorize, approve, and initiate payments to 
ensure good stewardship of funds and reduce risk
Determine 
how long funds transfer takes; establish process to ensure adequate funds are always availableTrain KCL central office and washing station staff to use payment platform(Some washing station staff had never used a PC; all were successfully trained. Training required on-site support for 31 weeks at the washing stations)Publicize the availability of mobile money and benefits of uptake
Solicit 
feedback from farmers on mobile money
Seek to 
work with MNOs to address challenges (e.g., pricing, which may or may not be possible)Determine agent avail-ability, and agent liquid-ity (famers identified this early on)
Recruit 
agents as necessary, and ensure liquidity man-agement (this required the introduction 
of a third-  
party liquidity management firm)
(Continued)40
Digitizing Agricultural Payments
StepChoose 
payment service provider (PSP)Assess system needsDesign payment systemDetermine infrastructure needsProcure equipmentDesign internal payment procedures Train staffRecruit farmersAssess agent network and recruit agents
PCs chosen because they mirrored the cash process in the of-fice, they could be more easily secured, and they were more rugged. 
Tablets will 
introduce a different modality that does not require going into the officeInvolvedKCL, UNCDF , Vital WaveKCL, Yo! Uganda, Vital WaveKCL, Yo! Uganda, Vital WaveKCL, UNCDF , MTN, Yo! Uganda, Vital WaveKCL, UNCDF , Yo! Uganda, Vital WaveKCL, Yo! Uganda, Vital WaveKCL, Yo UgandaKCL, UNCDF , Yo! UgandaKCL, Yo! Uganda, MTN, PotbellTABLE A2.  Bulk payment decision sequence overview (Continued)