San José de la Montaña Guadalupe Isnos Palestina Guamal Santa Rosa de OsosTurbaco San Bernardo del Viento Buenavista Pradera Espinal El Doncello Santa María
Altamira Caloto Saladoblanco Puerto López Chinú Coyaima Córdoba La Argentina
Puerto Gaitán Restrepo Pitalito San Andrés  de Sotavento Puerto Tejada RioblancoEl Roble San Juan de Arama Santander de Quilichao Colombia San Pelayo El Bagre
Momil Cotorra Hobo Caldono Chima Cereté La Montañita Anorí Guamo TimanáRivera Fuente de Oro Tesalia Miranda Morelia Tarazá Sahagún Piendamó PlatoSan Juan de Betulia (Betulia) Candelaria El Castillo Silvia Tumaco San Antero Uribe
Roncesvalles Purísima San Pedro  de Urabá Acacías Talaigua Nuevo San Agustín Tello
San Vicente del Caguán Elías Campamento La Macarena Turbana Mutatá Necoclí
Carepa San Juan  de Urabá Castilla la Nueva Palmito Vistahermosa Planeta Rica
Cartagena del Chairá Ciénaga de Oro Nátaga Magangué Puerto Concordia Sampués Puriﬁcación
San Carlos Buenavista Caucasia Pital El Dorado San José del Fragua Baraya Cicuco
Palermo Lejanías Teruel Ituango Florida La Plata Barranca de Upía Jamundí
Valdivia Jambaló El Paujil San Onofre El Calvario Villa Rica El Guamo Prado Yaguará
María la Baja Cáceres Planadas Tierralta Cabuyaro Chalán Yarumal Ayapel Oporapa
Saldaña Galeras Cubarral Toledo Sucre Angostura Agrado Morales Ataco Lorica
Apartadó San Pedro San Antonio Corinto Buenos Aires Acevedo Morroa Nechí Íquira
Mahates Turbo Tarqui San Martín Los Córdobas Corozal Toluviejo Arboletes Chigorodó
Cumaral Campoalegre San Andrés de Cuerquía Canalete Villavieja Colosó Suárez
San Juan Nepomuceno Aipe Mesetas Moñitos Paicol Padilla Zambrano Briceño
San Jose de Ure Puerto Escondido Gigante San Juanito Mapiripán La Apartada
Puerto Rico Puerto Rico Santa Ana Puerto Libertador Arjona Los Palmitos Toribío
Ortega Valencia Belén de los Andaquíes El Carmen de Bolívar Chaparral Guachene
San Carlos de Guaroa Puerto Lleras Garzón Ovejas Zaragoza Pueblo  Nuevo Sincé
Tuchín Natagaima Montelíbano Suaza Mompós Algeciras San Jacinto GranadaFINANCIAL 
INCLUSIONSavings
Credit
InsuranceUSAID Rural Finance InitiativeDigital 
Financial Services 
in Rural Areas of Colombia  
Characterization of the supply, demand and available channelsThe priority of USAID’s 
Rural Finance Initiative 
(RFI) is to explore and 
promote new operation 
models that will enable 
Colombian financial 
entities to increase the 
number of clients it 
attends in the rural areas 
of the country.Picture: Rural Finance InitiativeUSAID 
Rural 
Finance 
InitiativeDigital 
Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia
Characterization of the 
supply, demand and 
available channels
The United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID)
Lawrence J. Sacks 
Director in Colombia
Jennifer Tikka
Director of the Economic and Rural Development Office
Germán Sanz
Financial Inclusion and Development Officer Rural Finance Initiative
 
Rural Finance Initiative
Asdrúbal Negrete Lebette
Chief of Party
Claudia Elicet Roncancio López
Deputy Chief of Party 
Arcenio Segundo Daza Molina 
Specialist in Digital Projects
Dairo Ayiber Estrada  
President of Finagro
Asdrubal Negrete Lebette, Dairo Ayiber 
Estrada,  Arcenio Daza Molina Co-authorsJohn Fredy GuzmánEdition 
Juan Camilo Pedroza
Design
Oscar Merchán
Statistician
Fernanda Pineda - Hanz Rippe para USAID
Photography
Yanhaas, ACH COLOMBIA S.A.S, BANCO DE 
LA REPÚBLICA DE COLOMBIA
Research Partners
July 2019
This publication is made possible thanks to the support of the people and government of the 
United States, through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID).  The 
information provided is not official of the U.S. Government and does not represent the views or opinions of USAID or the U.S. government.Acknowledgements  page 3  
List of Illustrations  page 4   
Presentation. Lawrence Sacks
USAID Director for Colombia  page 5  
Prologue  page 7 
Digital Financial Services – an Opportunity to Impact Poverty in Colombia  page 8
Technology alone is not enough to 
boost financial inclusion
 
The rural populations of Colombia: Economic and Financial Characteristics
 
- A preliminary methodological clarification  page 15
 
- General data of studies conducted  page 16- Some characteristics of the rural 
population  page 18
 Index
11
page
14
page
21
page
25
pageFinancial behaviors in rural areas 
of the country: possibilities and challenges with regard to savings and credit
 
- Who saves? page 22
 
- Who obtains formal credits?   
page 23
- Strategies and recommendations
page 24  
Channels and access points to 
approach financial services and generate financial inclusion
- Channels and access points  page 26
 
- Trust in digital channels page 30
- Habits and uses of remittances and the receipt of money  
page 35
 
- Strategies and recommendations
page 36  Internet and its uses in financial 
transactions  
- Internet coverage and uses in rural areas page 38
   
- Myths regarding financial transactions online  
page 40
- Attributes of digital media page 43
  
- Opportunities to digitize banking  page 44
 
- Minimum requirements for achieving acceptance of a digital product page 47
  
- Access, use and notifications of financial digital services according to the sociodemographic profile  page 50
  
- Strategies and recommendations  
page 51   
Motivators and barriers for using 
digital transactional channels
 
- Motivators  page 54   
- Barriers  page 54  
- Strategies and 
recommendations page 55   
 
Glossary  page 75  
37
página
52
page
57
pageAcknowledgements
This document was elaborated thanks to the careful work 
of a group of professionals and entities. The different 
focuses, results and, in general, knowledge produced 
constitute the input that will be used to develop the 
goals of this publication.  We express our deep gratitude 
to the Banco de la República, for its significant support 
in defining the strategic approach and research 
methodologies for the rural areas of the country, and for 
providing the data and analysis results it has obtained 
from its Research.  We would also like to express our 
appreciation to ACH Colombia for its characterization 
of the low-income user of digital products and services.  
We would also like to thank the human team and the 
network of collaborators of the USAID’s Rural Finance 
Initiative (RFI) Program, for contributing their technical 
knowledge and wide experience to strengthen the digital 
financial dynamics in the country.  Finally, we are also 
grateful with Yanhaas, MSI-EVAL, the Universidad del 
Tolima and the research team for the technical studies 
conducted in different municipalities of the country.Illustration 1.  General data of studies 
conducted  Page 15
Illustration 2.  Sociodemographic 
characteristics of populations under study   Page 16
Table 1. Productive Characteristics of populations under study  Page 17 
Illustration 3.  Compared percentages 
of savings and credit in rural populations  Page 22
Illustration 4.  Reasons why people do 
not have any savings accounts and main destination of credits granted to rural households  Page 22
Illustration 5.  Channels most 
frequently used for making payments in rural areas  Page 26
Illustration 6.  Reasons for using certain 
channels  Page 27
Illustration 7.  Adjustment zones for 
the socialization of financial products  Page 28
Illustration 8.  Time and distance ratio 
of access points of financial entities in rural areas  Page 30
Illustration 9. Barriers to the use of 
online transactions  Page 31
Illustration 10.  Opportunities in online 
transactions  Page 33Illustration 11.  Perception of fraud risk 
when using internet or cellular phones to make payments or fund transfers versus trust in social media for making payments and fund transfers  Page 34
Illustration 12.  Channels for sending 
and receiving money, and reasons for using or not using internet  Page 35
Illustration 13.  Means of access and 
uses of internet by banked clients in rural municipalities  Page 38
Illustration 14.  Uses of social media in 
rural municipalities  Page 39
Illustration 15.  Financial services that 
can be provided through social media  Page 39
Illustration 16.  Behavior of promoters 
and ratio of detractors versus promoters on the use of online transactions  Page 41
Illustration 17.  Reasons why people 
do not make transactions through the internet  Page 41
Illustration 18.  Means for learning 
how to use the tool and reasons for not wanting to do it  Page 42Illustration 19.  Motivations for purchasing financial products online  Page42
Illustration 20. Attributes of digital 
transaction channels  Page 43
Illustration 21. Motivations for using 
digital financial services  Page 44
Illustration 22. Motivations for using 
social media for transactions  Page 45
Illustration 23. Knowledge and use of 
mobile wallets  Page 46
Illustration 24. Minimum requirements 
for accepting a digital product among 
the banked and unbanked population Page 47
Illustration 25. Preferred method for 
offering and notifying financial services  Page 48
Illustration 26. Percentages of 
acceptance of digital credit, and associated factors  Page 49
Illustration 27. Main credit destinations 
for rural households  Page 53
Tables and 
ilustration listDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia5
5
For the past 15 years, The 
United States Agency for Internatio-
nal Development (USAID) has been 
working jointly with the Govern-
ment of Colombia and the financial 
sector to improve the access that the 
country’s most vulnerable population 
has to financial services.  This is an 
indispensable effort if we are to build 
a more stable Colombia, with peace 
and economic opportunities for all.
In 2015, we started to imple-
ment a new phase of this collabo-ration and launched an Alliance to 
promote financial services in rural 
areas, consisting of a technical as -
sistance program, the Rural Finance Initiative, to support and accompany 
those financial entities that were be 
interested in expanding and impro-
ving the financial services that they offered in 197 rural municipalities, 
many of which were affected by the 
conflict.  We complemented this 
program with a program of financial 
guarantees denominated the Develo-
pment Credit Authority (DCA), with 
which we would share the financial 
risk of offering productive credits in 
these municipalities.
Today I can tell you that we 
never imagined the great acceptance that this alliance was going to have 
among Colombian financial entities.  
We have allied with 17 local financial 
entities and with 10 other non-fi-nancial entities to increase the access 
to these services in the municipa -
lities.  We have provided financial guarantees to 15 of these partners 
to back-up a total of $328 million of 
productive credits in the most rural 
areas of the country.
To date, the Alliance, through 
our financial partners, has mobilized 
more than $704 million in financial services to more than 521,000 clients, 
49% of them women, and many of 
them having approached the finan-
cial system for the first time thanks 
to this initiative.  These 521,000 
clients represent 521,000 micro, small 
and medium-sized companies that 
are contributing to the economic 
development of their regions, to the 
consolidation of new opportunities 
for themselves and their families, and, above all, to the creation of 
legal economic alternatives instead 
of belonging to illegal armed groups 
or participating in drug trafficking 
businesses, illegal mining or other 
criminal activities.
We are very proud to have the 
Colombian financial sector as our 
partner and ally in this huge and important effort.  For this reason, I 
would like to take this opportunity to 
thank all of you on behalf of the Uni -
ted States Government for accom-panying us in this important task.Much remains still to be done, 
and you know much better than 
us the challenges that need to be 
overcome to continue advancing in 
the financial inclusion.  We need to 
think innovatively to be able to take 
financial services to the most rural 
and conflict-affected areas.  It is 
necessary to develop more efficient 
and less costly channels for both for 
financial entities and end users. Thus, 
we consider of vital importance the work that many Colombian financial 
entities are implementing to develop 
digital financial ecosystems with less 
use of cash.
Finally, I would like to reitera-
te the commitment that the United 
States Government and USAID have 
to continue promoting financial 
inclusion in the country as a mecha -
nism for improving the economic 
and social conditions of the Colom-
bian population, and to contribute to 
the consolidation of peace.
Lawrence Sacks  
USAID Director for ColombiaUSAID Rural Finance Initiative6
Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia7
Introduction 
Arcenio Daza
Specialist in Digital 
Projects
The characterization of the rural population of Colombia is fundamental 
for the Rural Finance Initiative, which seeks to encourage the design and use 
of digital financial products of its financial allies.  In this context, the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID) funded between 2016 
and 2018, three strategic studies in several rural areas of Colombia:  a) the 
“Rural Financial Inclusion Survey (Southern Tolima)” , b) the “Evaluation of 
the Baseline for the Rural Finance Initiative” applied by MSI – EV AL, and c) 
the “Low-Cost Online Transactions” Study.  Although diverse, their objectives 
are aligned in a central one: to determine the characteristics, conditions and 
financial habits of the inhabitants of the country´s rural areas; and, in terms of 
their sociodemographic profile, to study the financial products and services, 
and determine their money management behaviors and habits and their rela -
tionship with the digital transactional channels that are available today.
The qualitative and quantitative findings of each one of the studies men -
tioned above have been included this document, as well as statistical models, 
the number of people who have responded to them (Br) and group sociode-
mographic variables to locate trends in the use of technology and the internet.
Dairo Estrada
President of FinagroAsdrúbal  
Negrete Lebette 
Chief of Party
USAID Rural Finance Initiative8
The priority of USAID’s Rural Finance Initiative (RFI) is to explore and 
promote new operating models that will enable Colombian financial entities 
increase the number of clients attended in rural areas of the country.  The Pro-
gram understands the importance of knowing and using developments made 
in the digital world, in a scenario involving the internet, communications, 
as well as hard and soft technologies, which will help to build or strengthen 
financial solutions for rural clients.
The big challenge is inclusion: It will not be enough to provide a digital 
credit, an electronic account or an electronic wallet to a client of a rural area if 
after doing so, the client must look for the nearest location to make his/her de -
posits or cash withdrawals day by day.  Therefore, we took on the task of gene-
rating integrated solutions that support our clients in different aspects of their 
daily life, and it is there where collaborative work between agents will make 
it possible to develop strategies that respond to the different requirements of 
rural populations in the country.  Our focus must be the client, and that is why 
we need to understand their daily life cycle and adjust to their needs.
In this context, RFI has been promoting digital products or solutions 
from several of our financial allies, which have now experience in the opera -
tion of digital productive credit models, which are aimed at the the dispersed 
rural sector and had more than a 30% level of acceptance during the first three 
months that they were offered, all of them supported by a clear strategy of 
financial education and effective communication.  Our allies recognize that 
the process of turning traditional users into users of digital channels requires 
the creation of a comprehensive digital culture inside the institution and the 
provision of very close accompaniment to clients in order to transmit educa-
tion, safety and quality on the service provided through digital channels and 
products.
Financial entities that wish to take advantage of this digital environ-
ment and use it for providing inclusive financial services, will face multiple challenges.  One challenge is to be able to develop scalable and sustainable 
digital products that meet the security and protection standards of client data.  
Another challenge is to be able to implement financial education models that 
generate transformation in those clients who are not familiar with digital tran-
sactional channels, but who will surely take advantage of them and mitigate 
the risks that they perceive by using the products and services available there.
Asdrúbal Negrete Lebette 
Chief of Party  
Rural Finance InitiativeDigital Financial Services: 
an Opportunity to Impact 
Poverty in ColombiaDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia9
The Government of Colombia 
is committed to digital development 
and with regulatory entities that are 
ready to promote fair and dynamic 
scenarios to address the country’s 
needs.  Thus, USAID will continue 
increasing its support for the public 
and private sectors, in order to achie -
ve results that will continue to fight, in the long run, against the poverty 
and inequality that affect the most 
forgotten regions of the country.
Likewise, USAID also remains 
committed to promoting financial inclusion for vulnerable populations 
and recognizes the disruptive effect 
that the digital world has had on 
financial services.  Consequently, 
USAID has supported initiatives in 
many countries that seek to impact 
the lives of the poorest people, always 
maintaining a responsible and safe treatment of client data.  A responsi -
ble data treatment is a primary issue in the process of digitizing financial 
services and invites us to guarantee 
responsibly that the private infor -
mation that we share with the client cannot be known or accessed by 
someone else.  
At the same time, the establi -
shment of collaborative work that promotes the development of fair bu-
sinesses, combining efforts, will make it possible to provide comprehensive 
solutions that generate positive chan-
ges in the lives of people and their 
families.  Therefore, we are convinced 
that financial interoperability will 
make it possible to cover many more 
regions of the country in an effi-
cient manner.  The study presented 
here is focused on this goal:  it is an 
initial input and a starting point for 
understanding the digital Colombian user and showing some elements that 
must be taken into account when un -
dertaking any process for digitizing financial services.
RFI will continue to promote 
digital solutions that meet industry 
standards, which should include:
1. A user-centered design.
2. Understanding of the current 
ecosystem of users: how they 
relate and operate.
3. The design of solutions for 
achieving economies of scale and 
massification.
4. Development of sustainable 
models.5. Data available for data-driven decision-making. 
6. Digital development with 
an open focus that promotes a 
collaborative environment of the 
digital community.
7. Reuse and improvement of 
existing products.
8. Privacy and security: Top prio-
ritization of the care with which data is collected or acquired, and 
how it is used, stored and shared.
9. Collaborative character: Sha -
ring of the information, vision 
and resources of projects, organi -
zations and sectors.
These principles, which are 
used by the industry in the develop-
ment of digital solutions, should be taken into account by all those actors 
in the country that are interested in 
developing inclusive models that 
impact the lives of the poorest people 
and are aligned with international 
principles.
Picture:  Courtesy Banca de las OportunidadesUSAID Rural Finance Initiative10
Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia11
Technology alone is not 
enough to boost financial 
inclusion
The future of financial inclusion is directly related to the poten-
tial that digital technology has to break down the barriers of 
access and use that the traditionally-excluded population has 
had to use financial products. The digitization of financial ser -
vices not only helps to reduce obstacles related to dispersion or geographical 
location, but also those related to the absence of credit history or information 
and to the high fixed costs of supply that are extended to consumers.
According to a calculation made by McKinsey & Company (2016), pre-
sented in its article titled “How digital finance could boost growth in emerging 
economies” , digital financial services could provide access to 1,600 million unbanked individuals; data and fingerprinting, along with new credit risk 
assessment models could increase credit placement by $2.1 trillion, and the 
transition from traditional accounts to digital accounts would allow financial 
service providers to save about $400,000 million per year in direct costs, since 
these they can be reduced 80% to 90%.
As evidenced by the 2018 Financial Inclusion Reports of 2018 Issued 
by the Colombian Financial Superintendence (SFC) and the Banca de Opor -
tunidades (BdO), the Colombian financial system has not been oblivious to 
the transformation of the sector and has seen in it an opportunity to further 
improve both bank penetration (bancarization) indicators (81.3% of the adult population has at least one formal financial product) and usage indicators 
(40% of the savings accounts are active and 79.2% of the adults have at least 
one active product).
The latter data certainly defines one of our greatest challenges.  For this 
reason, important efforts have been made during the past years to enable the 
digitization and disruption of financial services.  On the one hand, the Finan-cial Superintendence (SFC) and the Financial Regulations Unit (URF) have 
been working for the past ten years on regulatory and normative initiatives for 
more than 10 years and, on the other hand, both the Banca de Oportunidades 
(BdO) Program and the Social Prosperity Department (DPS) have supported 
directly both the supply and demand to bring people closer to technology.  
Likewise, the entities that make up the financial sector have created solutions 
based on innovative and disruptive business models.
From the Government, the regulator and supervisor have been adjusting 
the regulatory framework in accordance with financial inclusion strategies and, in particular, with digitization trends.  One of the most significant chan-
Mariana Escobar Uribe*
* Superintendent’s Office  
Financial of Colombia.USAID Rural Finance Initiative12
ges occurred in 2006, when the con-
cept of bank correspondents (131,614 
currently) emerged, which allowed 
financial entities to expand their 
coverage, reaching municipalities 
where they had not previously been 
present, and thus improving access 
opportunities for users in located in 
the most remote areas.  Another im -
portant regulatory milestone for the transformation process of the sector 
was the approval of the Law 1735 of 2004, or the Financial Inclusion Law, 
which created a simplified license 
for enabling new clients to enter the 
market as Corporations Specialized 
in Deposits and Electronic Payments 
(SEDPE).  The objective of this legis -
lative project was to increase compe-tition in the transactional business 
by allowing other actors to enter into 
this market (with reasonable requi-
rements that are fewer than those re-quired by other providers of financial 
services) in order to compete in it.  
To date, the SFC reports five entities 
with a permit to provide this service.
Projects mentioned above 
play undoubtedly a key role in the 
transformation of the sector.  Howe-
ver, there are two initiatives that I 
believe have the greatest impact in the digitization of the sector.  The 
first one relates to the legislative pro-
posals that made it possible to create 
special savings accounts and electro-
nic deposits that simplify greatly the 
formalities for opening them.  This 
way, entities can offer 100% digital 
products that can be opened remote-
ly and without any friction.
The second one is the creation 
of the Sandbox by the Financial Superintendence.  The Sandbox is 
created within the framework of the Innovasfc Strategy, whose objective 
is to “promote, investigate, facilitate and accompany innovation [...] in 
order to ensure that it is adopted in a sustainable and responsible manner. ”  
Through this initiative, several enti-
ties, under the guidance of Fintechs , 
will be able to test in a controlled en -
vironment and in real time, products, 
technologies or business models that 
support financial inclusion and con-
sumer protection objectives.
The Social Inclusion Sector, 
led by the DPS, has also developed several experiences that are worth 
highlighting.  One of them is the 
adoption of banking products by 
the participants of the Más Familias 
en Acción Program, using electro-
nic deposits, specifically Davipla -
ta, a strategy that has promoted 
the opening of approximately one 
million deposits
1  and improved the 
conditions that have facilitated the 
development of the financial market 
at the lowest income levels.  These 
electronic deposits have had a signi -
ficant impact on the reported figures of this product and on the country’s financial inclusion indicators.
But, if we have done so much, 
why is the use of banking products 
still low?  Why are there still people 
without any access to banking pro-
ducts, especially in rural areas? Is it 
1 Calculation made by the entity itself, based on 
figures and reports issued by the DPS.possible for the new business models 
and non-traditional players of the 
financial services industry to promote 
the efforts made by financial inclu-
sion projects?
What is certain is that, despite 
all these efforts, we have not figured 
out how to accelerate the adoption 
and use of digital financial services 
that contribute to generating well-be-ing and improving the quality of life 
of the people.  The lack of trust in the 
sector, poor client experience/treat-
ment and the notion that technology 
is sufficient to achieve greater inclu-
sion, in my opinion, do not allow us 
to find sustainable solutions to fulfill 
the promise of greater inclusion in 
Colombia.  In this aspect, I believe 
that both the State and the private 
sector should explore in greater depth, how to build and regain the 
trust of current and potential clients 
in the financial system.  One of the 
pillars for achieving this purpose 
is based on consumer protection 
mechanisms .  Allowing people to 
express their concerns and access 
instances designed to protect against 
inappropriate practices builds trust 
in the formal financial system.  Even 
though Colombia has a special law regime for the protection of finan-
cial consumers (Law 1328 of 2009), 
which is focused on recognizing and 
reducing economic, educational and 
reporting differences, among others, 
as well as on strengthening the proce-
dures established for attending their 
complaints, requests and complaint 
(the so-called Financial Consumer 
Service System (SAC), the system 
must certainly be updated to respond to the agile and simple characteristics 
of the new financial products and 
services.
We must also internalize 
the client empowerment concept, 
which gives greater responsibility to Allowing people 
to express their concerns and access instances designed to protect them against inappropriate practices builds trust in the formal financial system.Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia13
financial entities so that the choice 
of their clients and the use of finan-
cial services are more relevant to the 
client needs.  In this regard, I believe 
that there are three actions on which 
financial entities should focus, and in 
which non-traditional players such as 
Fintechs  are more advanced:
a) Improve the client experience, identifying the friction points in 
the relationship with the client.
b) Provide tools that clients can 
use to “learn by doing” , using in -
novative mechanisms and taking advantage of technology.
c) Improve opportunities of 
engagement or relationship, going 
beyond complaints.
Finally, the relationship and 
personal contact with the client must be maintained at the center of any di -
gital business model in order to make it inclusive.  In this regard, there is 
an opportunity in the alliances made 
between new players or Fintechs  and 
entities specialized in microfinance.  On the one hand, Fintechs provides 
more agile and lower-cost solutions, but cannot not necessarily focus di -
rectly on financial inclusion because they do not know the population and 
do not have the necessary resour -
ces to approach, test and promote 
products with among populations 
that are excluded from the financial 
system.  On the other hand, microfi-
nance institutions do not always have 
the resources to develop in-house 
technological innovations, but they 
do have all the necessary knowledge, 
experience and vocation to efficient-
ly address efficiently the challenges of digital banking.  These entities are willing to provide the necessary accompaniment to empower clients 
in the use of technology, know how 
to design inclusive products, and 
have voluntary consumer protection 
standards that are becoming more 
relevant today, in a world that is 
devoted to digital technologies.Picture:  Rural Financial InitiativeUSAID Rural Finance Initiative14
Base
Surv eysRur al Financial Inclusion Survey
Southern Tolima (2016)
Corozal: 303
Uribe: 302
Villa Rica: 301Cartagena del Chairá: 304Arboletes: 309
El Cerrito: 303
El Santuario: 321
San Martín :302
Trinidad: 300Paz de Ariporo:302Low -cost online transactions (2018)Base Line Ev aluation.
Rur al Finance Initiative (2017)
Sociodemographic variables common to the RURALITY contextImpact assessment for measuring changes
in ﬁnancial services with respect to their:
1)E/g499 ﬁciency, e/g499 fectiveness and quality.2)Access of  rural and vulnerable populations.
3)Costs of ﬁnancial services.
4)Underlying va riables that in /g501luence
. the impact of RFIFocused on ﬁnancial transactions . It aims to
identify barriers and moti vators that exist
for using technology in ﬁnancial transactions.
Special Co nditions: Persons who ma ke
at least 2 ﬁnancial transactions per month.600 su rveys conducted in the
municipalities of Caucasia, Miranda and S aldaña.Alliance between the Banco de la República,
USAID and the Universidad de Ibagué
Rioblanco : 80
: 162
: 162Ataco
Planadas
Demand, access and use ofﬁnancial services.
Formal and in formal savings and credit.
Question
Question/c252
/c2523.047
Respondents
56
RespondentsRepresen ta/g415v e
404Sample
Illustra tion No. 1:
General da ta from studies co nductedNote:For more  details on the da ta sheets, see th e
prelimina ry sectio n of this document.The Context of The 
Rural Population of 
Colombia
To achieve the objective of 
increasing each time the 
number of people in rural areas that become active 
users of financial entities, it is neces -
sary that these institutions design strategies that are adapted to their 
socio-economic and cultural charac -
teristics.  The first task required to 
stimulate the banking market is to 
get to know the financial behaviors of the population located in the rural territories of Colombia, especially 
in relation to savings and credit, and 
financial inclusion.  Aspects such as 
the promotion of bank penetration 
(bancarization), the expansion of 
the portfolio of goods and services, 
financial education, the simplifica -
tion of formalities and requirements, and, in general, the synchronization of financial entities with the profiles 
and practices of target clients, must 
be taken into consideration to be able to promote the effective development 
of financial intermediaries in other 
business areas.
In order to contextualize the beha -
viors of financial consumers, the 
technical sheets of the methodology 
used for the collection of data are established as a precedent, which are 
as follows:Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia15
Base
Surv eysRur al Financial Inclusion Survey
Southern Tolima (2016)
Corozal: 303
Uribe: 302
Villa Rica: 301Cartagena del Chairá: 304Arboletes: 309
El Cerrito: 303
El Santuario: 321
San Martín :302
Trinidad: 300Paz de Ariporo:302Low -cost online transactions (2018)Base Line Ev aluation.
Rur al Finance Initiative (2017)
Sociodemographic variables common to the RURALITY contextImpact assessment for measuring changesin ﬁnancial services with respect to their:
1)E/g499 ﬁciency, e/g499 fectiveness and quality.2)Access of  rural and vulnerable populations.
3)Costs of ﬁnancial services.
4)Underlying va riables that in /g501luence
. the impact of RFIFocused on ﬁnancial transactions . It aims to
identify barriers and moti vators that exist
for using technology in ﬁnancial transactions.
Special Co nditions: Persons who ma ke
at least 2 ﬁnancial transactions per month.600 su rveys conducted in the
municipalities of Caucasia, Miranda and S aldaña.Alliance between the Banco de la República,
USAID and the Universidad de Ibagué
Rioblanco : 80
: 162
: 162Ataco
Planadas
Demand, access and use ofﬁnancial services.
Formal and in formal savings and credit.
Question
Question/c252
/c2523.047
Respondents
56
RespondentsRepresen ta/g415v e
404Sample
Illustra tion No. 1:
General da ta from studies co nductedNote:For more  details on the da ta sheets, see th e
prelimina ry sectio n of this document.A Preliminary 
Methodological 
Clarification
The Rural Finance Inclusion 
(RFI) Survey, the MSI-EV AL Baseline 
Study, and the Study on Low-cost Online Transactions mostly have ca -
tegorical variables, which in statistics 
are variables with a generally fixed number of values for a qualitative 
characteristic.  In the three surveys 
there is a large number of categorical 
variables, and therefore a multidi -
mensional statistical analysis was 
conducted of such variables.  In this 
case, due to the nature of the data, the most appropriate thing to do was to propose a multiple corresponden-
ce analysis (ACM), a data analysis 
technique for nominal categorical data, used to reduce dimensionality 
and identify relationships between 
variables or groups of variables.  This 
is done by representing the data as 
points in a smaller dimension, usua-lly represented in two-dimensional 
plans in which, when two or more 
variables are close to each other in 
the plan, it indicates the existence of 
a relationship between those varia -
bles (see the Technical Annex).
The bases mentioned above 
were compared with respect to those relevant sociodemographic charac -
teristics, but without joining them, 
because each of them used a different 
sampling method, size and approach.  
However, each of them gives us com-
plementary visions of the financial 
market in terms of the supply and 
demand of financial services, and 
the digital opportunities of the target 
population (Illustration No. 1).• For the Southern Tolima RFI 
Survey, the execution of a Multiple 
Correspondence Analysis (MCA) 
of variables related to credits, 
savings and digital media varia -
bles, as well as sociodemographic variables is proposed, which will 
help to identify profiles of poten-
tial clients.  The sociodemographic 
variables included for the analysis 
are Age, Gender, Highest Educa-
tional Level Reached, Stratum and Occupation. With respect to the 
multiple correspondence analysis 
for MSI- EV AL, the use of pre-
viously created variables related to 
credit and savings as well as socio-
demographic variables that help 
to identify profiles of potential 
clients, is proposed. The sociode-
mographic variables included for 
the analysis are Gender, Education 
Level, Stratum, Ethnic Group, and Civil Status.USAID Rural Finance Initiative16
• For the Y anhaas survey, the 
use of previously created variables 
related to digital media as well as 
sociodemographic variables that 
help to identify profiles of po-
tential clients, is proposed.   The 
sociodemographic variables in -
cluded for the analysis are Gender, Education Level, Stratum, Age, 
and Occupation.
General Data Obtained 
from Studies
The characteristics validated 
through the results of the studies are 
common statistically in most of the sociodemographic variables, which 
allows a comparison to be made of the collected information.  Thus, as 
shown in Illustration No. 2, there 
are coincidences between the target 
population of the surveys in terms 
of gender, age, educational level and 
socio-economic stratum.  Note that 
most of the population surveyed was constituted by males between 26 and 
55 years old that belonged to the 
socioeconomic strata 1 and 2. 
On the other hand, there are 
differences in the variables such as 
occupation and access to the internet 
at home.  The latter can be explained due to the focus of the surveys or to 
the specific conditions of the surve-yed population.  For example, the 
2016 Baseline Survey has a significant 
percentage of vulnerable population 
(44% of the population is constituted 
by displaced persons or victims of the 
armed conflict).  Likewise, the Low-
Cost Online Transactions Survey 
conducted in 2018 considered only 
individuals who conducted at least 
two transactions per month.
Comparisons and contrasts 
of the studies were made based on relevant sociodemographic characte-
ristics and using crossed categorical 
variables, but without joining them 
because different sampling methods, 
approaches, objectives and sample 
sizes were used (see the Technical 
Annex).  However, as will be seen 
throughout this document, each of these studies serves as a complemen-
tary analysis of the rural financial 
market in terms of the supply and de-
mand of financial services, as well as 
with respect to the digital opportuni -
ties and behaviors of the population. The crossing of coinciding variables 
and data certainly contributes to the 
findings and conclusions being extra -
polated to similar populations.Then, in order to evidence 
other common characteristics found in the municipalities surveyed, infor -
mation obtained from the National Agricultural Census, which was 
carried out in 2014 by the National 
Administrative Department of Sta-
tistics (DANE) in 2014, is organized 
in Table No. 1.  The table shows the 
agricultural production units (UPAs), 
non-agricultural production units 
(UPNAs), economic vocation, num-
ber of producers and the possession of machinery in the municipalities.  
Note the agricultural and livestock 
orientation of the municipalities (ex -
cept in El Cerrito, where only 44% of the UPAs correspond to agricultural 
activities), as well as those municipa -
lities that have the largest number of resident producers: Rioblanco, Ataco, 
Cartagena del Chairá, Planadas, Paz 
de Ariporo and Arboletes.  Likewi -
se, this characterization allows to 
identify the surveyed municipalities 
as municipalities that belong to rural 
areas.  It can also be deducted that 
the populations that were studied in 
the three surveys have similar pro-
ductive characteristics, as reflected in 
the percentages and preponderance 
of UPAs.
55%68,80%89%94%
72%91%
50,50%59,76%79%81,50%
37,52%83,95%
46,50%67,10%72,50%90,50%
73,20%
46,50%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Man 26-55 ye ars old Prima ry school and
High schoolStratum 1 and 2W orks Does not ha ve internet
service in his homeSouthern Tolima Baseline Digital Su rvey
Illustra tion No. 2:Sociodemographic Characteristics of the po pula tions thatare under stud yDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia17
Mu nicipality
Arboletes
Caucasia
El Santuario
Cartagena del Chairá
Miranda
Villa Rica
San Ma rtín
Uribe
Corozal
Ataco
Planadas
Rioblanco
Saldaña
El C errito
Paz de Aripo ro
TrinidadUPA
74%
90%
79%
96%73%
62%
88%
98%
80%
89%
94%
88%64%
44%
75%
81%Preponderance
Livestock
Livestock
Livestock
None
Agricultu ral
Agricultu ral
Livestock
None
Livestock
Agricultu ral
Agricultu ral
Agricultu ral
Livestock
Agricultu ral
Livestock
Agricultu ralResident
Producers
1.072
398
420
2.162
657
99
194
942
123
2.689
2.015
2.812
72
445
1.507
773UPNA
Services
Services
Services
Trade and services
Trade and services
Transformation of  agricultu ral
products and services
Services
Trade
Trade and services
Transformation of  agricultu ral
products and services
Trade and services
Trade and services
Services
Services
Trade and services
Industry and servicesAccess to
Machiner y
10%
27%
7%
76%
13%
2%
32%
48%
6%
28%
36%
45%
1%
19%
32%
53%Antioquia
Antioquia
Antioquia
Caquetá
Cauca
Cauca
Cesar
Meta
Sucre
Tolima
Tolima
TolimaTolima
Valle del Cauca
Casana re
Casana reDepartment
Source: National Statistics Department (DANE), “National Agricultural Census - 2014”Table 1.
Productive characteriza tion of the po pula tions thatare under stud y.
Prod uctive
Charac terization
of the P opulations
that are
Under Stu dySome 
characteristics of 
the rural population
Family  
Characteristics
Personal 
characteristics
Gender roles remain in place 
in rural areas: Men provide the money and women are engaged in home activities and childcare.
Men are defined as 
“handymen” and “ jacks-of-all-trades” . Their objective for working is to earn resources.   During the execution of the Low-Cost Online Transactions Study, the inha -
bitants of Caucasia, Miranda and Saldaña were asked about their behavior with respect to the digital financial services offered.  From a qualitative perspective, several adjustment areas were found in the family, social, aca-demic and social dimensions.  Important information was collected using the focus group technique, especially qualitative information, which finan-cial entities can take into account when implementing their market strate -
gies in rural areas of the country.
People aged between 26 and 40 years old “live for today” .  Their life 
projects for the present supersedes those of the future. Their biggest concerns are associated with their debts and achieving economic sustainability.  Their work is their source of sustainability.
The goals of individuals aged 
between 18 and 40 years old are geared towards the achievement of stability and economic well-
being. Many are focused primarily 
on obtaining facilities in 
life that will enable them 
to continue to produce (for 
example, acquiring a good or 
service).
Many became parents too 
quickly, and this has created 
barriers in the achievement 
of their medium- and long-
term projects.
The well-being of the family supersedes the well-being of the individual. This can lead to the 
postponement or abandonment of personal goals and dreams. 
People aged between 26 and 40 
years old belong to and prioritize 
the nuclear family.
The project of guaranteeing 
the education of the children is always on their outlook, although it is not always materialized effectively in their lives.  
In its own way, each family group 
structures a “strategic” project to achieve its goals of the family unit and of each of its 
members.
The young people that cons -
titute a family group acquire 
economic responsibilities at a 
very young age.
There is a lot of closeness 
between the nuclear and the extended family (they share the same space or live in surrounding houses).
People aged between 18 and 
26 years old are the closest to technology and the most attracted to its use. 
USAID Rural Finance Initiative
18
18
Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia19
19
Academic and Job  
Characteristics
People aged between 18 
and 40 years old are highly recursive to remain active at work (many do so from an early age).
Work is prioritized over 
academic activities. In the younger segment of the rural population, job opportunities define academic orientations. 
The option to migrate to major 
cities for better work options is always present in the lives of young people.
When there are no universities 
or technical career institutions in the municipality, the young people study in nearby towns.  The geographical location is a fundamental factor undertaking studies.
People tend to become 
entrenched in the municipality when there are more formal job opportunities (for example, those offered by industries and large companies).To study is a social aspiration that is not easy to bring to reality.  Since it does not 
generate productivity on a short-term, it is often not achieved. 
Many people work sporadically 
and in informal jobs to obtain an extra economic income.
Jobs do not offer stability.  For that reason, the “rebusque”
1  
leads them to work in different informal and independent activities. 
When they turn 40 years old, 
it becomes more difficult to be hired.  However , the people 
who exceed this age have the greatest stability.
Many are afraid of getting into 
debt but recognize that they need it for living today. 
The aspirational lifestyle is 
materialized in small material 
personal or family acquisitions.
1 A common coping practice in Colombia where people go out everyday willing to do anything in order to “pull themselves up by the bootstraps”, but uncertain of their prospects.They have annual economic cycles focused on two main expenses: the children´s entry to school and Christmas.  Every year , a new cycle is opened up in the family economy.
Vacations constitute an ever-
present economic challenge.  A specific amount is allocated for this purpose, which is easier to do in the middle of the year . In spite of this, having entertainment implies having expenses and not receiving an income.  For this reason, plans at home prevail during this time.
Formal job opportunities 
are limited.  Sugar and textile industries offer job opportunities seasonally.USAID Rural Finance Initiative20
20
 
Social Characteristics
There are multiple meeting 
places where people are more willing and have more time to receive financial information.
Parks or places with amuse-
ment parks are used by people from all ages.  Commercial pre-mises, shopping malls, cinema squares and youth centers are mostly visited by the youngest people.
Meeting places offer opportu-
nities for introducing the brand directly to potential users.
In rural areas there is a greater 
number of socialization points with a positive connotation by the people.Places such as the library, sports centers, football fields, culture centers and Community Action Boards are important for everyday life with children.  They bring together entertainment and learning, the public and the private.
Places like the Church, the
main avenue, the shop near the park, youth centers, bank banking institutions, town squares and parks are seen as places with a wide offer of cultural, recreational and leisure offers.  
The radio station of the town is 
important for any age range.  It is even more important than the television.   The local newspaper accessed through Facebook is very important for persons ranging between 18 and 40 years old.  It is also a social media used for becoming informed small events or “gossip”.
Megaphones allow to reach 
out to the more isolated rural settlements. 
Bulletin boards located near the 
Mayor’s Office and billboards located in front or near large companies or attract the attention of the people and generate impact.
WhatsApp has been consolida-ting as a new mode of communi-cation, even among adults, due to 
its easy operation and options for sending multimedia contents.
Picture:  Rural Financial InitiativeDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia21
Financial behaviors 
in rural areas of the 
country: 
possibilities and challenges with  
regard to savings and credit
Analyzing the financial behavior and beliefs that inhabitants of rural territories have about 
banks, cooperatives and other entities and intermediaries of the financial sector is an 
unavoidable task that must be undertaken to promote or strengthen products and services 
of this kind.  In this chapter we will point out some financial behaviors that prevail in the rural areas of the country with respect to credits, savings and financial services in general, and will set out some strategies derived from them.   Colombian financial intermediaries 
have gradually opted for new markets and channels, at the same time that users in rural 
areas progressively transform their habits and learn renewed ways to trade their money or 
use transactional services.
Favoring goals oriented 
towards stability and 
economic well-being or 
living for today are practices 
that have a direct repercussion impact on people’s finances.  In 
the case of some people that were 
observed, it was noted that they do 
not plan their future on a long term, 
although somehow it is never out 
of sight.  This behavior is especially 
evident in people aged between 26 and 40 years of age or in those who are part of a nuclear family. Although there are multiple circumstances 
that force its inhabitants to live 
for “today” , a careful projection of 
finances never ceases since only 
in this way it is possible to achieve 
personal and, above all, family goals 
(owning a house, creating a business, 
buying machinery, etc.).  Savings and 
credit are real options that sometimes 
are not used but are in their radar 
to make possible personal life and family projects.  
Colombian financial intermediaries have gradually opted for new markets and channels, 
at the same time that users in rural areas progressively transform their habits and learn renewed ways to trade their money or use transactional services.USAID Rural Finance Initiative22
22,3% Save s
Has a savings
account
Has obtained
a credit42%
60%15,5%
26%
29%
,0% 10,0% 20,0% 30,0% 40,0% ,0% 10,0% 20,0% 30,0% 40,0% 50,0% 60,0% 70,0%
Southern Tolima USAID Baseline
Illustra tion No. 3:Compared percentages of savings and credit in rural po pula tionsSavings and CreditIllustration No. 3 shows some 
savings and credit characteristics 
of the populations listed in it.  Note 
that, in relation to the Study of 
Southern Tolima, only 22.3% save, 
while in the study denominated  
“ Evaluation of the Baseline for RFI” , 
conducted by USAID in 2017, this 
percentage is 15.5%.  In the case of 
Southern Tolima, half of those who 
save do so in savings accounts.  For 
the baseline of USAID, this percen-tage amounts only to 26%.
It can also be noted that in the 
population surveyed in Southern 
Tolima, 60% have had a credit, 
while in the USAID baseline survey 
the percentage is 29.3%.  These important variations are due to 
population characteristics since this 
last study was focused on a popula-
tion with a significant vulnerability 
index.  In the study denominated 
“Evaluation of the Baseline for RFI” , 
conducted by USAID in 2017, one 
of the key questions on savings 
asked the reasons why people did 
not have any savings account with 
a financial entity (it was multiple 
selection question).  Results obtai-ned indicate that the main reason is 
that people do not have any money 
to save, which is followed by the re-
quirements established for opening 
them, preference of other forms of 
savings (such as saving at home or 
in a savings chain, or trading ani -mals), the distance where the insti -
tution is located and the minimum 
balance that is accepted to open 
a savings account.  On the other 
hand, answers to another multiple 
selection question concerning credit 
destinations showed that the main 
destinations of credits were business 
investment, property acquisition 
and the payment of debts, although 
other reasons also were mentioned 
such as for the future and old age, attending emergencies or health 
(Illustration No. 4).
Who is saving?
The Multiple Correspondence 
Analysis Methodology (ACM) shows that the habit of saving in 
financial entities is intimately related 
to people of stratum 1 and 2, and 
those with a high level of education 
(technological, professional and 
postgraduate).  We can infer from 
the latter that education has a direct 
influence on the saving vocation 
and the use of financial services in general.  According with ACM results 
(see Technical Annex), people with 
high educational level have access 
to credit and savings products and use mobile banking applications.  
Logically, there is also a relationship 
between having no savings in a 
financial entity and belonging to 
stratum 1, but it is really surprising 
that the association is established 
between not having formal savings 
and not having completed primary school, high school or technological 
studies.
Somehow, the above could be 
explained by the fact that not com-pleting formal studies reduces the 
chances of having a savings account 
in a financial entity, either due to 
forms and certifications that must be 
submitted or the formalities required 
for opening it.   Consequently, a re-
commended strategy for profiles with 
incomplete education is to omit the Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia23
Source: USAIDI do n't ha ve an y money to sa ve
They ha ve too ma ny requirements
I prefer other forms of saving such
as saving at home or in a savings
chain or trading animals, et c.
The ﬁnancial entity is too far aw ay
The minimum balance they require
is too high79%
34%
23%
21%
13%To invest in a business
To buy other assets
(machinery)
Other
Buy a property
Improve housing
Pay o/g499f debts39%
20%
16%
11%
6%
5%
Illustra tion No. 4.Reas ons wh y pe ople do no thave any savings accounts and main destina tion of credi ts gran ted to rural householdsReasons why people do not ha ve any savings accounts Main destination of credits granted to rural households
presentation of certain documents or 
make channels easier so that people 
with a lower education level can 
access the products and financial 
services. 
Who accesses a formal 
credit?
In general, the results of the 
study conducted in Southern Tolima 
and of the IFR Baseline Evaluation show that people who access a formal 
credit have a complete high school or technological education level; are 
mostly males, are currently working 
or are pensioned. People have short 
and medium-term goals, and therefo-
re credits are often closely related to 
needs that have to be met to develop 
productive activities.  Credit is also conceived as the possibility to de-
velop a business idea that will result 
in the consolidation of important 
life projects in personal and family 
terms.
There is also an association 
between having a bank credit, being 
married, being white, being trained 
for work and having completed primary school.  The profile of the 
people who have never obtained a 
bank credit includes:  being a woman, to be working and studying at the 
same time, not certifying the comple-
tion of full levels of education, and, 
of course, not demonstrating enough 
payment capacity or income.  Wo-
men with high school education level 
explain, for example, that the fact of 
not being able to certify their income is the main reason for not accessing 
credit.
A limiting factor that stood out 
in the aforementioned is the high 
cost of the paperwork required (more 
than COP$300,000), because this 
makes people desist from obtaining 
credits.  Consequently, it is worth su-
ggesting that the reduction of credit procedure costs, without neglecting 
the entity’s due diligence, regulations 
and procedures, is an action that 
could possibly be adopted to attract 
new users.   Also, having a lower 
revenue threshold to access a credit 
in compensation for the amount of 
paperwork required, is certainly a 
real opportunity for expanding finan-
cial services among new clients of the 
rural areas of the country.
It is common for individuals to 
be “afraid” of debts but to be recog-nize at the same time the need to 
request credits to live, materialize projects or meet specific needs.  In 
fact, on many occasions, they go turn 
to informal means of financing that 
do not have many pre-requisites.  In 
addition, it is known they have an-
nual economic cycles focused on two 
main expenses: the children’s entry to 
school and Christmas, and this con-firms the preeminence of the family 
over the individual.  Naturally, every 
year a new cycle is opened up in the 
family economy, and it is essential to 
understanding this for establishing 
any banking and banking and loyalty 
strategy for rural populations.
Women cannot 
certify their income, and this is the main reason why they do not access credits.1
2
3
4
5
6
7
USAID Rural Finance Initiative24
Strategies and 
Recommendations
Multiple Correspondence Analysis Methodology (ACM)
Understanding the  
pre-eminence of family over the individual. 
 Individuals 
start saving or apply for a credit to 
support a joint collective project.  
Therefore, the promotion of 
financial products and services 
from the perspective of the family 
development is related directly to 
the real actions and goals of  
the people.
Favoring financial inclusion. 
A much wider spectrum of clients can be consolidated if the inclusion of other people according to their age, gender , economic activity, educational level, etc., is considered.
Generate incentives for  the creation of savings  accounts. 
Giving tangible or 
intangible benefits for the acqui-sition of a service will continue to be an excellent strategy for 
attracting new clients.Education matters, but 
it should not become an obstacle. 
 The association 
between not having savings or credits with a financial entity and not having completed certain educational levels is paradoxical in rural areas, where they have other ways of earning resources.  In many cases, adjusting educational requirements according to the profile of potential users is a way of synchronizing and understanding their socioeconomic and cultural conditions.
Optimizing productive activities through credits.
 
It is known that in rural areas, access to credit is closely related to the development of productive activities that are considered to be essential for a specific family life project.  Therefore, for instance, conceiving a credit as a real option for accelerating a business initiative can result in the capture of new clients. Reducing the income level required for opening an account.  
Allowing savings 
accounts to be opened with less money and lowering transaction costs is starting to be seem to be a profitable and beneficial actions for both financial entities and clients.
Simplify and adjust requirements.
 The socio-
economic and cultural characteristics of the people change.  Therefore, the way to introduce them into the bank industry must also be transformed.  The excess or inability to adjust paperwork, supporting documents and certifications to access a financial service can be detrimental to the capture of new clients.Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia25
Channels and access points 
for approaching financial 
services and generating 
financial inclusion
In recent years, thanks to improvements made in access roads, the 
connectivity and security in rural areas, as well as the recognition of the business potential that exists in them, financial entities and intermediaries have expanded and diversified their channels and access points be able to attend the rural population.  International cooperation and public and private actors are making great efforts today to expand the supply of their products, increase their coverage, capture new clients and promote the dynamization of financial channels.  Bank offices and correspondents, remittance centers (points), payment points and mobile consultants are part of these measures that they are promoting, which are also trying to guarantee a greater financial inclusion of the country’s rural population.  To these channels, which continue to be commonly used by  the people due to the level of trust they generate for carrying out financial transactions, new ways of trading money have been added:  digital banking, mobile banking, light correspondents, etc., which have become key factors for achieving full coverage of financial services in Colombia.Picture:  Rural Financial InitiativeUSAID Rural Finance Initiative26
Channels and access 
pointsStudies conducted by 
USAID to determine 
the characteristics of the 
user of financial services 
in rural areas have revealed that 80% of the population of the Colombian 
countryside uses the remittance centers for making their financial transactions, showing no major diffe-
rences between the banked and un-banked population.  Likewise, 32.6% 
of the banked population informed 
that they make their payments in offi-
ces of financial entities, and 30.6% of 
the unbanked population does this in 
utilities or phone companies.Among the other centers where 
these transactions are made are utili -
ties companies, commercial premises 
and bank correspondents; and with 
a representation, less than 10%, the 
banked population and less than 
2.5% of the unbanked population 
make digital or online transactions 
(Illustration No. 5).
Banked Unbanked
Giro$
Remittance Centers79,6%
31,4%
Utilities/
Phone Co mpa ny
9,7%
Internet page
Bank webpageBanco
Bank O/g499 ﬁce32,6%
Commercial premises13,6%
13,4%
Bank Co rrespondent$
5,5%
Cellular phone
Application
1,7% Mobile Co nsultant
of the ﬁnancial intermedia ryBanc a
móvil
Br. 300Giro$
Remittance Centers83,8%
30,6%
Utilities/ Phone Co mpa ny
2,2%
Internet page
Bank webpageCommercial premises12,1%
10,8%
Bank Co rrespondent$
2,3%
Cellular phoneApplication
0,7% Mobile Co nsultant
of the ﬁnancial intermedia ryBanc a
móvilBanco
Bank O/g499 ﬁce14,2%
Br. 300
Illustra tion No. 5.Channels mos tfrequen tly used fo r making paymen ts in rural areasOV ER INDEX
UNER INDEXDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia27
Based on these figures we can 
conclude that the population conti -
nues to prefer traditional channels, 
such as going to the entity or to a 
physical place to make their transac -
tions.  This can be explained both by the trust that they have in a specific 
entity and the knowledge they have 
about the transactional procedures; 
but extrinsically, it can be explained 
by the fact that by doing the transac -
tions in the access points they can 
socialize with other people.  Reasons 
such as ease, proximity, reliability, 
economy, speed and security clear -
ly affect the choice of a channel or financial service.  Cultural and 
educational behaviors are likewise 
observed, which deserve to be taken 
into account in both for the banked 
and unbanked population (Illustra -
tion No. 6).
The variables presented in Illus-
tration No. 6 correspond to the per -
ceptions of the focus groups, which are deeply engrained 
in the Colombian municipa -
lities studied. In these muni -
cipalities, remittance centers 
are preferred over financial 
entities offices since in the 
in the former, they pointed out, queues are shorter and 
therefore a shorter waiting 
time is guaranteed.  Additio-
nally, interviewees agree that 
at the remittance centers, 
the wired money available 
immediately (compared to 
banks, in which transactions 
made between different 
institutions can take between 
one and three days).  Li -
kewise, interviewees claim 
that another reason for their 
preference is the existence of 
many branches located close 
to each other, and the possi -
bility that there is of paying 
credits, bank obligations and utility bills, which gives them level of trust in these entities.
In spite of the above, remittan-
ce centers have lower costs because 
it costs more to maintain a bank 
account.  Unbanked centers give a 
supporting document for any tran-
sactions made, which can be used 
to submit claims and complaints, 
delegating the responsibility of any error to a third party.  Additionally, 
the fact of asking for an identity card, 
fingerprint and signature for any 
transaction reinforces the feeling of 
tranquility in the face of any potential 
impersonation.  The latter aspects 
are pointed out more by people older 
than 40 years.  This is complemented 
further by the fact that the people 
who attend remittance centers are 
usually known in the community since they share with them in public 
places.Thus, it can be inferred that 
remittance centers give a very positive perception and thus the 
population does not restrict their use 
in any significant way regardless of 
their charges or fees, and even when 
they realize that the higher amount 
of money they transfer, the higher 
fees they have to pay, which makes it 
unfavorable to transfer large amounts 
of money through these centers and 
increases the uncertainty of loss or theft, which should lead them to 
make the transactions in a bank en -
tity.   And they don´t neither restrict their use of these centers in spite of 
flaws in the service and assistance, 
system crashes or restricted specific 
schedules to remove turns.
On the other hand, apart from 
access points, the way in which products and financial services are 
promoted is particularly important 
for their acquisition since people are 
more willing and have more time to receive information 
in scenarios that are in accord 
with their needs and concer -
ns, and according to their age range and sociodemographic 
profile.  For example, the youn-
ger population visit libraries, sports centers, football courts, 
cultural centers and parks with 
children’s attractions.  The 
elderly finds more attracti -
ve a church, a main avenue, the shop near the park or the 
Community Action Board.  In 
in the areas, these contact sites 
become important for addres-
sing financial issues since there 
they usually find entertainment 
and learning, the public and 
the private, have a positive 
connotation as they project a 
“better status” , and additionally 
become comfortable spaces 
located in certain areas (Illus-
tration No. 7).Ease
Proximity
Trustworthiness
Econom y
Speed
Security
The most well-known/
most co mmon
Responsible
There is no other option
Tradition
Good service
Comfort
It is well positioned in the ma rket
56,1%
37,6%
6,9%
6,1%
5,1%
2,5%
1,5%
1,0%
0,8%
0,6%
0,5%
0,5%
0,4%
Illustra tion No. 6.Reas ons for using certain channels.USAID Rural Finance Initiative28
All of these points of contact 
open up possibilities for financial 
intermediaries to identify opportu-
nities to make direct contact with 
current and potential clients, provide 
financial education and raise the 
awareness and provide training on 
the use of new services and conduct 
transactions.  It is also important to 
note that hardly anyone mentioned 
virtual channels in these surveys; In 
other words, there is still very little knowledge and acceptance of virtual financial channels.  They need to become fashionable, be used more 
and be recognized as reliable and 
easy-to-use means.  People over 40 
years old are concerned about the po-
tential charges associated with online 
downloads and require support from 
others to make downloads and install 
programs in their mobile cellular 
phones (they usually turn to family 
members and young people for help).  
People over 26 years old knows about the supply of specialized applications (pictures, music, languages).  Howe-ver, they are not used due to their 
charges and data consumption.
Thus, people tend to prefer 
presential channels for financial tran-
sactions (payments, remittances and 
fund transfers).  For this reason, pre-
sential training in offices is a strategy 
pending to be implemented since 
it is a suitable channel for breaking the insecurity barrier against digital 
media and favoring the identification 
and use of the offered services.  
Illustra tion No. 7.Adjustmen tzones fo r the socializa tion offinancial productsDi/g499f erent meeting points are identiﬁed where people a re
more willing and have mor e time to receive in formation,
which turns these spaces into opportunities of direct contact
between the b rand and the target .
Library Sports Center Football courts Culture Center
 Community Actio n
Boar d
/c159It is impo rtant in the da y-to-day activities with
children.   Schools usually encourage a regular visit to it.
/c159It brings enter tainment and learning together, the
public and the privat e.
/c159It has a positive connotatio n–it projects a "better
status".
/c159It is a comfor table space in ve ry high-t emperature
areas (it is fresh and free from insects).
“i stheplacewheretheso/g509 tdrinksshop ,tobaccoshop andcommercial stores arelocated….
Everything happens onthat street ”."The shop where the start si sw here youmeet bef oregoing
dancing ortodosomethingelse tohavefun”…”Thelibraryisnothot andtherearen 'tanymosquitoes”TroncalSaldaña
rumb aPeople over 40
years are very
activeAcross the different age ranges
Places with a wide
cultural,
recreational and
leisure offer
Groups of interest create by social
networks, where meetings, activities and
celebrations are coordinatedChurch Main Avenue Shop Near
the Pa rk
Youth Centers Parks and squares Bank institutions Chat groups
BANCO
Contact P oints
Adjustment AreasDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia29
Illustra tion No. 7.Adjustmen tzones fo r the socializa tion offinancial productsDi/g499f erent meeting points are identiﬁed where people a re
more willing and have mor e time to receive in formation,
which turns these spaces into opportunities of direct contact
between the b rand and the target .
Library Sports Center Football courts Culture Center
 Community Actio n
Boar d
/c159It is impo rtant in the da y-to-day activities with
children.   Schools usually encourage a regular visit to it.
/c159It brings enter tainment and learning together, the
public and the privat e.
/c159It has a positive connotatio n–it projects a "better
status".
/c159It is a comfor table space in ve ry high-t emperature
areas (it is fresh and free from insects).
“i stheplacewheretheso/g509 tdrinksshop ,tobaccoshop andcommercial stores arelocated….
Everything happens onthat street ”."The shop where the start si sw here youmeet bef oregoing
dancing ortodosomethingelse tohavefun”…”Thelibraryisnothot andtherearen 'tanymosquitoes”TroncalSaldaña
rumb aPeople over 40
years are very
activeAcross the different age ranges
Places with a wide
cultural,
recreational and
leisure offer
Groups of interest create by social
networks, where meetings, activities and
celebrations are coordinatedChurch Main Avenue Shop Near
the Pa rk
Youth Centers Parks and squares Bank institutions Chat groups
BANCO
Contact P oints
Adjustment AreasAccess points to financial 
services are represented in offices, 
bank correspondents, remittance 
centers, payment centers and mobile 
consultants, among others.  The 
possibility of paying of credits and 
bank obligations in them represents 
security and ease for making those 
procedures.  However, there are subs -
tantial differences between making a transaction directly in an office of 
a financial intermediary and making 
it, for example, through a mobile consultant or a remittance center, as 
time and distance can be increased or reduced depending on the selected 
channel.  It is also clear that some operations can only be carried out at 
the financial entity’s office.
A key aspect for the develop-
ment of new financial businesses in rural areas is, therefore, to guarantee 
a reduction of time and distance between the user or client and the 
access point arranged by the financial 
entity.  Thus, for example, as shown 
in Illustration No. 8, in the munici -
palities of Southern Tolima, only 8% 
of the respondents take less than 15 minutes to go to a financial entity, while, on average, there is an access point every 31 km.  Similar results 
were found in the municipalities of 
the RFI baseline, where only 29% of 
people take less minutes to go to a 
financial entity, and where there is an 
office every 6 km on average.USAID Rural Finance Initiative30
Digital USAID
Surv eys
98%RFI–SOUTHERN
TOLIMAUSAID
Baseline
8% 29%
Bank o/g499ﬁces an d
correspondents, remittance
and payment centers,
mobile consultant, et c..They ha ve at least one place
to make  payments and cash
remittances at least 15
minutes away .
They include:
31 Km ²It takes less than 15 minutesto go to  the closest ﬁnancial
entity.
The municipalities su rveyed
have on average 1 bank o/g499ﬁce
or correspondent everyIt takes less than 15 minutesto go to  the ﬁnancial entity.
The municipalities su rveyed
have on average 1 bank o/g499ﬁce
or correspondent ever y 6 Km ²
People who take more than 15 minutes to  travel
spend between $20,000 and $30,000 Pesos.
22,5% 20%
Illustra tion No. 8.Time and distance ra tio of access po ints of  financial en tities in rural ar eas
Finally, if it is believed that 
travelling to an access point brings 
additional costs, such as transporta-
tion expenses or the suspension of an 
employment activity, then financial 
entities should continue to streng-
then other transaction channels and 
methods such as mobile consultants, 
new remittance and payment centers, 
and especially virtual transactional 
channels.  In fact, about 20% of 
the people who take more than 15 
minutes to get an access point, spend between $20,000 and $30,000 Pesos.
Trust in digital channels
Among the banked population, 
the financial entity’s office ranks 
second for financial transactions, 
but the use of other channels and 
methods have been growing steadily, 
such as utilities and phone compa -
nies, commercial premises, bank correspondents, internet pages or the bank’s websites.  However, the 
great challenge is the generation of 
trust and financial culture in digi-
tal transactional channels because, 
according to the results of the study 
of low-cost online transactions, only 
9.7% of the population surveyed uses their bank’s website and only 5.5% 
uses their cellular phone application.
The population perceives and 
values the novelty of the payment 
methods and the technological 
advances but their use of the same is 
not foreseen for fear of not knowing 
how to use technology properly.  
Online payments are not foreseen either, which converts the different 
platforms into simple display cases.  
Instead, payments are made through 
tangible means such as remittance 
centers and other premises that issue 
physical receipts that can be used to 
make claims.  Along these lines, risk 
scales are established with regard to the use of digital transactions.  Many respondents pointed out that some 
transactions that are “scarier” than 
others, pointing out that the verifica -
tion of balances and the creation of profiles pose the lowest risk.  There 
are multiple barriers to online tran-sactions.  For example, ignoring how 
to do them, lacking support, not wi -
lling to share financial information, not seeing clearly their benefits or 
fearing insecurity (Illustration No. 9).  
It can then be concluded that many of 
these barriers could be broken down 
through education mechanisms and 
direct communication with banked 
and unbanked users.Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia31
32115“A GUINEA PIG” .
The usage of  the applications is
blurred.
(The banked population).Innovations and new developments ar e
valued.  H oweve r, no one wants to  be
/c159 Perception "THEY ROB ME"
(The unbanked population)./c159 Perception:
"THEY CHARGE ME FOR EVER YTHING”Theb ehavio ro fm anaging money from
"you rown poc ket"iscommon .
The application is used to check the
balance and once the entire money is
withdra wn from the account , the
application "loses its usefulness" (it is
underused).The money that you ha ve in the bank
“leaks” and that duplicates in the
Application since it is part of the bank.Online
Transactions
Usage barriers
NO T KN OW ING HO W
TO USE THEM
Financial entities dev elop the tools but
users express that they do not teach or
communicat e the target user HO W TO
USE THEM ./c159Mo ney management isa sensitive issue
forwhich one cannot get support from just
anyperson(noteven yourownchildren).
/c159They prefer tobe taught by a third part y
instea do fa close relati ve(their own
children). The latter mak evalu e
judgements that become potential
con/g501 licts.
/c159Older people do not consider youn g
people tobe suitable todele gatethem the
management ofmoney orlearnhow
todoit.DIST RU ST TO  SHARE
FINANCIAL INFORM ATION
Those older than 40 years old do not
share information about their econo my
with third parties and not even withtheir o wn families because they f eel that
by doing so , they are " exposed."
I MANIPUL ATE IT MYSELF OR HA VE
DIRE CT CONTROL OF IT .LACK OF SUPPO RT
/c159They feel lonely in the process and that
they do n'thaveanyqualiﬁed perso nto help
them.
Perception
They are good at downloading the application but not at managing one 's
funds …”.M y son knows ho w to handle F acebook and he 's the one who teaches
me, but not so with my  bank account... ".“They are not going to be responsible
with the money of someone; it is not their own mone y.Illustra tion No. 9.Barrier s to the use of
online transacti onsUSAID Rural Finance Initiative32
/c159Having the money deposited in anaccount
This causes clients totake all their
moneyout tomanageitintheirpockets.doesn 'tseem togiveav erytangible
beneﬁt.
/c159TheWeb:Youmustputtheaddress on
theba randthepage canbecloned./c159
(cellular phones) and the websit e
(computer) rein forcefears associated
withthedanger offraud.Di/g499ferences between the APP/c159Inthe participating municipalities ther eis
abank penetration (bancarization) in
paper. People ha vebank accounts but do
not use them. They open them tofulﬁll
andobligation(usuall yfortheirjob).
/c159APP: Itis not certain whether ornot
theAPPisthebank's o/g499ﬁcialpage./c159There arepotential fearssuch as physical
damage du eto the/g509 t (people over4 0y ears
ofage)./c159
(handling, transactions and
discounts).People refuse topayforﬁnancial
services/c159Internet isagood in formatio nand
communication channel but when it
comes tomoney management, trust
fades away .
It's not a game and errors are costly ".
Security tools... a double-edged
weapon.
/c159Sensation of greater exposure tophysical damage from common
crime./c159Generate a sensation o f tranquility .
Dissonant in the process:  Many stepsmake it tedious, less mak e it unsafe .
"They are too lazy to go through so
many steps:  open the app, introduce
the ﬁrst password, introduce the
second password, then put your
ﬁngerprint ”.“I take a screenshot and send it to theother person.  I save a picture just incase…With a receipt I can go and makeany claim, there's the seal and thesignature of the man who receives youthe money".recibió a uno la plata”Placing security measures also increasesindirectly the perception of insecurity.There isn't any message about safety.
/c159Users older than 40 years old a
validation has to be made or aphysical supporting document has tobe issued to dele gate any liability to a
third party in case of any eventuality.It is di/g499 ﬁcult to change from the realto the virtual (screenshot).Financial entities ha ve/g501laws in
communicating about security .  Myths
and beliefs on this matter are notremoved.Online
Transactions
Barriers
It is necessary to clean online transactions from myths and fictional stories
“What if they cut o/g499 f my ﬁnger
for putting the ﬁngerprint on
my cellular phone ".
Illustra tion No. 9.Barrier s to the use of
online transacti onsDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia33
However, important opportu-
nities have been identified to en -
hance are also addressed to promote 
transactional channels:  providing 
pedagogy, modeling successful expe-riences, and supporting autonomous 
or empirical learning, among others 
shown in Illustration No. 10.
The previous panorama re-
garding barriers and opportunities is closely related to the perception 
of fraud when using the internet 
or cellular phones, which is almost 50%.  In fact, about 80% of the people recommend abstaining from making 
virtual money transactions since they 
envisage a high risk of loss or fraud.  
However, “there isn’t either” total 
confidence when it comes to taking 
and bringing large sums from the payment center to the house, and vice 
versa.  In rural areas there is an 87% 
confidence in remittance centers, 
while digital channels only have a 
level of trust of around 30%.  This last aspect that could be remedied throu-
gh the effective use of new financial services and channels.
The case of WhatsApp and 
Face-book is particular because the 
level of trust is significantly redu-
ced.  Only 16% of the people feel safe 
when making transactions through 
these applications.  It is also assumed 
that when the transaction is greater, so will be the collection, which does 
not favor sending large amounts of money through this option.
As stated, the core issue is edu-
cation since, above all, older people do not master easily technological 
aspects involving the use of internet, mobile applications or technological 
devices such as a smartphone; or else take longer to learn and become 
familiar with the digital environment.  
During the interviews, older people 
expressed that they often prefer a 
friend to teach them about techno -Online
Transactions
Opportunities
There are entr y options through the generation
of trust and transparency
Services where there is no
direct or visible link with the
bank are valued.
Failure to pay obligations an d
transactions prevents thelink to the bank to be visible .Pedagogy in the use of
applications is transmittedthrough modeling andsuccessful experiences ofothers (fashionable subject).
Openness to kno wledge occurs
by looking at another person
and seeing success.  Lettingothers know real casesgenerates closeness.
There are no autonomous orempirical learning processeson the acquisition and use of
applications.Ap rocess ofshared andclose
knowledg eisnecessary .
Illustra tion No. 10.
Opportunities in online transacti ons.Picture: Rural Financial Initiati veUSAID Rural Finance Initiative34
logy and not their children because 
they lose patience and can find out about their parents’ financial state-
ments, which parents certainly regard as being private.
The fact that there are digital 
procedures for which people ac -
cept help but there are others for which privacy is required, stands 
out.  Accompaniment is accepted 
for searching and downloading 
fashionable applications, accessing and managing downloaded apps and 
sharing multimedia through social 
networks.  Likewise, monitored ac -companiment is allowed to download financial applications (checking that it is the correct one) and create users 
to access them (except passwords); but accompaniment is not accepted 
for accessing basic information such 
as balances in banking applications 
(handling sensitive and money infor -
mation).
Finally, there are also several 
limitations in making virtual tran-
sactions; some related to financial inclusion itself, such as the fact of not 
having a bank account; and others 
to the preconceptions of insecurity when using the internet and mobile devices.  However, in like manner, there are several opportunities for 
developing this virtual transactional market since sending money mon-
thly and fortnightly, between $50,000 
and $200,000, is quite common 
among the banked and unbanked 
population (Illustration No. 12).
11,6%9,8%22,3%32,0%24,3%
BTB
21,4%MTB
22,3%TTB
56,3%
Very lo w Neither high
nor lowVery high High Low9,5%6,8%
17,1%11,5%
73,4%81,7%Municipalities
BTB
(2+ ) Little trustMTB
(3)TTB
( +4) A lot of  trustMunicipalities
AB
Illustra tion No. 1.1Percep tion of fraud risk when using internet or cell pho nes to make payments or  shipments (A)
vs. trust in social networks to make payments and money transfers (B)Fraud risk perceived when using internet or cell phone
phones to ma ke payments or remittancesTrust in social media
Br. 600Br. 298Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia35
Habits and uses of remi/g404 ances
and the receipt of money
(1) Remittance centers
Reason why they wouldn 't
like to learn ho w to mak e cell
phone transactions.
/c159They do n't have a bank
account.
/c159They do n't think it is useful.
/c159It is not safe to leave data
on the internet .(2) Bank o/g499ﬁcePeople receive and sendmoney to their relatives.
(3) Bank correspondent
Fortnightly:
/c159Banked 9%mak e monthly or biw eekly
money transfers.
47% of the people send
between $50,000 and $200,000Pesos every two weeks:35,7% of the people
From whom would you like to
learn ho w to mak e cellular
phone transactions.
/c159From a bank adviso r/c159Unbanked 17%
/c159From a friend or a relativeHo w they receive their income.
73%
Cash or chequ e
80% of survey
respondents wouldnot recommendinternettransactions .
Incentives:Cost savings,discounts inpurchases, gi/g509 tssuch asor cell phone top-ups.NETFLIX
53% of the
people percei ve
that there is a highor ve ry high risk of
fraud in internet
Illustra tion No. 12.Channels fo r sending and receiving mone y, and reas ons for using or not using internet
/c80
Bank transfer
Picture:  Rural Financial InitiativeUSAID Rural Finance Initiative36
1
2
3
4
5Strategies and Recommendations
Provide education and information at presential access
point. In rural areas, o/g499 ﬁces of ﬁnancial entities generat e more trust an d
are social meeting places.  Therefor e, they are strat egic places for training
as w ell as promoting and pro viding in formation about available services
and ﬁnancial products .
Provide and strengthen other access points. Time and distance
are limiting factors in the bank penetration (bancarization) and inclusion of
ﬁnancial users.  Hence, having di/g499f erent access points opens the way to
strengthen the ﬁnancial mark et in rural areas .
The ad vantages o/g499 fered by the internet and technological devices for the
self-management ofﬁnancial procedures are enormous .  Th e
dissemination of the beneﬁts and possibilities o/g499fered in this ﬁeld is a
constant task of banks, cooperatives and other ﬁnancial entities .  The radio ,
television and digital media themselves are important allies in thiscommunication and promotion ex ercise.Promote the use of digital transactional channels.
Education and technological instruction. The use of technological
devices and applications is a massi ve phenomenon in modern society .
Colombia naturally participates in this dynami c, but a lot of  training an d
promotion of digital channels provided by ﬁnancial entities are still
required
Eradicating myths about internet security. The perception of
insecurity and fraud in the web has to  be fought with real in formation and
permanent accompaniment, resulting in the real use of digital
transactional channels and ser vices.  To  give users greater security, some
entities sell insurance for withdr awals and online transactions, which
guarant ees that in case of the/g509 t or virtual fraud, the entity will be
responsible for the st olen amounts .  These types of strategies must
continue to be promot ed in order to impr ove  security perception.
Source: Focus Gr oupsDigital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia37
Internet and its uses in 
financial transactions
With the digital connectivity of urban and rural areas in Colombia, a new horizon has been opened 
in the supply of financial products and services.  New challenges and opportunities are therefore constituted for intermediaries and financial entities to better integrate into the consumption habits of the Colombian population.  Traditional banking channels coexist today with diverse portfolios and strategies that fit the dynamics of the globalized world and the market, but also to the specific needs of communities.  A specific case is evidenced by the so-called “z”, which uses internet, technological devices, software and applications to connect clients and their financial entities with just one click.
There are multiple aspects that influence whether or not users use a digital channel: their trust in onli-
ne banking services, sociodemographic and economic conditions of the population, internet coverage in the area, knowledge in the use of smart phones and computers, the very myths that circulate regar -
ding the security of such operations, and the information or disinformation that circulates between peers, among others.  This chapter will include data and trends related to the use of the internet and mobile devices and applications as a financial transactional means in rural areas, as well as some strategies that can be implemented today in national financial entities to boost their use, thus facilita-ting their access to many populations that require innovative methodologies and processes in order to enjoy financial products and services.USAID Rural Finance Initiative38
Internet Coverage and 
uses in rural areas of Colombia 
The First Major ICT Survey 
conducted in 2018 by the Ministry of 
Information Technologies and Com-
munications (MinTIC) indicates that 
four out of ten Colombians improved 
their personal well-being through 
the use of the Internet.  However, the 
same survey warns that only 10% of 
the rural population of the country 
has internet in their homes, which is 
the reason why access to this service is made especially through the data plans of smartphones, which entails 
an additional cost for individuals and 
is also contingent on the coverage of 
mobile operators in certain areas of 
the country.
This information coincides with 
the data collected during the study of 
low-cost online transactions, which 
showed that 87.6% of the popula-
tion uses smart cellular phones to access the internet, although most-
ly through prepaid plans.  In fact, 
respondents made statements like:  
“each time there is less internet in 
the house; everything is now done through the cellular phone” .  On the 
other hand, when asked about the 
use of the internet, it was found that 
73.7% of the population claimed to 
use the cellular phone to connect to 
social networks, 60.3% to navigate 
in internet and 52.8% for entertain -
ment, music, videos or games.  Fi -
nancial activities are clearly not listed 
in the first places of usability, and 
only appears with 16.8% for chec -
king balances of savings accounts or 
paying financial services (Illustration 
No. 13).
Means of access (A)
6,%57
Main device through internet is accessed
Cell phone  /
SmartphoneCom puter
(Laptop)Tablet8,%76 11 8,% 06,%Which means do you use to access internet?Yes
Home -ﬁ xed charge
Cell phone - by pre-
paid reﬁlls
Cell Phone - monthly data plan
Public netw ork/free wiﬁ
Internet co /g499fee shop
Home - prepaid reﬁlls5,%35
30,5%
19,9%
16,1%
7,6%
4,3%Main uses (B)
Navigate
Entertainment
(music, videos, gam es)
Email
Check balances or pa y
for ﬁnancial services
Reﬁlls
Shopping
Send money to
a third party
Paying fo r utilities60,3%
52,8%
38,8%
16,8%
12,5%
11,1%
5,3%
1,9%Social media 73,7%
Illustra tion No. 13 Means of access and us es of  internet by banked
clients in rural municipalitiesBr. 600
Br. 354Br. 410Uses
internet
Br. 410Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia39
However, when asked about the 
frequency of use of social networks, 
relevant data was obtained:  82.3% 
dedicate their online time to Face -
book, 79.9% to WhatsApp and the 
remaining percentage to other social 
networks with a lower participation 
as shown illustrated in Illustration 
No. 14.   
Evidently, social networks 
are already part of people’s consumption habits, and the internet is gradually positioning itself as a means of information and entertainment.
Illustra tion No. 14. Uses of  social media in rural municipalitiesWhich social netw ork do you use
with greater frequency?
82,3%
79 9,%
20,4%
4,7%
4,1%
0,8%
Br. 300
This information can be 
useful to the financial sector when 
designing strategies to promote 
their products through these so-
cial networks since only 18.5% of 
respondents affirmed having entered the website of the company with 
which they had a commercial or or transactional relationship.  In this 
scenario, WhatsApp stands out for 
its high relevance, since it is present 
in everyday life, multifunctional and 
has achieved a perception of “greater” usefulness compared to other social 
networks (for example, Facebook).  
Due to its mode of operation, What-
sApp makes it possible to control the 
contacts with which a person wishes 
to establish, as well as characteristics 
like privacy, proximity, trustful-
ness, etc.  Likewise, when inquired whether they would use Facebook or 
WhatsApp to access financial services 
(Illustration No. 15), most preferred 
the latter one and mainly to check 
balances, most preferred this latter social network, mainly for checking 
balances (41.5%), followed by pay-ment of utilities (29%) and cell phone 
refills (27.7%).Transactions carried out
Balance inquiry
Payment of  utilities
Cell phone top-ups
Mo ney transfers
None
Open savings accounts
Request loans41,5%
32,8%
29,0%14,1%
27,7%34,2%
22,3%35,5%
21,9%24,6%
6,8%10,5%
2,0%22,9%
Illustra tion No. 15. Financial services th atcan be provided th rough social mediaBr. 34 Br. 19USAID Rural Finance Initiative40
Myths about online  
financial transactions
Despite the growing purchase of cell smartphones and, con-
sequently, the use of internet through them in rural areas of 
the country, there are many myths that the population has in 
this regard, which limit its the access to much information 
and it underutilizes the capacity installed for the self-management of proce-dures, including financial transactions. According to studies conducted by 
USAID, the internet is valued as a powerful information access tool but has the shadow of risks.  In general, this is because there is a lack of knowledge 
about security in cyberspace.   For this reason, many people presume that the -
re is a high probability that the devices used to navigate in the internet will be hacked, whether they are cellular phones or computers.  In the case of people over 40 years old, the concern consists in having possible charges associated 
with online downloads, which leads them to refrain from making operations 
from their cellular phones.
These two great myths are the cause and effect of people having no 
trust in carrying out financial transactions from their cellular phones.  For many, physical evidence is additionally required (a signed document, receipt 
or invoice) to certify that that an online operation has been carried out and 
ensure that they will not have any legal difficulties to prove it in the future.  In this regard, the study of low-cost online transactions investigated about the 
rating given by promoters and detractors of the internet use (NPS) and found 
that 6 out of 10 interviewees were detractors of the use of the tool (Illustra -
tion No. 16).   When this methodology was applied in municipalities, it was 
identified that the panorama for online transactions is still in an incipient state 
of consolidation since there are 71.3% more detractors than promoters of such 
transactions.The Internet is 
valued as a powerful 
information access tool, 
but it has the shadow 
of its risks.  This is 
because there is a lack 
of knowledge regarding 
security in cyberspace.
Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia41
NPS (NET PROM OTER SCORE)
Online Tr ansactions
Detractor s
Do not recommend
transactionsPassive Promoters
Recommend
transactions
NPS=% %-79 9,%
11 5,%8,6%
NPS=-71,31 a 67  a 89  a 10
Promoters less detractor s
Illustra tion No. 16. Score of prom oters and rate of  detracto rs versus promoters of t he use of online transacti onsBr. 600
Delving into the reasons why 
people do not transact on the cellular 
phone, it was found that 44.6% do 
not trust entering data into the web, 
41.8% do not know how to use it, 
22.1% do not know that option, 
19.4% believe that none will take the 
responsibility if  there is any pro-
blem with the transaction, and 18% confess that its operation is compli -
cated (Illustration No. 17).  Based 
on this data it is possible to infer that the main adversities of online 
transactions are associated with the 
lack of trust, but also with the lack 
of knowledge and complexity that is 
wrongly attributed to digital tran-
sactional processes, which are myths 
that can be eradicated, showing the 
client through empirical evidence, 
the ease and advantages of this type 
of service. Reasons for not making transactions through the cell phone
44,6% Doesn 't trust entering his/her data in the internet
41,8% Doesn 't know how to  use it
22,1% Doesn 't know that option
19,4%None takes the responsibility if  there is
any problem with the transactio n
18,0% Their operation is complicated
12,1% They ha ve too ma ny steps
11,1% Believes that it generates additional costs
6,5% I do n't ha ve a Smartphone
2,9%Lack of security /
scared of being robbed
1,2% Proximity/all
Illustra tion No. 17. Reas ons wh y pe ople do not make transacti ons through the internet.Br. 317
USAID Rural Finance Initiative42
On the other hand, some people 
are interested in learning how to 
handle these tools.  It is a segment 
of clients that must be handled in a 
special way, emphasizing the most 
relevant operations that they can 
learn.  These clients seek advice from 
the entity or the financial interme-
diary, ask a friend for help or simply 
learn through a video.  However, 
it should be clarified that there are 
people with various preconceptions: they are not interested in learning 
for basic reasons such as not having 
an account, not seeing the usefulness 
of learning, not trusting the data or 
lack of knowledge of the applications.  
The fact of not understanding the 
usefulness and ignoring the applica -
tions have significant participation percentages of approximately 20%, 
which confirms the need that there is 
to continue implementing education programs focused on showing the 
advantages of internet transactions 
and the simplicity of their access and 
handling (Illustration No. 18).Learning Channel
From whom/where would you like to learn?
Advice from the bank
Through a relative or a friend
Through a video
Not interested in learning
Doesn ’t know
Through the cell phone
3 answers with results l owe r
than 0.7%were omitted43,5%
32,8%14,2%11,8%1,0%0,7%
Why are you not interested in learning?
Doesn ’t have a bank account
Doesn ’t think it is useful
It is not safe to leave data in the internet
Lack of knowledge of  those applications
Infrequent use and forgot how to use it
Vulnerability of the internet data
Seven answ ers with results equal or l owe r
than 10.2% were omitted31,4%23,9%20,0%18,9%13,6%10,2%
Illustra tion No. 18. Means for lear ning ho w to use the tool and r easons for no twanting to do itBr. 600
Br. 64
Another way to reach potential 
clients of virtual transactions is to 
discover their main motivations for 
purchasing financial products. In 
this respect, the study of low-cost 
online transactions investigated these motivations and found that 66.2% 
of people purchased a digital finan-cial product due to savings in costs 
(handling fee, interest), 29.4% due 
to discounts on purchases made in 
stores, and 19.4% due to gifts they re-ceived such as cell phone and Netflix 
top-ups (Illustration No. 19).  This 
shows that alliances with presential 
retail stores, factories, restaurants, 
etc., and with non-presential stores 
like Netflix are vital to motivate and 
secure the loyalty of the financial 
entities’ clients since they find in 
these places indirect ways of making profitable their financial products.
Illustra tion No. 19. Motivations for purc hasin gp roducts o nline financialSavings in costs
(handling fee, interest)66,2%
Discounts on purchases
Stores29,4%
Gi/g509 ts
(Intangibles such as cell phone top-ups and Net/g501 lix)19,4%
Gi/g509 ts
(Tangibles such as T-shirts, thermos /g501 lasks, caps)13,4%
I do not recommend it1,5%Moti vators fo r purchasing f inancial products$$
$$$
$$$
$
$
$$
$
$$
Br. 600Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia43
Digital media 
attributesIn rural areas, only 18.5% of 
respondents had used the bank’s 
website, claiming that they had done it because they found advantages 
such as agility, ease and security.  It is fundamental to have these attributes 
when, for example, designing a tran-sactional website of a financial entity 
(Illustration No. 20).
Have  you used the bank's we bsite?
18,5%Yes
We bsite
Agility60,2%
We bsite
Ease83,7%
We bsite
Security70,3%Website and Attributes
Illustra tion No. 20. Attributes of  digital transacti on channelsBr. 52Attributes
@USAID Rural Finance Initiative44
44
Opportunities  
to Digitize the  Banking Industry
Today we know that 
internet is an infinite, 
inexhaustible, uncon-
ditional resource with 
a high emotional bond.  In recent years, different banking actors have 
created products such as Daviplata 
or Nequi de Bancolombia.  However, 
according to studies conducted by 
USAID, only 33.8% of those surveyed 
know what an electronic wallet is and 
only 0.9% have used it, which shows a significant gap between the knowle-
dge and use of the product.
In line with the above, in order 
for the supply of digital financial 
services to continue to increase, and 
for more users to start using these 
applications, it is essential to take into 
account some of the recommenda-
tions included in the USAID studies.  First of all, the need to communicate 
to the people the security tools that 
online transactions have (token, 
double password, fingerprint, facial 
recognition), which could improve 
their use.  This must be combined 
with the design of teaching strategies 
(for example, transaction assistants to 
learn how to use financial electronic 
means), offering transaction or fraud 
insurance (in order to guarantee clients that they will be covered in 
case of any computer crime), and, Despite the persistent gap that exists between the urban and rural sectors in Colombia in terms of 
connectivity, and the myths that rural people still have regarding digital operations, the Colombian 
financial system has been evolving towards low-cost online transaction solutions that guarantee 
agile and easily accessible supply for users, and generate at the same time opportunities for greater rural financial inclusion.
Moti vators for its Use
Illustra tion No. 21. Motivations for using digit al services financial51,8% Save  time
39,5% I can do it from my home
24,4% Easy functionality
20,7% Avoid mo ving around
15,7%Cheaper than
remittance centers
15,2% I am taught
14,8%They guarant ee that my  data
will not be le/g509 t exposed
14,5%I don't necessarily ha ve to be
a client of  a bank
14,2%I will be able to  withdr aw at
any nea rby center
13,1%Someone will tak e on the
responsibility in case of any mistake
 12 answers with results lower than 12.5% were omitted
Br. 507Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia45
An indispensable requisite for people to access this type of financial 
services is that the product generates trust.  Therefore, it is necessary for 
digital products to be characterized by their ease of access, clear information 
inside the application, process speed, security with the data and the operation, 
and low cost.  Likewise, the main reasons that people gave for making 
transactions through Facebook and WhatsApp (the latter network being 
the one that they choose the most) were that they saved time (44.8%), were 
taught how to make them (31.1%) and that the system generated trust (29.1%) 
(Illustration No. 22).according to each user profile and 
channel, the promotion of financial 
education on security in electronic transactions.
Nevertheless, since one of the 
main challenges has to do with the 
client’s first contact with the cell 
phone app, the study demonstrated 
the important role that peers play in 
eradicating myths.  Therefore, it is es -
sential that financial entities promote the word of mouth as a communi -cation strategy to encourage the use 
of digital transactional tools.  Many 
respondents said that through this word of mouth they had heard how 
someone else used the program or 
application, as well as the advantages 
of using it, and thus began to replica -
te the behavior. This can be explained 
by the fact that many respondents trusted in  people with work or 
academic experience on the Internet, and thus delegated them responsi -
bility of downloading and installing applications.  Another relevant fact 
to consider is that the respondents 
expressed interest in making transac -
tions through cellular phones in or -
der to save time and decrease travels, due to the ease of the operations and 
the reduction of transactional costs 
(Illustration No. 21).
Save  travelling time
They taught him
how to  do it
The system generates trust
Doesn 't have any other option
to make  payments or remittances
Ease in paying bills
of public services44,8%
31,1%
29,1%
23,8%
20,9%31,8%
32,2%
28,9%
26,3%
22,8%
Illustra tion No. 2.2Motivations for using social netwo rks to make transacti onsUse through social netw orks
Br. 542
USAID Rural Finance Initiative46
Reasons fo rnot using a mobile wallet
For those who know the mobile wallet but do not use it
Doesn ’t know
Doesn ’t generate trust
Hasn ’t had the need to use it
It is ve ry complicated and dela yed
Doesn ’t know how to  handle it
They do n’t recei ve it in other commercial st ores40,1%
22,7%10,6%
9,0%8,2%4,8%
33,8%They know the mobile wallet
Spontaneous
Induced9,3%
24,5%
36,2%Knowledge and use
of the mobile wallet
Illustra tion No. 23.
Know ledge and use of mobile walletsTotal knowledge
They use the mobile wallet
Five answers with results l ower than 4.3% were omittedBr. 600
Br. 155
Br. 95Another important line of 
reflection is that related to the 
knowledge and use of mobile 
wallets, which yields very low 
results since only 33.8% of the 
population claims to know this 
resource. However, it should be 
clarified that when the question 
is spontaneous, only 9.3% relate 
it to a wallet or know what it is.  
However, after making a more 
detailed explanation accompanied by examples, there is a greater 
number of people who recognize 
them.  According to the studies, 
only 36.2% of the total number of 
people who know mobile wallets, 
uses them.  They indicate that the 
main reasons for not using them 
is that they do not know how to 
use them, the fact that they don’t 
generate trust, not having the 
need to use them, and the fact 
that it is a very complicated and 
delayed process.  This confirms once again that the knowledge 
of the operation of the wallet 
is essential for the success of a 
financial transactional strategy 
(Illustration No. 23).Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia47
Minimum requirements  
for achieving the acceptance 
of a digital product
Respondents also identified the minimum requirements for accepting a digital 
product.  They underlined ease, movement, speed and security that the pro-ducts must have (Illustration No. 24).  Despite this, these participations have 
important differences depending on whether the person is banked or not be-
cause the unbanked focus more on not making queues, but they are more lax in terms of speed 
and security (Illustration No. 24).  It is important to mention that among the requirements 
that a digital product should have no mention is made to the cost, which can be overlooked if a 
solution is provided that meets other criteria that are even more important to the user such as 
those described above.
Illustra tion No. 24. Minimum re quiremen ts fo r accep ting a dig ital prod uctamong the banked and unbanked po pula tion.To be easy
Not having to  get into a queue
To be close by
Mo ney to  arri ve immediately
Recei ve a security mechanism
such as a receipt
To be cheaper than the option
that is being used today
Not having to  be client
of a bank
Being able to do it through
a cell phone
Being able to do it through
internet and a computer
Being able to pay fo r it collect53,7%
45,4%36,1%33,1%31,5%21,9%21,4%16,5%10,9%
9,6%52,8%52,6%39,2%28,3%25,9%23,5%19,9%15,4%
8,6%
6,1%
To be easy
Not having to  get into a queue
To be close by
Mo ney to  arri ve immediately
Recei ve a security mechanism
such as a receipt
To be cheaper than the option
that is being used today
Not having to  be client
of a bank
Being able to do it through
a cell phone
Being able to do it through
internet and a computer
Being able to pay fo r it collectBanked Unbanked
Six answers with results l ower than 8.6% were omitted Eight answers with results l ower than 5.7% were omittedOV ER
INDEXUNER INDEX
UNER
INDEX
Br. 300/c252USAID Rural Finance Initiative48
It was very important to have 
analyzed during the study the users’ 
perception of digital credits. When 
asked which would be best means 
through which they would like to be 
offered a digital credit, they answered 
curiously that they preferred perso-
nalized services at the office.  54.9% 
believed that to be the ideal way to 
access a digital credit.  Similarly, if 
a digital credit would be offered, 
people would prefer to be notified of the service through a telephone call 
(Illustration No. 25).
On the other hand, it is 
important to point out that the 
context in which the questions on the 
digital credit were asked was neither 
influenced by the respondents’ 
trusted financial entity nor by a 
credit request that was not requested by the user.  In other words, based 
to the spontaneity of the needs, it 
was evident that only 15.6% of the 
respondents would accept a credit 
without having requested it.  As a 
matter of fact, they would accept it 
if they required it at the time or if it 
would save them time or if it had a 
better interest rate.  The population 
that would not take the digital credit 
declared that it sounded like a fraud (56.9%) because due to the fact that 
it was a digital transaction, it was not 
possible to confirm the information 
and there was none to explain.  
However, analyzing the disbursement 
stage of a digital credit, respondents 
argued that what mattered most to 
them was that the installments were 
comfortable, that the interest rate was 
lower and that they didn’t ask  
for many requirements (Illustration 
No. 26).
Illustra tion No. 25. Prefer red method fo ra nd no tifyin gs ervices offering financialMethod fo r o/g499fering digital credits
54,9%
29,4%
9,5%
5,0%
42,8% 28,2% 21,5% 17,3% 2,5%Personalized services at the o/g499 ﬁce
Personalized door to door service
Through a mobile applicatio n
Specialized call center
1.1% It doesn 't matter
Method for notif ying the service
Telephone callEmail Notiﬁcation from
the Bank's ApplicationCell phone
messageIt doesn 't
matter
4 mentions belo w 2.2% are omitt edBr. 600
Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia49
Wh y they would accept digital credit
4 answers with results l ower than 0.8% were omittedIf I would need it I would take
it at that moment
Saves time
Has better int erest ra tes
It is a beneﬁt / I would see it as a beneﬁt
/ opportunity
Saves money
Find out what it is / it depends
what they o/g499 fer me35,5%
27,8%
12,8%
11,1%
11,0%
2,3%
7 answers with results l ower than 19.0% were omitted
Wh y they w ould NO T accept digital credit
56,9%
37,4%
30,2%
29,6%
28,4%
22,4%
6 mentions l ower than 19.0% are omitt edSounds lik e scam
There is no way to conﬁrm the in formation
There is no one to explain
It gives distrust not to leave
signed papers
Do not kno w credit conditions
Do not kno w what the requirements ar e15,6%Yes
The installments would be
comf ortable35,9%
The int erest ra te would be lo wer28,9%
Not too ma ny requirements
would be made16,2%
Wouldn 't' have toﬁll out
many documents5,9%
It wouldn 't matter 4,7%
The disbursement would be
immediate3,0%The approval would be immediate 3,3%
Illustra tion No. 26.
Percen tages of accep tance of  digital credi t, and associa ted facto rsBr. 600Reason why he/she would disburse a digital credit Would accept a credit without requesting it
Br. 600Br. 509USAID Rural Finance Initiative50
Access, use and notifications 
of digital financial 
services according to the 
sociodemographic profile
Undoubtedly, one of 
the outstanding fin-
dings of the study 
conducted has to 
do with the differences in access, use and preferred notifications according 
to the sociodemographic profile.  
Thus, for example, 84.4% of the res-
pondents considers that if there is no 
notification, the product looks like 
a fraud.  There are also differences 
depending on the age range.  Y oung people are potential clients for social 
media transactions such as Facebook 
or WhatsApp; but at the same time, 
young people ranging between 18 
and 25 years old prefer notifications 
of transactions via email.  This pre-
ference changes for people between 
the ages of 26 and 35, who are more 
inclined towards text messages, and 
also for people 35 years old and older, 
who prefer the telephone call.A prominent variable is the 
device that they use according to the 
type of product.  For example, users 
prefer to manage credit resources 
through a smartphone and savings 
resources from their home computer.  
For utility payments and balance en -
quiries they prefer WhatsApp and for cell phone top-ups and transfers they 
choose Facebook, especially because 
they can recognize people through 
photos, comments, etc.  This is com-plemented by the sociodemographic 
profile of each type of product.  The  
smartphone is more related to stra -
tum 2 while internet access at home is more associated with stratum 3. 
The above may give an indication 
that, regardless of household inco -
me, people may have a smartphone, and that this is in turn related to the 
ease of access to credit products and 
mobile banking.  Both men and women in the 
labor market (with a higher parti-
cipation of women) are using the 
bank applications, are interested in 
being notified through this means, 
which is an added value that the 
client requests to enhance the use 
of the Application.  This variable is 
closely related to people who have an 
educational level of at least secondary 
school and to people between 36 
and 45 years old.  Finally, there is an important information that can help 
to include a population in the digital 
services market:  people between ages 
46 and 55 do not yet have clear po-
sitions with respect to these means.  
There is a potential market there, 
which, with good orientation, can be 
captivated due to the conditions of 
ease, agility and security.
Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia51
51
Strategies and  
recommendations
Eradicate myths.  
Bank penetration (Bancarization) 
and the use of new financial 
services, such as digital services, must overcome certain false 
beliefs that people have.  For 
example, some believe that transactions are very expensive 
or that there are almost infallible 
fraud risks on the web. Likewise, people should be informed 
about the security tools that 
online transactions have (token, double password, fingerprint, 
facial recognition).
Make time effective and 
overcome distances. The 
main advantage of online 
transactional services is that they 
reduce distances and the time required to perform an operation 
and thus, communicating such 
benefits to potential and real users is a way to guarantee the 
existence of a transactional 
culture that is constantly growing and consolidating.
Promote online 
transactional services.
Especially in rural areas of 
the country, promoting and 
educating the population in 
online financial services can contribute effectively to improve 
the rate and speed with which 
users make self-managed transactions.Enhance liaising through 
social networks.  
When designing strategies to 
promote financial products and services, social networks (Facebook and WhatsApp) 
should be considered as effective 
and direct channels to reaching potential clients or captives.
Understand the 
motivations for purchasing 
financial products.   
Cost savings (such as handling 
fees, interest), discounts on 
purchases made in commercial premises, gifts such as cell phone 
top-ups and the consumption of 
intangibles, among others, are some of the main ones.Design and implement 
innovative strategies. 
To bring the user closer to the use 
of digital transactional channels, 
teaching strategies can be used, 
such as transaction assistants to learn how to use financial 
electronic means; transaction 
or fraud insurance can be offered to guarantee clients 
that they will be covered in case 
of any computer crime; and financial education on security 
in electronic transactions can be 
promoted.
The cellular phone is a 
central ally. 
Respondents express interest 
in making transactions through 
cell phones in order to save time, 
decrease travels, facilitating operations and lowering 
transactional costs.
Build trust. 
To avoid the perception that 
digital products look like frauds, 
notifications should be made to 
users via telephone calls, email or social media, depending on 
the client’s sociodemographic 
profile.
USAID Rural Finance Initiative52
Motivators and barriers  
for using digital 
transactional channels
Financial decisions 
of the people are 
not always rational 
because not only 
depend on econo-
mic variables, but also depend on individual, social and situational 
factors, and particularly depend on 
the rules that the human brain uses 
when deciding on some matter. These 
rules are predictable, known and 
documented, and that’s why people’s decision-making process, despite 
being often irrational, is predictable, 
and that’s where the power of the 
Behavioral Science approach is based: 
predicting decisions by understan-
ding the effects of the rules of our 
brains.  Illustration No. 38 summari-
zes the main motivators and barriers 
that have been identified in terms of 
“psychological levers” or “behavioral 
economics” , according to surveys and studies conducted in rural areas of 
the country.
 
In rural areas of the country, digital channels for making financial transactions offer multiple benefits, as pointed out in previous chapters, but they also face multiple cul-tural and personal barriers that make it difficult to chan-ge user habits and create new forms of relationships with financial entities.  Identifying common motivators and barriers of digital transactions helps to understand the profound reasons that are associated with the process of deciding whether or not to use digital channels.  People’s decisions are not exclusively rational but depend on mul -
tiple individual, social and situational factors (for exam -
ple, their emotions or beliefs).  That’s where the so-called “psychological levers” become important since they help to measure and somehow predict how the minds of users operate when making financial decisions in the digital scenario. Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia53
Incentive
I ﬁnd important beneﬁts for me.Loss Aversion
We  pref er to  avoid losses rather
than acquiring gains.
If I ha ve to ask people fo r help, they
get to  know my  mo vements.The more familiar I am with it ,
the more I am going to
defend/choose it.Familiarity
I know how digital transactions work.Social Standard
Very few people close to  me use
digital transactions.Perception guided by
expectations
It is easy to make digital
transactions.Banks al ways tak e ad vantage of  you.
Surely they earn more if I ma ke
digital transactions.Messenger We  do n't ha ve
will po we r
As time goes by , interest
decreases…At ﬁrst there is a lot of
hope.  Over time,  it fades away .
I ha ve to have an account in the bank
to make online transactions.
Attachment to
If I make  digital transactions, I
would lose the opportunity to talk
and see other people.the process
We  love
stereotypes
We  are in/g501l uenced by them.  Digital
transactions are for yo ung people.
I feel bad about having to  ask how
to make  digital transactions.Ego
I ha ve heard that when making
digital transactions, they also steal.Priming
1
2
3
4
5
 6
 7
8
9
10
11Behavioral
Economics
Illustra tion No. 27.
Behavioral Economics Analysis37,6%
66,1%30,8%32,4%38,1%58,9%
46,4%
40,1%
26,1%
43,2%
70,4%Br. 600USAID Rural Finance Initiative54
Motivators 
In addition to the incentives 
and motivators that financial entities 
help to consolidate through their 
various promotion and communi -
cation strategies, there is another universe of possibilities derived from 
the financial experiences and concep -
tions of users.  After identifying the behaviors of the statements included 
in Illustration No. 27, a first motiva-
tor that deserves to be highlighted is 
that people recognize the real benefits of digital transactions, such as saving 
on time and travel, the possibility 
to self-manage certain procedures 
at different times from the offices’ 
working hours or to pay for utilities 
without having to stand in line.
Additionally, there is increasing 
familiarity with digital transactions, 
aligned with the massification of products, services and technological 
environments, such as the internet, 
social networks and access to smar -
tphones or applications.  A wide ran-ge of financial services and options is 
available for users today, who realize 
that the traditional relationship 
with financial entities, mediated by 
their presence, is being transformed 
inevitably, and that it is up to them to 
decide to change or not in the face of this dynamic.  The cellular phone, for 
example, makes it easy to do transac -
tions from home or check account statements in a matter of minutes 
and with little effort.  Here there is a perception guided by the expectation that making digital transactions is 
easy, since it is a fairly common and 
increasingly widespread practice among the people.
Another important motivator is 
that people have loss aversion, which means that more than winning by having or using a financial product 
or service, what they always aim for 
is to ensure that there are no “leaks” 
or “losses” and, obviously, that their 
digital transaction is reliable.  They certainly recognize that if they 
comply with the procedures and use 
properly the channels provided by 
the financial entities, the possibility 
of occurring a “capture” or illegal use 
of banking or personal information 
will be significantly reduced.
Barriers 
Many of the barriers for using 
digital transactional channels are related to lack of technological 
knowledge, cultural stereotypes or information about security that 
circulates socially and involves 
making money transactions throu-
gh the internet.  on security that 
affects money movements through 
internet and an electronic device. The first argument for not making 
online money transactions is not 
knowing any close person who has 
had communicable experiences or 
makes regular financial transactions or operations of this kind.  In other words, the social norm dictates that one has to continue managing money 
in a traditional way.
There are, additionally, stereo-
types and fears about one’s ability to learn since it is believed that the ability to make a digital transaction 
is reserved for the young people.  The renunciation to learn is also explai -
ned as a matter of ego since learning means having to accept one’s lack of 
knowledge or having to make basic 
questions about the way in which a service, application or technological 
device works.
On the other hand, certain pre-
conceptions about the requirements 
for making a digital transaction are 
materialized.  One of them is the 
idea that to make a transaction it is 
necessarily to have an account in the financial entity or that an unbanked 
user cannot use certain digital 
services.  Other information also 
circulates stating that when a person 
makes digital transactions, the banks earn more since they charge more 
for the services provided.  Finally, a 
major barrier that must be analyzed 
is that associated with thefts in digital transactions and the risk that the 
information will be “usurped” or that 
the bank account data will be appro-
priated for fraudulent purposes.
Digital Financial Services in Rural Areas of Colombia55
55
Strategies and  
recommendations
Continuously promote and educate people on digital 
services.  Many barriers to the use of this type of services are caused 
by the people’s lack of knowledge of technological environments.  The 
word of mouth or experience testimonies can help to give assurance 
that many preconceived ideas in this regard do not really happen.  
Additionally, the promotion and communication of digital offers that take into account the educational levels, age ranges and gender of users may result in the uptake of new digital users.
Guarantee the security and reliability of digital financial transactions. 
This involves eradicating many myths and misleading information about the internet, but also educating the population in procedures or actions for guaranteeing the custody of the information or prevent fraud.  Having consultants who are willing to teach clients how to manage transactional channels, and to accompany and continuously relate to the user becomes a crucial aspect for the consolidation of new habits in users.Overcome cultural stereo-types and myths. 
 Nowadays, 
technology and the internet 
are global phenomena that are involving gradually all the people.  Age, gender or economic status cannot be obstacles for accessing digital financial channels and ser -
vices.  Likewise, it is necessary to 
eliminate the “ego” of some users who do not want to look ignorant because they do not know the new technologies. Myths asso-ciated with the cost or need to have a bank account to be able to make a digital transaction can be overcome by providing clear and concise information.Do not lose sight of the quality of the presential 
care. 
Many times people 
will prefer to make financial 
transactions in offices or fixed access centers; some will opt for digital operations and others will prefer the traditional way.  Therefore, guaranteeing the excellence of the service provided to financial clients in the   financial entities’ offices continues to be a priority.  In turn, the presential advisor must be the first promoter of the digital services since he/she is more familiarity with the user . 
Provide financial services to the unbanked population.
Not all of the services offered by a financial entity are reserved for clients.  The unbanked can also represent a business niche for certain transactions (for example, money transfers).
Technical Annex57
USAID Rural Finance Initiative58
Data of the relationship that exists between categorical variables
The Rural Financial Inclusion (RFI), MSI-EVA Baseline, and Low-cost Transactions (Yanhaas) surveys mostly have 
categorical variables.  In statistics, a categorical variable is a variable that has a usually fixed number of values for a qualitative characteristic.  For this reason, a very important statistic that allows to determine the interaction between variables as well as behavior patterns, is the correlation.  In this case, most variables are categorical and thus chi-square tests were conducted to find relationships between them.  It this test, a contingency table for the variables is made and a statistic with chi-square distribution is calculated.  The null hypothesis is that there is a relationship between the variables and, consequently, if in the test a p-value greater than 0.05 (5%) is obtained, the hypothesis that there is a relationship between variables is not rejected.  The main relationships between the categorical variables for the surveys are shown below
Section 1:  SAVINGS
Some of the most outstanding results of the study conducted in Southern Tolima indicate that 50% of the people do not save.  Likewise, 93.8% of the people do not save formally in a bank.  On the other hand, some difficulties that they encounter in approaching a bank office are the time and cost of travelling.  Therefore, an interesting analysis to make consists in looking at the relationship that exists between the fact that people do not save formally and the time and cost incurred in travelling to a bank office.
Only four people of those who save at the bank take less than an hour to go to the bank, 21 take more than an hour , 
and 328 who don’t save would take over one hour to go to the bank.  Then, through observation, a strong relations-hip is found between does not save in the bank and the travel issue, but to verify this hypothesis, the behavior is presented in Chart No. 1 as well as the chi-square test.
The p-value for Chart No. 1 is 0.9536 and, clearly, the variable relationship hypothesis is not rejected.  That is, there 
is a clear relationship between does not save in the bank and having a long travelling time to reach the entity.
Now, if we look at the contingency table for the variable “does not save in the bank” versus “spends more than 
$10,000 Pesos to go to the bank” in Chart No. 2, only 9 people of those who save in bank spend less than $10,000 Pe -
sos to go to the bank, 16 people who save spend more than $10,000 Pesos to go to a bank, 278 who don’t save spend more than $10,000 Pesos to go to the bank.  For this reason, descriptively, there is a strong relationship between not saving in bank and a high travelling cost, but to verify this hypothesis, the behavior is presented in Chart No. 1 as well as the chi-square test.
In this case, considering that the p-value is 0.4322, the variable relationship hypothesis is not rejected, but not as 
clearly as in the case of the “travelling time” variable.  This means that there is a relationship between not saving in a bank and a high travelling cost, although it is not as high as the travelling time.  This in practical terms implies that for the placement of a new financial saving product, it is important to focus more in ensuring that the benefi-ciary has less travelling time instead of focusing on the travelling cost.  
Anexo  técnicoTechnical Annex59
Section 2:  CREDITS 
With regard to credits, for the identification of related financial products, the following statistical relationship can 
be established: “Not having a bank credit due to paperwork costs” and “a credit was granted upon request” and 
“because the person did not have a sufficient income.”
The following is the relationship analysis between these variables:
35 people who do not have a credit consider that they would spend more than $300,000 Pesos in paperwork, 122 
who do not have a bank credit consider that they would spend less than $300,000 Pesos and 177 who have a bank 
credit consider that they would spend less than 300,000 in paperwork.  In this case, an observation relationship cannot be found as clearly in the contingency table between “not having a bank credit” and the “expense of the procedure”.  However , the chi-square test is performed between the variables as illustrated in Chart No. 3
In this case, the relationship between variables “not having a bank credit” and “paperwork costs” is not rejected.  
Likewise, an analysis is made of the variables “not having a bank credit” and “not granting a credit due to insuffi-cient income”. In this case, Chart No.4 shows a relationship between “not having a bank credit” and “low income”.
In this case, the relationship between variables is not rejected because the p-value is 0.6825, which is a high value.
In summary, with respect to the relationship between “Not having a bank credit due to paperwork costs” and “a credit was granted upon request” and “because the person did not have a sufficient income,” it is worth noting that “not having a bank credit” and “low income” are very well related.  There is also a relationship between “not having a bank credit” and “paperwork costs higher than $300.000.  This shows that even if the credit paperwork was di-minished a little, it is much more important to have a lower income threshold for granting the credits and that the paperwork costs decrease.
Within the survey there are variables about digital media such as “internet access at home” and “if the person has a 
smartphone”.  Likewise, it is also important to look at the relationship between these variables and the variables of savings, credits and bank office use.
To complement the analysis of Sections 1 and 2, the following is the analysis between “digital media” and “no ha-
ving savings or credits in the bank”.
Section 3 RELATIONSHIP WITH INTERNET
Relationship between the variable “does not save in bank” and “internet access at home”: 
In this case to see more clearly the relationship, the variable “access to internet” is converted conversely.  This 
means that the variable is worked out as “does not have internet access”, as illustrated in Chart No. 5.
Only 5 of the people who save at the bank have internet access at home, 20 people who save do not have internet, 
and 352 people who do not save do not have access to internet.  There seems to be a relationship between not 
saving in bank due to the lack of access to internet, but the graphical behavior and the chi-square test between the variables are presented to verify this hypothesis.
In this case, considering that the p-value is 0.054 (at the limit), the variable relationship hypothesis is not rejected, 
working with a 5% probability.  This means that there is a relationship between “no saving in the bank” and “not 
having access to the internet”, but the relationship is not that high.USAID Rural Finance Initiative60
Relationship between variable “does not save in the bank” and “does not have a smartphone”  
shown in Chart No. 6.
13 people who save at the bank have smartphones, 12 people who save do not have smartphones and 239 who do 
not save do not have smartphones.  There seems to be a relationship between “does not save in the bank” and “not having a smartphone”, but to verify this hypothesis, the behavior graph and the chi-square test between the varia -
bles are presented.
In this case, the variable relationship hypothesis is not rejected considering that the p-value is 0.1968, which means 
that there is a relationship between “does not save in the bank” and “not having smartphone.”
Now, going into a little more detail regarding the use of smartphones, the survey captures the question of whether 
the person uses mobile banking in his/her cell phone or the bank website platform.  It is interesting to look at the relationship between this variable and the variable “non-savings in the bank”, as illustrated in Chart No. 7.20 people who save at the bank do not use mobile banking and 343 people who do not save do not use mobile ban-king.  There seems to be a relationship between “does not save in the bank” and “not using mobile banking”, but to in order to verify this hypothesis, the behavior graph and the chi-square test between the variables are presented.
In this case, considering that the p-value is 0.1795, the variable relationship hypothesis is not rejected, which means 
that there is a relationship between “does not save in the bank” and “not using mobile banking.”
The relationship between the variable “no internet access, no smartphone, and no mobile banking” and “not 
having a bank credit, ” is shown in Chart No. 8.
11 people who do not have a bank credit have internet at home, only 21 people who have a bank credit have inter -
net, and 226 who do not have a bank credit do not have internet.  There seems to be a clear relationship between 
not having a bank credit and not having internet access, but in order to verify this hypothesis, the behavior graph and the chi-square test between the variables are presented.
In this case, considering that the p-value is 0.7236, the variable relationship hypothesis is clearly not rejected.  This 
means that there is a high relationship between not having a bank credit and not having internet access.
The relationship between the variable “not having a bank credit” and “not having a smartphone” is shown in 
Chart No. 9.
57 people who do not have a bank credit have a smartphone, 151 people who have a bank credit do not have a smar -
tphone, and 100 people who do not have a bank credit do not have a smartphone.  There seems to be a slight rela-
tionship between not having a bank credit and not having a smartphone, but to verify this hypothesis, the behavior graph and the chi-square test between the variables are presented.
In this case, considering that the p-value is 0.6803, the variable relationship hypothesis is not rejected.  This means 
that there is a relationship between not having a bank credit and not having a smartphone.
Regarding the relationship between the variable “not having a bank credit” and “not using a mobile banking appli-
cation,” we concluded the following from Chart No. 10:
24 people with a bank credit use mobile banking, 223 who have a bank credit do not use mobile banking, and 140 
people who do not have a bank credit do not have mobile banking.  There seems to be a slight relationship be-Technical Annex61
tween not having a bank credit and not using mobile banking, but to verify this hypothesis, the behavior graph and 
the chi-square test between the variables are presented.
In this case, considering that the p-value is 0.8481, the variable relationship hypothesis is not rejected.  This means 
that there is a high relationship between not having a bank credit and not using mobile banking. The MSI-EVAL survey defined in statistical terms a methodology for measuring the impact of the Program. Unlike the Southern Tolima Study, the methodology implemented for defining the baseline involves two groups:  one treatment group and one control group.  For this reason, the results are differentiated for each one of the groups.  With respect to bank credits and in order to have a comparison point with the Southern Tolima Study, the iden-tification of related financial products can be established, the statistical relationship between the variables “not having a bank credit” and “insufficient income” can be established.
Relationship between the variables “not having a bank credit” and “insufficient income” for treatment.Below is the analysis of relationships between the variables “not having a bank credit” and “insufficient income” for 
the treatment group, as illustrated in Chart No. 11.
Six people who do not have a bank credit, have insufficient income, and none of the persons that has a bank credit 
has insufficient income, which was to be expected.  In this case there seems to be a relationship between not having a bank credit and having an insufficient income.  However , the chi-square test is performed between the variables.
The relationship between the variables “not having a bank credit” and “insufficient income” is not rejected with a 
p-value of 0.29 for treatment.
Relationship between the variables “not having a bank credit” and “insufficient income” for control.Three people who do not have a bank credit have insufficient income, and none of the persons that has a bank 
credit has insufficient income, which was to be expected.  In this case there seems to be a relationship between not having a bank credit and having an insufficient income.  However , the chi-square test is performed between the variables as illustrated in Chart No. 12.
The relationship between the variables “not having a bank credit” and “insufficient income” is not rejected with a 
p-value of 0.58 for treatment. 
It is worth noting that the variables “not having a bank credit” and “having a low income” are highly related.  There 
is also a relationship between “not having a bank credit” and “paperwork costs higher than $300.000,” but there is no relationship between “not having a bank credit” and “the refusal of a bank credit after being requested.”  This shows that even if the credit paperwork was diminished a little, it is much more important to have a lower income threshold for granting the credits and that the paperwork costs decrease.USAID Rural Finance Initiative62
Does not sa ve in the bankmás_una_hora
Less than one hour                  More than one hourSav es in the bank Does not sa ve in the bank                                                more thatn one hour
does not save in the bank      more thatn one hour    less than one hour
saves in the bank                                               21                                          4does not save in the bank                         328                                        51
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correctiondata: tabla1X-squared = 0.0033787, df = 1, p-value = 0.9536
Warning message:
In chisq.test (tabla1) : Chi-squared approximation may be incorrectList of Technical Charts
Chart No. 1:  Contingency table for the variable “does not save in the bank” and “takes more than one hour to go to the bank”.
Less than $100,000 Pesos  More than 100,000 Pesosmore_10000_pesos
Does not sa ve in the bankSav es in the bank Does not sa ve in the bankDoes not sa ve in the bank vs
more than $100,000 for credit paper work                                                                       more than 10.000
does not save in the bank        more than 10.000 pesos     less than 10.000 pesossaves in the bank                                                        16                                                     9does not save in the bank                                  278                                                101
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla2
X_squared = 0.61684, df = 1, p-value = 0.4322
Chart No. 2:  Contingency table for the variable “does not save in the bank” and “spends more than $10,000 Pesos to go to the bank.”
More than $300,000 Pesos for credit paperwork
Does not ha ve a bank creditLess than $300,000 Pesosfor credit paperworkDoes not ha ve a
bank credit Has a bank creditDoes not ha ve a bank credit vs
more than $300,000 for credit paper work
More than $300,000 Pesosfor credit paperwork                                                       more _ 300.000 credit paperworknot_ bankcredit               more than 300.000 for credit         less than 300.000 for credit 
                                   paper work                                         paper work
does not have a bank credit                         35                                                                        122
has a bank credit                                               70                                                                        177
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla3
X-squared = 1.5239, df = 1, p-value = 0.217
Chart No. 3:  Contingency table for the variable “does not have a bank cre-dit” and “paperwork costs.”Technical Annex63
Does not ha ve a bank credit
vs no insu/g499 ﬁcient funds
Has a bank creditDoes not ha ve
a bank credit
Does not ha ve a bank creditInsu/g499 ﬁcient incomeSu/g499 ﬁcient incomeInsu/g499 ﬁcient incomefor credit                                                                                 insu fficient funds
does not have a bank credit         insufficient income for credit       sufficient income
does not have a bank credit                                        1                                                            156
has a bank credit                                                                4                                                           243
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla5
X-squared = 0.16732, df = 1, p-value = 0.6825Warning message:In chisq.test (tabla5) : Chi-squared approximation may be incorrect
Chart No. 4:  Contingency table for the variable “does not have a bank cre-dit” and “credit not granted due to insufficient funds.”
Does not sa ve in the bankSav es in the bank Does not sa ve in the bank
Has internetNo internet
no_internetDoes not sa ve in the bank
vs no internet                                            no_internetdoes not have a bank credit          no internet      has internetsaves in the bank                                             20                             5does not save in the bank                         352                          27
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla6
X-squared = 3.712, df = 1, p-value = 0.05402Warning message:In chisq.test (tabla6) : Chi-squared approximation may be incorrect
Chart No. 5:  Contingency table for the variable “does not save in the bank” versus “access to internet at home.”
Does not sa ve in the bankSav es in the bank Does not sa ve in the bank
Has a smartphoneNo smartphone
no_smartphoneDoes not sa ve in the bank
vs no smartphone                                                         no_smartphonedoes not have a bank credit          no smartphone      has smartphonesaves in the bank                                                 12                                       13does nor save in the bank                            239                                   140
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla7
X-squared = 1.6661, df = 1, p-value = 0.1968
Chart No. 6:  Contingency table for the variable “does not save in the bank” versus “has smartphone.”USAID Rural Finance Initiative64
Does not sa ve in the bankSav es in the bank Does not sa ve in the bank
Uses mobile banking Does not use mobile bankingDoes not use mobile bankingDoes not sa ve in the bank vs
does not ha ve mobile banking                                            does not have mobile banking 
does not save in the bank          no mobile banking      has mobile bankingsaves in the bank                                               20                                                 5does not save in the bank                          343                                               36
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correctiondata: tabla8
X-squared = 1.8016, df = 1, p-value = 0.1795Warning message:In chisq.test (tabla8) : Chi-squared approximation may be incorrect
Chart No. 7:  Contingency table for the variable “does not save in the bank” versus “does not use the mobile banking application.”
No bank creditNo bank credit
Has internetNo internet
no_internetNo  bank credit vs no internet
Has a bank credit                                         no_internetno bank credit           no internet      has internetno bank credit                       146                         11has a bank credit                 226                        21
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla9
X-squared = 0.12505, df = 1, p-value = 0.7236
Chart No. 8:  Contingency table for the variable “no bank credit” versus “has access to internet at home.”
No bank creditHas smartphoneNo smartphone
no_smartphoneNo  bank credit vs no smartphone
No bank credit Has a bank credit
Chart No. 9:  Contingency table for the variable “no bank credit” versus “no smart phone.”                                            no_smartphoneno bank credit          no smartphone      Has smartphoneno bank credit                          100                                  57has a bank credit                      151                                 96
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla 10
X-squared = 0.16974, df = 1, p-value = 0.6803Technical Annex65
Sí bancamovilNo bancamovil
no_bancamovilno_c rédit o_banco vs no bancamovil
No crédito banco Sí crédito banco
no_crédit o_banco                                             not have mobile banking 
no bank credit          no mobile banking    uses mobile bankingno bank credit                           140                                           17has bank credit                      223                                           24
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correction
data: tabla 11
X-squared = 0.036708, df = 1, p-value = 0.8481
Chart No. 10:  Contingency table for the variable “no bank credit” versus “does not use mobile banking application.”
No  bank credit vs with insu/g499 ﬁcient income
No Sí
Su/g499 ﬁcient income
Insu/g499 ﬁcient income_msitInsu/g499 ﬁcient Income                 insufficient income_msitinsufficient income       sufficient income no                     6                                           1097yes                    0                                             416
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correctiondata: tablachimt2
X-squared = 1.0996, df = 1, p-value = 0.2943Warning message:In chisq.test (tablachimt2) : Chi-squared approximation may be incorrect
Chart No. 11:  Contingency table for the variable “no bank credit” versus “insufficient income for treatment.”
No  bank credit vs with insu/g499 ﬁcient income
No Sí
Su/g499 ﬁcient income
Insu/g499 ﬁcient income_msicInsu/g499 ﬁcientincome                 insufficient income_msicinsufficient income      sufficient income  no                       3                                          1048yes                     0                                             477
Pearson´s Chi-squared test with Yates´continuity correctiondata: tablachimc2
X-squared = 0.29639, df = 1, p-value = 0.5862Warning message:In chisq.test (tablachimc2) : Chi-squared approximation may be incorrect
Chart No. 12:  Contingency table for the variable “no bank credit” versus “insufficient income for control.”USAID Rural Finance Initiative66
Data for Correspondence 
Analyses
The Rural Financial Inclusion (RFI), MSI-EVA Baseline, and Low-cost 
Transactions (Yanhaas) surveys 
mostly have categorical variables.  
In statistics, a categorical variable is a variable that has a usually fixed number of values for a qualitative 
characteristic.  In the three surveys 
there is a large number of categori-
cal variables, and therefore a mul-tidimensional statistical analysis was conducted of such variables.  In this case, due to the nature of the data, the most appropriate thing to do was to propose an multiple correspondences.  The multiple correspondence analysis (MCA) is a data analysis technique for nomi-nal categorical data that is used to reduce dimensionality and identify relationships between variables or groups of variables.  This is done by representing the data as points in a smaller dimension, usually repre-sented in two-dimensional plans, in which, indicate the existence of a relationship between such variables when two or more variables are close to each other in the plan.
For the Southern Tolima RFI Sur -
vey, the execution of a multiple 
correspondence analysis (MCA) of variables related to credits, savings and digital media variables, as well as sociodemographic variables, is proposed, which will help to identi-
fy profiles of potential clients.  The 
sociodemographic variables inclu-ded for the analysis are Age, Gender , 
Highest Educational Level Reached, Stratum and Occupation.
The first factorial plan will be taken 
into consideration for the analysis.  From this multiple correspondence analysis, certain profiles of potential clients can be identified for credit and savings products.  For example, there is an association between having savings in the bank and peo-ple of stratum 2 and stratum 3 with complete and incomplete university educational level.  At the same time there is an association between having a bank credit and a slightly different profile from the savings profile with a complete secondary and technological education level, pensioned and working, of the male gender .
On the other hand, other profiles 
are also identified about individuals who have not obtained bank credits, such as, for example, females who work or study at the same time.  Therefore, a possible training strate-gy for capturing new clients for bank credits could be to give preferential benefits to women and persons who are studying.  The aforementioned analysis is also ratified in trying to reduce paperwork costs to less than 300,000 Pesos in order to promote access to bank credits.
In turn, the relationship with those 
who do not have savings in the bank and have to travel for a long time (more than one hour) to arrive to a bank entity, is ratified.  However , there is also a relationship between not having savings in a bank and people of stratum 1 (which was to be expected), but it is surprising that there is an association between not having savings in the bank and incomplete educational levels, such as incomplete primary school, incomplete secondary school, and incomplete technological school.  This could be explained in a way by the fact that not completing the studies reduces the possibility that people having a bank savings ac -
count, either due to the forms that need to be filled or lack of certifica-tions.   Therefore, for these incom-plete education profiles, a strategy could be to omit the requirement of submitting certain certificates, if applicable, or to validate an advan-ced training certificate.  
At the top of the plan, variables of 
no response, stratum, education and occupation are grouped, and are associated with the people who spend more than $10,000 Pesos in transportation.  This could be inter -
preted as people who would spend a large amount of money in trans-piration, who generally travel long distances, who do not find credit and or savings products to be useful or are not interested in obtaining them.  Finally, regarding variables of possession of bank savings and cre-dits, no relationship is found.  This along with the analyses described 
above, show us that people’s profi-les for savings and credit products must have different strategies.
Technical Annex67
Categorical variables - MC A
Man
Woman Complet e primary educatio nIncomplet eS chool Education Primary
Edu_Secundaria completa
Incomplete High Sc hool Education
Edu_ Técnico/tecnológico completoTechnician / incomplete technical educatio n
Edu_Universidad completoEdu_Universidad incompleto
Stratum1Stratum 2
Est_Estrato3Rural without stratum
Unemplo yedStudy and work
Household chores
Pensioner Work
Saves in the bankDoesn 't save in the bank
More than one hourMenos de una hora
Over $100,000 PesosLess than $100,000 Pesos
No bank credit
Has bank creditMore than $300,000 PesosLess than $ 300,000
Enough income for creditInsu/g499 ﬁcient income for creditNo internet
Sí internetNo smartphone
Has smartphoneNo mobile banking
Has mobile banking
-1012
-1 0 12
Dim1 (8.1%)Dim2 (6.7%)
Below is the multiple correspondences analysis for MSI-EVAL.  In this case, the use of the previously created varia-
bles related to credit and savings, is proposed, together with the sociodemographic variables, which will help to identify profiles of potential clients.  The sociodemographic variables included for the analysis are Gender , Educa-tion Level, Stratum, Ethnic Group, and Civil Status.
The first factorial plan will be taken into consideration for the analysis.  From this multiple correspondence analy -
sis, certain profiles of potential clients can be identified for credit and savings products.  In general, the credit is more related to the internet access and savings accounts, and a little more to the travelling 
time to the bank branch.  This confirms the chi-square analyses presented before.
If we look more closely by categories of variables, we obtain the following plan:USAID Rural Finance Initiative68
Ma n
Wo manPrimary basic 5o (1o  - )
Basic S econdary
SchoolJob Instruction with a Degree
Training fo r work  without a degreeAverage (10. o  - 13o )Postgraduate with degree
Postgraduate without degreePreschool
Professional with a Degree
Profesional sin títuloProfessional Technician with a Degree
Professional Technician without a DegreeProfessional Technician with a Degree
Technologist without degreeFour,ﬁve ixo sThreeMarriedDivorced
Common-law marriag e
SingleWidow
Doesn 't have a
Savings AccountHas a Sa vings Account
No bank creditCredit_Yes
No Int ernet
Has internet Between 1 and 2 hoursbetween 30 and 45 min.Between 45 and 60 min.Mo re than 2 hours
Less than 15 min stratumZero , on e, two
Reason for Credit.  The credit destination w as not appr ove dReason for credit_low amountReason for Credit: I am report edReason for Credit:  Does not pr ove  incomeReason Credit _Surpassed Age
18-25 years26-35 years36-45 ages46-55 agesMo re 55 ye ar
-3-2-101
-1 01 2
Dim1 (4.8%)Dim2 (4.1%)Cat egorical variables - MCA
For example, there is an association between having savings in the bank and the people who have professional 
education, postgraduate, technological education with a degree, with completed and incomplete university edu-cation level.  At the same time there is an association between having a bank credit and a slightly different profile from the savings profile, married, white, instruction for work and primary school education, which is the most frequent category.
On the other hand, other profiles were also identified of people who have not obtained a bank credit.  For example, 
being of a low-stratum and low-income.  Not having credit or savings account due to paperwork is also ratified.
At the top of the plan, the variable “very low credit amount” and “credit destination was not approved” were grou-
ped with the variable “people with postgraduate education without a degree.”  Then there can be the relation that these credits could have been requested for completing such studies.Technical Annex69
Categorical variables - MCA
Trab
Dese
EstudentEst1
Est2
stratum 318-25 years26-35 years36-4546-55 yearsmore 55 year
Prim
Secu
UnivBancNoB anc
Inte rNoI nternet
mailTelephone call
SMSApB anDoesn 't matter
internet _hom e
PlanC eluCeluRec
public internet
Internet stor eWo man
Ma n2points3points
4points
Mas5puntosMicroF
Coop
dont know use itNoConf
AccC elu
transfer whatsapp
transfer facebook
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
-10 1
Dim1 (12.8%)Dim2 (6.3%)Below is the Multiple Correspondence Analysis (ACM) for the Yanhaas survey.  The use of previously created varia-
bles related to digital media as well as sociodemographic variables that help to identify profiles of potential clients, is proposed.   The sociodemographic variables included for the analysis are Gender , Education Level, Stratum, Age, and Occupation.
The results are as follows:USAID Rural Finance Initiative70
 ■ Viudo: Marital status:  widow.
 ■ Divorciado: Marital status:  Divorced.
 ■ Casado:  Marital status:  Married.  
 ■ En unión libre: Marital status:  Common-law marriage.
 ■ Soltero: Marital status:  Single.
 ■ Preescolar: Educational level:  Preschool.
 ■ Básica primaria: Educational level:  Basic Primary School.
 ■ Básica secundaria: Educational level:  Basic Secondary School.
 ■ Media: Educational level:  Middle School.  
 ■ Técnico profesional con título: Educational level:  Technical with 
Degree.  
 ■ Técnico profesional sin título: Educational level:  Technical without Degree.  
 ■ Tecnológico con título: Educational level:  Tecnological with Degree.
 ■ Tecnológico sin título: Educational level:  Tecnological without Degree.
 ■ Formación para el trabajo con título: Educational level:  Job Instruction with Degree.  
 ■ Formación para el trabajo sin título: Educational level:  Job Ins-truction without Degree.  
 ■ Profesional con título: Educational level:  Professional with Degree
 ■ Profesional sin título: Educational level:  Professional without Degree
 ■ Posgrado con título: Educational level:  Postgraduate with title.  ■ Posgrado sin título: Educational level:  Postgraduate without title.  
 ■ 18-25: age range:  18 to 25 years of age.
 ■ 26-35: age range:  26 a 35 years old.
 ■ 36-45: age range:  36 a 45 years old.
 ■ 46-55: age range:  46 to 55 years old.
 ■ Mas55: age range:  Older than 55 years old. 
 ■ No crédito banco: Doesn’t have a credit at the bank. 
 ■ Sí crédito banco: Has a credit at the bank.  
 ■ Internet_No: Does not have internet
 ■ Internet_Si: Has internet.  
 ■ CuentaAho_No: Does not have a savings account.  
 ■ CuentaAho_Si: Has a savings account.  
 ■ Menos de 15 min: It takes him/her less than 15 minutes to go to the bank .
 ■ Entre 16-30:  It takes him/her between 16 and 30 minutes to go to the bank .
 ■ Entre 31-45: It takes him/her between 31 and 45 minutes to go to the bank.
 ■ Entre 46-60: It takes him/her between 46 and 60 minutes to go to the bank.
 ■ Entre 1 y 2:  It takes him/her between 1 and 2 hours to go to the bank. 
 ■ Mas de 2 horas: It takes him/her more than 2 horas to go to the bank.
 ■ Hombre: Gender:  man. ■ Edu_primaria incompleta:  Incomplete Primary education level.
 ■ Edu_primaria:  Complete Primary education level.
 ■ Edu_secundaria completa:  Complete Secondary education level
 ■ Edu_secundaria incompleta:  Incomplete Secondary education level
 ■ Edu_técnico/tecnológio incomplet. Incomplete technical/techno-logical education level.
 ■ Edu_técnico/tecnológio completo:  Complete technical/technolo-gical education level.
 ■ Edu_universitario incompleto:  Incomplete University education level.
 ■ Edu_universitario incompleto:  Complete University education level.
 ■ Est_rural sin estrato: Rural stratum without stratum. 
 ■ Est_estrato1: Stratum 1.
 ■ Est_estrato2: Stratum 2.
 ■ Est_estrato3: Stratum 3. 
 ■ Estudiar y trabajar: Occupation:  study and Work.
 ■ Oficios hogar: Occupation:  household chores.
 ■ Pensionado:  Ocupation:  pensioner .
 ■ Unemployed:  Ocupation:  unemployed.
 ■ Ocup.NA: Ocupation: Not Applicable.
 ■ Menos de 10000 Pesos:  Spends less than $ 10,000 Pesos to go to the bank.  ■ Más de 10000 Pesos: Spends more than $10,000 Pesos to go to the bank.  
 ■ Menos de una hora:  Spends less than one hour to go to the bank.
 ■ Más de una hora: Spends more than one hour to go to the bank.
 ■ No crédito banco: Does not have a bank credit.
 ■ Sí crédito banco: Has a bank credit.  
 ■ Nointer: Does not have internet.
 ■ Si Internet: Has internet.  
 ■ Hombre: Gender:  Man.  
 ■ Mujer:  Gender:  Woman.  
 ■ No bancamovil: Does not use mobile banking.
 ■ Si bancamovil: Uses mobile banking.
 ■ No Smartphone: Does not have a smartphone.
 ■ Sí Smartphone:  Has a Smartphone.
 ■ Ahorra banco: Saves in the bank.
 ■ No ahorra banco: Does not save in the bank.
 ■ Ingreso insuficiente crédito:  Credit was rejected due to insuffi-cient funds.
 ■ Ingreso suficiente crédito: Credit was granted due to sufficient funds.
 ■ Menos 300000 tr: They believe that they would spend less than
 ■ $300.000 in paperwork for credit.
 ■ Más 300000 tr:  They believe that they would spend more than $300.000 in paperwork for credit.Multidimensional Analysis Labels
Labels for Southern Tolima
MSI-EVALTechnical Annex71
 ■ Woman:  Gender woman. 
 ■ RazonCreEstoyreportado:  They did not give him/her a credit 
because he/she was reported.
 ■ RazonCremontonbajo:  The credit amount they lend is too low.
 ■ RazonCrenocompruebaingreso:  Could not prove income for the credit. ■ RazonCreSobrepasoedad: Surpassed age for credit.
 ■ Crédito_No: Does not have a credit.
 ■ Crédito_Sí: It has a credit.  
 ■ Cero uno o dos: Stratum zero, one or two.  
 ■ Tres: Stratum three.
 ■ Cuatro, cinco o seis: Stratum 4, 5 y 6.
 ■18-25: Age range:  18 to 25 years old.
 ■26-35: Age range:  26 to 35 years old.  
 ■36-45: Age range:  36 to 45 years old. 
 ■46-55: Age range:  46 to 55 years old. 
 ■Mas55: Age range:  Older tan 55 years old.
 ■Est1: Stratum 1.
 ■Est2: Stratum 2.
 ■Est3: Stratum 3.
 ■Trab:  Worker occupation.
 ■Dese: Occupation:  Unemployed.
 ■Estu:  Ocupación:  Student. 
 ■Amac: Ocupación:  Homemaker .
 ■Prim:  Educational level:  Primary School Level.
 ■Secu: Educational level:  Secondary School Level.
 ■Univ:  Educational level:  University.  
 ■MicroF: Has used a Microfinancing.
 ■Coop: Has used a cooperative.
 ■Banc: Bancarized.
 ■NoBanc: Not bancarized.
 ■2 puntos:  Has 2 payment centers nearby.
 ■3 puntos: Has 3 payment points nearby.  
 ■4 puntos: It has 4 payment points nearby.
 ■5 puntos: It has 5 payment points nearby.
 ■Mas5 puntos: It has more 5 payment points nearby.
 ■Inter: Has internet. ■Nointer: Does not have internet.
 ■Internet Intercasa:  Internet access at home.
 ■InterCaf:  Internet access at internet cafe.
 ■InterPub:  Internet access through the public network or free wifi.
 ■AccCelu:  Internet access through the cell phone.
 ■PlanCelu: Internet access through a mobile plan.
 ■CeluRec: Internet Access in the mobile through topping up.
 ■SMS: Wants to receive bank notifications on the via SMS.
 ■Llamad:  Wants to receive bank notifications on his/her through a telephone call made to his/her cell phone
 ■ApBan: Wants to receive bank notifications through the bank app
 ■Mail: Wants to receive bank notifications by mail
 ■Llamad:  Is not interested in receiving bank notifications by any means
 ■Hombre:  Man (male gender) 
 ■Mujer:  Woman (female gender)
 ■Transface: Would make transactions or transfers through Face-book
 ■Transwap: Would make transactions or transfers through What -
sApp
 ■NoConf:  Does not trust making bank payments through cell phone
 ■Nosabeus:  Does not know how to make payments through the cell phone. YanhaasUSAID Rural Finance Initiative72
Na me of  the
investigationRural Financial Inclusion Su rvey–S outhern Tolima
Acronym EIFR
Responsible
EntityAlliance between the Banco de la Republica, USAID and the Unversidad de Ibagu é.
ObjectiveTo identify and analyze aspects related to  sociodemographic charact eristics, and inquire about
the access toﬁnancial products and money management of the population su rveyed.
Scope Information for three municipalities on the demand of ﬁnancial services.
Year 2016
Type ofInvestigatio nSample su rvey; 95% level of  trust; 5% sampling error; sample size:  404 su rveys distributed as
follows: 80 in Rioblanco, 162 in At aco and 162 in Planadas.
Periodicity Yearly
Universe ofStudy Three municipalities of Southern T olima: At aco, Planadas and Rioblanco.  Mu nicipalities charact erized by  being
rural, with great agricultural potential, specializ ed in the production of specialty co /g499fee, cocoa and banana.
Observationunit
People over 18 ye ars old, in the su rveyed municipalities.
GeographicalCove rageMunicipal co verage for Ataco, Planadas and Rioblanco in Southern Tolima.Data sheets
of the studie s
1.Rural financial inclusion surve y.
2.Evaluation of the baseline for the Rural Finance Initiative (RFI).
ObservationNa me
Acronym
ResponsibleEntityEvaluation of the Baseline fo r the R ural Finance Initiative (RFI) .
MSI-E VAL
Management Systems International (MSI) and USAIDTechnical Annex73
Objective
Scope Information of 5 out of the 197 RFI municipalities (2,5%).
Year 2017
Type of
investigation
Periodicity Yearly
Universe of
Study
Observation
UnitPeople over 18 ye ars old, in the homes of the selected municipalities.
GeographicalCove rageUSAID selected the EVAL Project (E valuatio nandAnalysis forLearning Project), which was
implemented byManagement Systems International, toconduct anRFI baseline evaluation. This is
the ﬁrst phase o famultiannual process that will be conducte with the objecti veofevaluating whether
the RFI is having the intended impact .This report ofthe baseline ofthe impact evaluation will ha ve
two objectives: a) will ser veasabenchmark formeasuring changes in the quality ,access ,e/g499 ﬁciency
and cost ofthe ﬁnancial services arising from the interventio nof the Initiati ve;b) will ser veasan
analysis ofthe underlying variables that in /g501luence the e/g499 fectiveness ofthe Initiati ve.The evidence is
expected tobe useful forUSAID, the G overnment ofColombia, the Banco de la República, other
donors ,and other stakeholders ,forimproving the current and future programs, andaddressing the
barriersthatexistagainstﬁnancial rural inclusion.
Baseline with a random, probabilistic , multi-stage sampling su rvey.The design is probabilistic
because each sample unit hasaknown selectio nprobability greater tha nzero.Aprobabilistic sample
is the only design that will allo wEVALt od rawconclusions about the su rveyed inhabitants ofthe
municipality that wererandomly selected. Once the treatment municipalities andcontrol
municipalities deﬁned,a multi-stage sampling will be made oneach ofthem following structure in
each ofthem: the Prima rySampling Unit (UPM) in the urbanareaand the populated centers is the
cartographic block (locally known as “apple”); andin the scattered ruralarea, the UPM is the rural
settlement (vereda). TheSeconda rySampling Unit (USM) is the home .The Final Sampling Unit
(UFM) is the person belonging totheuniverse under study .The method forselecting the sampling
units during all three stages is the Simple ,Rando mSampling. EVAL conducted 3047 su rveys: 1519 in
thetreatmentmunicipalities and1528inthecontrolmunicipalities.
10ruralmunicipalities ofthe country: Corozal, Uribe, Villa Rica, Cartagena del Chairá, Arboletes ,El
Cerrit o,ElSantuario ,SanMartín, Trinida dandPazdeA ripo.Eachmunicipalityissubdividedint othree
zones: a) urbanarea, b) populated centers (suburban area) and (c) scattered ruralarea(rura larea).
According tothe deﬁnitions made bythe National Administrati veDepartment ofStatistics (DANE),
theurbanareai sc alled the municipal head, while the populated centers andthe scattered ruralarea
constitutetherest ofthemunicipality(thatis,themunicipalityis predominantl yrural.
Coverage for ten (10) municipalities ,ﬁve (5) treatment an dﬁve (5) control, with the following su rvey
distribution.
Control:
El Cerrito: 303
El Santuario: 321
San Martín: 302
Trinidad: 300
Paz de Aripo: 302Treatment:
Corozal: 303
Uribe: 302
Villa Rica: 301Cartagena del Chairá: 304Arboletes: 309USAID Rural Finance Initiative74
3.Low-Cost Online Transactions
Observation
Na meLow -cost Online T ransactions
Acronym N. A.
ResponsibleEntityYanhaas and USAID
ObjectiveCharacterize people who conduct ﬁnancial transactions, and identif y the barriers an d
moti vators that exist fo r using t echnology in such transactions .
Scope Information of three rural municipalities of the RFI initiative: Caucasia, Miranda and Saldaña.
Year 2018
Type ofInvestigatio nPersonal interceptio nsurveys (without asample fram e,where the siz eof the universe is not known or
each ofits elements cannot be located and identiﬁed). People are selected systematicall yaccording to
apreviously-deﬁned criterion. Inthis case ,sampling consists ofintercepting and interviewing one out
of“k” people that pass throug hacertain place, who meet the characteristics that deﬁne the universe
under study .I nt otal, 600 su rveys wereconducted, 200 per municipality .Thestudy wascarried out
through focus groups since its purpose also ha vequantitati veinformation.
Periodicity Yearly
Universeof Study Three rural municipalities: Caucasia, Miranda and Saldaña, with banked and unbanked people whocarry out at least two ﬁnancial transactions per month.
ObservationUnit
People older than 18 years old, and found in the interception sites.
GeographicalCove rageCove rage for 3 municipalities with the following distribution of surveys:
Saldaña: 100 banked, 100 unbanked.Caucasia: 100 banked, 100 unbanked.
Miranda: 100 bank ed, 100 unbankedTechnical Annex75
1. Saving. It is the action of separa-
ting a part of the income that a per -
son or company earns to save it for future use, either for some planned or unforeseen expense, economic emergency or possible investment.
2. Aversion to loss. In economy and 
decision theory, it refers to people’s strong tendency to prefer “not to lose rather than winning.”
3. Mobile banking. It is a service 
provided by a bank or another fi-nancial entity that allows its clients to perform a series of transactions remotely through a mobile device (such as a cellular phone or tablet) and a software, usually an app pro-vided by the financial entity for that purpose.
4. Mobile wallet.  It’s an applica-
tion for smart devices, in which credit cards, debit cards or deposit accounts are digitized, and which allows the user to save money and make transactions (payments and collections).
5. Transactional channels.  All those 
technological and physical tools that financial entities use to establi-sh their relationship with the client.  Usually reference is made to ATMs, physical branches, the portal web, banking correspondents, mobile offices and mobile operations.
6. Credit. Also called a credit agree-
ment, is a financial transaction in which one person (the creditor) makes a loan for a certain amount of money to another person (the debtor), and in which the debtor is committed to repay over time the requested amount (in addition to the payment of accrued interest, insurances and costs, if any) in the established time or deadline, in accordance with the conditions established for such loan.
7. Financial education. It is a 
process for the development of skills and attitudes that, through the assimilation of understandable information and basic resource management and planning tools, allows individuals to:  a) make personal and social economic decisions in their daily lives, and (b) use financial products and services to improve their quality of life under certainty conditions.
8. Financial entities.  Banks, savings 
entities or savings and credit unions in which financial intermediaries manage and lend money.  It also encompasses intermediaries which, without being banks, offer loans or cash financing facilities.
9. Nuclear family. Family made 
up of members of a single family nucleus constituted by the parents and their children.  The broadest de -
finitions consider a nuclear family to be made up of two paired adults with children or without children, and by an adult with one or more children.
10. Financial inclusion. For indivi-
duals and companies, it is unders-tood as the access to useful and affordable financial products that satisfy their needs (transactions, payments, savings, credits and in-surances), provided in a responsible and sustainable manner .
11. Financial intermediary. It is a 
person, entity or institution that offers financial services, carrying out an economic function between savers and companies that require financing.
12. Baseline. Also called a baseline 
study, is the first measurement of all the indicators contemplated in the design of a social development project that allows stakeholders to know the value of the indicators when the planned actions are initia-ted.  In other words, it establishes the starting point of the interven-tion project.
13. Financial portfolio.  It includes 
all the financial products and/or services that an entity offers to its clients.
14. Priming. Concept used in 
cognitive psychology to refer to the fact that certain stimuli given to a 
person influence in the response that the person will give to subse-quent stimuli.
15. Financial product. Instruments 
that help to save and invest in different ways that are appropriate for the risk level that each investor is willing to assume.GlossaryUSAID Rural Finance Initiative76
16. Financial access centers 
(points). It corresponds to the sites in which people can have access to financial products or services.
17. Remittance centers (points). A 
remittance center is a commercial establishment from which electro-nic transfers or electronic remit -
tances can be made between two persons without the intermediation of a bank.
18. Facial recognition. It is a com-
puter-led application that identifies automatically a person in a digital image.  It consists in making an analysis of the facial characteristics of the person, extracted from the image or from a key film frame of a video source, and comparing it to a database.
19. Financial Services.  Services pro-
vided by the entities of the financial sector to their clients. These are pro-vided by savings and credit unions, banks, funds and other financial entities, especially to safeguard clients’ money, manage savings and credit products and provide transac -
tional services, among others.  
20. Token. A security token is an 
electronic device that is given to an authorized user of a computerized service to facilitate the authenti-cation process.  Electronic tokens are small and thus can be carried comfortably in a pocket or purse, and their design allows them to be 
carried in a keychain.  
21. Electronic Transaction. It is a financial operation carried out using a digital application; that is, without the intermediation of physical money.
22. Financial Transaction. It is an 
agreement, communication or movement made between a buyer and a seller , in which an asset is exchanged for a payment. It invol-ves a change in the status of the finances of two or more businesses or individuals.  The buyer and seller are separate entities or objects that generally exchange valuable pro-ducts, such as information, goods, services or money.
23. Banked Users. Adults who hold 
an account at a formal financial entity, such as a bank or a savings and credit cooperative.
24. Unbanked users. Adults who 
do not have an account at a formal financial entity, such as a bank or a savings and credit union, and the-refore cannot have access to formal financial services such as credits, de-posit accounts and money transfers.Allied Financial entities 
Allied Non-Financial Entities
San José de la Montaña Guadalupe Isnos Palestina Guamal Santa Rosa de OsosTurbaco San Bernardo del Viento Buenavista Pradera Espinal El Doncello Santa María
Altamira Caloto Saladoblanco Puerto López Chinú Coyaima Córdoba La Argentina
Puerto Gaitán Restrepo Pitalito San Andrés  de Sotavento Puerto Tejada RioblancoEl Roble San Juan de Arama Santander de Quilichao Colombia San Pelayo El Bagre
Momil Cotorra Hobo Caldono Chima Cereté La Montañita Anorí Guamo TimanáRivera Fuente de Oro Tesalia Miranda Morelia Tarazá Sahagún Piendamó PlatoSan Juan de Betulia (Betulia) Candelaria El Castillo Silvia Tumaco San Antero Uribe
Roncesvalles Purísima San Pedro  de Urabá Acacías Talaigua Nuevo San Agustín Tello
San Vicente del Caguán Elías Campamento La Macarena Turbana Mutatá Necoclí
Carepa San Juan  de Urabá Castilla la Nueva Palmito Vistahermosa Planeta Rica
Cartagena del Chairá Ciénaga de Oro Nátaga Magangué Puerto Concordia Sampués Puriﬁcación
San Carlos Buenavista Caucasia Pital El Dorado San José del Fragua Baraya Cicuco
Palermo Lejanías Teruel Ituango Florida La Plata Barranca de Upía Jamundí
Valdivia Jambaló El Paujil San Onofre El Calvario Villa Rica El Guamo Prado Yaguará
María la Baja Cáceres Planadas Tierralta Cabuyaro Chalán Yarumal Ayapel Oporapa
Saldaña Galeras Cubarral Toledo Sucre Angostura Agrado Morales Ataco Lorica
Apartadó San Pedro San Antonio Corinto Buenos Aires Acevedo Morroa Nechí Íquira
Mahates Turbo Tarqui San Martín Los Córdobas Corozal Toluviejo Arboletes Chigorodó
Cumaral Campoalegre San Andrés de Cuerquía Canalete Villavieja Colosó Suárez
San Juan Nepomuceno Aipe Mesetas Moñitos Paicol Padilla Zambrano Briceño
San Jose de Ure Puerto Escondido Gigante San Juanito Mapiripán La Apartada
Puerto Rico Puerto Rico Santa Ana Puerto Libertador Arjona Los Palmitos Toribío
Ortega Valencia Belén de los Andaquíes El Carmen de Bolívar Chaparral Guachene
San Carlos de Guaroa Puerto Lleras Garzón Ovejas Zaragoza Pueblo  Nuevo Sincé
Tuchín Natagaima Montelíbano Suaza Mompós Algeciras San Jacinto GranadaThis publica  on is made possible thanks to the support of the people 
and government of the United States, through the United States 
Agency for Interna  onal Development (USAID).  The informa  on 
provided is not oﬃcial of the U.S. Government and does not 
represent the views or opinions of USAID or the U.S. government.The rural ﬁnancial market in the country is full of opportunities and 
challenges. The diversiﬁcation of entities, deployment of new services 
and ﬁnancial products or the emergence of other ways of relating with 
users (such as digital means) constitute a promising picture in which both 
banked and unbanked people are included.  From a ﬁnancial perspective, 
the development of rural areas implies the access of populations to 
services and products o  fered by ﬁnancial entities and intermediaries. To 
contribute to this purpose, the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), through its Rural Finance Initiative (RFI) 
program, conducted three studies between 2016 and 2018 in di ferent 
rural areas of Colombia in order to investigate the characteristics, 
conditions and ﬁnancial habits of its inhabitants.  This document shows 
and explains  several of their ﬁndings, with a focus on digital 
transactional channels, while proposing some strategies for the ﬁnancial 
inclusion of communities, so that they may obtain beneﬁts, security and 
education from the use of mobile devices or the new services and 
products o  fered. 