Photo: Bernard Recirdo , 2017 CGAP Photo Contest
© CGAP 2017
2Digital financial services can lead to…
They contribute to international development across several sectors (education, energy, 
health, water) and organizational structures (for-profit business, nonprofit, government 
body). Greater 
EfficiencyDeeper Customer 
EngagementUnleashed 
InvestmentNew Business    
Models
3Reduce both upfront capital 
expenditures and ongoing 
operational expenses by 
leveraging third -party 
payment infrastructure 
to reduce cash handling 
costs and instantly transfer 
money anywhere.Digital transactions create 
digital records, which can 
be tracked and audited. 
This real -time, granular 
data bring much -needed 
transparency to organizations, 
while allowing them to solve 
problems quickly and use their 
resources more efficiently.Similarly , digital 
payments lower frictions 
for customers, enabling 
them to make payments 
from their own home or 
neighborhood without 
long queues .Greater efficiency
Digital payments create leaner businesses.Digital finance saved lives and money
during the 2014 –2016 Ebola crisis in Sierra Leone.1
Over 14,000 people were 
infected with Ebola in 
Sierra Leone and nearly 
4,000 ofthem died.
Estimated number 
of lives saved by 
reducing worker strikes.Estimated number of 
working days gained 
by preventing strikes.Estimated amount saved by 
reducing fraud and cost of 
handling cash and increasing 
accuracy.Ebola response workers 
were at the front lines of 
fighting the outbreak.Workers found that cash 
payments were subject 
to errors , delays ,and 
fraud.
Implementing digital payments to these workers had a dramatic impact.
4Efficient healthcare saves lives and moneyGreater EfficiencyUgandan electricity distributor 
Umeme began eliminating cash 
payments in 2014.
➢Operating costs cut by 2.5% 
year-on-year through 2017.
➢At the same time, its customer 
base increased by 73%.3Digitizing Teacher Salaries in 
Liberia (USAID)2
Reduce missed 
class time because 
teachers can collect 
salaries in less time.
Save time to collect 
salary from 2 days per 
month to 25 minutes.Reduce cost to 
collect salary ,
from $25 to $2.Efficiency can improve access to education and energy. 
5
Electric Utility Going        
Cashless in UgandaGreater EfficiencyDigital payments save customers time and money. 
6Digitization of school fees in Côte d’Ivoire strengthened schoo l systems…
Secondary school 
registration 
payments made 
by mobile money.4Households save 
time and money 
by paying fees 
digitally .Increase in overall 
fee collection means 
larger school 
budgets.Better data for 
monitoring students 
and schools and 
allocating resources .
…Digitizing water bills in Kenya saved households valuable time.
Decrease in time customers in 
Kiamumbi , Kenya , spend to pay water 
bills .50001010
1101010
1010100
Greater EfficiencyDFS enables proactive cashflow management.
7Pay-as-you-go (PAYGo) 
solar operators know the 
minute that a payment is 
due; they use that data to 
pro-actively encourage 
customers to pay on time.Education ministries can 
more easily track where 
their funds are going, 
helping to eliminate “ghost 
teachers.” Ghost teachers in 
India cost the government 
about $1.6 billion per year.6Bus operators in Kigali 
increased revenue by140% 
after implementing digital 
payments by eliminating 
side-selling of tickets. The 
change to digital payments 
helped them optimize route 
placement.7OPTS BACKPAYMENT 
NOTIFICATION:
Your payment 
is due FridayPHONEGreater EfficiencySegmentation improves customer management.
8
Green tortoises pay 
behind schedule, but 
are consistent and will 
repay their loan in full.Red tortoises have 
a higher likelihood of 
default and require 
rapid, proactive 
interventions.M-KOPA, a leading PAYGo solar company, uses repayment data 
to segment its customer base , then tailors credit interventions 
for each segment.8
DUE 
DATE
Giraffes consistently 
pay on time and finish 
their loans on schedule.Leopards pay ahead 
of time and retire 
their loans early.?
M-KOPA
Greater Efficiency9Deeper Customer Engagement
Providers leverage their 
customer relationships and 
granular data to design tailored 
savings, credit, and insurance 
products that bring more value 
to their customers.Digital payments platforms 
make it possible to implement 
differential pricing schemes, 
which can be powerful tools 
to expand service access 
for vulnerable households.Digital finance data can be analyzed to improve customer 
service and develop new product offerings tailored to a 
customer’s needs.DFS data lead to new and better services for customers.Deeper Customer Engagement
10In 2016, CGAP 
worked with Fenix to 
develop an education 
financing product.
PAYGo providers have developed new credit, savings, 
and insurance products for good -paying customers.9
Alternative credit providers such as One Acre Fund have 
bundled additional assets with their agricultural input 
loans, allowing farmers to purchase solar home systems(SHS). 
10
Fenix International11
Households borrowed 
for a term’s school 
fees, then could 
pay off over the next 
100 days.If they missed a 
school fee payment, 
their lights went out.Percentage of 
households selling 
assets prematurely to 
pay school fees fell 
from 46% to 20%.
DFS+ smart meters can help water utilities connect more 
customers and keep them connected.12Deeper Customer Engagement
11
CityTaps, a French technology company, helps water utilities sell water on a 
prepaid basis . 
Its CTSuite solution includes water meters for customers and a cloud -based 
management platform for the utility that collects use data , reconciles 
accounts, and connects to smart meters to switch them off and on.
The solution is integrated with digital payments. Customers pay as much 
as they want, when they want, from wherever there’s a mobile network.
The water provider in Niamey , Niger ,is piloting the CityTaps solution 
in several ways. Rather than disconnect customers who have arrears, 
the utility gives them the option of adopting prepayments and paying 
down the arears over time.
The CityTaps solution could be used to help customers finance new 
connections , which allows utilities to expand into lower -income areas. CityTaps
Targeted subsidies are more effective when 
implemented through DFS.Deeper Customer Engagement 
An often -overlooked aspect of digital 
finance is that it permits (and 
enforces) a level of pricing nuance 
that is difficult to achieve with cash.
In Bogota, smartcards allow the 
metro system to extend millions of 
dollars in discounted fares to over 
160,000 low -income riders. This had 
a positive impact on the hourly 
earnings of workers.13
Energy and water providers are 
looking to do the same, allowing 
them to maintain affordability through 
cross -subsidies.
1213Unleashed investment
A principal benefit of digital 
finance cited by providers is 
the security it brings to their 
investors.By securing end-to-endpayments and providing easily auditable 
records, digital finance helps companies and organizations raise 
new funds and manage thefunds more efficiently.
Digital cash flows can be 
passed through directly to 
investors or special purpose 
vehicles, giving them added  
security.Digital bill pay accounts 
can be held as collateral for 
commercial debt 
transactions.DFS provide investors greater transparency 
of and security over investee cash flows.Unleashed Investment 
Similarly, Bboxx securitized part of its solar 
loan portfolio using digital payments. The 
structurer of the transaction wrote: 
“These interventions are crucial for 
many ‘blended finance’ structures, 
in which cash flows are isolated and 
divided among investors and providers.”15“It is essential to be able to isolate the pool of assets transferred to the 
[special purpose vehicle (SPV)]. This means segregating…the payment 
stream from those assets so that they flow into the SPV with no or a 
minimum amount of interface [from the originator…[ideally] proceeds will 
flow directly from the mobile money provider into the SPV’s bank account 
without involvement of the [off -grid energy company].”15
Vulcan financed 10 minigrids
throughout Kenya by holding 
the billpay account that 
customers paid into, securing 
its investment.14
141415New Business Models
When finance is digitized, all types of service providers can 
better serve lower -income and more remote customers.
Digital payments facilitate 
more micropayments and 
prepayments ,which fit 
better with irregular incomes 
and are cheaper to collect.
Separately, each of these attributes can improve existing service models. 
But combined , they can be used to create entirely new classes of business models 
that sustainably meet development objectives, such as PAYGo solar.Remote transactions enable new business models 
that can expand access to critical services.
Transaction data and 
low-cost communication/ 
payment channels make it 
easier for providers to design 
follow -on offerings with 
higher value propositions.The added security 
of digital payment 
flows enables 
increased investment.Remote Lockout 
technology reduces 
portfolio risk by ensuring 
willingness to pay.Digital Payments 
allow companies 
to sell to anyone 
who has mobile 
connectivity.
Customer pays 
a$10-30 deposit 
and acquires the 
asset.Flexible repayment 
schedule fits well 
with low-income 
cash flows.Monthly payments 
of $8 -$20 combine 
loan installments 
and use fees .Financed, Affordable SHS
SHS is purchased 
on credit.Digital finance+ remote communications facilitates PAYGo
service and financing , which can expand access to 
lighting, cooking fuel, and water.New Business Models 
16DFS can increase smallholder farmers ’income by giving 
them better access to markets.New Business Models 
17TruTrade Africa, a social enterprise, uses a cloud -based 
digital platform toprovide smallholder farmers with a more 
transparent and efficient market for their crops.TruTrade Africa
TruTrade negotiates 
a price and quantity of a 
commodity that a buyer 
will offer to purchase.TruTrade’s platform 
notifies a network of 
traders who can accept 
the terms and collect the 
crops from smallholders.
TruTrade provides 
traders with financing so 
that they can pay farmers 
“cash on the bag.” Traders buy from 
smallholders based on the 
terms provided by TruTrade.
They are incentivized to 
provide the best price 
possible to farmers. And 
farmers can see the full costs 
of intermediation, including 
the commissions of TruTrade 
and of the trader.17%
Approximate 
premium paid to 
smallholders 
through TruTrade.16
1 2 3
© CGAP 2017
Conclusion
18Digital financial services can play a significant role in 
advancing international development, across a broad 
range of sectors.Conclusion
19
Realizing the full potential of DFS in other sectors 
requires further effort.Conclusion
20In mature DFS markets… 
SUGGESTIONS EXAMPLES
Test blended finance models for 
lower -income segments.Encourage innovation beyond 
proven business models.
Explore integrating DFS into 
other value chains.Test DFS -enabled business models in 
pharmaceutical value chain.
Support responsible 
consumer finance models.Adapt consumer protection principles to 
PAYGo energy and digital credit.
Support investment in 
early -stage providers.Provide funding for seed capital, 
accelerators, and piloting of innovation.Realizing the full potential of DFS in other sectors 
requires further effort . (continued)Conclusion
21Where there is low DFS adoption… 
SUGGESTIONS EXAMPLES
Provide evidence of the link between 
DFS and other policy objectives.Encourage policy makers to 
make DFS a priority.
Convince providers to invest 
in DFS and promote use cases.Demonstrate the business opportunity of 
DFS in utility payments and other sectors.
Build out the basic DFS 
infrastructure.Encourage mobile money 
interoperability.
Help non -DFS providers 
integrate with DFS providers.Encourage harmonized , open APIs.Research continues on…
22•Making PAYGo solar an investable asset class by improving the sustainability 
of the business model and creating a common language of performance 
metrics for investors and companies.
•Adapting the PAYGo business model for other sectors, e.g.,financing income -
generating assets ( solar mills, motorcycle taxis ,etc.). 
•Building the case for policy makers to adapt DFS as a means to achieve 
broader policy objectives in access to water , education ,and energy.
•Expanding the understanding of the regional differences in how DFS can 
affect other sectors by exploring more use cases in Asian and Latin American 
markets.
•Exploring the role of financial inclusion in furthering development objectives in 
other sectors, possibly healthcare or housing.Conclusion© CGAP 2017
www.cgap.org
Acknowledgments
241.Bangura , J. A. 2016.  “ Saving Money, Saving Lives: A Case Study on 
the Benefits of Digitizing Payments to Ebola Response Workers in 
Sierra Leone .” New York: Better Than Cash Alliance. 
2.mSTAR . 2016. “Mobile Salary Payment Factsheet .”Washington, 
D.C.: USAID and FHI360. https://www.bushchicken.com/wp -
content/uploads/mSTAR_Liberia_2 -pager_MobileMoney.pdf
3.Umeme Limited. “H1 2018 Results Presentation.” 
https ://www.umeme.co.ug/file/Investor -Relations/Umeme_H1 -
2018_Results -Presentation.pdf
4.Frydrych, Jennifer, Claire Scharwatt , and Nicolas Vonthron . 2015. 
“Paying School Fees with Mobile Money in Côte d’Ivoire: A Public -
private Partnership to Achieve Greater Efficiency.” London: GSMA . 
https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -
content/uploads/2015/10/2015_GSMA_Paying -school -fees-with-
mobile -money -in-Cote -dIvoire.pdf
5.Hope, Rob., Tim Foster, Aaron Krolikowski , and Ilana Cohen. 2011. 
“Mobile Water Payment Innovations in Urban Africa.” Oxford: 
University of Oxford
6.Muralidharan , Karthik, Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, and Aakash Mohpal . 
2016 . “The Fiscal Cost of Weak Governance: Evidence from 
Teacher Absence In India.” Washington , D.C.:World Bank .
7.Iqbal, Sabahat . 2016. “A Public -Private Partnership to Digitize Bus 
Fares in Rwanda.” CGAP blog post, 27 December . 
https://www.cgap.org/blog/public -private -partnership -digitize -bus-
fares -rwanda
8.M-KOPA. 2017. Interview with CFO. 
9.TechMoran . 2017. “PEG Africa Partners BIMA to Reward Loyal 
Customers in Ghana with Free Medical Insurance Covers.” 
TechMoran .https://techmoran.com/2017/01/18/peg -africa -partners -
bima -reward -loyal -customers -free-insurance -cover/This presentation was created by Daniel Waldron and Alexander Sotiriou 
under the supervision of Xavier Faz. Design and data visualization by 
Gail Zuniga. 
Critical review, input, and guidance were provided by CGAP colleagues, 
Mayada El -Zoghbi, Anna Nunan, Lauren Braniff, Michael Tarazi ,and 
Maria Fernandez -Vidal.End NotesEnd Notes, continued
2510.Tucker, Hailey. 2015. “A Loan and a Light: One Acre Fund, in 
Partnership with GreenLight Planet , Aiming for 100K Solar Lamps in 
Kenya This Year.” Next Billion. https://nextbillion.net/a -loan-and-a-
light/
11.Waldron , Daniel ,and Chris Emmott. 2018. “Off -Grid Solar Company 
Helping Customers Pay School Fees.” CGAP blog post, 1 August . 
https://www.cgap.org/blog/grid -solar -company -helping -customers -
pay-school -fees
12.CityTaps. 2017. “Impact Report: CityTaps –SEEN Prepayment 
CTSuite Pilot Project in Niamey , Niger .”Paris : CityTaps.
13.Hernández, Camila Rodríguez ,and Tatiana Peralta Quiros . 2016. 
“Balancing Financial Sustainability and Affordability in Public 
Transport: The Case of Bogota, Colombia .” Washington , D.C.:
World Bank . https://www.itf -
oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/colombia -financial -sustainability -
affordability -public -transport -peralta.pdf
14.Blodgett, Courtney, Emily Moder , Lauren Kickham, and Harrison 
Leaf. 2017. “ Financing the Future of Rural Electrification.” Vulcan 
Inc. and SteamaCo . P. 28. 
https ://www.vulcan.com/MediaLibraries/Vulcan/Documents/Financin
g-the-Future -Whitepaper -Oct-2017.pdf?website_link1
15.Aidun , Chris ,and Dirk Muench. 2016. “Securitization: Unnecessary 
Complexity or Key to Financing the DESCO Sector ?” Zurich : 
Persistent Energy Capital. https://persistent.energy/wp -
content/uploads/2018/11/Securitization.pdf
16.Mattern , Max ,and Rossana Ramirez. 2017. “Digitizing Value Chain 
Finance for Smallholder Farmers.” Focus Note 106. Washington , 
D.C.: CGAP. https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/digitizing -
value -chain -finance -smallholder -farmers