International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE ) 
ISSN: 2277 -3878,  Volume -8 Issue -2S6, July 2019  
 
662 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number:B11260782S619/2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.B1126.0782S619   
Abstract: Food delivery aided through digital apps has emerged 
as one of the fast -growing developments in the e -commerce sp ace. 
The advent of digital tools has bestowed a different outlook on the 
food industry. Consumers today have the privilege to choose from 
a variety of cuisines, anywhere, anytime from a range of food 
providers listed in the e -commerce space. Added attracti ons like 
no minimum order value and the multitude of payment options 
like net banking, digital wallets, and cash on delivery all have 
increased the consumer convenience. Shrinking urban -rural 
divide with easy access to smartphones has hastened the growth 
and acceptance of online food delivery systems. Companies have 
remodelled their business strategies on a modern day digital 
platform to keep pace with the customer’s changing needs and 
preferences. In this paper, we particularly examine the growth 
and relev ance of digital apps in the food delivery systems run by 
the food providers particularly fast food companies in India and a 
few strategies which could be adopted by them for sustainable 
business in the days to come.   
 
Keywords: Digital Apps, e -Commerce, Fo od Products 
Marketing, Consumer Choice   
I. INTRODUCTION  
The business of delivering ready to eat foodstuffs from 
restaurants to home is undergoing a sea change as new online 
platforms enable food providers to capture markets and 
customers day by day. Worldw ide, the food delivery market 
stands at 4 percent of food items sold through restaurants 
chains and fast -food outlets. This market has already matured 
in many countries with a growth rate estimated at 3.5 percent 
for five years down the line (McKinsey, 201 6). The picture is 
not so different in our country as well. The conventional mode 
of food delivery wherein customers order food online through 
the websites of restaurants, or fast -food chains have now been 
replaced with the concept of ‘aggregator business model.’ 
Here the business player provides a ‘single window system’ 
enabling the customers to order food online from a wide 
variety of food providers registered on the portal. The 
‘aggregator’ would charge a fixed margin of the order from 
the food provider and in turn, handles the delivery of the food 
item at the doorstep of the consumer. The focus has now 
shifted from technology to logistics, which is currently acting 
 
Revised Manuscript Received on July 22, 201 9. 
N. Thamaraiselvan *, Department of Management Studies, National 
Institute of Technology, Tiruc hirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India . Email: 
selvanthamarai27@gmail.com  
G. R. Jayadevan , Department of Management Studies, National 
Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India. Email: 
jayadevan.nitt@gmail.com  
K. S. Chandrasekar , Institute of Management  in Kerala , University of 
Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India. E mail: kscnair@gmail.com  
 as the major cost drivers for the food industry. Despite 
escalating traveling and vehicle maintenance costs, these food 
delivery companies make profits by up to 30% (Mckinsey, 
2016).  
Indian consumers habituated to online shopping experience 
through digital apps and e -commerce websites with maximum 
convenience and transparency would expect the s ame when it 
comes to the matter of online food ordering as well (Kapoor 
and Vij, 2018). Just next to grocery items, food delivery 
proved to be a big opportunity for Indian e -commerce 
companies. Online food delivery market in India, comprising 
of aggregator s and internet kitchens, showed a spectacular 
growth in recent years. The market in India is of the tune of 15 
billion USD and is all set for an exponential growth phase 
(Kanteti, 2018). The sector is very competitive, and growth of 
online food ordering vi a digital platform made the 
businessmen and entrepreneurs awake and took notice. Some 
popular ‘food aggregators’ like Zomato, Swiggy, Food Panda, 
and UberEats are feeding the Indian cities online and making 
decent profits. Various food delivery web portals  and mobile 
apps offer the rational Indian customer a direct comparison 
between the prices and rating of different food outlets and 
restaurants serving the same dishes and to choose among the 
various options (Gera et al., 2018).   
II. METHODOLOGY  
This paper is  purely analytical based on the available 
secondary data. Existing literature was thoroughly analyzed 
to explain the trends and patterns in the ‘Digital Food 
delivery’ market in India. Secondary data was explored to 
identify and explain various variables t hat drive the 
acceptability of ‘food aggregators’ in Indian food marketing 
scenario, the newer trends, and future market. The secondary 
data sources used were sales reports available from the 
official websites of various companies, published documents, 
survey reports, reports released by Government agencies and 
Marketing Research agencies.  
III. DISCUSSION  
A. Growth Drivers  
 
India , with population  of over 1.3 billion, is undoubtedly a 
big consumer market across the globe. We have more than 
50% of our population belo w the age of 25 and more than 
65% below the age of 35 years. It is estimated that, in 2020, 
the average age of an Indian will be 29 years, compared to 37 
for China and 48 for Japan which would make India, a nation 
with the youngest population in the world too.  
 
 Digital Food Delivery Apps Revolutionizing 
Food Products Marketing in India  
N. Thamaraiselvan, G. R. Jayadevan, K. S. Chandrasekar   
Digital Food Delivery Apps Revolutionizing Food Products Marketing in India  
663  
Published By:  
Blue E yes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number:B11260782S6 19/2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.B1126.0782S619  Youth populations below 40 years demand more fast food 
items in their diet (Kharas, 2017). Young  Indian appetite 
would be one of the major growth drivers for food and 
beverage sector on the whole.  
 
Indian youth productively employed in high -earning fields 
like IT/ITES, banking  and financial se rvices, tourism, and 
hospitality have scaled up their standard of living and made 
their wallets  heftier. A recent study conducted by the World 
Bank revealed a remarkable 50% hike in per capita income in 
India dur ing the period from 2006 to 2016. Urban -rural divide 
is shrinking in  the country. Almost all cities in I ndia witness a 
visible change in the social setting, which further propelled 
the mushrooming of fast food outlets across the length and 
breadth of the c ountry.  
 
Lifestyle changes mainly in Urban India with 
double -income earners in families, crunch on quality time for 
spending with family members, changing food habits all have 
resulted in growing demand for  speedy  access to food items 
especially cooked fo od stuffs at affordable rates. More 
women became earning members in their families, with the 
result that they spend most of their productive hours for 
commuting and at work . There will be less time at their 
disposal to cook full blown meals at home, all by  themselves. 
In such situations, employed women generally spend a large 
portion of their disposable income on buying take outs or 
eating out.  
 
Nowadays, more and more restaurants and food outlets 
offer global cuisines. More Indians, particularly those 
dwelling in urban centers, tryout new cuisines, with the result 
that the number of times they dine out increase, thus positively 
influencing t he overall Indian food industry. There exists a 
symbiotic association between the growth of retailing and the 
prolife ration of international food brands and restaurant 
chains in the country. The food providers identified retail 
malls to be ambient for getting more customers who visit 
malls for shopping. On the other side, m ore customers dining 
at food outlets obviously p erform s hopping at the shops in 
retail malls too. Hence a ‘synergy’ is developed between the 
parties.                                                                                                                                         
 
Door delivery foc used food business demands lesser initial 
investment when compared to opening up a restaurant be it for 
the matter of rent, interior designing, or cost of furniture. Such 
cost benefits lure more and more operators to dedicate  their 
time, money, and energy in these food business options . The 
operators can enjoy considerable  cost cuts in terms of labor, 
supplies, and the need for aesthetic store locations , which is 
the costliest of all investments in restaurant  busines s. 
B. Experimenting with the Business Portfo lio 
The fast -food joints and restaurant chains keep on offering 
more door delivery services with an aim to maximize their 
business output. They target on rationalizing the existing 
fixed costs and also keeping their business sustainable. The 
food business operators have identified home delivery to be 
an essential ingredient in th eir product mix. Food outlets 
whether big or small; all are striving to get a share in the digital business . Moreover, with this format, comparatively 
more number of customer s can b e serviced, than the 
conventional ‘sit -and-dine’ format where at busy hours;  lot of 
customers may be missed. The door delivery format would 
also keep customer loyalty robust.  
C. Technology is the Power  
Many players are entering the Indian food business sector  
consequent to the growing usage of  internet and smart phone s 
among customers . As a general rule, the success of any 
business lies in certain vital factors. To perform a precise 
market study, the choice of  updated technology and the future 
vision of the c ompany are most relevant . The choice of 
updated technology  has proven its role by boosting the market 
share, building competitive advantage, and improving profit 
margins for the company.  In the  present  digital era  with 
mammoth size data available, Inform ation  and 
Communication Technology can be utilized as a n effective  
tool to gain competitive edge over other players in the market. 
A company can obtain valuable insights by analyzing the data 
and take more appropriate decisions. The food aggregators 
need  to quickly realize the challenges associated with the  
adoption of technology and work towards solving such issues. 
They need to create a platform that provides an ‘user engaging 
experience’ which ultimately increases customer satisfaction 
levels and loyal ty. 
D. New Trends  
Smartphone literacy has increased over the past few years, 
with cheaper access to the internet. The growing relevance o f 
mobile -based food delivery apps and web site-based food 
ordering  platform  cannot be ignored at this juncture. Well 
known brands like Domino’s Pizza delivers over 50,000 
pizzas in a day and 15,000 of those orders are placed through 
the digital  mode . Fassos , another popular food chain caters to 
over 60,000 orders in a day all through their in-house mobile 
app.  In the recent t ime, these big players have  joined hands 
with online  food service site Food Panda  with the result that 
the number of food orders would double in the years to come. 
With the success of E -Tailing, all delivery -based ‘quick 
service restaurants’ (QSR) would ha ve better prospects for 
earning more than the revenues generated from their 
conventional business models . 
E. Challenges in Operational Efficiency  
To derive the best possible operational efficiency would be 
the greatest challenge of any food aggregator in India. India n 
business is considered to be of comparatively lower margin 
portfolio for majority of the food  companies.  Many players 
operate with  poor profits thus posing severe hurdles for their 
mere sustenance in the market.  It becomes extremely difficult 
for any company to charge a decent sum of money from the 
consumers to make it operationally sustainable. Use of low 
cost technologies and strategies to operate, innovate and 
create value for the end -user is the need of the hour. To cite an 
example, Zomato,  one of the leading food aggregators in 
India, started offering varied products and services to 
generate more  revenue. Products like Zomato Base, Zomato 
Book, and Zomato White label, 
along with business 
consultancy services have made International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE ) 
ISSN: 2277 -3878,  Volume -8 Issue -2S6, July 2019  
 
664 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number:B11260782S619/2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.B1126.0782S619  
 the revenue model more  sustainable (Chadda, 2012).  
F. Skeptical Business  
The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), 
the food safety regulator in India recently cautioned the ‘food 
aggregators’ for placing unverified food outlets on their 
digital platforms. The autho rity directed them to ensure 
proper training and capacity building of restaurant partners in 
the business to improve food safety and hygiene instead 
eyeing only on huge discounts and aggressive marketing 
strategies.  
 
The way the food aggregators now operat e offering deep 
discounts, cut -throat competition, and lack of food safety 
checks would adversely affect the survival chances of these 
players in the long run. Restaurant chains and food outlets, 
now part of this platform are little cautious not to be too much 
reliant on this line of business. Many have revamped their 
in-house food ordering apps. They prefer preserving the 
in-house delivery infrastructure, even when the aggregator 
business is expanding. To cite an example is the Jubilant Food 
works running the Domino’s Pizza chain stores in India 
recently updated their in -house app and secured an 
overwhelming response from the customers. A similar case is 
that of McDonald’s outlets in India. Both their online 
ordering and delivery platform, as well as third -party food 
apps, have grown complementary over the past few years.     
IV. IMPACT  
The business format of delivering ready -to-eat food over a 
digital platform either through a web portal or mobile apps 
has captured more customers to its ambit  particularly in 
places like retail malls, housing apartments and office 
locations . The customer today admires the online food 
ordering and delivery mechanism . Everyone would admit that 
convenience and time savings are the major attractions  of this 
business model . More over people  now in the midst of their 
busy life style prefer  restaurant type food items of varied 
cuisines in the privacy of their homes or office locations . The 
Indian fast-food business  sector is about twenty years old and 
still remains unorganized . Consider ing the present growth 
patterns in organized restaurant business sector, it is sure that 
tremendous impact would soon happen on the existing 
restaurant business es without own delivery -focused formats 
and it is only a matter of time and some significant glo bal 
investments . 
V. CONCLUSION  
Rapid urbanization connected with the influx of 
professionals in urban centers and exposure to western 
lifestyle is aiding the spectacular growth of food delivery and 
restaurant segment in India. Adding to this scenario is the 
increase in usage of smartphones and food delivery apps. 
These have become a big hit in the food industry with a 
growing number of tech -savvy customers using food delivery 
apps at the comfort of their homes and offices.  Present day 
food tech space offer m any business models. To name a few, 
are on-demand delivery , cloud -kitchen , thin layer, full stack , 
restaurant and food discovery, concierge, market place,  and 
home cooked food models . Most valued, the toughest and unexplored one among these is the Home coo ked food model 
(Kanteti, 2018). Thus innovation can spin off the restaurant 
business in a wholly new direction. Technology and 
innovation will now dictate the growth of this sector. 
Technology is the potential tool to offer high cost and 
efficiency improve ments for food providers as well as 
customer ecstasy at the other end.  
REFERENCES  
1. Bajaj, K. & Mehendale, S. (2016). Food - Delivery Start -Ups: In Search 
of the Core. Prabandhan: Indian Journal of Management, Volume 9, 
Issue 10.  
2. Bhargava, A., Jadhav, N., Joshi, A., Oke, P., & Lahane, S. R. (2013). 
Digital ordering system for Restaurant using Android. International 
Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, Volume 3, Issue 4 . 
3. Gera, M., Nawander, N., Tharwani, N. & Bhatia, P. (2018). Operations 
researc h in food delivery. International Journal of Advance Research 
and Development, Volume 3, Issue 10, Pages 73 -78. 
4. Hannu, S., Lasse, M. & Yrjölä, M. (2014). From selling to supporting – 
Leveraging mobile services in the context of food retailing. Journal of 
Retailing and Consumer Services, Volume 21, Issue 1, Pages 26 -36. 
5. Kanteti, V. (2018). Innovative strategies of startup firms in India - A 
study on online food delivery companies in India. International 
Research Journal of Management Science & Technology, Vo lume 9, 
Issue 3, Pages 17 -23. 
6. Kapoor, A. P. & Vij, M. (2018). Technology at the dinner table: 
Ordering food online through mobile apps. Journal of Retailing and 
Consumer Services, Volume 43, Pages 342 –351. 
7. Kashyap, K. (2017, June 26). The Food Delivery App s That Are 
Competing To Gain Market Share in India. Retrieved from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/krnkashyap/2017/06/26/the -food-deliver
y-apps-that-are-competing -to-gain-market -share -in-india/#56bc21ad19
93 (accessed on May 29, 2019) . 
8. Kharas, Homi. 2017. The unprecedented expansion of the global middle 
class: An update. © Brookings, India. http://hdl.handle.net/11540/7251.  
9. Kimes, S. E. (2011). Customer perceptions of electronic food ordering. 
Cornell Hospitality Report, Volume11, Issue 10, Pages 6 -15 
https://s cholarship.sha.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1069&c
ontext=chrpubs . 
10. Mckinsey. (2016, November). Retrieved from 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/high -tech/our -insights/the -chang
ing-market -for-food-delivery (accessed on May 29, 2019).  
11. Raman, P. (2018): Zomato: a shining armor in the food tech sector, 
Journal of Information Technology Case and Application Research, 
DOI: 10.1080/15228053.2018.1552396 . 
12. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/stocks/news/indias -con
sumption -story -why-you-just-cant-ignore -this-opportunity/articleshow/
66346111.cms?from=mdr (accessed on June 2, 2019).  
13. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/small -biz/startups/newsbuzz/swi
ggy-zomato -in-top-gear-as-ride-hailing -companies -slow-down/articles
how/69405510.cms (accessed on Jun e 2, 2019).  
AUTHORS  PROFILE  
 
Dr. N. Thamaraiselvan, MBA, MPhil, 
PhD is the Professor (Marketing) at the 
Department of Management Studies, 
National Institute of Technology, 
Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India.  
With over 25 years of academic and 
industri al experience , he proved to be a 
passionate academician with incessant 
drive to contribute the best to 
educational  community by discovering innovative pedagogical techniques 
in the teaching learning process. He served the positions of Associate Dean 
(Admin istration) and Head, Department of Management Studies of the 
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli.  His active commitment to 
research made him to publish more than 40 articles in referred journals  and 
present research papers in several nationa l and international conferences . 
 
 
 
  
Digital Food Delivery Apps Revolutionizing Food Products Marketing in India  
665  
Published By:  
Blue E yes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number:B11260782S6 19/2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte.B1126.0782S619  
 
h
oto 
 
  
 
  
G. R. Jayadevan, B.Tech (Dairy Technology), 
MBA, PGDM, PGD -PRM, UGC -NET is an 
Assistant Professor in the Department of Dairy 
Business Management, Faculty of Dairy 
Science, Kerala Veterinary and Animal Sciences 
Universit y, Wayanad, Kerala. He is currently 
pursuing Doctoral Programme in Management 
Studies (on Study Leave) at the National 
Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil 
Nadu, India. With 12 years of teaching and administrative experience, he 
published 11 res earch articles  and several popular articles in reputed journals 
and magazines . 
 
 
 
Dr. K. S. Chandrasekar, B. Pharm (Hons.), 
MBA, MS, CPET, PGDHP, PhD, Post -Doctoral 
Degree (Commonwealth Open University, 
Spain) is the Professor , Institute of Management 
in Kerala, University of Kerala and Formerly, 
Dean of Faculty of Management studies  and 
Chairman - Board of Studies in Business 
Management  of the University of Kerala. He is 
presently the Vice Chairman, Centre for 
Management Development , Trivandrum  (A Governme nt of Kerala 
institution) . With 22 years of teaching MBA, M.Phil.  Programmes  at 
Alagappa University  and University of Kerala specializing  in Marketing,  
Strategic Management and HRM , he could author  seven books in 
Management area, published 161 research art icles and presented 179 
research papers in several national and international conferences.  
 