Photo: Sujan  Sarkar, 2015 CGAP Photo Contest
Sustainable Development Goal No. 4: 
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education 
and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all .Digital finance can help make 
universal access to quality 
education a reality.
Contents
Development 
Challenges in 
Education Sector
Roles for Digital 
Finance in 
Addressing Barriers
Opportunities
Photo: Jon Snyder4The stakes are high:
Benefits of education1Development Challenges in Education
Increase in an individual’s earnings 
with each additional year of 
education .
A child whose mother can 
read is 50% more likely 
to live past the age of 5.10% 20%Income
Health
Poverty
420million could be 
lifted out of poverty2
If they received a secondary 
education. This would reduce the 
number of poor worldwide by half.2
Photo: © Arne Hoel / The World Bank5Education crisis : Many children do not attend school …Development Challenges in Education
For those in school, attendance is often inconsistent —
they are asked to leave when their parents can’t pay.children and youth 
out of school worldwide5
Of those not currently in school, 41% 
will never enroll.6Of those who will never enroll, 
2/3 are girls.7
41% 67%6Education crisis : Even those in school are not 
learning basic skillsDevelopment Challenges in Education
“Schooling is not the same as learning. In Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, when grade 3 
students were asked recently to read a sentence such as “The name of the dog is Puppy,” 
three -quarters did not understand what it said.”
–World Development Report, 201814
young people in low -
and lower -middle income 
countries are illiterate41
in
4
of grade 2 students in 
India and Ghana could 
not read a single word 
of a short text14adults cannot 
read and write3
67%Of the adults who cannot read 
and write , two -thirds are women.3
80%7Poverty prevents many children from attending schoolDevelopment Challenges in Education
$ $Inequitable distribution 
of resources in 
low-income countries :
In 12 African countries, nearly half of the household’s 
education budget was spent on expenses other than 
school fees .17Even in countries with free public school, 
the cost of books, supplies, uniforms, and transport can 
be prohibitive for low -income households.In low -income countries, an average of 40% of education 
spending comes from households.16That figure varies by 
country:
Uganda
57%Nepal
49%Côte d'Ivoire
33%Vietnam
24%
All of this disproportionally impacts low -income households 
whose children go to schools that receive less government funding and 
are less likely to be able to contribute themselves.18are allocated to educate 
the top 10% most educated 
students15of public education resources 8Families often lack the funds to keep children in 
school on a consistent basisDevelopment Challenges in Education
Source: Financial Inclusion Insights ,20160%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
Uganda Kenya Tanzania Nigeria Bangladesh India Indonesia PakistanPercent who have lacked funds to pay part or all of schooling costsSource: Digital Payments for Education in Uganda, BMGF 2014For those below the poverty line 
(bottom 40% of the population), 
the cost of education is prohibitive.
9In Uganda , education is cost -prohibitive for 
many low-income familiesDevelopment Challenges in Education
Those just above the poverty line
(middle 40% of the population) face 
difficult trade -offs among other 
expenses (health, food) or prioritize 
boys over girls.Percentage of annual income 
devoted to education of ONE child
8% –24%
Percentage of annual income 
devoted to education of ONE child
24% –40%10Making payments can be expensive and time consuming 
for many householdsDevelopment Challenges in Education
Unpredictable costs beyond tuition 
(books, uniforms, transport, activity fees) 
Lumpy payments due at the beginning 
of each term don’t always correspond to 
when money is available
Inconvenience of cash results in wasted 
time and money making payments at the 
school or bank, often several times per 
term until payment is made in full.19$
“You have to pay in bits because it's hard to have a lump sum.” —Charles, Uganda11Cash -based systems at schools waste resources and 
contribute to the high cost of educationDevelopment Challenges in Education
Paper -based systems for managing payments and data on employment 
and attendance are subject to human error and aremore likely to produce 
inaccurate and limited data . Government budgets and capitation grants 
from governments to schools are based on these data .
Lack of controls can allow for leakage and overcharging parents. 
In addition to school fees, schools often charge parents for exams 
and activities, even when prohibited by the government. 
Insufficient accountability and transparency contributes to “ ghost 
teachers.” In India , ghost teachers who collect a salary but do not do their 
job cost the government an estimated $1.5 billion per year .20$12Cash -based systems contribute to teacher absenteeism, 
which impedes academic successDevelopment Challenges in Education
Survey findings of teachers’ rate 
of absenteeism,2004 –2011
Sources: Abadzi , 2007; Adeyemi and Akpotu ,2009; African Economic Research Consortium ,2011; Benveniste , Marshall ,and 
Araujo, 2008 ; Carneiro , Das ,and Reis, 2010; Center for Democratic Development ,2008; Chaudhury et al., 2006 ; Das et al., 2005 ; 
Glewwe et al., 2010 ; Vermeersch and Kremer ,2004; World Bank 2006, 2004 , 2001 .Teachers travel long 
distances to collect a 
salary, which results in 
time out of the classroom 
and contributes to 
low-quality education.
Chronic challenges 
with teacher absenteeism 
cost an estimated 10 –
24% of primary education 
expenditures.21
Teachers in attendance 
often spend less than 
50% of the academic 
day teaching.Photo © Dominic Chavez/World BankContents
Development 
Challenges in 
Education Sector
Roles for Digital 
Finance in 
Addressing Barriers
Opportunities14Expand Access to 
Financial Services
Financial products could 
help more parents keep 
their children in school .Improve Transparent 
Use of Public Funds
Increase accountability 
and oversight of funds 
in the education sector .
Increase 
Teacher Presence
Improve teacher 
accountability; 
reduce time spent 
to collect salaries .Roles for Digital Finance
Digital finance can address several systemic barriers to high -
quality global education$1
15Digitize School 
Fee Payments
Make it easier for 
households to make 
payments .Roles for Digital Finance
3 ways digital finance can support systemic change 
and remove barriers to education
2 3
Digitize Savings , 
Credit, Remittances
Provide tools for parents 
to better manage 
the cost of education .Digitize 
Teacher Salaries
Reduce time and 
cost for teachers to 
collect salary .
$1. Digitize School Fee PaymentsRoles for Digital Finance
16Benefits
•Households save time and money
•Better transparency and controls at 
schools , less potential for leakage
•More automated and accurate record 
keeping , which can include attendance 
and performance data
•Mobilize funds from the social network
to keep children in schoolChallenges
•Limited school capacity and 
infrastructure : electricity, connectivity, 
computers, and staff capacity. 
•Value proposition to parents and schools. 
May save time and/or money and improve 
convenience, but also requires behavior 
change.
•Informal record keeping allows for 
negotiation between parents and schools.
•Need to balance accountability with local 
customs and social norms .Making payments easy for schools and payers can 
improve payment rates and attendanceRoles for Digital Finance: Digitizing School Fee Payments
17Step 1
Students provide 
contact information for 
all those who help pay 
for school  (Payers) Step 2
School sends SMS 
invoice to all Payers 
informing of student 
balance and 
payment instructions.Step 3
Payers use M -PESA 
to send funds to 
school, via Rex 
Mercury platform.Rex Mercury , Kenya
Step 4
School uses app 
to reconcile student 
accounts and monitor 
attendance and 
performance.Making payments easy for schools and payers can 
improve payment rates and attendance (cont’d)Roles for Digital Finance: Digitizing School Fee Payments
18Key Elements of Rex Mercury Model
Hold in -person parent meetings to support 
registration process. Even though parents were 
familiar with M -PESA , using the service to pay school 
fees was new to them . Pilot Results (ongoing)
•Improved transparency 
and accountability 
of student accounts 
and data
•Paying with mobile money 
is less expensive than 
cash or check
•Increased on -time 
paymentMake it as easy —and as cheap —as possible to 
make payments. Requiring payers to enter a school 
ID, student ID, and amount was too difficult. Instead, 
the school and Rex use back -end reconciliation to 
match phone numbers to student accounts.
Use an app to track payments , and potentially 
more. The school previously had no formal system for 
tracking outstanding balances . A simple app helps to 
clean up past balances and provide transparency and 
accountability going forward.Government -led initiative in Côte d’Ivoire produced 
better education data through payments digitizationRoles for Digital Finance: Digitizing School Fee Payments
19Government initiated digital payments for 
university and secondary school to digitize 
education data. GSMA reports:22
•99% of secondary school registration 
payments were paid by mobile money 
in the2015 –2016 school year .
•Students and parents save time and 
money by paying the fee digitally .
•Mobile payments led to increase in 
overall fee collection and thus larger 
budgets for schools .
•Better data help the government monitor 
students and schools and better allocate 
resources.Looking ahead, how to increase impact 
of digital school fee payments …
Only 9% of smallholder farmers in Côte d’Ivoire 
used mobile money to pay school fees.23
Due to limited infrastructure and familiarity 
with mobile money , schools and parents use 
others to make school registration payments on 
their behalf.
Collaboration between government, mobile 
money providers, and schools could help to 
increase adoption and use of mobile money and 
generate more and better data for the education 
sector.
?School Fee Digitization in Côte d’Ivoire202. Digital financial 
services for households24Roles for Digital Finance
Benefits
•Products that smooth payments help match 
irregular income flows of low -income 
households.
•Quickly and efficiently mobilizing funds 
from a social network can increase funds 
available for school. 
•Building savings for education can reduce 
stress of finding the money atthe last minute.
Challenges
•Longer -term credit products to space out 
payments over the academic year are needed, 
but lenders are reluctant to lend for longer 
periods .
•Saving for school in advance can be difficult 
to prioritize among other pressing needs 
and competes with notion that money should 
be “working” at all times.
$21Mobile -based savings can help parents stay on track 
with education savingsRoles for Digital Finance: Education Finance
Econet’s mobile -based savings account helps families save gradually for their 
child’s school fees (pilot launched January 2018 ).Econet , Zimbabwe
Product Features
•No minimum monthly savings. 
•SMS reminders to keep customers on track.
•Savings are locked and can be used only for school fees.
•At the beginning of the school term, funds are paid directly 
to the school using EcoCash , saving parents time.
$22Fenix International’s school fee loan helped parents 
pay fees and keep children in schoolRoles for Digital Finance: Education Finance
Education Outcomes 
(self-reported by customers)
Higher level of attendance . 
Only 15% missed more than one 
day of school vs 24% in control 
group.
Better academic performance . 
91% reported improved grades vs 
67% in control group.
Reached a similar number 
of girls and boys.
47% 53%Product offered to PAYGo solar 
customers with good repayment 
history on their completed solar 
loan. Solar unit acts as collateral.
Easy sign -up and approval 
process over USSD. Funds 
disbursed directly to customer’s 
mobile wallet.
Repayment schedule provides for some 
flexibility and allows customers to manage 
repayment according to their own ability.  $Fenix , Uganda25
$23Advans CI’s digital credit product helped 24% more 
children start school in Côte d’IvoireRoles for Digital Finance: Education Finance
Advans CI, Côte d'Ivoire 26
Outcomes 
(self-reported by customers)
24% more children started 
school in the 2016 school year
(increase from 49% to 73%)
60% farmers said the loan 
amount met their children’s 
educational needs 
All 242 loans were repaid in full, 
on time. Based on the success of 
the pilot, Advans has increased 
the number of farmers it is lending 
to in the current season by 5XDigital education loan (average size of $165) 
was offered to select users of Advans ’ 
savings products, identified in partnership 
with farmers ’ cooperatives .
Cooperatives identified creditworthy 
borrowers, farmer training and education , 
andpayment collections; they underwrote 
30% of the education loan balance .
Easy sign -up and automatic approval over 
USSD. Funds disbursed directly to 
customer’s mobile wallet at the time of 
school fee payment (Aug / Sept); repayable 
over 3 months.  
$24Facilitating domestic and international remittances 
can increase funds available for educationRoles for Digital Finance: Education Finance
Many families rely on 
routine remittances 
or occasional financial 
support from family 
and friends to support 
their children’s 
education. 
Increase in remittances when the 
sender had the ability to label 
funds for education15%Flexipay, Kenya27
Evidence on International Remittances28
$
Sending digital 
payments directly to 
schools could reduce 
the number of 
children who miss 
school because of 
lack of funds.Flexipay , a pilot in 
Kenya, found that 
children whose fees 
were paid via M -
PESA missed fewer 
days than those not 
using M -PESA. Researchers’ 
assumption is that 
using mobile money 
allowed families 
to more quickly 
mobilize funds from 
their social network. 
Increase when funds were 
sent directly to school2%253. Digitizing 
Teacher Salaries
Benefits
•More reliable salary payments
•Increase tracking and accountability 
of teachers
•Less time spent collecting salaries
•Teachers give others in the community 
mobile money advice and support
•Save money due to reduced leakage 
and no ghost teachers
Challenges
•Political buy -in
•Requires strong agent network 
to manage liquidity challenges 
•Building ecosystem to reduce cash -
out requires significant behavior change 
for customers
Photo: © Curt Carnemark / World BankReduced missed class time
Teachers spent more time in 
class because they spent less 
time collecting their salaryDigital salary payments can save money and reduce 
the time teachers spend out of the classroomRoles for Digital Finance: Digitizing Teacher Salaries
26USAID Pilot to Digitize Teacher Salaries in Liberia29
Estimated annual cost savings 
to government, enabled it to 
cover 50% of cash -out fee for 
teachersBiometric registration 
allows government to link 
salaries to attendance
Reduced time to collect 
salary from 2 days per 
month to 25 minutesReduced cost to collect 
salary from $25 to $2Photo: Simone D. McCourtie / World BankContents
Development 
Challenges in 
Education Sector
Roles for Digital 
Finance in 
Addressing Barriers
OpportunitiesLinks between DFS and 
education outcomes . 
Ongoing pilots link use of 
DFS to specific objectives, 
such as reducing cost, but 
not enough evidence links 
these efforts back to 
education outcomes. More
evidence can lead to more 
funding from the education 
sector for long -term 
opportunities that improve 
the sector.
28Experimentation with digital 
education finance products . 
A few providers have created 
specific digital savings and 
credit products for education, 
but more innovation and 
experimentation is needed. 
DFS should help make it 
easier to expand access to 
credit for previously excluded 
customers and offer product 
terms that match customer 
needs, such as flexible 
payment.More use cases . Mobile 
learning companies that offer 
short courses or tutoring 
support, paid in small 
amounts via mobile money, 
have potential to expand 
access to education and/or 
improve learning outcomes, 
especially in crisis and 
conflict settings. More work 
is needed to understand the 
potential impact of these 
products and how DFS can 
support their use.Opportunities
Topics for further research29Digital Tutoring . These services can reinforce learning for those 
in school or replace the classroom for those out of school (due to 
poverty or crisis/conflict environments where schools are closed). 
Mobile money or digital vouchers could help make thisaffordable .
Adult Learners . The increase in smart phones can enable adults to use 
mobile money to pay for education that improves their employability and 
supports the shifting nature of work stemming from rural to urban migration.
Classroom Technology . Improvements in connectivity and availability of 
tablets and smart phones will enhance classroom learning experiences . 
Mobile payments can help parse content in small amounts , e.g., textbooks, 
and make it more affordable for providers to collect small payments from a 
distributed set of customers.Opportunities
New digital finance -enabled business models could 
benefit educationAcknowledgments
301.“ The Benefits of Education,” The Global Partnership for Education, 
accessed o1 February 2019. 
ttp://www.globalpartnership.org/education/the -benefits -of-education.
2.UNESCO.2017a. “Accountability in Education:Meeting Our 
Commitments ; Global Education Monitoring Report.” Paris : 
UNESCO.
3.UNESCO.2016a. UIS Fact Sheet No . 45. Paris: UNESCO, p. 1. 
4.UNESCO. 2014. ”Teaching and Learning: Achieving Equality for All.” 
Paris: UNESCO ,p. 208. 
5.Institute for Statistics database, UNESCO, 015 ,. 
http://data.uis.unesco.org/ Education/Pages/oosc -data-release -
2015.aspx
6.UNESCO.2016b. “Education for People and Planet: Creating 
Sustainable Future for All. Global Education Monitoring Report.” 
Paris: UNESCO ,p. 180.
7.UNESCO (2016b).
8.UNESCO . 2015. “Education 2030: Equity and Quality with a 
Lifelong Learning Perspective.” Paris: UNESCO ,p. 3. 
9.UNESCO( 2014). 
10.UNESCO.2017b. UIS Fact Sheet No . 46. Paris: UNESCO, p. 7.
11.UNESCO(2017b). 
12.UNESCO(2014). 
13.UNESCO . 2016c . UIS Fact Sheet No . 39. Paris : UNESCO, p. 1. 
14.World Bank. 2018 . “World Development Report 2018: Learning to 
Realize Education’s Promise.” Washington D.C.: World Bank Group .This presentation was created by Lauren Braniff and Alexander Sotiriou 
under the supervision of Xavier Faz. Design and data visualization by 
Gail Zuniga. 
Critical review, input, and comments were provided by CGAP 
colleagues, Mayada El -Zoghbi, Anna Nunan, Daniel Waldron, Stephen 
Rasmussen, Greg Chen, Michael Tarazi ,and Maria Fernandez -Vidal. End Notes23.Riquet , Corinne , David Musiime ,and Collins Marita . 2017. 
“National Survey and Segmentation of Smallholder Households 
in Côte d’Ivoire.” Working Paper. Washington D.C.: CGAP 
.https ://www.cgap.org/research/publication/national -survey -and-
segmentation -smallholder -households -cote-divoire
24.Riquet , Musiime, and Marita (2017).
25.Braniff ,Lauren, Daniel Waldron, John Foye, and Chris Emmott. 
2017. “Meeting Education Finance Needs in Rural Uganda .” 
CGAP blog post , 8 May. https://www.cgap.org/blog/meeting -
education -finance -needs -rural-uganda.
26.Vidal, Maria Fernandez, and Fernando Barbon . "Digital Credit 
Helping to Put Kids in Classrooms in Cote D'Ivoire .“CGAP blog 
post , 21 November. https://www.cgap.org/blog/digital -credit -
helping -put-kids-classrooms -cote-divoire.
27.BFA. 2017. “Engaging Social Networks for School Fees 
Payments: Lessons from an Experiment in Kenya”, Nairobi: FSD 
Kenya .
28.De Arcangelis et al. 2015 . "Directing Remittances to Education 
with Soft and Hard Commitments: Evidence from a Lab-in-the-
Field Experiment and New Product Take -up among Filipino 
Migrants in Rome." Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization 111:  197-208.
29.mSTAR and FHI360 . 2016. “Mobile Money Salary Payment 
Factsheet: Nimba County.” Washington D.C.: USAID .End Notes, continued
3115.The Education Commission. “The Learning Generation: Investing in 
Education for a Changing World .”Executive summary, p. 10. 
https ://report.educationcommission.org/wp -
content/uploads/2016/09/Learning_Generation_Full_Report.pdf 
16."The World's Families: Hidden Funders of Education." The Global 
Partnership for Education. Accessed 4February 2019 . 
https://www.globalpartnership.org/blog/worlds -families -hidden -
funders -education. 
17.UNESCO. 2012 . “Household Education Spending: An Analytical and 
Comparative Perspective for 15 African Countries.” Dakar : 
UNESCO.
18.World Bank . 2018 . “World Development Report 2018: Learning to 
Realize Education’s Promise.” Washington D.C., World Bank Group .
19.Braniff , Lauren. 2017. “Schools in Africa Aren't Taking Advantage of 
Mobile Money —Why?” CGAP blog post , 23 May. 
http://www.cgap.org/blog/schools -africa -aren’t -taking -advantage -
mobile -money -–-why
20.Muralidharan , Karthik, Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, and Aakash Mohpal . 
2016 . The Fiscal Cost of Weak Governance: Evidence from Teacher
Absence in India . Washington , D.C.: World Bank. 
21.Patrinos , Harry A. 2013. “The Hidden Cost of Corruption: Teacher 
Absenteeism and Loss in Schools .” World Bank Jobs and 
Development blog post , 1 October. 
http://blogs.worldbank.org/education /hidden -cost-corruption -teacher -
absenteeism -and-loss-schools
22.GSMA. 2015. “ Paying School Fees with Mobile Money in Côte 
d’Ivoire: A Public -private Partnership to Achieve Greater Efficiency.” 
London: GSMA .© CGAP 2018
www.cgap.org
