Technical writers
Deepti KC, Nithya Srinivasan and
Arbind VishwakarmaDIGITIZING 
LOW-INCOME 
CLUSTERS IN 
AN URBAN 
SLUM
TESTING THE EFFICACY OF DIGITAL 
PAYMENT SOLUTIONS IN BHATTA 
BASTI, JAIPURTECHNICAL REPORTThis publication is made possible by the generous support of the American people through the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID). The contents are the responsibility of CATALYST and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of USAID or the United States Government.About CATALYST
CATALYST is a user-centric ‘digital financial inclusion innovation 
platform’ for the underserved last mile. The initiative is funded by the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) under the 
mSTAR Program, through funding provided to FHI 360. Housed within 
the Institute for Financial Management and Research, Leveraging 
Evidence for Access and Development (IFMR LEAD), the initiative aims to 
expand digital payments and financial inclusion in India. 
CATALYST identifies, develops and validates solution frameworks and 
business models in collaboration with facilitating government agencies 
and participating industry solution providers to responsibly transition 
small business ecosystems (i.e., merchants, consumers, suppliers) from 
an inefficient cash economy to digital payment platforms, and further 
onto broader digital finance solutions. CATALYST has also launched 
a new business incubator, ‘Fintech for the Last Mile,’ to promote 
entrepreneurs focused on developing innovative digital finance solutions 
for traditionally underserved segments.
Technical team
Arbind Vishwakarma has an experience of over 6 years in business 
consulting and ICT Solutions for various Government Ministries and 
Departments. He has also been associated with National Institute for 
Smart Government, Bluefrog mobile technologies Pvt. Ltd and IIM 
Indore. Prior to joining Catalyst, he has been a part of the National 
Institute for Smart Government (NISG) New Delhi, where he was 
associated with various Ministries and Govt. departments, which 
included Controller General of Defence (MoD), Department of Finance 
(Govt. of Bihar), Election Commission of India, Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, Punjab Governance Reforms and others.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank and acknowledge the support 
of Preethi Rao for work on conceptualizing project design and 
partner management. Gratitude is also extended to SEWA Bharat, 
the local community partner, and FIA Technologies, the banking 
correspondent for their support in successful implementation of the 
interventions. Special thanks also to the very hardworking Catalyst 
feet-on-street (FoS) team, who carried out the data collection, 
and to Darshan Singh for FoS coordination and management. 
Thanks to Josh Woodard, Jaheed Parvez and Harsh Pandey 
(FHI 360) for editorial reviews and feedback, and to Sharon 
Buteau and Badal Malick for their consistent support and 
encouragement. Ananda Swaroop, Kanika Khanna for content 
editing, and Allan Macdonald for design of the report.4Summary
Given the massive growth in the penetration of mobile 
phone and internet connectivity in urban India, some 
of the most effective methods of increasing financial 
inclusion have been based on the application of 
mobile-based technologies. This has created a new 
opportunity for providers seeking rapid and robust 
cost-effective expansion of services to reach excluded 
populations in new and emerging markets such as 
urban slums.
Recognizing the opportunity, CATALYST initiated a 
project to expand uptake and usage of digital payment 
solutions by implementing a holistic ecosystem 
approach, in conjunction with a range of public and 
private partners in a low-income cluster, Bhatta 
Basti – an urban  slum on the outskirts of the city of 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, where infrastructure and financial 
capabilities are weak while the role of informal 
community institutions is strong.
The project had a two-stage approach. In the first 
stage, the project focused on understanding efforts 
that go into opening of bank accounts and identifying 
the pain-points and challenges that account holders 
face in the process – from opening bank accounts to 
preparing to adopt digital payments. In the second 
stage, the project focused on understanding the 
challenges and pain-points in onboarding account 
holders with debit cards linked to bank accounts on 
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) and other modes of 
digital payments.
CATALYST partnered with SEWA Bharat (Sewa) 
and FIA Technology Service Private Limited (FIA) in 
the first stage which included lead generation and 
account opening initiatives in Bhatta Basti focused 
on community-based efforts to build trust and 
encourage engagement through door-to-door and 
camp-based outreach efforts. The initial months were 
focused on bringing low-income individuals from 
poor households onto the formal banking system and 
promoting active banking among them. By June 2018, 
we had facilitated several account opening camps and 
opened accounts of 619 individuals. (In total, 1,703 
accounts were opened till November 2018 but, for our 
experiment's purpose, we considered 619 accounts 
that were opened prior June 2018).
In August 2018, we contacted these 619 account 
holders to understand their access to debit cards and 
smartphones. The result helped us divide our base 
into four tiers – each tier had account holders that 
were similar in specific ways.• The study indicated 135 account holders               
(22 percent) had a functional debit card  
(PIN generated) [Tier 1]; 
• 167 account holders (27 percent) had collected 
their debit cards but not generated Automated 
Teller Machine (ATM) PIN [Tier 2]; 
• 155 account holders (25 percent) had not received 
or collected their debit cards [Tier 3]; and
• 162 account holders (26 percent) had already 
changed their mobile numbers and were 
unreachable despite multiple attempts [Tier 4].
After differentiating account holders by their 
behaviors and the drivers of behavior, we acted in 
response to a tier-based intervention instead of a 
‘one-size-fits-all’ approach. Our focus was to provide 
handholding support for the adoption of digital 
payment solutions to Tier 1 account holders as they 
were proactive about adopting debit cards without 
external support and had positive attitudes towards 
technology used in banking. We aimed to discover 
‘early adopters’ amongst them, who are excited by 
the possibilities of new ideas and new ways of doing 
digital transactions.
First, we ran an experiment with account holders by 
organizing a community-level ATM PIN Generation 
Camp to understand account holders’ interest in 
collecting debit cards from the Customer Service 
Points (CSPs) and generating PINs if they were 
provided basic information about the benefits of 
a debit card. We targeted Tier 2 account holders         
(167 account holders) and tracked 44 debit cards 
of Tier 3 account holders in the CSP. We contacted       
211 account holders, informed them about the 
benefits of a functional debit card and invited them 
to our camp to generate ATM PINs. Only 59 obliged 
(response rate= 28 percent). We now had 184 account 
holders that had a functional debit card.
Second, we targeted 184 account holders, 
emphasizing personalized interactions to discuss 
digital payment solutions, particularly onboarding 
them on the UPI platform. Only 112 eligible account 
holders (61 percent) agreed to our visit — the rest 
either rejected (6 percent) or were not eligible as they 
did not have a smartphone (33 percent). Amongst  
112 account holders that we visited, only  
61 (54 percent) were successfully onboarded on the 
UPI platform; and the rest were unsuccessful due 
to technical difficulties as such as poor network 
connectivity, registration failures, etc.
By the end of the experiment (September 2018), only 
61 account holders (10 percent of the 619 account 
holders) were onboarded on UPI.5• 70 percent (435 account holders) on the list was 
excluded because of the lack of a functional debit 
card;
• 12 percent (72 account holders) rejected our visits 
or did not own a smartphone; and
• 8 percent (51 account holders) could not be 
onboarded due to technical problems despite them 
showing interest.
Early adopters constituted 10 percent of the total 
number of account holders. They were young 
(average age 27), male (not head of the household), 
smartphone owners, internet friendly, and active 
users of social media such as Facebook, WhatsApp 
and YouTube.
A month after UPI onboarding (October 2018), we 
followed up with 61 account holders to understand 
the usage of the UPI application. We were able to 
contact 50 account holders. Only 24 early adopters  
(48 percent) were actively using the UPI app at the 
time of the interview and the top motivations for 
using UPI applications were for mobile recharge (74 
percent) and bank-to-bank transfer (65 percent). 
Twenty-six early adopters did not actively use an UPI 
app after being onboarded three weeks prior to the 
interview. The top reasons were: users’ perceptions 
that they did not have enough savings in the bank 
account; and their preference for cash transactions 
mainly due to others in their social network not 
having UPI apps. One of four found the procedure 
complicated despite being provided with handholding 
support and necessary instructions.
Finally, the following are the key learnings from the 
experiment.
• Segmentation is the key to identify early adopters 
who can help pinpoint the challenges in adopting 
digital payment solutions. This was also the best 
way for us to use our resources more effectively 
and make better strategic marketing decisions to convert early adopters to influencers in the 
community.
• Poor experience faced by early adopters can limit 
the uptake of digital payment solutions. In our 
pilot, 46 percent of potential early adopters who 
showed interest in digital payment solutions could 
not be onboarded due to technical problems. Early 
adopters generally play a crucial role as they tend 
to be ‘opinion leaders’ in a community like Bhatta 
Basti, and such incidences faced by potential early 
adopters when heard through word-of-mouth 
might result in other consumers rejecting the 
uptake of digital payment solutions.
• Understanding the infrastructure constraints 
prior to entering the market:  Prior to entering 
any community such as Bhatta Basti, a financial 
provider should be aware of infrastructure 
constraints that could be hurdles in mobilizing 
the community. They should assess if the 
community has institutional support from banks 
and government agencies to promote financial 
inclusion and adequate infrastructure to make 
digital payment solutions viable. 
• Digital literacy is the need of the hour: Finally, in 
our follow-up study with early adopters, 35 percent 
reported to be inactive because they did not have 
enough savings in the bank account for any kind 
of digital transaction. One key observation that we 
made in Bhatta Basti was that the community had 
not fully realized the potential of digital finance. 
For example, our qualitative study indicated that 
wage laborers have an option to ask their employer 
to transfer money directly into their account. 
However, most are not aware of the concept of 
stored value and tend to regard savings as simple 
unspent money. Hence, financial literacy using 
technology (the power of media such as WhatsApp 
groups, mobile and internet) is the key to promote 
the concept of active banking and digital savings in 
a community such as Bhatta Basti.6Table of contents
1 Background and context 8
1.1  Overview 9
1.2  Diagnostic 10
1.3  Feet-on-street activity and digital payment camp 10
2 Pilot design and implementation 12
2.1  Theory of change 13
2.2  Scope 13
2.2.1   Target segment 13
2.2.2   Partnerships 14
2.2.3   Objective 14
2.2.4   Methodology 14
3 Observations and insights 16
3.1  Overall metrics 17
3.2  Lead generation and account opening 18
3.2.1   Characteristics of the account holders 18
3.2.2   Key learnings – opening of bank accounts 19
3.3  Debit cards access and activation 19
3.3.1   Attitude towards a debit card 20
3.3.2   Key learnings – accessing a functional debit card 21
3.4  Active banking and pathway to digital payments 21
3.4.1   Promoting active banking through PIN generation camps 22
3.4.2   Key learnings – ATM PIN generation 22
3.5  Going digital - UPI onboarding 23
3.5.1   Conversion funnel 24
3.5.2   Challenges and barriers to conversion 24
3.5.3   Key challenges for UPI onboarding 25
3.5.4   User profile of early adopters 27
3.6  Key learnings 28
3.7  Cost-benefit analysis 29
3.7.1   Project investment 29
3.7.2   Outcomes 29
3.8  SWOT analysis 30
4 Recommendations 328
BACKGROUND 
AND CONTEXT11.1 Overview
The world is rapidly urbanizing, and India is no 
exception. Urban India is undergoing a process 
of great transformation amid economic reform, 
liberalization and globalization. As rural residents 
move to urban areas in search of jobs and villages 
are overtaken by expanding urban agglomerations, 
the rapidity and scale of urban growth has raced far 
ahead of provision of services, and many developing 
countries are increasingly concerned with the 
urbanization of poverty.1
It is a well-established fact that financial inclusion 
is a key instrument to promote inclusive growth; 
nevertheless, despite advances in financial inclusion 
across the globe, about 1.7 billion adults remain 
unbanked without an account at a financial institution 
or through a mobile money provider.2 According to the 
Global Findex Database 2017, India’s adult population 
with a bank account has more than doubled to  
80 percent since 2011. Nevertheless, the country still 
has 190 million adults without a bank account despite 
the government’s ambitious financial inclusion 
scheme – Jan Dhan Yojana – making it the world’s 
second largest unbanked population after that of 
China.
As the magnitude of financial exclusion is more 
widespread in rural areas and there are no clear 
estimates on the proportion of urban poor that are 
financially excluded,3 the government’s programs and policies are predominantly rural-focused. As a result, 
exclusion of the urban poor is sometimes overlooked 
at a policy level even though it is widely known that 
there are pockets of poverty and exclusion in all 
urban areas, particularly among slum-dwellers.4 
It may thus be concluded that although financial 
inclusion has become the buzzword in present-
day financial circles, there are miles to go before 
it becomes a reality for the urban population living 
in low-income clusters. Hence, understanding how 
digital technology can be an enabler for the urban 
poor is essential.
As we move into the digital era, evidence is quickly 
escalating the power of digital payments to increase 
financial inclusion.5 Recognizing this potential, in the 
past few years, the government as well as private 
sector actors, including banks and non-banks, have 
made multiple efforts to use digital payments and 
mobile technology as a key component to drive real 
improvements in digital financial inclusion to benefit 
everyday life, including ‘the last mile,’ across the 
developing economies. Given the massive growth 
in the penetration of mobile phone and internet 
connectivity in urban India, some of the most 
effective methods of increasing financial inclusion 
have been based on the application of mobile-based 
technologies that has created a new opportunity for 
providers seeking rapid and robust cost-effective 
expansion of services to reach excluded populations 
in new and emerging markets such as urban slums.
1https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4746497/
2https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/sites/globalfindex/files/chapters/2017%20Findex%20full%20report_chapter2.pdf
3https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2866853
4http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/Slums%20of%20Mumbai.pdf
5https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214845017301503?via%3Dihub101.2 Diagnostic
Recognizing the opportunities mentioned earlier, 
CATALYST has initiated projects to expand 
uptake and usage of digital payment solutions 
by implementing a holistic ecosystem approach, 
in conjunction with a range of public and private 
partners. These multi-stage projects include a set 
of research and operational initiatives centered 
on a low-income cluster, Bhatta Basti, in Jaipur 
city, where infrastructure and financial capabilities 
are weak while the role of informal community 
institutions is strong. The project aims to design 
operational strategies to promote awareness, usage, 
and sustainable adoption of digital payments in 
economically depressed and socially marginalized 
communities.
The project’s two-stage approach is explained in 
Figure 1.
In the first stage, the project focused on 
understanding efforts that go into opening of 
bank accounts and identifying the pain-points and 
challenges that account holders face in the process, 
from opening bank accounts to getting ready for 
adopting digital payments.
In the second stage, the project focused on 
understanding challenges and pain-points in 
onboarding account holders with debit cards linked 
to bank accounts on UPI and other modes of digital 
payments.
1.3 Stakeholder analysis 
• CATALYST partnered with two implementing 
partners: FIA Technology Service Private Limited 
(FIA) and SEWA Bharat (Sewa).
 »Along with our account opening implementing 
partner, FIA, we facilitated several account opening camps and opened bank accounts 
of 619 individuals from Bhatta Basti by June 
2018. In August 2018, we began the process 
of converting these account holders to users 
of digital payments and solutions. For our 
multi-stage pilot, we conducted a research 
with these 619 account holders to understand 
the challenges and pain-points that users 
face in the process of opening a bank account 
to becoming an adopter of digital payment 
solutions 
 »FIA introduced Customer Service Points (CSPs)/
Bank Mitras in and around Bhatta Basti, and 
activated, trained and supervised the CSP 
personnel as change agents to drive digitization 
in the area. It took the lead in enrolling 
residents to open savings bank account, 
inculcating habits of regular savings, and use of 
bank account for digital transactions. FIA also 
audited and monitored the CSPs’ activities with 
respect to statutory compliance, adherence to 
guidelines of the bank, and safeguards in the 
interest of customers.
 »Sewa, with its strong networks in the Bhatta 
Basti cluster especially among the women, 
collaborated closely with FIA and CATALYST to 
enable access to the Bhatta Basti community 
across several education and digitization 
initiatives. Sewa worked with CATALYST to build 
awareness among the target group to avail of 
locally available banking services through its 
mobilization efforts and campaigns. It took up 
the role of educating low-income communities 
on financial and digital literacy which can 
facilitate better uptake of banking and payment 
digitization solutions among the target groups. 
• Anchor merchants that were provided with digital 
payment solutions such as Aadhaar-Enabled 
Payment System (AEPS); UPI QR Code
• New bank account holders (customers)
Debit cards access and 
activation
• PIN generation camps
• Customer education 
for protection: PIN 
generation
• Micro-ATM to generate 
PINActive banking
• Encourage wage 
payments into accounts
• Government to People 
(G2P)
• Financial education 
campsDigital Payments
• UPI onboarding
• Merchant education and 
incentives to use UPI
• PoS/eMitras/AEPS 
devices at key 
merchantsLead generation and 
account opening camps
• Create awareness of 
account features
• Ensure CSP operations 
and  timings are 
convenientFigure 1:  Project implementation strategies12
PILOT DESIGN AND 
IMPLEMENTATION 2132.1 Theory of change
CATALYST adopted a holistic approach towards going digital by bringing low-income individuals from ultra-poor 
households into the formal banking system, promoting active bank usage and providing handholding support to 
account holders to graduate from active bank users to adopters of digital payment solutions.
No bank 
accountsStage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Stage 5
Converting to 
bank account 
holdersConverting to users 
of digital payment 
solutionsConverting to 
active users of 
bank accountsConverting to active 
users of digital 
payment solutionsFigure 2:  Theory of change
2.2 Scope
The overall scope of this initiative was to create 
access points and awareness for an inclusive financial 
ecosystem that supports digital financial transactions 
for 10,000 residents of Bhatta Basti, Shastri Nagar, 
Jaipur.
2.2.1 Target segment
Bhatta Basti, an ultra-poor urban locality on the 
outskirts of the city of Jaipur, Rajasthan, is a migrant 
settlement with an estimated 10,000 households and 
a population of over 45,000 people. It is predominantly 
a Muslim community with low levels of literacy. 
Bhatta Basti residents are primarily engaged in 
home-based work, including the production of 
chemical-based bangles.The Institute for Financial Management and 
Research, Leveraging Evidence for Access and 
Development (IFMR LEAD) conducted a baseline 
survey with randomly selected 442 low-income 
households in Bhatta Basti in August 2017 to assess 
their socio-demographic profile and financial needs.6 
The study indicated that low-income households of 
Bhatta Basti largely relied on cash-based payments, 
depending on their social network for financial advice 
and borrowing/saving activities. Despite being located 
in the urban city of Jaipur, Bhatta Basti still lacks 
an adequate internet network, smartphones, Point 
of Sale (PoS)/mobile PoS (mPoS) machines which 
limits the adoption of digital payment solutions by 
households.
Key findings from the baseline survey are highlighted 
in Figure 3.
6IFMR- LEAD Baseline Survey.# households 
(approx.): 10,000
Avg. household 
size: 5Average income 
per household
INR 1,800 per 
week
(94% salaries 
are in cash)<2 bank 
accounts per 
household
Approx. 80% 
bank accounts 
are inactive due 
to non-usage in 
the last 30 days 
or moreEmployment 
rate: 74%
Primarily 
employed as: 
daily wage 
laborers, 
home-based 
businesses39% of the 
employed 
maintain 
savings, with the 
majority keeping 
savings as cash 
at homeHousehold level 
mobile phone 
penetration: 
77%
 Household level 
smartphone 
penetration: 
29%Figure 3:  Findings from the baseline survey in Bhatta Basti142.2.2 Partnerships
CATALYST partnered with two 
implementing partners: FIA 
Technology Service Private 
Limited (FIA) and SEWA Bharat 
(Sewa).
2.2.3 Objective  
Given that many financial 
institutions are focusing on 
devising the perfect customer 
experience in an effective and 
seamless way, the main objective 
of this all-inclusive pilot was 
to capture triggers and pitfalls 
in the process that low-income 
customers face and better 
understand their experience, 
needs, goals and context at each 
stage.
2.2.4 Methodology
The following implementation 
strategies were adopted: 
1. Conduct customer/provider 
interviews at each stage: 
Assessing the current situation 
and understanding the 
customer at each stage (gain 
key insights into customers’ 
motivations, behaviors, and 
emotions at each step of the 
financial journey);
2. Affinity mapping: Discover 
trends, challenges and areas of 
opportunity at each stage; 
3. User journey mapping: Form 
a deeper understanding of 
customers’ processes, needs 
and perceptions at each stage; 
and
4. User-centric testing: Ensure 
the product/intervention is 
functional, user-friendly and 
valuable for customers at 
each stage. Document what 
is working and what is not 
working.
16
OBSERVATIONS 
AND INSIGHTS3173.1 Overall metrics
Over the duration of the project from November 
2017 to October 2018, a total of 1,703 accounts were 
opened at the Bank of Baroda (BoB) and State Bank 
of India (SBI) CSPs set up by FIA. Out of this, 144 
accounts were actively transacting and 158 accounts 
recorded digital outflows.
The month-wise trends are visualized in Figures 5 
and 6. Active usage is defined as accounts where 
there are transactions recorded at least two out of 
three consecutive months. Over the life of the project, 
only unique accounts are reported as active. Digital 
transactions include payments into ‘Lakshya’ savings 
account, which is a goal-based savings mechanism 
promoted by Kaleidofin7, and into the government’s accident insurance scheme, Pradan Mantri Suraksha 
Bima Yojana (PMSBY). It also includes transactions 
made through Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) 
and through FIA’s own digital payment application 
called m-Pay. It does not include the UPI transactions 
conducted by the consumers who were actively 
onboarded on UPI by our field team.8 As well, the 
digital transaction numbers exclude the Aadhaar 
Pay transactions promoted by Fingpay9 among the 
identified anchor merchants in Bhatta Basti.
The jump in accounts opened in July and August 
were due to the concentrated efforts put in by the 
CATALYST field team to convert engagement into 
opening of accounts. From September 2018 onwards, 
we directed our efforts towards promoting digital 
payment uptake while monitoring the organic growth 
of the number of accounts opened and their activity.
7Kaleidofin is one of the incubatees of CATALYST which had also engaged in actively promoting its product in Bhatta Basti. 
8Due to absence of validated data, the transactions made via this mode cannot be reported.
9Fingpay is another CATALYST incubatee promoting the Aadhaar Pay mode of digital payments. Due to absence of validated data from 
Fingpay, the transactions made via this mode have not been reported.Figure 4:  Account opening and digitization funnel
Total accounts opened
1,703
Total digital transactions
158
Active users
144
Figure 5:  Account opened by month
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
065
Nov-17 Dec-17 Jan-18 Feb-18 Mar-18 Apr-18 May-18 Jun-18 Jul-18 Aug-18 Sep-18 Oct-1886
37168
75 79109
52386
258
65
16718Figure 6:  Active user by month
Figure 7:  Digital transactions35
30
25
20
15
10
5
014
Nov-17 Dec-17 Jan-18 Feb-18 Mar-18 Apr-18 May-18 Jun-18 Jul-18 Aug-18 Sep-18 Oct-1816
629
111218
910
89
2
60
50
40
30
20
10
011
3 425
203450
10
Lakshya PMSBY IMPS FIA m-Pay
Sep-18 Oct-18
3.2 Lead generation and 
account opening
In partnership with FIA and Sewa, lead generation 
and account opening initiatives in Bhatta Basti 
focused on community-based efforts to build trust 
and encourage engagement through door-to-door 
and camp-based outreach efforts. 
Sewa, with its experience of working very closely 
with the low-income communities in urban slums of 
Jaipur, supported our team in mobilizing community 
members and building awareness about account 
opening, digital finance and payment solutions in 
Bhatta Basti households. Sewa also helped the team 
in identifying locations for account opening camps 
and mobilizing the community on the days of the 
camps.
The initial months were geared towards bringing 
low-income individuals from poor households into the formal banking system and promoting active banking 
among them. By June 2018, along with our account 
opening implementing partner FIA, we had facilitated 
several account opening camps and opened accounts 
of 619 individuals.
3.2.1 Characteristics of the account holders
• Half of the account holders were women;
• The majority of account holders was engaged in 
home-based bangle making; the second largest 
proportion of the account holders was students;
• Only 45 percent of the interviewed account holders 
(N=457) owned a smartphone registered with the 
bank account; and 
• There was a gender disparity in the ownership of 
smartphones. Only 33 percent of female account 
holders owned a smartphone compared to  
56 percent male account holders.19Figure 8:  Tier-based segmentation of account holders 3.2.2 Key learnings – opening of bank accounts
Field challenges Solutions
Lead 
generationRefusal to open bank accounts due to 
prior experience with cases of fraud in 
Bhatta BastiUsed Sewa brand to motivate the community through the 
value proposition of having bank accounts
Problem associated with name printed 
with (.) on Aadhaar cardIdentified the Aadhaar enrolment center near Bhatta Basti, 
FIA/ Sewa representatives took community members to 
centers for updating names, addresses and figure prints
Identification 
of location 
for account 
opening 
camps Limited availability of places for 
organizing account opening camps. 
Scarcity of amenities like electricity, 
space for installing laptop and 
computersTargeted schools and madarsas for organizing the bank 
account opening camps
Opening 
accounts at 
the CSPBiometric issues while validating the 
individual identity, leading to delays in 
issuing passbooksConsulted with the bank at corporate levels for resolving this 
issue
Timings of CSPs. Trust factor – 
householders trust a CSP less compared 
to a bank branchAsked FIA to make sure that CSP is open from 8 am to 8 pm
Value proposition of CSP through  CSP branding, placing 
signage  boards and display stands to replicate the feel of a 
bank branch
ManpowerCommunity organization failed to 
recruit, train and deploy effective 
Youth Ambassadors for community 
mobilization. High employee turnover 
every month, affecting the pace of the 
account opening processCATALYST recruited feet-on-street staff in July 2018. We 
trained, managed and supervised our team which worked 
with Sewa staff. The team first focused on mobilizing the 
community to open bank accounts, promoting active use of 
banking services, and then providing handholding support 
for digital transaction 
3.3 Debit cards access and 
activation
We called 619 account holders whose bank accounts 
were opened prior to June 2018 to understand 
their access to debit cards and smartphones. Our 
hypotheses, as of August 2018, were that all  
619 account holders should have received their debit 
cards; they should have generated the ATM PIN; and 
their bank-registered mobile numbers should have 
been active.The study indicated 135 account holders (22 percent) 
had a functional debit card (PIN generated);  
167 account holders (27 percent) had collected their 
debit cards but not generated Automated Teller 
Machine (ATM) PIN; 155 account holders (25 percent) 
had not received or collected their debit cards; and 
166 account holders (27 percent) had already changed 
their mobile numbers and were unreachable despite 
multiple attempts. This result helped us divide our 
base into four tiers – each tier had account holders 
that were similar in specific ways as explained in 
Figure 4.
Account holders with a functional debit cardTier 1
135 account holders (22%)
Account holders have a debit card but 
have not generated an ATM PINTier 2
167 account holders (27%)
Account holders do not have a debit cardTier 3
155 account holders (25%)
Account holders have already changed 
their number/unreachableTier 4
162 account holders (26%)203.3.1 Attitude towards a debit card
We conducted qualitative interviews with 8 to 10 account holders from each tier. The interaction focused on their 
attitudes towards banking services, in particular, debit cards. Table 1 shows highlights of the interviews, which 
helped us identify their outlook and plan distinct interventions for each tier. 
• Perceived location and round the clock availability of 
ATMs are convenient.
• Did not perceive queue at ATM as problematic 
compared to dealing with queue in bank branch.
• Perceived debit card essential for transactions, 
particularly withdrawal of cash.Tier 1
Proactive about visiting 
CSPs to collect the debit 
card and generate PIN on 
their own.
• Some of them were waiting for their card. 
• Most of the account holders in this tier showed 
frustration about not receiving the debit card despite 
opening an account.
• Not applicableTier 3
Not received the debit card. 
Tier 4
Not able to reach them 
due to change in mobile 
number. • They did not have any experience using any banking 
services, including ATMs.  
• Women perceived the location of ATMs as not 
accessible (on average, the closest ATM is 2 km away 
from Bhatta Basti).
• Concern about the security of using ATM card.
• Some tried to generate an ATM PIN but failed and they 
perceived generating an ATM PIN as a daunting and 
complex task.Tier 2
Collected debit card 
from CSPs but have not 
generated ATM PIN.Figure 9:  Tier-wise attitudes towards a debit card 213.3.2 Key learnings – accessing a functional debit card
Implications
Frequently changing 
mobile numbers 
have a significant 
impact on financial 
inclusionWe observed a few trends in Bhatta Basti regarding usage 
of mobile phone numbers; numbers are frequently changed 
due to network problems, insufficient funds in the mobile 
account and new plans offered by different service providers. 
For example, residents suggested some SIM cards did not 
have the ability to pick up mobile data signals in Bhatta Basti, 
hence, they upgraded to a better SIM card, which resulted in 
their receiving a new phone numberIf a mobile number registered 
with the bank account has 
already changed prior to the 
arrival of the debit card, the 
account holder cannot generate 
an ATM PIN unless he/she visits 
the bank branch to change/
update his/her mobile number
Many account 
holders in urban 
slum do not receive 
their debit card At the time of the interview, 155 account holders (25 percent) 
reported not receiving their debit cards. They were either 
waiting for the card or had not collected it from the CSP. Only 
58 (37 percent of 155 account holders) reported enquiring 
with the CSP or nearby bank branchPoS, online banking or UPI 
onboarding is not possible 
without a functional debit card
Many are unaware 
of how to generate 
an ATM PIN despite 
having a debit cardAmongst these 619 account holders, 167 (27 percent) 
reported not generating an ATM PIN despite collecting the 
card.  When probed, 34 percent of these 167 account holders 
reported failure of the ATM machine when they tried to 
generate a PIN; 31 percent did not see value in generating a 
PIN due to lack of savings and fear of safety; and 29 percent 
were not aware of the procedure. This result indicates 
that perceived risk, complexity, lack of knowledge and 
fear of safety and confidentiality are the major factors that 
discourage the use of ATMsInternet banking, ATM 
withdrawals, or any other digital 
transactions using a debit card 
are not possible without an ATM 
PIN
Figure 10:  Tier-based interventions to promote bank usage  3.4 Active banking and pathway 
to digital payments
After differentiating account holders by their 
behaviors and the drivers of behavior, we acted 
in response to a tier-based intervention instead 
of ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach. We designed the following intervention model ensuring each tier 
was covered; nonetheless, our focus was to provide 
handholding support to Tier 1 account holders as they 
were proactive about adopting debit cards without 
external support and had positive attitudes towards 
technology used in banking. Our goal was to discover 
‘early adopters’ amongst them, who are excited by 
the possibilities of new ideas and new ways of doing 
digital transactions.
Introduced to any 
intervention
Track their 
activities over the 
period of timeHandholding 
support (in person 
meeting) for 
UPI onboarding/
promote other 
digital payment 
solutions such as 
AEPS- FingPay; 
digital savingsATM PIN 
generation camps
Track debit cards 
and inform the 
account holdersDigital mela
campsTier 4
InterventionTier 3
InterventionTier 2
InterventionTier 1
InterventionPanel223.4.1 Promoting active banking through PIN 
generation camps
We ran an experiment with account holders by 
organizing a community-level ATM PIN Generation 
Camp to understand account holders’ interest in 
collecting debit cards from the CSPs and generating 
PINs if they were provided basic information about 
the benefits of a debit card. We targeted Tier 2 
account holders (167 account holders) and tracked 
44 debit cards of Tier 3 account holders from the CSP 
[the agent suggested that despite making multiple 
calls, these account holders had not collected their 
debit cards]. We called 211 account holders, informed 
them about the benefits of a functional debit card 
and invited them to our camp to generate ATM PINs. 
We demonstrated how to generate an ATM PIN using 
Bank of Baroda’s videos and pamphlets designed by 
our internal team. Amongst 211 account holders that were invited to 
generate ATM PINs, only 59 obliged (response rate= 
28 percent). Amongst these, 10 immediately agreed to 
UPI onboarding.
Half of the account holders (54 percent) without a 
functional debit cards were women. However, despite 
getting calls from our team, their active participation 
was low. In many cases, women were accompanied by 
a male member of the household and, in some cases, 
instead of the female account holder, her husband 
came with the debit card. In-depth qualitative 
interviews with women in their houses revealed 
that they chose not to come (or come with the male 
member) because they perceived the procedure of 
generating ATM PIN as too complex.
Figure 11:  ATM PIN generation analysis
Telephone call a day before the 
camp
Basic information about the 
importance of a PIN generated 
debit card and digital payments
Canopy in front of Bank of 
Baroda branch (around 2 km 
away from Bhatta Basti)
Distributed pamphlets 
Provided handholding support to 
download and register any UPI-
based applicationTotal account holders that were called 
211
28% successfully generated 
ATM PIN
59
17% UPI adoption
10
3.4.2 Key learnings – ATM PIN generation
Opportunities
Young students 
and youths in the 
community are 
excited about card-
based productsMany young students in Bhatta Basti showed 
interest in owning a functional debit card because 
they perceived it as giving them a higher social 
status in school (in many cases in their own 
household too)If financial institutions can create a favorable 
impression on the minds of these young 
customers, it can go a long way in creating 
valuable customers 
Many smartphone holders are attracted to 
mobile-based digital payment options such as 
UPI or wallets.Active banking can be promoted to such 
individuals showing such payment options as 
a useful value proposition
Low women’s 
participation Women either did not turn up or were 
accompanied by male household membersThere is an opportunity for community 
organizations like Sewa to create innovative 
and interactive financial literacy modules on 
PIN generation and benefits of a debit card23Field Story 1: Why installation of a card 
machine in Bhatta Basti market did not work
In July 2018, we interviewed 67 anchor merchants 
from Bhatta Basti to understand if they were 
interested in installing a PoS machine in their 
shops. Twenty-one anchor merchants showed initial 
interest. The branch manager of State Bank of India 
(SBI) accepted our invitation to visit Bhatta Basti and 
discuss the installation of PoS machines with these 
interested merchants. However, because merchants 
did not have landline numbers, there was a cost 
associated with the installation of PoS machines, due 
to which no merchant was ready to adopt them.
Their resistance to digital payments resulted from 
transaction costs of rental and installation of the card machine and fear of losing existing profits. 
Addressing their concern about the transactional and 
hidden costs with transparent information to enhance 
their user experience could be a trigger to promote 
adoption of digital payments by this group. 
At the same time, in a community where the majority 
of account holders do not have access to a functional 
debit card, it is possible that many account holders 
do not use their debit card for transactions.  All 
merchants reported that if customers demand for 
digital payments existed, they would be ready to 
pay the costs of rental as well. However, at present, 
since there was no demand from the customers, they 
decided to opt out of installing PoS machines.
3.5 Going digital - UPI onboarding
We targeted 184 account holders who had functional debit cards, emphasizing personalized interactions to 
discuss digital payment solutions with them. Only 112 eligible account holders (61 percent) agreed to our visit — 
the rest either rejected (6 percent) or were not eligible as they did not have a smartphone  
(33 percent). Amongst 112 account holders that we visited, only 61 (54 percent) were successfully onboarded; 
and the rest were unsuccessful due to several technical difficulties as highlighted in the subsequent sections.
Figure 12:  Outcomes of handholding support for UPI onboarding
Outcome of home visits
61%
29% 
14% 
8% Successful registration and 
activationof UPI app
Did not receive OTP or dropped 
out due to network issue
Technical difficulties such as multiple 
accounts linked with the same number
Debit card was 
already lost100%N=184
33%
6%
112 
home 
visitsInterventions: UPI onboarding, information about AEPS
61%Home visitRejected to meetNo smartphoneOne-on-one handholding support for UPI 
onboarding
Pros: High attention as the message was 
customized, helpful in identifying different 
use cases, persuasive impact, potential of 
development of a relationship, high conversion 
rate
Cons: Labor intensive, only reached a limited 
number of customers, high cost24Figure 13:  Conversion funnel
Stage 1: Initial list Target list of 619 
account holders
70% from the list 
excluded (435) 
— those without 
a PIN generated 
debit card
39% of 'contacted' 
excluded (72) 
— those who 
rejected our visits 
or did not own a 
smartphone
46% of qualified 
excluded (51) — 
those that could 
not be onboarded 
due to technical 
problemsStage 2: Contacted
Stage 3: Qualified
Stage 4: Successful onboarding 184
Those that had a PIN 
generated debit card
30%Total- 619 account 
holders
(100%)
112
Those who had shown 
initial interest in UPI 
onboarding
18%
61
Successful UPI 
onboarding
10%3.5.1 Conversion funnel
Figure 13 describes at which 
stage account holders were 
excluded; the reasons for 
exclusion; and the profile of those 
that were successfully onboarded 
in the end. 
3.5.2 Challenges and barriers to conversion
Challenges Implications
Lack of a debit card70 percent of account holders in the list were 
not qualified for onboarding because they had: 
i) already changed their bank registered mobile 
number; ii) not collected a debit card; iii) not 
received a debit card; or iv) not shown interest in 
generating an ATM PINPerceived risk, complexity, lack of 
knowledge, fear of safety and confidentiality 
were the major factors that discouraged 
the use of a debit card. PoS, online banking 
or UPI onboarding is not possible without a 
debit card and/or PIN
Lack of a 
smartphoneAmongst those that had generated debit card 
PINs, one in three did not own a smartphone. 
Most account holders that did not own a 
smartphone were women who had a feature 
phone (or even when they used a smartphone, 
they shared it with their husbands). While these 
individuals were provided with information 
about AEPS or digital transactions using a PoS 
machine, for UPI onboarding purpose, they were 
excluded from our list (we did not consider using 
the Unstructured Supplementary Service Data 
(USSD) version of Bharat Interface for Money 
(BHIM) because of its cumbersome procedure to 
use)Use of app-based digital payment solutions 
such as wallets or UPI is not possible 
without a smartphone
Poor user 
experience during 
onboarding We faced several challenges during the 
onboarding process resulting in half of eligible 
account holders dropping out. These challenges 
resulted in poor customer experience resulting in 
half of them dropping out before the completion 
of the onboarding processPoor customer experience faced by early 
adopters can limit the uptake of digital 
payment solutions253.5.3 Key challenges for UPI onboarding
Lengthy onboarding process due to poor network 
connectivity:  Affordable smartphones and 
reasonably priced internet connectivity in urban 
cities of India have played a significant role in 
the adoption of digital transactions using mobile 
internet in recent years. Nonetheless, even though 
the digital infrastructure in Jaipur city is good, 
there are places such as Bhatta Basti where 
network connectivity is unreliable and almost 
non-existent, resulting in a lengthy and time-
consuming onboarding process. For example, in 
many cases, each successful UPI onboarding took 
more than 60 minutes (this includes visiting home, 
initial conversation to discuss UPI, walking to the 
central market and procedure for UPI onboarding) 
and account holders had to walk to the central 
market of Bhatta Basti (almost 1.5 kilometers 
away), where mobile data coverage was reliable.
Cases of financial loss:  Some account holders’ 
experience of the onboarding process translated 
into financial loss. For instance, it is a must to 
send an SMS for mobile number verification that 
is linked to the bank account for UPI registration. 
The sender also bears the cost of sending the 
text messages (INR 1.50 per message). Despite 
sending multiple text messages (and being 
charged for each), some account holders did 
not receive the One Time Password (OTP) from 
the issuer bank on his/her registered mobile 
number. Worse, text messages that the account 
holders received were in English, which none of 
them understood. As many as 29 account holders 
decided to opt out during the onboarding process, 
mainly because of the poor user experience of not 
receiving the OTP despite being charged for text 
messages.
Registration failure due to multiple accounts 
linked to the same mobile number:  While it is 
a common trend to frequently change mobile 
phone numbers in urban slums such as Bhatta 
Basti resulting in a registration failure, account 
holders also experienced a registration failure 
with a mobile number that was registered 
with the bank account. Some account holders 
reported the household head’s mobile number 
as their own. In such cases, UPI onboarding was 
not allowed given that the bank record showed 
the same mobile number registered to multiple 
account holders. Account holders were not 
informed that only one mobile number should be 
associated with one bank account holder’s name 
for that bank. We recommended that they visit 
the nearby bank branch to change the mobile 
number. Nonetheless, many chose not to go due 
to their perceived notion of the bank’s ‘customer 
unfriendly environment’ and the lengthy procedure 
(the banking agent was not authorized to update 
new mobile numbers in Bhatta Basti).
26Field Story 2: How a poor customer service 
adversely impacted digital payment solutions 
in Bhatta Basti
AEPS runs on the existing Aadhaar infrastructure 
through which a customer’s biometrics are used for 
authentication. Once the authentication is successful, 
the customer can transfer funds directly from one 
bank account to another without using a smartphone 
or a debit card.
Bhatta Basti is a community where many account 
holders do not have a functional debit card. 
Additionally, not all debit card holders have a 
smartphone. Hence, we decided to introduce the 
Aadhaar Pay application and provide handholding 
support to both merchants and customers to promote 
digitization of transactions.
We identified seven anchor merchants (kirana and 
garment shops) who were enthused about providing 
multiple payment options to their customers. The 
device was provided to these merchants at no 
subscription cost or monthly rental charge. The only 
condition was that merchants had to encourage their 
customers to use this payment option. A field staff 
was allotted to frequently visit these seven merchants 
to track their activities.
Nonetheless, our experiment was unsuccessful due 
to poor customer service by the solution provider. 
Firstly, the electronic Know Your Customer (eKYC) of 
the merchants was pending with the service provider 
for a long time, due to which these merchants were 
not able accept any payment higher than INR 500. Any 
transaction above INR 500 repeatedly failed. Despite 
multiple calls to the customer service agent, this 
issue was not resolved.
Secondly, customers preferred to pay in cash because 
of the lengthy transaction time required by the 
Aadhaar Pay application, especially for lower ticket 
size transactions. Many customers did not have 
Aadhaar-linked bank accounts, and such customers 
did not carry their Aadhaar card or remember their 
16-digit Aadhaar number that was required for the 
transaction.Finally, AEPS does not provide the instant money 
transfer facility between two parties. The cut off 
for transactions is at 11 pm every day and any 
transaction done before this time for the day is 
included in this settlement. For instance, a customer 
paid INR 100 using the AEPS device and received an 
instant message that INR 100 had been debited from 
his bank account. However, the merchant received 
information of a pending transaction. The merchant 
failed to contact the customer service agent, who 
could have assured him that he would be paid by the 
following day.  The customer service agent’s failure 
to fix problems quickly created a serious conflict 
between the merchant and his customer (early 
adopters) resulting in poor customer experience. 
Early adopters generally play a crucial role as they 
tend to be ‘opinion leaders’ in a community such as 
Bhatta Basti and this incidence, when heard through 
word of mouth, resulted in other merchants limiting 
the uptake of the AEPS solution in Bhatta Basti.
Learnings:  Three reasons for the failure of the 
product in Bhatta Basti
1. Poorly trained customer service team members: 
During the initial phase of the introduction of the 
solution in Bhatta Basti, both anchor merchants 
and their customers required a certain degree 
of handholding support. The agent representing 
the service provider was not knowledgeable nor 
courteous, which caused merchants to question 
whether this digital payment solution was the right 
payment option for them;
2. Poorly equipped customer service agent: The 
agent did not have the correct equipment or plan 
to execute his job which impacted accuracy, speed 
and efficiency in getting the job done; and  
3. Inconsistent service: All it took was one 
negative customer service encounter to ruin 
our relationship with anchor merchants (early 
adopters) resulting in the failure of the pilot. Had 
the customer service agent reached the anchor 
merchants in a timely manner, we could have built 
trust amongst the early adopters.273.5.4 User profile of early 
adopters
Early adopters constituted  
10 percent of the total number of 
account holders. They were young 
(average age 27), male (not head 
of the household), smartphone 
owners, internet friendly, and 
active users of social media such 
as Facebook, WhatsApp and 
YouTube.
Even though issues such as 
low internet connectivity had 
hampered the adoption of digital 
payments in Bhatta Basti, these 
early adopters had learning 
patience (on average they 
waited for 60 minutes for UPI 
onboarding); had positive attitudes 
towards banking technology, including debit cards; and 
were not reluctant to try digital 
transactions.
Most of them had knowledge 
about PoS machines (89 percent) 
and half (45 percent) had made at 
least one debit card purchase. The 
majority was aware of the Paytm 
mobile wallet (73 percent) and 
almost half (42 percent) had tried 
to use Paytm. Only 27 percent had 
tried to use a UPI app at the time 
of the onboarding.
A month after UPI onboarding 
(in October 2018), we followed 
up with 61 account holders to 
understand the usage of the 
UPI application. We were able to 
contact 50 account holders.Figure 14 highlights early 
adopters’ usage of banking 
services and technology within 
six months prior to the interview. 
The results indicated that the 
majority of early adopters was 
an active user of ATMs, more 
than half were active in checking 
account balance, visiting CSP/
banks to deposit money, and/
or transferring money between 
accounts. One in three was 
engaged in using downloadable 
apps such as Paytm, BHIM or 
PhonePe for payment.
When asked about the financial 
products or services used for 
transactions at least once six 
months prior to the interview, no 
one reported relying on cash only 
as indicated in Figure 15.
76%
59% 
57% 
45% 
35% Withdrew money 
from ATM
Checked account balance 
in my bank account
Visited bank branch/CSP 
to deposit money
Transferred money 
between accounts
Use downloadable apps such as 
Paytm, PhonePe, etc., for payment100%Figure 14:  Usage of banking services and technology 
in the past six months
N=50 early adopters
80%
37% 
20% 
8% 
4% 
0% ATM card
BHIM, PhonePe, Tez, etc.
Paytm
Check
Major credit card
None, only cash100%Figure 15:  Financial products or services used in the 
past six months for financial transactions
N=50 early adopters28At least 24 early adopters (48 percent) 
were actively using the UPI app at 
the time of the interview. Figure 16 
highlights the primary motivations for 
actively using UPI apps as reported by 
active users.
There were 26 early adopters who did 
not actively use any UPI app after they 
were onboarded three weeks prior 
to the interview. Figure 17 highlights 
the top reasons for not using the 
app. The most common reasons 
were: users’ perceptions that they 
did not have enough savings in the 
bank account; and their preference 
for cash transactions mainly due to 
others in their social network not 
having UPI apps. One of four found the 
procedure complicated despite being 
provided with handholding support and 
necessary instructions.35%
31% 
31% 
23% I do not have enough 
savings in my bank account
My peers do not have any UPI 
application for any transaction
I prefer doing 
cash transactions 
The procedure is 
still complicated100%Figure 17:  Top reasons for not using UPI applications
N=N= 26 non-user74%
65% 
26% 
26% 
22% Mobile recharge
Bant-to-bank transaction
Pay utility bills
Referral to get cash back
Check bank balance100%Figure 16:  Top five motivations for using UPI 
applications
N=24 active users
3.6 Key learnings
Segmentation is the key to identify early adopters: 
First, we learned that the task of getting new account 
holders onboarded on a digital payments platform 
required the highest degree of handholding support, 
which is both costly and time-consuming. Hence, it 
was important to identify account holders that already 
had a positive attitude towards banking technology 
(debit cards) as they would be more interested in 
digital payment solutions too. Our biggest learning 
from this exercise was that such an approach 
allowed us to contact these potential early adopters 
with specific needs. This was also the best way for 
us to use our resources more effectively and make 
better strategic marketing decisions to convert early 
adopters to influencers in the community.
Early adopters can help identify the challenges 
in adopting digital payment solutions: Second, 
we learned that, at this stage, such mobile-based 
digital payment solutions are more attractive to 
young, male members of the household (who are 
not necessarily heads of the household) who are 
already active on other mobile applications such as 
Facebook, WhatsApp and YouTube and curious about 
digital payment solutions. These young users faced 
problems during or after the adoption. However, they 
were the ones that positively responded to a problem 
description and offered detailed examples of their 
problems. For example, half of the early adopters had 
not used the UPI applications when we followed up 
with them a month after onboarding. None reported 
dropping out, rather they explained that it was their 
inability to save in the bank account or get their friends onboard UPI apps that was hindering their 
own ability to actively use the application. At the 
same time, those who were actively using the UPI 
app were aware of the problems and could describe 
the last time a problem had happened and how they 
solved it. For example, some active users reported 
failed transactions; however, instead of focusing on 
what did not work, they were more excited to discuss 
how they tried to solve the problem by reaching out to 
customer support and get their problem resolved.
Poor experience faced by early adopters can limit 
the uptake of digital payment solutions: Third, 
early adopters represented only 10 percent of 
the potential customers in our experiment, and it 
is easy to be misled on the real requirements of 
mainstream customers. About 70 percent of the 
potential customers still do not have easy access 
to PIN generated debit cards, which could be a 
major hindrance to the adoption of digital payment 
solutions. Additionally, even those who showed initial 
interest in digital payment solutions faced challenges 
such as inability to transact due to network/service 
downtime, complex and confusing terms used on 
UPI apps (multiple accounts not possible), and non-
transparent fees (cost of failed SMSs) resulting in 
poor customer experience. In our pilot, 46 percent 
of potential early adopters who showed interest in 
digital payment solutions could not be onboarded due 
to these technical problems. Early adopters generally 
play a crucial role as they tend to be ‘opinion leaders’ 
in a community like Bhatta Basti, and such incidences 
faced by potential early adopters when heard through 
word-of-mouth might result in other consumers 
limiting the uptake of digital payment solutions.293.7 Cost-benefit analysis
3.7.1 Project investment
This pilot was more experimental in nature and 
involved taking a deep dive on understanding the full 
customer journey starting from bank account opening 
to digital payment usage. While rich insights have 
been gathered, the costs incurred in the pilot would 
not translate directly into break-even commercials.
3.7.2 Outcomes
Opening of new accounts
As of October 2018, in partnership with FIA, 1,703 new 
accounts were opened. Benefits to the new account 
holders included: 
• Access to insurance benefits under Pradhan Mantri 
Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY); 
• Access to Direct Benefits Transfer (DBT) schemes 
promoted by the government;
• Proximity to basic banking services as we have 
established Business Correspondent points within 
the community; and
• Handholding support for UPI onboarding and 
introduction to digital payment solutions.
Identification of the profile of early adopters and 
entry of PhonePe
• Conversion rate: In a community such as 
Bhatta Basti where infrastructure and financial 
capabilities are weak, the pilot helped us 
understand that, with strong handholding support 
to potential early adopters, one can expect  
10 percent conversion of new account holders to 
adopters of digital payment solutions. Amongst the 
619 account holders, 323 (52 percent) were male 
and 296 (48 percent) were female account holders. 
All, except one, of those that were onboarded 
were male. Hence, at this stage, one can expect 
a conversion of approximately 20 percent of male 
account holders, and less than 1percent of female 
account holders.
• Profile of early adopters: The experiment that 
we ran in Bhatta Basti also helped us pinpoint 
the profile of early adopters of digital payment 
solutions in poor urban communities. If financial 
providers are interested in entering an untapped 
market in urban slums, they need to first focus 
on identifying young male smartphone owners 
who could adopt digital payment solutions. 
These adopters have potential to influence other 
members in the community.
We started converting new account holders into 
potential adopters of digital payment solutions in August 2018 when there was no financial provider 
in the Bhatta Basti market. We created enthusiasm 
among the early adopters from August to October 
2018 and relied on their network to further promote 
digital payments. By the time we closed this project 
in October 2018, PhonePe had entered the market 
and started its marketing, which gave a boost to our 
campaign.
Identification of pain-points
The experiment helped us identify the pain-points 
in converting account holders into digital payment 
adopters in a community such as Bhatta Basti. 
Prior to entering any community like Bhatta Basti, 
a financial provider needs to first assess if the 
community has institutional support from banks and 
government agencies to promote financial inclusion 
and adequate infrastructure to make digital payment 
solutions viable. 
• Institutional support
 »The biggest pain-point is the lack of a functional 
debit card (exclusion of 70 percent of new 
account holders), which is a prerequisite for any 
digital transaction; and 
 »Financial providers should first assess how 
banks and government agencies are supporting 
the community in accessing a functional debit 
card. 
• Infrastructure 
 »Even though infrastructure in Jaipur city for 
digital transactions is good, there are places 
such as Bhatta Basti where network connectivity 
is almost non-existent resulting in a lengthy and 
time-consuming onboarding process. Financial 
providers should be aware of such challenges 
before entering the market.
• Challenges in onboarding women account holders
 »Our experiment suggested that men are more 
in charge of getting women online in the first 
place in lower income household.  Qualitative 
interview in Bhatta Basti indicated that women 
with a smartphone are more likely to get their 
first smartphones as a present and choose a 
phone their partner weighed in. 
 »After contacting and getting consent from 
women, we visited 16 households of women who 
owned a smartphone, had a functional debit card 
(PIN generated) and the mobile number that 
was registered with the bank account. In all our 
visits, men were present; and men took the lead 
in communicating with our field staffs. We called 
these women after three weeks after our visits; 
and almost all reported that their husband using 
the payment solution, not them.303.8 SWOT analysis
StrengthsCommunity organizationsThe presence of robust and trusted community organization such as Sewa 
that has a strong local presence. The community can be easily mobilized 
through effective partnerships with such community organizations
Strong peer networkNetworking and sharing experiences amongst peers is a key component 
of the customer experience. If a service provider can provide a positive 
customer experience to early adopters, the best tool in such a market is 
word-of-mouth advertising, which is free, reliable and viral
Emerging marketA potential emerging market that presents opportunities for small 
companies looking to acquire new business
Coverage of smartphone 
amongst potential early 
adoptersPenetration of smartphones is high amongst the potential early adopters of 
digital payment solutions (young, male, bank account holders) 
WeaknessWeak infrastructureNetwork connectivity could be unreliable and almost non-existent in such 
communities which could be the biggest hurdle for digital payment adoption
Lack of institutional 
supportLack of a functional debit card, which is a prerequisite for any digital 
transaction. Banks should be proactive about promoting active banking and 
ensure the account holders have functional debit cards
Trust factorWithout the support of a trusted organization or influencer, inhabitants 
of such communities do not trust new financial providers in the market 
because of their prior experience with shams 
Penetration of 
smartphone in the 
communityPenetration of mobile phones is still low with only one-third of the 
household owning a smartphone in Bhatta Basti ( especially amongst 
women account holders)
OpportunitiesWord-of-mouth 
advertisingPositive word-of-mouth advertising is easy to create in such close-knit 
communities if financial providers deliver the products or services with 
good customer experience for early adopters, who are mostly influencers in 
the community
Product cross-sellingThere is an opportunity for selling related or complementary financial 
products, for example, digital savings or insurance products
Product testing with 
diverse segmentsTo ensure a business’ appeal to its customer segment, the business must 
understand who the customer is. Such an emerging market can provide 
an opportunity to evaluate different customer segments’ environment, 
experiences and general context and these factors contribution to how each 
segment is responding to the product
ThreatsNegative word of mouthBecause this is a close-knit community, negative word-of-mouth also 
spreads faster than expected if early adopters face a negative experience. 
We learned that these early adopters in such communities are also 
community influencers
Change in regulatory 
complianceChanges in the political environment and government regulations can affect 
the viability of the product
Poor data securityCases of data breach and fraudulent transactions could result in payment 
failures especially because many residents in the community are not aware 
of data security. Instances of some residents sharing their ATM PIN number 
with others could be found in Bhatta Basti31
32
RECOMMENDATIONS433Handholding support is vital: The task of getting 
new account holders onboarded on digital payment 
solutions requires the highest degree of handholding 
support throughout the onboarding process. Hence, 
there is a clear need for greater guidance and 
handholding through the onboarding process and in 
helping an account holder make the first transaction.
Segmentation is the key: Because it is logistically 
not possible to provide handholding support to 
everyone, it is important to break down the market 
into specific, targetable segments. In our case, we 
used the account holders’ access to debit card and 
attitude towards banking technology as a basis for 
segmentation. The majority of (more than 75 percent) 
account holders did not have a PIN generated 
debit card; there were only 184 individuals who had 
collected their debit cards and visited the nearby 
bank branch (about 2 kilometer away) to generate 
a PIN on their own. Instead of targeting all 619 
individuals, which would have been an expensive 
and ineffective exercise, we created a list of Tier 1 
individuals (including those from Tier 2 and Tier 3, 
who graduated to Tier 1) and reached out to them; 
they responded positively.
Identification of early adopters leads to higher 
adoption of digital payment platforms: Segmentation 
of target audiences allowed us to precisely identify 
early adopters of UPI applications, and we were able 
to cater to their specific needs. This was also the best 
way for us to use our resources more effectively and 
make better strategic marketing decisions to convert 
early adopters to influencers in the community. 
For example, our experience on UPI onboarding 
indicated that the early adopters have huge potential 
to act as ambassadors of digital payments and to 
drive adoption of digital payment solutions in the 
community if provided with enough support. This 
should be therefore considered as one of the most 
important factors to determine the usability and 
sustainability of making transactions digitally in a 
low-income community.Understanding the infrastructure constraints prior 
to entering the market: Before entering a community 
such as Bhatta Basti, a financial provider should 
be aware of infrastructure constraints that could 
act as hurdles in mobilizing the community. The 
service provider should assess if the community has 
institutional support from banks and government 
agencies to promote financial inclusion and adequate 
infrastructure to make digital payment solutions 
viable. For example, the biggest pain-points in 
Bhatta Basti were the lack of a functional debit card 
(exclusion of 70 percent of new account holders), 
which is a prerequisite for any digital transaction; 
and network connectivity that is almost non-
existent resulting in a lengthy and time-consuming 
onboarding process. Financial providers should be 
aware of such challenges before entering the market.
Digital literacy is the need of the hour: Finally, in our 
follow-up study with early adopters, 35 percent was 
inactive because they did not have enough savings in 
the bank account for any kind of digital transaction. 
One key observation that we made in Bhatta Basti 
was that the community had not fully realized the 
potential of digital finance. For example, most 
inhabitants of Bhatta Basti are daily wage laborers 
working in the informal sector using cash as a mode 
of payment. Our qualitative study indicated that they 
have an option to ask their employer to transfer 
money directly to their account. However, most are 
not aware of the concept of stored value and tend 
to regard savings as simple unspent money. Hence, 
promotion of financial literacy using technology 
(use the power of media such as WhatsApp groups, 
mobile phones and the internet) is the key to foster 
the concept of active banking and digital savings 
in a community such as Bhatta Basti. Only once 
an adopter receives information about financial 
instruments and options, would he/she know about 
what to look for and think of the benefits that can be 
obtained from adopting digital financial solutions.H-5, Second Floor, Green Park Extension, New Delhi - 110016
011-49096529 | info@cashlesscatalyst.org | www.cashlesscatalyst.orgwww.facebook.com/CashlessCatalyst www.twitter.com/cashlesscatalyswww.linkedin.com/company/catalyst-inclusive-
cashless-payment-partnership
