2020 DIGITAL FINANCE
BRIGHT SPOT
Support for Market Growth with
USAID/Ethiopia
SEPTEMBER 2020Photo:  Thomas Cristofoletti for USAID1 INTRODUCTION  
USAID’s Digital Financial Services (DFS) Team’s vision is to support secure, inclusive, and sustainable digital 
ecosystems in USAID partner countries. This vision is centered on the Agency’s priority for helping countries 
progress along their Journey to Se lf-Reliance and the objectives of the USAID Digital Strategy . The DFS team 
pursues this vision by focusing on two main objectives: (1) integrating DFS into USAID projects and programs, as 
an accelerator of development and humanitarian objectives, and (2) broadening sector - and program -specific 
efforts to foster inclusive enabling environments, private sector investment, and demand for inclusive financial 
services. The team works to achieve thes e objectives in several  ways, and the primary mechanism is engaging 
with USAID Missions around the world. As articulated in the team’s ecosystem theory of change, the DFS 
technical practice aims to identify and reach “tipping points” in the partner country  markets through partnership 
and support to USAID Missions and other market stakeholders, leading to the scaling of digital finance solutions 
and models that support a country’s Journey to Self -Reliance.  
Core to the efficacy and efficiency of the team’s m odel is evaluating its work to ensure continuous learning, 
adaptation, and application of best practices that result in sustained market level change. For example, are team 
efforts helping USAID reach tipping points in the market that enable public or priv ate sector service delivery 
models to reach and improve the lives of the most vulnerable populations? In support of this, the team has 
initiated an annual effort to identify models or examples of success that demonstrate the achievement of DFS 
team objecti ves and lessons learned for replication and scale. This case study is one of the bright spots identified 
and evaluated in 2020, presenting a pathway for catalyzation of development outcomes supported by digital 
finance. The following provides an overview o f the methods, context, verified pathway, barriers and enablers, 
and key takeaways from the Digital Finance team’s engagement with the USAID/Ethiopia Mission from 2017 to 
present day.  
BRIGHT SPOT STORY  
CONTEXT  
USAID/Ethiopia is the Africa region’s largest Mission. The Mission focuses on substantial humanitarian efforts, 
disaster risk management, resilience, food security, a burgeoning economy,  continuous and emergent health 
concerns, and strengthening democracy and governance. To enhance integration  across technical sectors and 
promote a learning and systems -oriented approach, the Mission embarked on development of their 2019 -2024 
Country Development Cooperation Strategy (CDCS). This most recent CDCS also reflects the unique 
generational and historic al moment Ethiopia has experienced over the past few years, seeking to strengthen 
engagement with the partner country in light of the new leadership, a reform agenda, and new opportunities for 
economic growth and political reform.   
Harvard University and the Millennium  Challenge Corporation conducted a growth diagnostic for Ethiopia, 
which highlighted that one of the primary constraints to economic growth was private investments with low 
returns and a high cost to finance. It determined that Ethiopia would  need to address issues around slow 
profitability for any businesses and investments entering the market. A culmination of these factors led to the 
current effort to privatize five state -owned enterprises, starting with the telecommunications industry.1 As the 
Government of Ethiopia assesses options to partially privatize long -held state enterprises, USAID stands 
uniquely positioned to provide technical assistance to facilitate Ethiopia’s Journey to Self -Reliance.  
 
1 China has dominated Ethiopia’s telecommunications industry to date, making the Government’s privatization effort even 
more  important to help ensure competitiveness.  2 The following narrative details the full USAID/Washington - USAID/Ethiopia engagement from an initial digital 
agriculture assessment conducted by the Digital Development for Feed the Future (D2FTF) team to the 
finalization of the activity design for the Market Systems for Growth activity. The mil estones below provide a 
possible, verified pathway for successful Mission engagement to promote a country’s Journey to Self -Reliance, 
support the objectives of the USAID Digital Strategy , and help catalyze a Mission’s development outcomes.  
METHODS  
This Bright Spot case study uses a positive deviance evaluative approach that looks at behavioral and social 
change.2 The DFS team uses this approach to identify and better understand exemplary engagement and 
application of digital finance tools and practices by clients they support. The DFS team selected the 
USAID/Ethiopia Mission engagement for a case study through reg ular highlighting of bright spots at weekly team 
meetings. The case was then further prioritized for a deep dive during selection of the most exemplary and use -
focused cases. As this case had a known, discrete outcome, the team then pursued additional data  collection to 
substantiate the outcome and improve understanding of the how, why, and contextual factors that led to the 
positive deviant. This case used purposive sampling given the limited number of specific actors with detailed 
knowledge of this engage ment between USAID/Washington and the Mission. In total, this case study is informed 
by various documentation and nine interviews. All narrative process points included have been validated by 
multiple sources.  
STEP-BY-STEP  
PRE-ENGAGEMENT (2017)  
In October 2017, the D2FTF Lab -Wide Priority in USAID/Washington was considering deepening its approach 
to Mission engagement to support rollout and implementation of the new Global Food Security Strategy (GFSS) 
for their third and final year as a matrixed  team. As part of their Mission review process, the team had 
implementing partner (IP) Strategic Impact Advisors (SIA) come and present to D2FTF and the DFS team on 
digital issues of interest  to the Feed the Future (FTF) countries. Shortly thereafter, the Bureau for Food 
Security, which partnered with the U.S. Global Development Lab to establish the D2FTF team, requested that 
the team provide a rapid digital agriculture assessment in each of t he nine remaining FTF Missions not yet 
engaged by the team, including Ethiopia. With its forthcoming CDCS and interest in digital, USAID/Ethiopia 
began planning for a February 2018 assessment. The subsequent trip to conduct the assessment involved a team 
with technical expertise in digitally -enabled extension services, remote sensing technology, digital finance, and 
more.  
PHASE 1 (2018)  
Step One  After the assessment, USAID/Ethiopia decided to move forward with the recommendation 
to conduct digital finance training for Mission IPs. Paul Nelson, the DFS point of contact 
(POC), joined the Mission engagement effort to help refine the training to the context and 
support discussions around aggregating IP demand for digital services. The training 
increased  interest and demand for improved digital finance capacity and led to the Mission 
sending a Foreign Service National (FSN) to USAID/Washington for a Lab FSN Fellowship 
with the DFS team.  
 
2 It is based on the concept that, “in any context, certain individuals confronting simil ar challenges, constraints, and resource 
deprivations to their peers, will nonetheless employ uncommon but successful behaviors or strategies which enable them to 
find better solutions.”  
https://www.betterevaluation.org/en/plan/approach/positive_deviance  3 Step Two  Distinct from the planned Mission Engagement, USAID/Ethiopi a received a request for 
information from the United States Department of State. The DFS POC, already 
supporting the Mission, had the expertise and capabilities to inform the Inter -Agency 
discussions and provide a technical response to the request. The DFS  team’s technical 
insights, responsiveness, and Inter -Agency engagement contributed to establishing a long 
and fruitful engagement with the Mission.  
PHASE 2 (2019 - 2020)  
Step Three  The DFS team hosted an FSN Fellow who was part of the Economic Growth and Trade 
(EG&T) team at the Mission and who managed their financial sector -related activity. The 
fellowship culminated in preliminary material to develop an activity concept note on digital 
financial inclusion with support from the DFS team. The mo tivation for an activity concept 
note stemmed from a continued desire for further uptake of digital finance by the Mission 
after the assessment and training. The team’s consistent, expert, and responsive support 
eventually led to digital finance becoming a  timely priority of the Mission during their 
CDCS development process.  
…………………  
Step Four  The FSN fellowship also coincided with a leadership transition at the Mission, resulting in a 
new Office Director for the EG&T team. Due to the level of engagement, knowledge, and 
trust in the DFS Team POC, the Mission leaned heavily on the DFS POC during this 
transition. This supported continuity for the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) 
discussions during a crucial period at the Mission. The DFS POC also helped to onboard 
new staff to the current design efforts, alongside the Foreign Service Nationals on t he 
EG&T team, by providing briefings and sharing documents in a consolidated manner. This 
collaborative onboarding effort and consistency in the PAD design team helped accelerate 
the overall leadership transition and design timeline.  
A key expediting factor at this stage was the announcement of the plan for licensing and 
privatization of telecommunications. The DFS POC had conducted consultations with the 
Government of Ethiopia, in coordination with the Mission, about their roadmap and  was 
able to provide insights on how best to utilize this transformational moment for Ethiopia 
for the Mission to best support the growth of the digital and economic ecosystem.  
…………………  
Step Five  In October 2019, the DFS POC returned to Ethiopia with colleagues from the Bureau for 
Economic Growth, Education, and Environment (E3) to further develop the EG&T PAD for 
USAID/Ethiopia’s CDCS Development Objective #3. This trip consisted of various 
whiteb oard sessions looking at the activities across the Mission, assessing how they 
connect, identifying gaps, and determining how possible activities relat e to the CDCS 
theory of change. From those sessions, the PAD team worked towards further defining an 
overarching PAD and a flagship activity. Digital became a core component from the early 
conceptualization of the flagship activity that would contribute to Ethiopia’s market 
systems.  
The DFS POC became a de facto, virtual member of the team and helped coordinate Inter -
Agency and USAID/Washington inputs into the development of the EG&T portion of 
USAID/Ethiopia’s CDCS, Project Appraisal Document, and activity  design. The POC 
effectively conveyed how digital finance could help the Mission achieve their objectives in 
the PAD. For example, the POC clearly connected how digital finance could contribute to 4 women’s economic empowerment, which was a key priority for the Mission.  
…………………  
Step Six  The Mission held a theory of change workshop in January 2020 to finalize the activity 
design. The DFS POC provided ongoing, remote support during this time, including 
drafting a statement of objectives that served as the basis for the activity design. 
Subsequent conversations further flushed out the details, identifying complementary 
activities and the appropriate mechanism for procurement.  
Outcome!  The DFS team’s support to USAID/Ethiopia, in collaboration with E3, resulted in the design 
and procurement of the flagship Market Systems for Growth (MS4G) activity. The activity 
objective for MS4G is to foster enterprise -driven growth and to cost -share and leverage 
USAID’s investments with the private sector to maximize impact. Digital is a core 
component of the MS4G activity. One of the activity objectives is: "private sector -led 
digital economy advanced that is open, inclusive, and secure." Overall, MS4G will 
contribute to the Mission’s Private Enterprise Proj ect objective to foster private enterprise 
development, primarily in the food and fiber system, in order to create jobs and increase 
household incomes, improve access to healthy diets, and broaden the revenue base for 
essential public services.  
The integration of digital as a core priority in a five -year, strategic investment by 
USAID/Ethiopia demonstrates sustained prioritization and attention to digital issues 
throughout implementation of the current CDCS. This enhances the likelihood of 
contin ued investments and uptake of catalyzing digital services more broadly at the Mission, 
especially if the MS4G activity generates early positive outcomes, as expected.  
Looking Forward  
Moving forward, the DFS team POC’s engagement with the Mission will tra nsfer primarily to the Digital 
Development Advisor covering the region.3 This will facilitate quicker turnaround given the time zone similarity 
with USAID/Ethiopia, as well as the ability to align regional digital investments.  
For the MS4G activity, the Mission’s EG&T team will be looking to identify quick wins from early implementation 
to share with the Government of Ethiopia to continue the momentum of enterprise privatization and continued 
Mission investment in digital and related market ecosystem acti vities that will help catalyze progress towards 
Ethiopia’s Journey to Self -Reliance.  
BARRIERS  
● The initial ideas around aggregating IP demand for digital financial services did not receive sufficient 
uptake and momentum from the Mission. Missions are busy and often have competing priorities. It can 
be challenging for USAID/Washington staff to get a Mission’s attention when the Mission staff is focused 
internally on their design processes. If an idea or a scope is not responsive to Mission priorities at the 
moment or there is a lot going on at once, it can be difficult to break through. The DFS team h ad 
established feedback loops concerning the USAID/Ethiopia engagement and was able to identify this lack 
 
3 Under the Digital Strategy, there is a push to increase the number of Digital Development Advisors at Missions to further 
strengthen and integrate support for digital development. Continued support for digital initiatives at Missions will be 
streamlined and coordinated between USAID/Washington and an in -country or regional Digital Development Advisor in 
the future, providing more intensive, localized, and continuing support.  5 of momentum early on and pivot to other digital investments that aligned better with Mission and other 
Agency priorities.  
 
● Missions experience signifi cant turnover at regular intervals due to the nature of Foreign Service Officer 
duty lengths and other staffing contracts. This regular staff turnover can lead to shifting priorities and 
delays in work as new staff onboard to their positions and existing p ortfolio development. At 
USAID/Ethiopia in summer 2019, there was significant leadership -level turnover. This can make it 
difficult to maintain institutional knowledge but  is also an opportunity for USAID/Washington staff to 
engage in the transition by bri nging new staff up to speed and providing continuity of support.  
ENABLERS  
● USAID/Ethiopia and the DFS team intentionally brought in different skill sets and areas of expertise on 
the extended PAD team (digital finance, transparency, public finance, and urb anization) for an integrated 
and systems approach to project and activity design. Rather than bringing in only one person and 
expecting them to know everything, this approach better enabled comprehensive technical input for the 
Mission and was less burdensome for the technical advisors. The Mission leadership had a good 
understanding of the support they needed and actively engaged the USAID/Washington technical staff 
throughout the PAD design process as part of the extended team. Continuity in suppor t is important to 
maintain institutional knowledge, relationships, context, and background. Regular POC turnover or 
disparate support between USAID/Washington and a Mission can dramatically affect efficiency of design 
processes and deplete momentum and und erstanding for worthwhile initiatives. USAID/Washington 
support should be provided as one -voice to a Mission -- this approach will be further strengthened by 
the implementation of the Agency Approach to Field Services. The approach taken by the DFS team in 
its engagement with USAID/Ethiopia exemplifies the importance of bringing different voices and 
expertise together, and ultimately contributed to a well -conceived and broad -based activity that will be 
effective in addressing the Mission’s and Ethiopia’s nee ds and priorities.  
 
● Washington staff supporting Missions need to remain informed of the country context and engage with 
the Mission and partners to assess how shifting or upcoming contextual factors will influence their work.  
For Ethiopia, the emergence of  the privatization of various Government of Ethiopia enterprises made it 
an opportune time for private sector engagement and digital finance activities. The DFS POC conducted 
consultations with relevant government and private sector actors to better unders tand the opportunity 
and remained abreast of the dynamics throughout his support to the Mission, ensuring technical support 
was appropriately contextualized.  
● Collaboration is key, especially when the majority of support may be provided remotely. The DFS P OC 
created a virtual whiteboard on Google Slides to capture early conversations and the Mission team still 
uses it to take live notes, rearrange ideas, and collaborate on a shared document. Additionally, the ability 
to leverage Google Docs for ongoing deve lopment and refinement of the PAD and MS4G activity 
enabled all the engaged USAID/Washington technical experts to provide timely feedback to the Mission.  
 
● The DFS POC, through targeted technical assistance, was instrumental in identifying how digital fina nce 
and the broader digital economy implicate or are responsive to Mission priorities. The DFS POC 
conveyed how  digital finance could help the Mission achieve their PAD objectives. According to the 
Mission, the DFS POC was extremely responsive, articulate in his writing, collaborative with other 
Agency colleagues , and able to bring in support beyond his sectoral expertise.  6 KEY TAKEAWAYS  
The DFS team’s engagement with USAID/Ethiopia presents a few key takeaways for USAID/Washington client 
services to Missio ns when seeking to drive change in the digital ecosystem. When considering these types of 
efforts or opportunities to replicate this approach, reflect on the following learnings from this example:  
1. Provide dedicated support, sustained until it can be trans itioned effectively.  
USAID/Washington can provide more binary and transaction -like services, and often these interactions 
facilitate quick reviews and cohesive technical feedback on broader design efforts, like the Country 
Development Cooperation Strategy Washington feedback p rocess. However, building activities from 
scratch or delving deeper into how a Mission might expand its work in a technical area where 
USAID/Washington technical assistance is requested  requires a different client services approach. It is 
important to reme mber that USAID/Washington Mission engagement is always relational and requires 
dedicated service to achieve mutually beneficial results. Under the new Bureau for Development, 
Democracy and Innovation  (DDI), Mission engagement with USAID/Washington will ha ve improved 
structure and systems to ensure streamlined and consistent technical service delivery to Missions. 
Dedicated service, including relationship building, is crucial to the success of any engagement that seeks 
to catalyze development outcomes and c ontribute to ecosystem level change, even though this type of 
support requires an increased level of effort and dedicated and consistent expertise.   
2. Take an ecosystem approach to tackle ecosystem barriers.  When tackling complex 
problems and trying to chan ge systems, it is essential to take an ecosystem approach. USAID/Ethiopia 
brought together multiple sectoral expertise from E3, as well as digital expertise to determine how best 
to build an activity that would address gaps and leverage the opportunity of the privatization of 
Government of Ethiopia enterprises. For USAID/Washington staff, leveraging country support systems 
within and across Bureaus for a particular Mission or region can ensure Missions receive coordinated 
and comprehensive technical support . 
3. Remain flexible and responsive to Mission and emergent context priorities.  Successful 
Mission engagement focuses on aligning with Mission priorities and leveraging contextual opportunities. 
Initial engagement with a Mission often results in a list of rec ommendations. Work with the Mission to 
prioritize what recommendations are actionable and in what time frame. More importantly, be willing to 
pivot to address emergent needs or adapt to working on a different recommendation throughout the 
engagement.   
4. Be proactive.  Follow -up with the Mission, and share ideas and new opportunities. Help the Mission 
identify alignment with Agency priorities. Help coordinate Washington technical expertise and be willing 
to go back to Washington and identify and bring in addit ional expertise as needed. Successful Mission 
engagement is about the partnership and ensuring the best development programming, which often 
requires proactive, continued engagement and collaboration to design activities that can catalyze 
development outco mes.  
  7  
ANNEX I: BEST PRACTICES FOR WASHINGTON & MISSION 
ENGAGEMENT  
The following is a distilled capture of best practices that led to this bright spot. They provide ideas and guidance 
for future USAID/Washington Mission engagement that are in line with existing evidence from the Sustained 
Uptake Developmental Evaluation Mission Engagement Playbook , as well as other client services approaches 
across the Agency.  
Outreach and Communication  Technical and Contextual Exp ertise  
● Be responsive. Follow -up and stay relevant to 
the Mission. Explain why and what you are 
doing is important and can help achieve Mission 
priorities.  
● Writing abilities are most useful to the Mission 
when responses are quick, of high quality, clear, 
and deta iled to the appropriate level.  
● Take initiative. Go beyond emails in 
communication. Use GChat or pick up the 
phone. Maintain strong working -level contacts.  
● Make sure there is an agreement on 
terminologies. Aligning rhetoric can facilitate 
smooth engagement s. 
● Use Google Suite to collaborate, including 
Google slides for virtual whiteboarding, and 
Google docs for simultaneous editing and 
feedback.  ● When you can, it is helpful to provide 
information and data on more than your 
technical area.   
● Technical/subject matter experts from 
USAID/Washington should also bring an 
understanding of the Washington political 
dynamics that influence policy. Have a grasp of 
political sensitivities and know what is in USAID’s 
lane, where Washington teams can plug into 
something, and when to disengage.  
● Remain up to speed about Agency and broader 
USG guidance and policies, as well as those of 
the partner government. This allows you to align 
priorities, use similar language, and offer a clear 
value proposition.  
Engagement Approach  In-person support (TDYs)  
● Get a Mission's attention by asking how you 
can help instead of presenting pre -cooked 
scopes or ideas.  
● Understand the country context and make 
clear links between Washington ideas and 
Mission priorities. Work closely with IPs and 
Washington to make the key messages and 
details receptive to the audience who needs to 
review, clear, etc.  
● Coordinate with other Washington expertise 
for the Mission. Be the connective tissue to 
other folks in the Agency. Be inclusive , seek 
out, and be ready to receive input from 
different offices. This inclusive attitude will help 
bring different thoughts and voices to the 
process and effectively respond to Mission 
needs.  ● Especially at the early conceptual stage of any 
design effort, there is no replacement for having 
someone come to the Mission on TDY or  
embedding a Digital Development Advisor 
directly with the Mission. Mission staff should 
facilitate trips to the field so  Washington staff can 
learn more about the country context - this 
allows them to understand more about what is 
going on the ground and what will / will not work 
when providing technical expertise.  
● USAID/Washington staff need to take charge in 
organizing a TDY - do not  put too much burden 
on the Mission. Work together to get clarity on 
the desired result s or deliverables of the TDY.  
● It helps if the USAID/Washington staff has some 
funds for a TDY. This makes things easier for the 
Mission and allows for greate r flexibility.  
 