sustainability
Article
Digital Financial Inclusion Sustainability in Jordanian Context
Abdalwali Lutﬁ1, Manaf Al-Okaily2,*
, Malek Hamed Alshirah3, Ahmad Farhan Alshira’h4,
Thaer Ahmad Abutaber2and Manal Ali Almarashdah2
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Lutﬁ, A.; Al-Okaily, M.;
Alshirah, M.H.; Alshira’h, A.F.;
Abutaber, T.A.; Almarashdah, M.A.
Digital Financial Inclusion
Sustainability in Jordanian Context.
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su13116312
Academic Editors: Aijaz A. Shaikh
and Francisco Li ébana-Cabanillas
Received: 16 April 2021
Accepted: 28 May 2021
Published: 2 June 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1Department of Accounting, College of Business, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia;
aalkhassawneh@kfu.edu.sa
2School of Business, Jadara University, Irbid 733, Jordan; thaer@jadara.edu.jo (T.A.A.);
manal@jadara.edu.jo (M.A.A.)
3Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, Al al-Bayt University, Al-Mafraq 130040, Jordan;
shraamalek@gmail.com
4Faculty of Administrative and Financial Sciences, Irbid National University, Irbid 2600, Jordan;
alshraah.ahmad@yahoo.com
*Correspondence: m.alokaily@jadara.edu.jo or m.oqaili@ju.edu.jo
Abstract: Digital Financial Inclusion (DFI) refers to efforts to make digital ﬁnancial services available
and affordable to all individuals and institutions, regardless of their net expense or institution size
and demographic location. Despite the immense beneﬁts of DFI and DFI-based products and services
such as mobile money and payment systems, users’ acceptance is thin, limited, and disappointing
in some developing countries as Jordan. Consequently, this study has investigated the factors
inﬂuencing the acceptance of the mobile payment system in the Jordanian context. This study’s
research model synthesizes the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) variables and extended the
model with perceived ﬁnancial cost as an independent variable. The research model has been
empirically conﬁrmed by ﬁtting the model to data collected from 304 Jordanian citizens using
a survey instrument. The data were analysed using Partial Least Squares-Structural Equation
Modelling (PLS-SEM). The result has conﬁrmed that behavioural intention to use the m-payment
system is signiﬁcantly and positively inﬂuenced by perceived usefulness and perceived ﬁnancial
cost; behavioural intention to use m-payment system was not found to be signiﬁcantly and positively
inﬂuenced by perceived ease of use and hence the related hypothesis was not supported. Finally,
conclusions and recommendations are further discussed in the last section of this paper.
Keywords: ﬁnancial technology; digital ﬁnancial; digital payment; ﬁnancial inclusion; Central Bank
of Jordan; ﬁnancial sustainability; digital economy; TAM; MAT
1. Introduction
Financial inclusion, including digital payment systems, is not conﬁned to spreading
digital services to a larger population; it also includes offering quality and diversiﬁed
ﬁnancial services at a reasonable cost [ 1]. At the macro level, the beneﬁts of ﬁnancial
inclusion and electronic payment are to enhance ﬁnancial inclusion, enhance the stabil-
ity of the ﬁnancial system, enhance economic development, increase employment rates,
increase the ﬁnancial access for enterprises, especially SMEs, increase transparency to
ﬁght money laundering and the ﬁnancing of terrorism, and reduce poverty levels through
cutting down the costs of ﬁnancial transactions [ 2,3]. Eventually, developing an advanced
electronic payment system is crucial for maintaining the strength and efﬁciency of the
sustainable national payment system, using the advantages mentioned above to attain
sustainable, comprehensive development and contribute to supporting Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) growth.
Recently, Jordan’s interest in developing infrastructure for ﬁnancial inclusion and the
digital banking sector has increased, especially in the mobile payment systems domain. As
such, the government objective to expand the diffusion of such systems is to achieve and
Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13116312 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 2 of 13
enhance ﬁnancial inclusion in the country via mobile phone technology to increase access
to formal banking and payment services in the broader population, especially those who
could not access the traditional delivery channels such as ATMs, Net Banking, and bank
branches. Accordingly, these systems will bring prosperity and socio-economic beneﬁts to
underbanked and unbanked population segments. Despite the strong commitment from
the Central Bank of Jordan (CBJ) to deepen ﬁnancial inclusion in a country where less than
a quarter of adults have bank accounts, the intended impact has not yet materialized [ 4].
In other words, it deepens the Jordanian economy ﬁnancial inclusion vision to reafﬁrm the
basic tenet that all adults have the right to access loans, savings, payments, and insurance
services from formal ﬁnancial institutions easily and at an affordable cost while maintaining
the sustainability of the businesses that provide ﬁnancial services [1].
In today’s globally connected marketplace, there is a very high penetration rate
regarding smartphones and social media due to rapid technology advancements [ 5–7]. This
is a great opportunity for many countries worldwide to promote their economic growth
and support ﬁnancial stability by adopting ﬁnancial inclusion through mobile payment
methods [ 3]. Accordingly, ﬁnancial inclusion can be deﬁned as the state wherein people
can access various ﬁnancial products and services (payment transactions, savings, credit,
remittances, and insurance), which are delivered appropriately, reliably, and sustainably at
a reasonable cost that meets their needs. Eventually, ﬁnancial inclusion strives to remove
the barriers that exclude individuals from participating in the ﬁnancial sector services and
using these services to improve their living standards.
Mobile payment (m-payment) systems are deﬁned as a means of sustainable payment.
The payer employs mobile communication techniques in conjunction with mobile devices
to initiate, authorize, or realize payments [ 4]. As such, it does not require a hefty deploy-
ment cost. In the Jordanian context, Mobile payment, otherwise known as Jordan Mobile
Payment (JoMoPay), is a new payment method that emerged from the need of the CBJ to
provide better ﬁnancial services to people who live in rural areas who do not maintain
a formal relationship or bank accounts. The JoMoPay system is deﬁned as “a payment
method using electronic money whether by the customer’s using his account at a bank or
by opening an e-wallet account in the company” (p. 1, [ 8]). In other words, the JoMoPay
system refers to payment through mobile technology synchronized with bank accounts or
via creating an m-wallet account (for those who do not have a bank account). In this regard,
the e-wallets apps in current research are all server-based non-bank e-wallets. In Jordan,
there are several server-based e-wallets apps providers such as Orang Money, Mahfazti,
and Dinarak. Accordingly, the CBJ has launched the JoMoPay system as a novel payment
systems method in recent years to improve ﬁnancial inclusion in a developing country
such as Jordan.
Unfortunately, the ﬁnancial inclusion aspects of including the mobile payment systems
were worse than expected compared to Jordanian society culture and the level of develop-
ment of ﬁnancial and banking services; hence, those results were not satisfactory for the
CBJ [ 9]. Despite those technological advancements mentioned above and the availability
of a good infrastructure to use JoMoPay system, it is still experiencing a low acceptance
rate [ 10,11]. Recent survey results conducted by [ 12] to explore the current JoMoPay system
status in the Jordanian context showed that only a small amount of the total Jordanian
population had used the JoMoPay system [ 13], showing a low JoMoPay system acceptance
in Jordan.
Accordingly, the current study is important for several reasons since the outcome
results will provide recommendations and valuable guidelines to increase Jordanians’
acceptance toward JoMoPay system usage. Therefore, the problems discussed in the
aforementioned highlight those research questions that are required to be examined, these
are as follows: Can a modiﬁed TAM model be used to determine the acceptance of the
JoMoPay system among Jordanian citizens? Is there a direct relationship between predictors
(perceived usefulness, perceived ﬁnancial cost and perceived ease of use) and behavioural
intention to use the JoMoPay system?Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 3 of 13
Concerning research objectives, the study intends to examine the inﬂuencing factors
on the acceptance JoMoPay system among citizens in Jordan. In addition, this study will
investigate the factors inﬂuencing the intention to use the JoMoPay system. Consequently,
the main research objective is formulated: To determine the factors that lead to the JoMoPay
system’s acceptance among Jordanian citizens using a modiﬁed TAM model. The related
objective is as follows: To test the direct relationships between perceived usefulness,
perceived ﬁnancial cost, and perceived ease of use and behavioural intention to use the
JoMoPay system.
The current paper covers nine main sections beginning with an introduction, which
explain the concept of digital ﬁnancial inclusion including the mobile payment systems,
followed by the problem statement, research questions, research objectives, signiﬁcance,
and motivation of the study. The next sections introduce the literature review, MAT
and TAM models, and then present the research hypotheses. Section 5 represents the
research methodology and Section 6 introduces data analysis and results. The seventh
section discusses the research results and provides the implications of the study. Section 8
focuses on the research limitations and recommendations for future directions. Finally,
the last section presents the paper’s recapitulations and conclusion, thus completing the
whole paper.
2. Literature Review
Realizing the signiﬁcance of enhancing ﬁnancial inclusion, and in order to develop
the national payment system in Jordan to keep pace with best international standards
and best practices, the CBJ set up inclusive retail payment systems in order to move from
the paper-dominated payment environment to the electronic environment, in a way that
attains the CBJ’s goals of expanding ﬁnancial inclusion in Jordan [ 3]. Additionally, both the
CBJ and NPC do support this movement through encouraging modern attainable payment
initiatives and exploring the possible opportunities to increase investment in advancing the
electronic payment process [ 2]. The CBJ is also looking to transform government payments
from paper-dominated to non-paper payments due to the substantial volume and quantity
of transactions, in addition to the fact that most of the beneﬁciaries are unbanked [ 1].
Thus, the mobile payment systems will make the improvement process more feasible
and achievable.
With respect to the mobile payment systems context, the previous study has also
considered another theme concerning key drivers of the user’s acceptance of mobile
payment. In this regard, Qasim and Abu-Shanab [ 11] tried a ﬁrst theoretical contribution
based on the Uniﬁed Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) by suggesting
a number of variables (namely, performance expectancy, followed by social inﬂuences, trust,
network externality) as key predictors of a user’s willingness to accept mobile payment.
Likewise, an empirical study in the context of Jordan conducted by Al-Okaily et al. [ 10]
found that behavioural intention towards using mobile payment systems is largely shaped
by the level of performance expectancy, social inﬂuence, price value, security, and privacy.
Moreover, Shaw [ 14] further investigated the mediating effect of trust on m-wallet
acceptance in Canada. Drawing from the TAM model, the results revealed that perceived
usefulness is the main factor that inﬂuences m-wallet acceptance that is mediated by trust.
Using an online survey with random sampling, 284 usable samples were gathered and
analyzed with PLS-SEM. The results showed signiﬁcant associations between perceived
usefulness, trust, informal learning, and intention to use m-wallet. In addition, information
learning also positively inﬂuences perceived usefulness. However, there are no signiﬁcant
effects of perceived ease of use and m-wallet self-efﬁcacy on the intention to use and
perceived usefulness, respectively.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 4 of 13
3. Theoretical Models
3.1. Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)
The TAM model was originally proposed by [ 15] in the information technology (IT)
acceptance context. It was introduced as one of the most critical IT acceptance theories in
the world [ 16]. Moreover, the TAM model has been selected by past studies to examine
IT acceptance and has been certiﬁed to be a predictor of IT acceptance and use [ 17].
Consequently, the success of IT adoption depends on user acceptance [ 18]. Recent research
has investigated the validity of the TAM in the context of mobile internet [ 19]. The results
of the aforementioned study recommend TAM as a strong model for the acceptance of the
m-internet. An expansion to the theoretical model of TAM is highly recommended by [ 15].
The proposed theoretical framework of the present study included the perceived ﬁnancial
cost as an extension to the TAM model to predict Jordanian citizens’ intention to accept
m-payment systems.
In short, the TAM model investigation of the user’s intention to use a particular IT
depends on four main steps [ 15]. The ﬁrst step examines the effect of external factors on
Perceived Usefulness (PU) and Perceived Ease of Use (PEU) of IT. PU rises from the extent
to which users believe that embracing a speciﬁc system could improve their performance,
while PEU refers to the extent to which users believe that embracing a speciﬁc system
could be free of physical and mental efforts. The second step is when the PU and PEU
affect the user’s Attitude Towards Using (ATU) a particular system. In the third step, the
PU and ATU determine the usage intention. The last step is making the ﬁnal decision to
accept or reject the use of technology [ 15,17]. In addition, TAM has been contingent on
several developments and additions, including the uniﬁed theory of the acceptance and
use of technology (UTAUT).
3.2. Mental Accounting Theory (MAT)
Digital payment, g, is characterized by uncertainties and risks on the part of payers [ 20].
Thus, theories that describe payer decisions under uncertainties and risks should shed light
on payer choice in the digital payment context. Mental accounting theory (MAT) explains
ﬁnancial decision-making of a payer under the aforementioned circumstances [ 21]. MAT
proposes that individuals weigh beneﬁcial results that are deemed assured more intensely
than beneﬁcial results that are considered plausible. It is the effect of conﬁdence which
make individuals avoid risks to make any decisions comprising beneﬁts, and that clariﬁes
why individuals are likely to desire an options with a certain but lesser gain. Actually, risk
avoidance is considered to be one of the well-known details concerning risky selections
involving utilities and gains [22].
As claimed by the MAT principle, an individual analyzes transactions in two stages,
the judgment and decision-making stage. In the judgment stage, and to evaluate probable
transactions, Thaler [ 21] suggested three kinds of utility: acquisition, transactions, and
whole utility. In acquisition utility, the values of the service received matched (compared)
to the expenditure. In transaction utility, an individual considers the perceived advantages
of a deal or transaction (based on the differences between the price objectives and the price
reference that an individual’s expect to pay for the service). Whole utility from a service is
the totality of acquisition and transaction utility that represents the perceived total values
and utilities derived from applying and using a service such as a digital payment system.
4. Research Model
The current research aims to understand the factors that inﬂuence Jordanian citizens’
intention toward acceptance of m-payment systems services. The research model was
based on the TAM model and the rationale of MAT (another related factor such as perceived
ﬁnancial cost) as depicted in Figure 1. In this respect, this part focuses on the discussion of
the most signiﬁcant m-payment systems acceptance predictors. These predictors factors
are classiﬁed based on the constructs of the TAM model. Consequently, the researchers
expect that current research will contribute to the TAM model as a theoretical contribution.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 5 of 13
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 13 
 
predictors factors are classified based on th e constructs of the TAM model. Consequently, 
the researchers expect that current research will contribute to the TAM model as a theo-
retical contribution. 
 
Figure 1. Research Model. 
4.1. Perceived Usefulness (PU) 
Perceived usefulness is defined by [15] “the  degree to which a person believes that 
using a particular system would enhance his or her job performance”. Perceived useful-
ness is the same as performance expectancy [23] . Theoretically, PU is identified as the im-
portant predictor of the behavioural intention [24–27]. In the context of this study, the 
formation of PU was to investigate Jordanian citizens’ beliefs of whether the mobile pay-ment systems services are useful, then they are more likely to accept these systems. Con-
sequently, we suggest the following hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 1.  PU will positively impact Jordanian citi zens’ intention to u se m-payment system. 
4.2. Perceived Financial Cost (PFC) 
Perceived financial cost construct did not come from the TAM model, but literature 
on IT recommend PFC as an additional construct that might influence the users to accept 
any new system. PFC is similar to price value in the UTAUT2 model, which can be defined 
as “the individuals’ cognitive trade-off between  the perceived benefits of the applications 
and the monetary cost for using them” [26]. PF C can be seen as mone tary sacrifices for 
applying a service or/and as a sign of service quality. In the context of digital payment, 
the quality of service is comparable across providers as the services (e.g., digital payment systems) are mostly in nature low-touch, and payers are generally familiar with the ser-
vice attributes. Therefore, PFC is more frequently measured as  monetary sacrifices than a 
sign of service quality. Based on MAT, PFC affects the monetary dimensions of transac-
tions benefits. Any rise in PFC inferred lesser transaction utilities. As transactions benefits 
and values are a component of total utility according to MAT, PFC should positively in-fluence total value and utility. 
  
Figure 1. Research Model.
4.1. Perceived Usefulness (PU)
Perceived usefulness is deﬁned by [ 15] “the degree to which a person believes that
using a particular system would enhance his or her job performance”. Perceived usefulness
is the same as performance expectancy [ 23]. Theoretically, PU is identiﬁed as the important
predictor of the behavioural intention [ 24–27]. In the context of this study, the formation of
PU was to investigate Jordanian citizens’ beliefs of whether the mobile payment systems
services are useful, then they are more likely to accept these systems. Consequently, we
suggest the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1. PU will positively impact Jordanian citizens’ intention to use m-payment system .
4.2. Perceived Financial Cost (PFC)
Perceived ﬁnancial cost construct did not come from the TAM model, but literature
on IT recommend PFC as an additional construct that might inﬂuence the users to accept
any new system. PFC is similar to price value in the UTAUT2 model, which can be deﬁned
as “the individuals’ cognitive trade-off between the perceived beneﬁts of the applications
and the monetary cost for using them” [ 26]. PFC can be seen as monetary sacriﬁces for
applying a service or/and as a sign of service quality. In the context of digital payment,
the quality of service is comparable across providers as the services (e.g., digital payment
systems) are mostly in nature low-touch, and payers are generally familiar with the service
attributes. Therefore, PFC is more frequently measured as monetary sacriﬁces than a sign
of service quality. Based on MAT, PFC affects the monetary dimensions of transactions
beneﬁts. Any rise in PFC inferred lesser transaction utilities. As transactions beneﬁts and
values are a component of total utility according to MAT, PFC should positively inﬂuence
total value and utility.
In the current context, numerous studies have found that PFC will be signiﬁcant
for accepting mobile technologies [ 27,28]. Based on the prior discussion, it is expected
that Jordanian citizens are actually interested in the perceived beneﬁts of using mobile
payment system services compared to the ﬁnancial cost paid to use such systems. Hence,
the following hypothesis is suggested:
Hypothesis 2. PFC will positively impact Jordanian citizens’ intention to use the m-payment system .
4.3. Perceived Ease of Use (PEU)
Perceived ease of use can be deﬁned as the “extent to which users believe that applying
a speciﬁc system would be free of efforts” [ 15]. Perceived ease of use is same to effort
expectancy [ 23]. Based on reviewing the previous studies, Perceived ease of use was
determined to be a vital factor in the intention of mobile systems [ 27–31]. In this regard,Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 6 of 13
it is expected that if the Jordanian citizens’ ﬁnd the mobile payment systems easy to use
and effort-free, then they are more likely to adopt these systems. Therefore, this drives the
subsequent hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3. PEU will positively impact Jordanian citizens’ intention to the use m-payment system .
5. Research Methodology
A quantitative research method was adopted in the current study to test the proposed
theoretical framework. In view of this, there are many data collection methods such as
mail survey, Internet survey, phone survey, and self-administrated survey [ 32]. In this
study, the self-administered approach is more common in the different contexts to achieve
a large response rate, e.g., [ 33,34]. This is due to some limitations in selecting probability
sampling, such as random sampling of Jordanian citizens, for example, the inability to
obtain the listing of all Jordanian citizens’ names and addresses, citizens scattered all
around the country, the high cost of conducting the study in every city, and a hard time
accessing certain groups or classes of citizens. On the other hand, the purposive sampling
technique is considered fast and easy, where Jordanian citizens can be selected because of
their convenient accessibility and proximity to the researchers [ 35]. Based on the previous
argument, the researchers have applied non-probability sampling with the purposive
sampling technique.
The Arabic language is the native language of Jordanians. The original measurements
were adapted from several previous studies, which were in the English language. However,
the use of the Arabic language in the questionnaire of the current study provides ease in
understanding for respondents as an advantage in communication. This also enables the
researchers to get more insightful information by using the native language of the target
population in the data collection process. However, there is little literature published in the
Arabic language that investigates a similar context, where survey items are available for
the set of variables employed in this study. Therefore, extensive validation and translation
procedures have been conducted before the data collection procedures.
In the translation process, since English is not the ofﬁcial language in Jordan, as well
as to avoid the impact of cultural and language differences, the researchers followed the
back-translation method (forward-backward-translations) suggested by Brislin [ 36], which
is considered to be one of the most popular approaches for questionnaire translation. The
services of a professional translation centre were acquired to translate the English version
into the standard Arabic language. Later, the Arabic version was retranslated into English
by another academic team at the same centre to ensure consistency and avoid mistakes in
translation; the original version of the English questionnaire and the translated version
were compared. This process is called the back-translation method.
Of the 438 surveys distributed among Jordanian citizens, 352 were completed and
48 were excluded. Of the 304 respondents, 161 (53%) were male and 143 (47%) were
female. Only the established variables from prior research have been done, measuring
the constructs in 7-Likert Scales. In this regard, the main variables of TAM such as per-
ceived usefulness and perceived ease of use were measured by the same items used by
Davis [ 15]. Meanwhile, perceived ﬁnancial cost was measured using four items adapted
from Venkatesh et al. [ 23]. Lastly, behavioral intention to use the mobile payment system
was measured using four items adapted also from Davis [ 15], Venkatesh et al. [ 23]. All
items applied are provided into the Table A1 in Appendix A.
6. Data Analysis and Results
Researchers used various analytical methods to develop and conﬁrm their research
results [ 37,38]. There are two methods of SEM, covariance-based SEM (CB-SEM) and
composite-based SEM (PLS-SEM). It is worth mentioning that the PLS-SEM method has
taken up a prominent role within the academic literature of many ﬁelds in management sci-
ence, speciﬁcally information systems (IS) research. In general, the PLS model is normallySustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 7 of 13
analysed and interpreted in two stages [ 39,40]. The ﬁrst stage, which is the measurement
(outer) model, is tested to ensure its validity and reliability. Measurement properties of
multi-item constructs, including convergent validity, discriminant validity, and reliability,
are examined by conducting Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis (CFA). The second stage, the
structural (inner) model, is analysed by assessing R square, effect size, the predictive rele-
vance of the model, the GoF of the model, and the path coefﬁcient through bootstrapping
for testing the hypotheses of the research [ 41,42]. These two stages are depicted clearly in
the following sub-sections.
6.1. Measurement Model Assessment
Measurement model assessment is the pre-requisite step for generating results in PLS-
SEM. Indeed, Hair et al. [ 43] described four stages of evaluating the measurement models
for PLS-SEM. These stages are (1) indicator reliability is evaluated using indicator loadings
of 0.70; (2) internal consistency reliability is evaluated using Composite Reliability (CR)
of 0.70 and above; (3) convergent validity is evaluated using Average Variance Extracted
(AVE) of 0.50 and above; and (4) discriminant validity is evaluated by using Heterotrait-
Monotrait (HTMT) ratio of correlation, Fornell & Larcker criterion, and cross-loading of
the indicator. By looking at the cross-loading, the factor loading indicators and the square
root of AVE of each latent construct should be higher than its correlation with any other
construct in the PLS-SEM model used in a study, with the condition that the cut-off value
of factor loading is higher than 0.70 [44–46].
Regarding the measurement model assessment, the outcomes presented in Table 1
clearly support all conventional standards of validity and reliability. Additionally, various
statistical analyses reveal that all the measurement items were right and exceeded the
recommended value. Subsequently, it can be concluded that the proposed path model has
a satisfactory level of validity and reliability. Therefore, the researchers can safely progress
toward inner model analysis and test the suggested hypotheses. The next section displays
an assessment of the PLS-SEM inner model.
Table 1. Assessment of the Measurement Model.
Variables IndicatorsReliability Validity
Indicator Reliability Internal Consistency ReliabilityConvergent
ValidityDiscriminant
Validity
Factor LoadingsCronbach’s
AlphaCR A VE HTMT
Loading > 0.70
or >0.40 & Has No
Impact on A VE and CR0.70 CR0.70 A VE0.50 HTMT < 0.90
Perceived
UsefulnessPU1 0.954
0.942 0.962 0.895 AcceptablePU2 Dropped
PU3 0.945
PU4 0.940
Perceived
Financial CostPFC1 0.936
0.941 0.958 0.850 AcceptablePFC2 0.948
PFC3 0.919
PFC4 0.883
Perceived Ease
of UsePEU1 Dropped
0.921 0.944 0.849 AcceptablePEU2 0.926
PEU3 0.918
PEU4 0.920Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 8 of 13
Table 1. Cont.
Variables IndicatorsReliability Validity
Indicator Reliability Internal Consistency ReliabilityConvergent
ValidityDiscriminant
Validity
Factor LoadingsCronbach’s
AlphaCR A VE HTMT
Loading > 0.70
or >0.40 & Has No
Impact on A VE and CR0.70 CR0.70 A VE0.50 HTMT < 0.90
Mobile
Payment
IntentionMBI1 0.927
0.957 0.969 0.885 AcceptableMBI2 0.957
MBI3 0.942
MBI4 0.936
6.2. Structural Model Assessment
The structural model was estimated to assess the relationships proposed in the theoret-
ical framework. We employed a bootstrapping approach with 5000 sub-samples to examine
those relationships as seen in Figure 1. As a result, the research hypotheses examined
by the structural model were all supported except for (Hypothesis H3) as illustrated in
Table 2.
Table 2. Hypotheses Results.
No.Relationship Standard Beta Standard Error TV PV Sig. Decision
IV!DV
H1 PU!MPI 0.193 0.073 2.633 0.008 Sig. + Accepted
H2 PFC!MPI 0.108 0.057 1.911 0.056 Sig. + Accepted
H3 PEU!MPI 0.017 0.040 0.414 0.679 N.S. Rejected
7. Discussion and Implications
7.1. Discussion
The objective of the present study is to determine factors that inﬂuence mobile pay-
ment systems usage in the Jordanian context. Thus, in line with that, this study offered
new clariﬁcations about the acceptance of digital payment systems using the TAM model
in Jordan. To sum up, the major factors that affect the intention of m-payment system
acceptance among Jordanian citizens are perceived usefulness and perceived ﬁnancial cost,
while perceived ease of use seems irrelevant. Accordingly, this study provides valuable
theoretical implications as discussed below.
7.1.1. The Effect of Perceived Usefulness on Intention to Use Mobile Payment System
The empirical results principally show that behavioral intention to use the m-payment
system is positively impacted by perceived usefulness. This means that Jordanian citizens
are more inclined to increase their use of mobile payment if they recognise that such
systems are useful. Consequently, those with high perceived usefulness had high approval
for using mobile payment. Jordanian citizens were inﬂuenced mostly by their perceptions
about the perceived usefulness and the expected advantages of using the mobile payment
system. In this regard, this result concurred with the TAM model suggested by Davis [ 15].
Moreover, this study outcome concurred with existing literature in the mobile payment
system area (e.g., [ 10,11,29,30,47]). Those studies state that increasing perceived usefulness
lead to an increased behavioral intention to use those systems.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 9 of 13
7.1.2. The Effect of Perceived Financial Cost on Intention to Use Mobile Payment System
This study’s current results also suggest a positive relationship between perceived
ﬁnancial cost and intention to use mobile payment system. The main reason for this result
could be because Jordanian citizens are really concerned about the perceived beneﬁts
of using services of mobile payment compared with the cost paid to use these systems.
Consequently, the Jordanian citizens are more receptive to being encouraged to use mobile
payment systems. In other words, it was showed that Jordanian citizens are most interested
in ﬁnancial issues in formulating their decision to reject or accept the use of the mobile
payment system. This result is consistent with other studies, such as [ 10,19,23,25,48], that
perceived ﬁnancial cost directly impacted using m-payment.
7.1.3. The Effect of Perceived Ease of Use on Intention to Use Mobile Payment System
The study results reveal an insigniﬁcant relationship between perceived ease of use
and behavioural intention to use m-payment system. However, behavioural intention is
positively inﬂuenced by perceived ease of use as presented in the TAM model [ 15]. On the
other hand, the perceived ease of use does not have a signiﬁcant effect on this study. Thus,
this hypothesis result is not consistent with the prediction of the TAM model. This implies
that Jordanian citizens do not place some importance on m-payment systems, although
there is a high penetration rate and daily usage of smartphones. Thus, the above reasons
suggest that perceived ease of use for this relatively new mobile-based technology is less
important [10,11].
7.2. Implications
In terms of managerial implication, the indicators that are critical for practitioners to
determine to enhance the acceptance of mobile payment systems are perceived usefulness
and perceived ﬁnancial cost. These two indicators are strongly related to the acceptance
of mobile payment systems in the Jordanian context. Consequently, the policy-makers in
the CBJ need to pay more attention to those indicators by increasing the awareness levels
of the advantages of using the mobile payment systems services, as well as conﬁrming
transactional safety with its reasonable cost comparing with other systems. Thus, it will
lead to improvement of the payment systems and increase the payment options for the
people in long term, one of the major objectives of increasing ﬁnancial inclusion among
Jordanian society which the CBJ seeks to achieve digital ﬁnancial stability in the country.
Additionally, Jordanian banks and payment service providers, as well as other related
parties, should constantly improve their e-payment systems because of the unprecedented
growth rates of e-payment implementation in the breakout of Covid-19 crisis. Services
delivered should meet users’ anticipations as m-payment systems should be effective and
convenient to gain more markets share from cash and increase users’ awareness. Likewise,
the above-mentioned parties must make sure that m-payment systems, channels and tools
are always secure to maintain conﬁdence for the users during such periods. Furthermore,
this research is the ﬁrst reporting the drivers inﬂuencing m-payment intention in Jordan,
which, in turn, could enhance the understanding for decision makers of the role of these
drivers in framing the infrastructure of m-payment in Jordan. Moreover, the results
undertaken would extend the developers’ knowledge by considering these drivers while
developing such systems. M-payment systems developers should emphasise forming
m-payment systems that can work on diverse kinds of devices, enhance the performance of
payment transactions, achieve tasks in the shortest time frame, are easy to use, user-friendly,
and not expensive in order to sustain the user’s intention to use m-payment applications in
Jordan. More importantly, the bank’s decision makers should organize awareness battles to
educate users and make them aware of the m-payment risks that could occur throughout
the transactions adopting m-payment applications if used incorrectly.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 10 of 13
8. Limitations and Recommendations
The ﬁndings pointed out that the best drivers of m-payment intention is PU, followed
by PFC. Given these ﬁndings, the current research could offer suitable support for the
decision makers in Jordan in building the m-payment infrastructure and make sure that the
channels of m-payment are not costly and are capable of executing ﬁnancial transactions
securely and efﬁciently wherever and whenever the users favor using them.
Regardless of its prominent implications, there are some limitations that need to be
highlighted, which could offer fruitful paths for further studies opportunities. As noted,
the current study uses the TAM model and MAT combination as a theoretical foundation to
conceptualize the inﬂuences of proposed drivers on the m-payment system. The ﬁndings
cannot be justiﬁed as the key drivers motivating m-payment systems in general. Therefore,
the explanation of ﬁndings should be very loose. Accordingly, a suggested model is
validated for understanding m-payment systems intention, the current research encourages
future studies to verify and replicate the generalization of the model in further countries as
well as with other mobile systems in different technology applications (e.g., mobile wallet,
mobile banking, mobile learning, mobile health, mobile shopping, mobile government,
and mobile digital TV). Consequently, additional studies are deﬁnitely required in the
technology sector to enhance and verify the validity and applicability of this framework by
applying it in different contexts. Finally, this study tested the aforementioned model for
studying m-payment (pre-adoption diffusion). Future research may gain a more holistic
picture of the post-adoption stage of m-payment at the individual level.
9. Conclusions
Generally, the use of mobile phones’ applications plays an important role in every
aspect of our life, as in the case of mobile payment systems which can be used to save
money, time and effort. However, the adoption rate of m-payment systems is still very
slow in Jordan, and only a few prior studies have investigated the issues related to it.
Despite the weakness of accepting mobile payment system in the Jordanian environment,
the ultimate objective to increase the diffusion and acceptance of mobile payment systems
is still within the CBJ priorities. Consequently, the current study realized the necessity of
considering the factors inﬂuencing the Jordanian citizens’ intention to use mobile payment
systems. This research presumed that three major predictors will determine the intentions
to use mobile payment systems; they are perceived usefulness, perceived ﬁnancial cost
and perceived ease of use. Therefore, there were three hypotheses formulated to test
the relationship. Results showed that all expected constructs are important and positive
inﬂuences in predicting intention to use mobile payment systems, except perceived ease of
use. Such a result supports all hypotheses except hypothesis number three, as shown in
the research model.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.L. and M.H.A.; methodology, M.H.A.; software, A.L.;
validation, M.H.A. and A.F.A.; formal analysis, M.A.-O.; investigation, A.L.; data curation, A.F.A.;
writing—original draft preparation, M.A.-O.; writing—review and editing, T.A.A.; visualization,
M.A.A.; supervision, M.A.-O.; project administration, M.A.-O. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the re-
viewers and editor who have provided critical suggestions to improve the quality of the article.
The suggested comments have helped in improving the quality of the article considerably. Lastly,
we would like to thank the all participants for cooperation and providing pieces of information to
contribute to the success of this research.Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 11 of 13
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Appendix A
Table A1. Measurements Items and Sources.
Variables Code Measurements Items Sources
Perceived UsefulnessPU1 Using the m-payment is useful in my daily life.
Davis [15]PU2Using the m-payment system increases
my productivity.
PU3 Using the m-payment system saves my time.
PU4Using the m-payment system enhances
my efﬁciency.
Perceived Financial CostPFC1 M-payment system service is reasonably priced.
Venkatesh et al. [23]PFC2M-payment system services are reasonably
priced comparing with other systems
(e.g., mobile banking systems).
PFC3M-payment system services is a good value for
the fees.
PFC4At the current cost, I think m-payment system
will provide a reasonable and good cost.
Perceived Ease of UsePEU1 I feel that the m-payment system is easy to use.
Davis [15]PEU2 I feel that the m-payment system is convenient.
PEU3Getting the information that I want from the
m-payment system is easy.
PEU4 The m-payment system requires no training.
Mobile Payment IntentionMBI1 I am planning to use m-payment frequently.
Davis [15], Venkatesh et al. [23]MBI2I expect that I would use m-payment system in
the near future
MBI3It would be very likely that I will use m-payment
system in the near future
MBI4I seriously intend to use m-payment system in
the near future
References
1. Central bank of Jordan. Jordan Financial Stability Report-2017. Available online: http://www.cbj.gov.jo/Pages/viewpage.aspx?
pageID=45 (accessed on 9 October 2019).
2. Central bank of Jordan. Jordan Financial Stability Report-2016. Available online: http://www.cbj.gov.jo/EchoBusV3.0
/SystemAssets/PDFs/EN/FINANCIAL%20STABILITY%20REPORT%202016.pdf (accessed on 9 October 2019).
3. Central bank of Jordan. Jordan Financial Stability Report-2015. Available online: http://www.cbj.gov.jo/EchoBusV3.0
/SystemAssets/PDFs/EN/FINANCIAL%20STABILITY%20REPORT%202015.pdf (accessed on 9 October 2019).
4. Scharwatt, C.; Nautiyal, A. The Long Road to Interoperability in Jordan Lessons for the Wider Industry ; Groupe Speciale Mobile
Association (GSMA): London, UK, 2016. Available online: https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/
uploads/2016/12/GSMA-case-study_Jordan_2016.pdf (accessed on 11 October 2019).
5. Pousttchi, K.; Turowski, K. Mobile Economy: Transaktionen, Prozesse, Anwendungen und Dienste. Workshop Mob. Commerce
2004 ,2, 3.
6. Gharaibeh, M.K.; Arshad, M.R.M. Determinants of Intention to Use Mobile Banking in the North of Jordan: Extending UTAUT2
with Mass Media and Trust. J. Eng. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,13, 2023–2033.
7. Al-Okaily, A.; Al-Okaily, M.; Ai Ping, T.; Al-Mawali, H.; Zaidan, H. An empirical investigation of enterprise system user
satisfaction antecedents in Jordanian commercial banks. Cogent Bus. Manag. 2021 ,8, 1918847. [CrossRef]
8. Central Bank of Jordan. Mobile Payment Service Instructions. Available online: https://procurementadmin.fhi360.org/Files/
jomopay_instruction_635586593682135070.pdf (accessed on 9 October 2019).Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 12 of 13
9. Sehwail, L.; Bahou, M. Interview with the Jordanian Ofﬁcial Television—Program Money and Business—Financial Inclusion
[Video File]. 24 April 2017. Available online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ouJVc7nBqU (accessed on 18 June 2019).
10. Al-Okaily, M.; Lutﬁ, A.; Alsaad, A.; Taamneh, A.; Alsyouf, A. The determinants of digital payment systems’ acceptance under
cultural orientation differences: The case of uncertainty avoidance. Technol. Soc. 2020 ,63, 101367. [CrossRef]
11. Qasim, H.; Abu-Shanab, E. Drivers of Mobile Payment Acceptance: The Impact of Network Externalities. Inf. Syst. Front. 2016 ,
18, 1021–1034. [CrossRef]
12. Al Shawwa, M. The 2nd Electronic and Mobile Payments in the Arab World Conference—Presentation on the Jordan Retail
Banking Survey and Findings of the E & M Banking Services [Video File]. 7 May 2016. Available online: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=WLeikg3AFA4 (accessed on 18 June 2019).
13. Ghazal, M. Mobile Payment Transactions Reach 13498 Since Start of Year. The Jordan Times . 13 June 2017. Available online:
http://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/mobile-payment-transactions-reach-13498-start-year (accessed on 21 August 2019).
14. Shaw, N. The mediating inﬂuence of trust in the adoption of the mobile wallet. J. Retail. Consum. Serv. 2014 ,21, 449–459.
[CrossRef]
15. Davis, F. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and user acceptance of information technology. MIS Q. 1989 ,13, 319–340.
[CrossRef]
16. Shankar, A.; Datta, B. Factors affecting mobile payment adoption intention: An Indian perspective. Glob. Bus. Rev. 2018 ,19, 72–89.
[CrossRef]
17. Venkatesh, V .; Davis, F. A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model: Four longitudinal ﬁeld studies. Manag. Sci.
2000 ,46, 186–204. [CrossRef]
18. Moh’d Al-adaileh, R. An evaluation of information systems success: A user perspective-the case of Jordan Telecom Group.
Eur. J. Sci. Res. 2009 ,37, 226–239.
19. Alalwan, A.A.; Baabdullah, A.M.; Rana, N.P .; Tamilmani, K.; Dwivedi, Y.K. Examining adoption of mobile internet in Saudi
Arabia: Extending TAM with perceived enjoyment, innovativeness and trust. Technol. Soc. 2018 ,55, 100–110. [CrossRef]
20. Ross, I. An information processing theory of consumer. J. Mark. 1979 ,43, 124–126. [CrossRef]
21. Thaler, R.H. Mental accounting matters. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 1999 ,12, 183–206. [CrossRef]
22. Kahneman, D.; Tversky, A. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. In Handbook of the Fundamentals of Financial
Decision Making: Part I ; World Scientiﬁc: Singapore, 2013; pp. 99–127.
23. Venkatesh, V .; Morris, M.G.; Davis, G.B.; Davis, F.D. User acceptance of information technology: Toward a uniﬁed view. MIS Q.
2003 ,27, 425–478. [CrossRef]
24. Ameen, N.; Tarhini, A.; Shah, M.H.; Madichie, N.; Paul, J.; Choudrie, J. Keeping customers’ data secure: A cross-cultural study of
cybersecurity compliance among the Gen-Mobile workforce. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2020 ,114, 106531. [CrossRef]
25. Al-Okaily, M.; Alqudah, H.; Matar, A.; Lutﬁ, A.; Taamneh, A. Dataset on the Acceptance of e-learning System among Universities
Students’ under the COVID-19 Pandemic Conditions. Data Brief 2020 ,32, 106176. [CrossRef]
26. Venkatesh, V .; Thong, J.Y.; Xu, X. Consumer acceptance and use of information technology: Extending the uniﬁed theory of
acceptance and use of technology. MIS Q. 2012 ,36, 157–178. [CrossRef]
27. Merhi, M.; Hone, K.; Tarhini, A.; Ameen, N. An empirical examination of the moderating role of age and gender in consumer
mobile banking use: A cross-national, quantitative study. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag. 2020 . [CrossRef]
28. Al-Okaily, A.; Al-Okaily, M.; Shiyyab, F.; Masadah, W. Accounting Information System Effectiveness from an Organizational
Perspective. Manag. Sci. Lett. 2020 ,10, 3991–4000. [CrossRef]
29. Singh, S.; Srivastava, R.K. Predicting the intention to use mobile banking in India. Int. J. Bank Mark. 2018 ,36, 357–378. [CrossRef]
30. Al-Okaily, A.; Abd Rahman, M.S.; Al-Okaily, M.; Ismail, W.N.S.W.; Ali, A. Measuring Success of Accounting Information System:
Applying the DeLone and McLean Model at the Organizational Level. J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol. 2020 ,98, 2697–2706.
31. Alalwan, A.A.; Dwivedi, Y.K.; Rana, N.P . Factors inﬂuencing adoption of mobile banking by Jordanian bank customers: Extending
UTAUT2 with trust. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2017 ,37, 99–110. [CrossRef]
32. Sekaran, U.; Bougie, R. Research Methods for Business , 5th ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 2010.
33. Alshira’h, A.F.; Al-Shatnawi, H.M.; Al-Okaily, M.; Lutﬁ, A.; Alshirah, M.H. Do public governance and patriotism matter? Sales tax
compliance among small and medium enterprises in developing countries: Jordanian evidence. Eur. Med. J. Bus. 2020 . [CrossRef]
34. Lutﬁ, A.; Al-Okaily, M.; Alsyouf, A.; Alsaad, A.; Taamneh, A. The Impact of AIS Usage on AIS Effectiveness Among Jordanian
SMEs: A Multi-group Analysis of the Role of Firm Size. Glob. Bus. Rev. 2020 . [CrossRef]
35. Sekaran, U. Research Methods for Business: A Skill Building Approach , 4th ed.; John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
36. Brislin, R.W. The Wording and Translation of Research Instruments ; Sage Publications, Inc., Group European Journal of Scientiﬁc
Research: London, UK, 1986; Volume 37, pp. 226–239.
37. Al-Fraihat, D.; Joy, M.; Sinclair, J. Evaluating E-learning systems success: An empirical study. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2020 ,102,
67–86. [CrossRef]
38. Al-Qudah, A.A.; Al-Okaily, M.; Alqudah, H. The relationship between social entrepreneurship and sustainable development
from economic growth perspective: 15 ‘RCEP’countries. J. Sustain. Financ. Investig. 2021 , 1–18. [CrossRef]
39. Ringle, C.M.; Sarstedt, M.; Straub, D.W. A Critical Look at the Use of PLS-SEM. MIS Q. 2012 ,36, iii–xiv. [CrossRef]
40. Gefen, D.; Rigdon, E.E.; Straub, D. Editor’s comments: An update and extension to SEM guidelines for administrative and social
science research. MIS Q. 2011 ,35, iii–xiv. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2021 ,13, 6312 13 of 13
41. Hair, J.F.; Hult, J.G.T.M.; Ringle, C.M.; Sarstedt, M. A Primer on Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) ; SAGE
Publications, Inc.: Kennesaw, GA, USA, 2014.
42. Valerie, F. Re-discovering the PLS approach in management science. Management 2012 ,15, 101–123.
43. Hair, J.F.; Ringle, C.M.; Sarstedt, M. Editorial-partial least squares structural equation modeling: Rigorous applications, better
results and higher acceptance. Long Range Plan. 2013 ,46, 1–12. [CrossRef]
44. Hair, J.F.; Black, W.C.; Babin, B.J.; Anderson, R.E.; Tatham, R.L. Multivariate Data Analysis ; Pearson Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA, 2010.
45. Hair, J.F.; Ringle, C.M.; Sarstedt, M. PLS-SEM: Indeed, a silver bullet. J. Mark. Theory Pract. 2011 ,19, 139–152. [CrossRef]
46. Henseler, J.; Ringle, C.M.; Sarstedt, M. A new criterion for assessing discriminant validity in variance-based structural equation
modeling. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 2015 ,43, 115–135. [CrossRef]
47. Karjaluoto, H.; Shaikh, A.A.; Leppäniemi, M.; Luomala, R. Examining consumers’ usage intention of contactless payment systems.
Int. J. Bank Mark. 2019 ,38, 332–351. [CrossRef]
48. Karjaluoto, H.; Shaikh, A.A.; Saarijärvi, H.; Saraniemi, S. How perceived value drives the use of mobile ﬁnancial services apps.
Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2019 ,47, 252–261. [CrossRef]