Shared Prosperity Digni/f_ied LifeWith the technical collaboration of:Digital Revitalization of the Agri-food Sector in MashreqDigital Revitalization of the Agri-food Sector in Mashreq
Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonDisclaimer 
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Bank Group, its Board of Executive Directors, or 
the governments they represent; the UN-ESCWA; the FAO of the UN; the CMI; and/or the American University of 
Beirut (AUB) concerning the legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or 
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The World Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy 
of the data included in this work. The mention of specific companies or products of manufacturers, whether or 
not these have been patented, does not imply that these have been endorsed or recommended by the World Bank 
Group, UN-ESCWA, FAO, CMI, and/or AUB in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. The 
views expressed in this information product are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views 
or policies of the World Bank Group, UN-ESCWA, FAO, CMI, and/or AUB. Nothing herein shall constitute or be 
considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and immunities of the World Bank, all of which are 
specifically reserved.
Rights and Permissions
Attribution —Please cite the work as follows: Bahn, Rachel A.; Juergenliemk, Armine; Zurayk, Rami; Debroux, 
Laurent; Broka, Sandra; Mohtar, Rabi. 2021. Digital Revitalization of the Agri-food Sector in Mashreq. Focus on Iraq, 
Jordan, and Lebanon. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Translations —If you create a translation of this work, please add the following disclaimer along with the attribution: 
This translation was not created by The World Bank and should not be considered an official World Bank 
translation. The World Bank shall not be liable for any content or error in this translation.
Adaptations —If you create an adaptation of this work, please add the following disclaimer along with the 
attribution: This is an adaptation of an original work by The World Bank. Views and opinions expressed in the 
adaptation are the sole responsibility of the author or authors of the adaptation and are not endorsed by The 
World Bank. Third-party content—The World Bank does not necessarily own each component of the content 
contained within the work. The World Bank therefore does not warrant that the use of any third-party-owned 
individual component or part contained in the work will not infringe on the rights of those third parties. The risk of 
claims resulting from such infringement rests solely with you. If you wish to re-use a component of the work, it is 
your responsibility to determine whether permission is needed for that re-use and to obtain permission from the 
copyright owner. Examples of components can include, but are not limited to, tables, figures, or images.
Third-party content —The World Bank does not necessarily own each component of the content contained within 
the work. The World Bank therefore does not warrant that the use of any third-party-owned individual component 
or part contained in the work will not infringe on the rights of those third parties. The risk of claims resulting from 
such infringement rests solely with you. If you wish to re-use a component of the work, it is your responsibility 
to determine whether permission is needed for that re-use and to obtain permission from the copyright owner. 
Examples of components can include, but are not limited to, tables, figures, or images.
Photos in document: ©FAOiii
 ÎTable of Contents
Acronyms  v
Acknowledgements  vii
Methodology vii
Executive Summary viii
INTRODUCTION  1
CHAPTER 1
THE STATE OF AGRI-FOOD SYSTEMS - OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES  3
Economic Dimensions 3
Social Dimensions 6
Environmental Dimensions  8
Common Challenges to the Agri-food Sector in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon 11
Agricultural Policy Frameworks in Mashreq  11
Current Crises and Agriculture in Mashreq: Political Instability and COVID-19 15
CHAPTER 2  
OPPORTUNITIES FROM DIGITAL AGRICUL TURE - WHICH DIGITAL AGRICUL TURE TECHNOLOGIES  
CAN HELP IMPROVE THE AGRI-FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMES IN MASHREQ?  19
Digital Technologies to Improve On-Farm Efficiency, Equity, and Environmental Sustainability 20
Digital Technologies to Facilitate Trade and Financial Inclusion 25
Digital Technologies to Deliver e-Government for Improved Public Services  30
CHAPTER 3  
STATE-OF-THE-ART DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM IN MASHREQ - WHAT IS THE STATUS OF DIGITAL  
AGRICUL TURE AND ITS ENABLING SYSTEM IN MASHREQ?  35
Digital Readiness  35
Status of Digital Solutions in the Agri-food Sector in Mashreq 41
CHAPTER 4  
WHICH PUBLIC ACTIONS CAN FACILITATE BROADER ADOPTION OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES  
AND HARNESS THEIR IMPACTS ON FOOD SYSTEM OUTCOMES?  55
Vision and Strategy 55
Foundation 55
Catalytic Investments and Policies 56
Conclusion and Next Steps 59
Biblio graphy 60
Appendix 1. Key Sector Indicators and Trends in Jordan, Lebanon, and Iraq. 67
Appendix 2. Digital Economy Performance in Mashreq 68v
 ÎAcronyms 
ACSAD Arab Center for the Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands
AES Agricultural Extension System
AI Artificial Intelligence 
APSS Agricultural Prices Statistics System
AUB American University of Beirut
BdL Banque du Liban 
BES Bees Management System
CAP Common Agricultural Policy
CBJ Central Bank of Jordan
CCIAZ Chamber of Commerce for Industry and Agriculture in Zahle
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CMI Center for Mediterranean Integration 
CNRS-L National Council for Scientific Research of Lebanon ( Conseil National pour la Recherche Scientifique )
CPSS Cost of Production Statistics System
CREAL Centre de Recherches & d’etudes Agricoles Libanais
CSA Climate-smart Agriculture
DLT Distributed Ledger Technology 
EO4SD Earth Observation for Sustainable Development
EPI E-Participation Index
EU European Union 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
FCS Forestry Centers System
FDI Foreign Direct Investment
FFV Fresh Fruits and Vegetables
FLS Fishing License System
FPO Farmer Producer Organization
G2B Government-to-Business
G2C Government-to-Citizen
G2G Government-to-Government
GCC Gulf Cooperation Council
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GIS Geographic Information System
GNI Gross National Income
GPS Global Positioning System 
HACCP Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points
IACS Integrated Administration and Control System
ICT Information and Communication Technology
ID4D Identification for Development
IDP Internally Displaced Person
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development
IHSES Iraq Household Socio-economic Survey
ILO International Labour Organization
IoT Internet of Things 
IPR Intellectual Property Rights
ISIL Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonvi
ISO International Organization for Standardization
ISSF Innovative Startups & SMEs Fund
ITU International Telecommunication Union
IVR Interactive Voice Response
IWMI International Water Management Institute
JEDCO Jordan Enterprise Development Corporation
JEGP Jordan’s Economic Growth Plan
JEPA Jordanian Exporters and Producers Association for Vegetables and Fruits
JoPACC Jordan Payments & Clearing Company
KEI Knowledge Economy Index
KYC Know Your Customer 
LARI Lebanese Agricultural Research Institute 
LoRaWAN Long Range Wide Area Network
LPIS Land Parcel Identification System
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MENA Middle East and North Africa
MFI Microfinance Institution
MoU Memorandum of Understanding
NCARE National Center for Agricultural Research and Extension
NDP Net Domestic Product
NERCITA National Engineering Research Center for Information Technology in Agriculture
NGO Nongovernmental Organization
NPTP National Poverty Targeting Program
NSAD National Strategy for Agricultural Development
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PDS Public Distribution System
PPSS Programs and Projects Service System
PRS2 Second Poverty Reduction Strategy
POC Proof of Concept
R&D Research and Development
REGEP Rural Economic Growth and Employment Project
RFID Radio Frequency Identification 
SAT -IRR Satellite for Irrigation Scheduling
SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises
SMS Short Message Service 
SPS Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
SuNaR Sustainable Natural Resource Management Platform and Early Warning System
UN United Nations
UN-ESCWA United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia 
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNECE United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UPU Universal Postal Union
USAID United States Agency for International Development
VAT Value Added Tax
WaPOR Water Productivity Open-Access Portal
WFP World Food Programmevii
 ÎAcknowledgements 
This background paper has been prepared by a team 
comprising lead authors and contributing authors who 
are members of the Mashreq Agricultural Initiative, which 
is a three-country process of knowledge and experience 
sharing on issues of common interest including digital 
technologies, climate change and water, and trade. The 
initiative seeks to raise the profile of the agri-food sector as 
a key economic sector for Mashreq countries; inform policy 
making and build political momentum for the support of 
the agri-food sector in the respective countries; stimulate 
new investments, both public and private, in agriculture and 
agribusiness; and launch new country programs and elicit 
support from development partners. It is building its work 
on background papers, working-level workshops, and high-
level meetings and events involving senior policy makers, 
experts, private sector actors, and other stakeholders. It 
is jointly supported by the World Bank, the United Nations 
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UN-
ESCWA), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the 
UN, and the Center for Mediterranean Integration (CMI) in 
partnership with the American University of Beirut (AUB), the 
Hashemite University of Jordan, the University of Babylon 
(Iraq), and the Ministries of Agriculture of Iraq, Jordan, and 
Lebanon.
Authors, the type of work of each group of authors, and their 
institutional affiliations are as follows: 
 Î Lead authors  structured the paper, prepared the draft 
text, and managed content development and editorial 
changes. The lead authors are Rachel A. Bahn (Faculty 
of Agricultural and Food Sciences, AUB), Armine 
Juergenliemk (World Bank), Rami Zurayk (Faculty of 
Agricultural and Food Sciences, AUB), Laurent Debroux 
(World Bank), Sandra Broka (World Bank), and Rabi 
Mohtar (Faculty of Agricultural and Food Sciences, AUB).
 Î Contributing authors  supported the paper’s 
development by identifying resources, reference 
materials, and studies. Contributing authors and their 
institutional affiliations are as follows: Fatma Aglan 
(World Bank), Nada Al Frihat (Ministry of Agriculture 
of Jordan), Hazim Al Smaidi (Ministry of Agriculture 
of Jordan), Bassam Al Yaseen (College of Science, 
University of Babylon), Wafaa Dikah Hamze (Ministry of 
Agriculture of Lebanon), Elias Ghadban (UN-ESCWA), 
Ali Mahdi (Ministry of Agriculture of Iraq), Saad 
Hatem Mohammed (Ministry of Agriculture of Iraq), 
Mahmoud Rabai (Ministry of Agriculture of Jordan), 
Mohammed Salahat (Faculty of Natural Resources 
and Environment, The Hashemite University of 
Jordan), and Roula Boukhozam (National Council for 
Scientific Research of Lebanon [ Conseil National pour la 
Recherche Scientifique , CNRS-L]).This report was produced under the overall guidance of 
Marianne Grosclaude (Practice Manager, World Bank) and 
Chakib Jenane (Practice Manager, World Bank). Strategic 
guidance was provided by Saroj Jha (Country Director, 
Mashreq Countries, World Bank).
The authors acknowledge the valuable support of 
institutional partners in developing this background paper, 
including the Faculty of Agricultural and Food Sciences, 
AUB; the World Bank; UN-ESCWA; the FAO’s Regional Office 
for the Near East and North Africa; and CMI. The authors 
specifically wish to thank the individuals who engaged with 
and shepherded this paper, including Sibelle El Labban 
(AUB), Abed Al Kareem Yehya (AUB), Rania Touma (AUB), 
Ali Alhasan (AUB), Reem Nejdawi (UN-ESCWA), Nour El 
Jundi (UN-ESCWA), Faten Adada (FAO), Carlo Bravi (FAO), 
Mohamed AbdelMonem (FAO), Frédéric de Dinechin (CMI), 
and Blanca Moreno-Dodson (CMI). The authors further 
acknowledge the contributions of multiple individuals who 
generously offered their time and expertise to inform the 
content of this paper, in particular, Mohammed Al Afranji 
(Hassad), Ashraf Amayreh, Ramy Boujawdeh (Berytech), 
Mariam Eid (Ministry of Agriculture of Lebanon), Ghaleb 
Faour (CNRS-L), Said Gedeon (Chamber of Commerce 
for Industry and Agriculture in Zahle [CCIAZ]), Issa Halabi, 
Ali Ismail, Hadi Jaafar (AUB), Ihab Jomaa (Lebanese 
Agricultural Research Institute [LARI]), May Mhanna 
(Ministry of Agriculture of Lebanon), Moussa Sawan 
(Jallad Group), Randa Serhal (Ministry of Agriculture of 
Lebanon), Salwa Tohmé Tawk (Lebanese University), David 
Olivier Treguer (World Bank), Samia Melhem (World Bank), 
Abdallah Wahib Jabbour (World Bank), Paul Welton (World 
Bank), Wael Mansour (World Bank), Irina Klytchnikova 
(World Bank), Kateryna Schroeder (World Bank), Ghada 
Elabed (World Bank), Samantha M. Constant (World Bank), 
Marolla Haddad (World Bank), Mohammed Yunis (Litani 
River Authority), and Ralph Zughaib (Ministry of Agriculture 
of Lebanon). 
The team is grateful to Maria Guardia Marin for the 
development of the design and the layout.
 ÎMethodology
This background paper has been informed by a desk-based 
literature review, secondary data analysis, direct input from 
the lead and contributing authors, and consultation with 
private sector experts. Consultation with experts was not 
exhaustive but based on a purposive sample. The paper 
defines Mashreq as the region comprising Iraq, Jordan, 
Lebanon, Syrian Arab Republic, and West Bank and Gaza. 
The focus of the paper, however, is specifically on Iraq, 
Jordan, and Lebanon.Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonviii
Digital agriculture provides opportunities for more 
diverse and remunerative employment, especially for 
youth. Yet it requires that users develop new skills.  
The knowledge base for developing and operating 
digital technologies could represent new employment 
opportunities that may be particularly attractive to 
youth. Modernizing the agriculture sector itself can thus 
create more productive, skill-intensive, remunerative and 
competitive jobs in the agri-business sector and along 
value chains. It can also create new markets for agricultural 
products. Digital technologies can be designed to enable 
smallholder farmers to learn and upgrade their skills as 
they use them. This can encourage inclusion rather than 
displacement of low-skilled smallholders and help raise 
their productivity.
Like any major technology change, digital transformation 
of the agri-food sector also comes with risks that need 
to be understood and appropriately managed.  The risks 
are associated with: inequality in access and affordability; 
concentration of market power of e-commerce platforms, 
social networks, and search engines; data privacy and 
consumer protection; and cybersecurity. There are equity 
concerns that using advanced digital technologies in 
the agriculture sector may widen the digital divide if 
smallholders are unable to make use of these technologies 
due to high cost and specialized skills needs. While 
evidence is scarce, emerging data suggests that increased 
use of digital technologies in the agriculture sector leads to 
displacement of manual and low-skilled jobs; hence, people 
who are less trained and educated are at risk of losing such 
jobs. Given the relatively low level of education for farmers 
in the focal countries, this displacement risk is potentially 
high. Digital innovations should not deepen inequalities 
for women, youth, refugees, and other vulnerable groups. 
Therefore, the public sector needs to identify and foster 
needed skills for widespread use of digital technologies, 
spanning audiences from small farmers and other 
vulnerable groups to developers and businesses.
Digital technologies show promise for advancing the 
digital transformation of the agriculture sector in the 
three Mashreq countries (Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon), 
although their adoption is still at a relatively early stage.  
In Mashreq, the digital transformation agenda already 
features prominently in the respective countries’ economic 
and sector development strategies. Indicators measuring 
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) for 
the three countries already show promising prospects for 
advancing digital technologies.  ÎExecutive Summary
Sustainably developing the agri-food sector in Mashreq 
countries is of paramount importance for food security, 
job creation, expanded export potential, and social 
stability and inclusion.  With increased competition 
for land, water scarcity, and high transportation costs, 
agriculture in Mashreq will need to shift toward high-
value, high-tech, and water- efficient crops and production 
systems. The Mashreq countries of focus (Iraq, Jordan, 
and Lebanon) have significant comparative advantage for 
exporting high-value fresh products to premium markets 
and expanding water- efficient agricultural production. 
Stimulating the agriculture sector will also stimulate 
other economic sectors in all three countries, supporting 
input supplies, food processing, logistics, and financial 
services. Supporting agriculture provides an economy-wide 
multiplier effect. COVID-19 impacts have already had a 
tremendous negative impact on jobs worldwide, reinforcing 
calls for revitalizing and rethinking the agri-food sector, 
including in Mashreq countries.
Digital technologies could create a new momentum for 
economic development by accelerating the structural 
transformation process and by supporting the transition 
toward a more competitive, commercially oriented, and 
export-oriented agriculture and agri-business sector.  
Digital technologies, supported by appropriate policies, can 
raise on-farm productivity, increase resource use efficiency 
(e.g. water, energy, fertilizers, and pesticides), and build 
climate resilience through targeted fertilizer application 
and precision irrigation. E-government can improve the 
transparency and efficiency of public services by digitizing 
land tenure mapping and registration, subsidy distribution, 
weather forecasting, and water resource management. 
E-extension services can help overcome constraints of 
traditional extension and provide cost-effective ways 
of reaching more farmers at lower costs. Access to 
information can also promote the inclusion of marginalized 
rural producers in markets. Digital marketplaces for 
agricultural products can: use e-platforms to directly 
link producers to consumers, shorten agricultural value 
chains, provide access to new markets, improve price 
transparency, reduce food loss, and offer new business 
opportunities for both small agricultural producers and 
small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Mobile money, 
digital credit scoring, and remote sensing can facilitate 
trade and improve farmers’ access to insurance and 
savings . A range of digital technologies including food 
sensing technologies, blockchain, and e-platforms 
can improve value chain transparency and traceability, 
delivering safer and better quality agri-food products to 
local and export markets.ixDigital agriculture in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon is limited 
by many factors, including: 
 Î low awareness and understanding of digital 
technologies and their potential agriculture sector 
applications, 
 Î limited interest among public and private sector 
agents, 
 Î a mismatch between the language used by 
technologies and those understood by farmers, and 
 Î inadequate access to finance and data. 
Achieving successful results in Mashreq will require that: 
 Î users have a better awareness of digital applications, 
and 
 Î digital applications provide timely, localized, and 
customized information addressing specific farming 
concerns in a comprehensible format and in Arabic or 
local languages.
The public sector has an important role in identifying 
public goods, policies, and investments needed to 
maximize the societal benefits from digital agriculture 
in increasing efficiency, equity, and environmental 
sustainability in agri-food systems.  To achieve the 
development goal of digital transformation, the public 
sector can facilitate and attract private investment 
resources by: promoting direct investment; adjusting the 
regulatory and incentive frameworks for private sector 
investments; and forming partnerships with the private 
sector, donors, and nongovernmental organizations. 
Public action to facilitate digital technologies adoption can 
contribute through three pathways: developing a vision, 
then developing the foundation, and providing catalytic 
investments and policies. The vision should include an 
aspirational statement and specific targets and actions to 
foster digital agriculture. The vision can be realized though 
a national agricultural strategy or a stand-alone e-strategy. 
Further, digital technologies are only a means to reach 
development objectives, and adopting these technologies 
should not be considered as the end goal. They must be 
accompanied by enabling policies and reforms.
The catalytic investments and policies include 
establishing e-Government systems for all public 
services, facilitating the deployment of smart irrigation 
and fertilizer management systems along with 
appropriate policies to safeguard overexploitation of 
natural resources, and fostering digital ecosystem 
development.  E-Government systems can include: gathering and 
disseminating statistics relevant to the agriculture sector, 
creating farmers’ digital identification, providing extension 
services, regulating land tenure and markets, and ensuring 
delivery of public support payments. While promoting the 
deployment of smart irrigation and fertilizer management 
systems, it is important to apply diverse service delivery 
approaches to enable smallholders to adapt digital 
technologies. To promote innovation, it is important to 
invest in platforms for data collection and access from 
public and private sources. This investment may accelerate 
the development of appropriate products and services 
for smallholders and develop a foundation of data for 
evidence-based policy making. Parallel investments are 
required in the enabling ecosystem at country, regional, and 
international levels for developing and supporting incubator 
and accelerator services targeting start-ups and private 
sector innovators in the agri-food sector. Lastly, adopting 
policies on digital privacy, ownership, and data use is 
essential to safeguard against unintended consequences.
To stimulate the agriculture sector’s digital 
transformation, governments should enable the following 
digital and non-digital foundations.  The digital foundation 
includes improving the quality of infrastructure and the 
speed of mobile and internet connectivity in rural areas. 
Also, reducing the use costs to end users may facilitate 
broader agriculture sector adoption of digital technologies. 
This entry point is particularly important in Iraq, where 
over 8.8 million rural residents lack broadband network 
connectivity. The non-digital foundation addresses 
connectivity to markets and power supply constraints 
of network providers in rural areas. It is difficult to sell 
products on e-commerce platforms if there are no roads 
to markets or to sell high-quality fresh foods to online 
customers if there is no cold storage to preserve their 
freshness en route to distant markets. Rural electrification 
through renewable sources can help facilitate rural-based 
food processing and green growth.
Even though digital technologies can contribute to 
efficiency, equity, and environmental sustainability, they 
are only tools that support achieving these development 
goals. Their success will depend on how broadly Mashreq’s 
agri-food policy frameworks are revitalized. Future 
extensions of this work should identify the required policy 
and regulatory reforms to transform the Mashreq’s agri-
food system toward an inclusive, productive, resilient, and 
sustainable growth path.1
In Mashreq, digital technologies could be harnessed 
to create a new momentum for inclusive economic 
development by accelerating the structural transformation 
process and by supporting the transition toward a 
more commercially oriented, competitive, and export-
oriented agri-food sector. As Mashreq countries have 
experienced structural transformation, and the relative 
economic contribution of agriculture has declined, their 
agriculture sectors have tended to be overlooked as a 
source of further growth. Because the agri-food sector 
has a significant unlocked potential, this publication 
seeks to promote revitalization of agriculture in the Middle 
East and North Africa, particularly in the three Mashreq 
countries of Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon. Specifically, this 
study seeks to stimulate the discussion on the potential 
for digital transformation to accelerate agriculture sector 
modernization and promote public and private investment 
in the agriculture sector of the Mashreq region, particularly 
benefitting smallholder farmers, displaced persons, women, 
and youth. It does so by addressing the following questions: 
 Î How can Mashreq countries take advantage of digital 
technology innovations to more rapidly transform 
the agriculture sector toward sustainable agricultural 
practices and livelihoods? 
 Î How can digital technologies increase agricultural 
productivity and climate resilience and also increase 
water use efficiency given increased climate variation 
and extremes, to access new markets and to make 
agriculture more inclusive? 
This paper considers opportunities for digital agriculture 
along the agri-food value chain and identifies solutions that 
can be applied over the medium term. In light of COVID-19 
and other pressing challenges, short-term opportunities 
are highlighted while long-term options and strategies will 
likely need to be reviewed regularly, given the rapid pace of 
change in digital technologies.This background paper is organized as follows: Chapter 1 
documents the current contributions and challenges of the 
agri-food sector within selected Mashreq countries—Iraq, 
Jordan, and Lebanon—across a range of economic, social, 
and environmental dimensions. Chapter 2 introduces the 
concept of digital agriculture and illustrates the potential 
application of digital technologies in agriculture in the 
Mashreq region. Next, Chapter 3 presents the digital 
ecosystem in the three focus countries, which lays the 
foundation for future digital transformation, and illustrates 
the current status of digital agriculture in the Mashreq 
region. The chapter then explores the current status of 
digital technologies in the agriculture sector of the three 
focus countries. The background paper gathers relevant 
knowledge and perspectives on digital technology 
innovations in agriculture from a range of stakeholders 
(farmers’ organizations, private sector, research 
institutions, and so on). Finally, Chapter 4 presents the 
public policy options to facilitate the digital acceleration 
of agricultural transformation in the selected Mashreq 
countries. The objective of this background paper is to 
inform policy making and contribute to building political 
momentum that supports the context-based digital 
transformation of agriculture in the respective countries. 
Therefore, it is addressed to government policy makers, 
private sector and business stakeholders, the innovation 
and academic community, civil society institutions, and 
farmers and their associations. ÎIntroduction
Sustainably developing the agri-food sector is of paramount importance for food 
security, job creation, social stability and inclusion, and expanded export potential 
in Mashreq countries. However, agricultural production is primarily constrained 
by water scarcity and inefficient natural resource use, small and fragmented farm 
structures, weak extension services, limited rural access to finance, and low food 
safety and traceability standards.  ÎChapter 1  
The State of Agri-food Systems  
Opportunities and Challenges
Key Messages
 ÎSustainably developing the agri-food sector is of 
paramount importance for food security, job creation, 
expanded export potential, and social stability and 
inclusion. 
 ÎThe agri-food sector has untapped potential exports 
that can decrease dependence on food imports and 
increase foreign currency inflows. 
 ÎThe agriculture sector stimulates other economic 
sectors, including input supplies, food processing, 
logistics, and financial services, and can have an 
economy-wide multiplier effect. 
 ÎCOVID-19 impacts have reinforced calls for revitalizing 
and rethinking the agriculture sector. 
3
Economic Dimensions
Agriculture and food production are important for the 
economies of Mashreq countries and have large potential 
for expansion.  Although primary agriculture contributes 
only a small share of gross domestic product (GDP) (Iraq 
1.5 percent, Jordan 4.9 percent, and Lebanon 3.1 percent 
in 2019), the broader agri-food sector contributes to a 
higher share of GDP . For example, in Jordan, it contributes 
to 26–28 percent of GDP when the related value chain 
activities are included (Netherlands Enterprise Agency 
2016). Agriculture’s share of GDP in Iraq and Lebanon is 
below the 2018 average of 4 percent for the Middle East 
and North Africa countries, while Jordan slightly exceeds 
the regional average (World Bank 2020c). The relative share 
of agricultural GDP has risen only in Jordan over 2011–
2018 compared to the previous decade (2001–2010) (from 
3.5 to 4.8 percent) ( Figure 1 a), and Jordan also shows a 
positive growth in labor productivity (Figure 1b). In the three countries, the agri-food sector could help 
build a more resilient and diversified economy and 
reduce reliance on more volatile sectors such as oil, 
finance, and real estate. Agricultural productivity has large 
potential for expansion in these countries. For example, 
projections indicate that achieving Iraq’s net domestic 
product (NDP) yield targets for fruits and vegetables, 
livestock, and cereals would lead to a 27 percent increase 
in agriculture GDP in the short to medium term (average 
annual increase in agricultural GDP of 4.9 percentage 
points) and would increase both rural and urban household 
incomes, even more so for female-headed households 
(World Bank 2019i). Building a resilient agri-food sector 
has paramount importance for avoiding the devastating 
impacts of short-term economic shocks such as COVID-19 
and longer-term impacts from climate change.
Iraq Jordan Lebanon2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
20180.02.04.06.08.010.0
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
201825000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0 ÎChapter 1  
The State of Agri-food Systems -  
Opportunities and Challenges
This chapter introduces the contribution and importance of the agri-food sector for 
jobs, exports, multiplier effects on the economy, and social stability and inclusion in 
Mashreq countries. It also introduces the unique role of agriculture in diverse post-
conflict contexts. It lays the groundwork for the potential contribution of a new, 
digitally empowered agricultural strategy for economic growth and food security. 
a) value added (percentage of GDP)  b) value added per worker (constant 2010 US$).  ÎFigure 1. 
Contributions 
of agriculture, 
forestry, and 
fishing to GDP
Source:  World Bank 
national accounts 
data, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) 
national accounts data 
files, and employment 
data from International 
Labour Organization, 
ILOSTAT database.
4
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
 ÎBox 1. Agricultural Production 
Systems
Iraq
Agriculture occupies one-fifth of the land in Iraq, and 
multiple farming systems are present . Agricultural land 
occupied 21.4 percent of all land area in Iraq in 2016, below 
the Middle East and North Africa average (33.3 percent of all 
land area). In absolute terms, agriculture occupied 93,000 km² 
in 2016. Irrigated farming systems dominate between the 
Tigris and Euphrates Rivers; the northwest is a combination of 
pastoral, dryland mixed, and rain-fed mixed farming systems; 
and highland mixed farming systems are found along the 
border with Iran (Lewis, Monem, and Impiglia 2018). Today, 
more than 80 percent of farms are less than 10 ha in total 
area, with plots nonadjacent in their location.
Iraq’s leading agricultural products include cereals, 
fruits, vegetables, and livestock.  Wheat and barley 
are the chief cereal crops and account for one-third of 
national cereal production (FAO 2018a); they are farmed 
primarily in the northern and central rain-fed areas of the 
country (Al-Haboby et al. , 2016; Lucani, 2012). Prices for 
locally produced grain have been reduced as a side effect 
of the national food basket subsidy program that relies 
on imported foodstuffs (Lucani 2012). The main crops 
produced on the largely irrigated land are rice, dates, 
cotton, vegetables, fruits, legumes, and alfalfa (FAO 2018a; 
Lewis, Monem, and Impiglia 2018; Lucani 2012). Raising 
livestock—notably cattle, goats, and sheep providing meat, 
wool, milk, and skins—is widespread among farming 
households, representing one-third of the total value of 
agricultural production. The country’s food processing 
sector is small in comparison to primary agricultural 
production (Al-Haboby et al.  2016). The yields of the 
agriculture sector fall below international comparators 
as a result of prolonged conflict, international economic 
sanctions, insufficient infrastructure for input production, 
deteriorated research and extension services, and droughts 
(Al-Haboby et al.  2016). Iraq lost about 40 percent of its 
agricultural production after the Islamic State of Iraq and 
the Levant (ISIL) took control of some of the country’s most 
important agricultural areas in 2014. 
Jordan
Agriculture occupies a minor share of the land area 
in Jordan, and the major agricultural products include 
vegetables, fruits, and roots and tubers . Agricultural land 
occupied only 12.0 percent of all land area in Jordan in 
2016, below the Middle East and North Africa average (33.3 
percent of all land area). In absolute terms, agriculture 
occupied 10,660 km². The production volumes have at least 
doubled between the 1960s and 2010s, largely due to yield improvements. In contrast, the production of cereals and 
pulses has declined in volume over the same period, as the 
area devoted to the production of these crops has fallen 
(World Bank 2018a). Vegetables are produced primarily in 
irrigated areas of the Jordan Valley and to a lesser extent in 
the eastern plains. Citrus and palm trees are grown under 
irrigation in the Jordan Valley. Stone fruits and grapes are 
mainly grown in the northeastern areas of the country under 
irrigation. Olive trees comprise a major share of all trees 
grown (72 percent), though only a minor share of these are 
irrigated (38 percent) (Department of Statistics 2017a). 
Jordan is self-sufficient in the production of vegetables, 
citrus, olives and olive oil, goat meat, poultry, table eggs, and 
fresh milk (Jordan Investment Commission 2017). 
The livestock subsector dominates the vast rangeland 
agroecological zones.  Small ruminants, including about 
3.4 million head of sheep and 0.8 million head of goats, 
account for about 35 percent of this total; broilers and 
cattle milk are also highly valuable. The livestock sub-
sector employed 50,300 individuals in 2017, primarily of 
household members (69 percent), followed by permanent 
employees (25 percent), casual employees (5.2 percent), 
and finally, seasonal employees (<1 percent).
Lebanon
Agriculture occupies a majority of the land area in 
Lebanon.  Agricultural land occupied 64.3 percent of all land 
area in Lebanon in 2016. Accordingly, Lebanon exceeded 
the Middle East and North Africa average (33.3 percent 
of all land area). In absolute terms, agriculture occupied 
6,580 km² in 2016. The majority of Lebanon’s cropland 
(54 percent) is irrigated (Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture, 
2016). 
Lebanon’s major agricultural products by volume include 
fruits, vegetables, and roots and tubers (World Bank 
2018a). Major crops include potatoes, citrus fruits, 
apples, grapes, and bananas (IDAL 2017). The production 
of livestock and animal products is also important and 
rising in Lebanon in recent decades (IDAL 2017). Animal 
production represents one of the main activities in rural 
Lebanon, particularly the southern and northern areas 
that have the highest rates of poverty in the country, with 
approximately 60 percent of farmers depending on dairy 
production as a primary means of subsistence (CNRS-L, 
FAO, and Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture 2018). While 
the cultivation of cannabis is illegal, it is significant in 
the central and northern Bekaa Valley in area cultivated 
(estimates range from 20,000 ha to 30,000 ha), as a source 
of demand for irrigation water, and as a contribution to 
agricultural livelihoods.
5
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and ChallengesThe agriculture sector can be a catalyst for job creation 
and stability given the current economic challenges and 
social instability in Mashreq countries. Agriculture is a 
labor-intensive sector and has a relatively strong long-
term value-added elasticity of employment in the Middle 
East and North Africa region. For every percentage point 
of growth in the value added of the agriculture sector, 
employment increased by 0.36 percentage points (while 
the corresponding employment increases for industry and 
service sectors were 0.30 and 0.20 percentage points, 
respectively) (World Bank 2018a). In 2019, the agricultural 
labor force accounted for 18.1 percent of total employment 
in Iraq and 13.6 percent in Lebanon but only 3.0 percent 
in Jordan. Jordan reported the highest agricultural 
labor productivity ( b). Only Iraq’s agricultural labor force 
exceeded the corresponding Middle East and North 
Africa average (15.8 percent). However, the damage from 
conflicts has had a devastating impact on employment in 
Iraq. It is estimated that the agri-food sector in Iraq has the 
potential to add over half a million jobs to the economy in 
the short run and about 2.5 million jobs over the medium 
term (5–10 years) (World Bank 2019i). This potential can 
have significant impacts, including for improved livelihoods 
and poverty reduction. Jobs are created in the production 
stage and also all along the value chain, including in 
processing, packaging, and distribution, and related sectors 
such as services, transport, and communication. Already, 
the overall agri-food sector contributes to the livelihoods of 
about a quarter of the population in Jordan, Lebanon, and 
Iraq (UN-ESCWA 2017). Poverty is especially found in rural 
areas with households depending on agriculture as their 
primary source of income. Modernizing the agriculture sector requires developing 
new skills that can provide opportunities for more 
diverse and remunerative employment.  Agriculture is 
also less capital intensive than many other sectors, so it 
offers investment opportunities to small- and medium-
scale entrepreneurs who may not be able to enter other 
sectors dominated by larger companies. This also creates 
opportunities for large capital investors, which would result 
in even higher multiplier effects. In all three countries, 
agriculture has been independently identified as a key 
driver of growth (Iraq Economic Monitor by the World 
Bank, 2019; Jordan Elements of a Growth Strategy by 
Harvard University, 2019; and Lebanon Economic Vision by 
McKinsey, 2018). 
The agriculture sector also stimulates other economic 
sectors, including input supplies, transport, food 
processing, logistics, and financial services, and can have 
an economy-wide multiplier effect.  Agricultural growth 
multipliers are estimated between 1.3 and 1.8 in developing 
countries, suggesting strong potential for agriculture sector 
investment to trigger wider economic growth (Haggblade, 
Hammer, and Hazell 1991; Haggblade, Hazell, and Dorosh 
2007). For example, in Jordan, US$1 invested in agriculture 
adds close to a US$4 value to the economy, compared 
to a return of US$1.3 in industry and US$0.5 in service 
sectors (World Bank 2018a). Multiplier effects are higher in 
economies or sectors with more unemployed resources, as 
idle resources can be utilized with less disruption than in 
situations when employed resources must be reallocated 
from their current use (GAO 1984). For employment and 
 ÎFigure 2.  
Leading 
Agricultural and 
Food Exports 
by Value (US$, 
millions), 2018
Source: ITC 2019.
0200400600800100012001400
Jordan Lebanon IraqMILLION USD
  Edible fru it and nuts; peel  of citrus fru it or mel ons (HS 08)
  Preparations of v egetab les, fru it, nuts or other parts of plants (HS 20)
  Edible veg etab les and certain roots and tubers (HS 07)
  Cerea ls (HS 10)
  Live animals (HS 01)
  Miscellaneous edible preparations (HS 21)
  Beverages, sp irits and vinegar (HS 22)
OtherAnimal or vegetable fats and oils and their cleavage products; 
prepared edible fats (HS 15)6
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonlabor demand, the multiplier effect operates as follows: 
productivity growth in agriculture accumulates additional 
purchasing power among rural families expanding job 
opportunities in off-farm sectors and thereby releasing 
labor to non-farm sectors (Yeboah and Jayne 2018). The 
multiplier effect of agriculture on the wider economy 
indicates that it is powerful in stimulating wider economic 
growth and in generating employment.
Food comprises a minor share of merchandise exports 
from the focus countries, though Jordan and Lebanon far 
exceed exports compared to Iraq. The top five categories 
of agricultural and food exports by value are presented 
in Figure 2. Food exports accounted for an average of 
20.1 percent of merchandise exports from Jordan over 
1998–2017 and 21.1 percent in Lebanon but only 0.2 
percent in Iraq, compared to a Middle East and North 
Africa regional average of 2.7 percent for the same period 
(World Bank 2020c). The limited contribution of food to 
total merchandise exports in Iraq is explained by the high 
dependence on high-value oil exports from the country. 
Agricultural and food exports in Jordan are significantly 
higher in absolute value terms than in either Lebanon 
or—especially—Iraq. Jordan’s agricultural and food exports 
were valued at more than US$1 billion in 2018, Lebanon’s 
at about US$665 million, and Iraq’s at US$91 million. In 
Jordan, the top five categories of agricultural and food 
exports by value in 2018 were edible vegetables, roots, 
and tubers; edible fruits and nuts; cereals; live animals; and 
miscellaneous edible preparations (ITC 2019). Lebanon’s 
top five categories of agricultural and food exports by 
value in 2018 were preparations of vegetables, fruit, or 
nuts; edible fruits and nuts; beverages, spirits, and vinegar; 
miscellaneous edible preparations; and animal or vegetable 
fats and oils (ITC 2019). The top five categories of Iraq’s 
agricultural and food exports by value in 2018 were edible 
fruits and nuts; preparations of vegetables, fruit, and nuts; 
sugars and sugar confectionery (HS 17); meat and edible 
meat offal (HS 02); and dairy products, eggs, honey, and 
edible products of animal origin (HS 04) (ITC 2019). 
Mashreq countries have significant comparative 
advantage for exporting high-value fresh products to 
premium markets.  Jordan and Lebanon have an estimated 
potential to increase exports of strawberries, tomatoes, 
herbs, potatoes, and other fresh fruits and vegetables by 
US$1 billion and US$0.6 billion, respectively.  Both countries 
can build on existing trade agreements with Europe. The 
Jordan Valley, with its exceptional climate at 300 m below 
sea level, is uniquely suited for production and export of 
early season fruits and vegetables to Europe and the Gulf 
markets. Potential food exports from Iraq also include 
fruits, vegetables, meat, and dairy products (Lucani 2012). 
Dates represent Iraq’s second source of exports after oil 
(Schnepf 2004), and the country could take advantage of a fast-growing global demand. Unlocking agriculture’s export 
potential would help reduce the high dependence on food 
imports. Expanding agri-food exports can also increase 
foreign currency inflows, which would be especially 
welcome in Lebanon where foreign currency is scarce. 
Trade in agricultural and food exports of the focus 
countries is generally concentrated within the Middle 
East and North Africa region, which is the most common 
current destination for agricultural and food exports by 
value (based on most recent data available from 2018).  
While Iraq’s largest export categories were destined for 
countries in Mashreq and the Maghreb, Jordan’s trade 
geography is more specifically in the Gulf countries. 
Lebanon’s exports appear to be the least concentrated 
within the Middle East and North Africa region, with major 
export destinations in North America and Europe (ITC 
2020).
Opportunities exist to increase production to meet the 
growing domestic demand driven by population growth 
and changing diet patterns.  The Mashreq countries of 
focus are all net agricultural importers. Available data for 
2017–19 indicate that Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon are all net 
importers of agricultural and food items, based on value 
(ITC 2020). These countries import at least 50 percent of 
the food calories they consume (Lampietti et al.  2011), 
and this is projected to increase in all three countries due 
to population growth and changing dietary patterns. For 
example, Iraq imports more than 80 percent of its food 
needs, including cereals, meat, refined sugar, cooking oil, 
canned and processed foods, fruits and vegetables, dairy 
products, dried fruits and nuts, and fruit juices (FAO 2018a). 
Agricultural and processed food imports comprise 30 
percent of the total import bill in Iraq (World Bank 2019i). 
There is potential for Iraq’s local agricultural producers 
to replace imports and reduce the cost of imported food, 
particularly horticultural and animal products (FAO 2018a), 
for the large and growing domestic market. Yet, there are 
challenges to unlocking the economic potential in the focus 
countries due to credit constraints, poor integration of input 
and output markets, missing insurance markets, weak 
infrastructure, and suboptimal agricultural practices and 
management.
Social Dimensions
Supporting the agri-food sector could help close 
the gaps related to food and nutrition security in the 
focus countries, which lag behind Middle East and 
North Africa regional averages on multiple indicators.  
Undernourishment affected approximately 29.0 percent 
of Iraqis, 12.2 percent of Jordanians, and 11.0 percent 
of Lebanese as of 2016–18, versus a regional average 
of 9.7 percent (Figure 3). Simultaneously, around a third 7
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and Challengesof adults in Iraq (27.4 percent), Jordan (33.4 percent), 
and Lebanon (31.3 percent) were obese, exceeding 
the regional average (27.2 percent) (FAO et al.  2019). 
The agri-food sector could play an important role in 
improving these outcomes by increasing incomes 
through agricultural development and redirecting support 
to more nutritious agricultural products (such as fruits 
and vegetables), actions which could enhance food and 
nutrition security (World Bank 2019i). 
Farmers and agricultural operators in Lebanon and 
Jordan tend to be older adults, and this population is 
ageing. In Jordan, as of 2017, farmers ages 45 years or 
older controlled 75 percent of all agricultural holdings and 
83 percent of all agricultural land; farmers ages 55 years or 
older controlled 47 percent of agricultural holdings and 55 
percent of agricultural land. Young farmers under the age 
of 35 controlled only 4 percent of all landholdings and only 
6.7 percent of agricultural land (Department of Statistics 
2017b). In Lebanon, the average agricultural operator 
was approximately 52 years old, while female agricultural 
operators were an average of 55 years old. Younger adults 
under the age of 35 represented only a minor share  
(11.1 percent) of all operators and operated a similar share 
of the total utilized agricultural area (12 percent). The figures 
are more extreme for farmers under 25 years, who comprise 
only 2 percent of agricultural operators and use 1 percent of 
the total agricultural area (Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture 
2012). No comparable information is available for Iraq.
Female labor force participation in agriculture in Mashreq 
exceeds female ownership of agricultural assets.  In 
Iraq and Lebanon, women are more heavily employed in 
agriculture than men, while the inverse is true in Jordan. 
However, women’s employment in agriculture tends to be both informal and seasonal. Female empowerment 
is further undermined by women’s limited ownership of 
productive assets, estimated at 5 percent of all agricultural 
assets in Mashreq countries. The distribution of agricultural 
land reveals gender disparities, with female farmers 
systematically controlling smaller parcels of land than 
male farmers in both Jordan and Lebanon (Bahn, Tell, and 
Zurayk 2019; Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture 2012). In 
Jordan, approximately 6 percent of landholdings by number 
are controlled by female farmers (2 percent of landholdings 
by area), while in Lebanon, women control 8.6 percent 
of farms (4 percent of the country’s utilized agricultural 
area). Furthermore, female-headed households comprise a 
minority of households in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon. Latest 
available figures are estimated at 26.2 percent in Iraq (Iraq 
Household Socio-economic Survey [IHSES]); 12.9 percent in 
Jordan (2012 figure) (World Bank 2020c); and 18.5 percent 
in Lebanon (2018–2019 figure) (CAS et al.  2020).
The countries of the Middle East and North Africa region 
hosted a significant number of displaced persons by the 
end of 2016, and Iraq had among the highest levels of 
internal displacement in the region (Table 1). Lebanon 
and Jordan were among the Middle East and North Africa 
countries hosting the largest numbers of displaced persons 
as a result of conflicts in Iraq, Syria, and West Bank and 
Gaza. Most displaced people came from Syria. 
With appropriate enforcement of social protections, 
agriculture can play a critical role in reducing poverty 
and vulnerability by employing poor and marginalized 
populations, including migrants, refugees, and other 
displaced people. Most displaced persons in Jordan and 
Lebanon work in agriculture with low wages and precarious 
working conditions. Jordan’s agriculture sector accounted 
 ÎFigure 3. 
Prevalence of 
Undernourishment 
(Percentage of 
Population)
Source: FAO et al.  2019.
05101520253035
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
Iraq Jordan Lebanon Middle East & Nor th Africa8
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonfor nearly 48 percent of all work permits for displaced 
Syrians from 2016 to 2019, making it the second-largest 
employer among all sectors (Ministry of Labour 2020). In 
Lebanon, agriculture is the second-highest employer of 
displaced and working Syrians (17 percent of those who 
have a regular job, second only to the construction sector); 
this figure was reported at 27 percent among children ages 
5–17 in 2019, though agricultural employment changes 
over agricultural seasons (UNHCR, UNICEF, and WFP 
2019). Lebanese adult men earn agricultural wages that 
are 34 percent higher than those paid to Syrian men in 
Lebanon, and wages paid to Syrian men are significantly 
higher than wages paid to women and children (Syrian or 
Lebanese) (FAO and UNICEF 2019). In Iraq, agriculture is 
critical to the resettlement of IDPs: 47 percent of people 
returned to rural areas, where agriculture, farming, and 
animal husbandry rank in the top three sources of income 
(IOM 2019). Evidence shows that more people have been 
returning to areas where agriculture, livestock, and market 
activities around agriculture were resumed. With the 
right investment and appropriate enforcement of social 
protections, agriculture can unlock progress toward social 
inclusion and reduce vulnerability.
The high degree of informality in the agriculture sector of 
the three focus countries currently limits access to social 
protections. In Lebanon, for example, the agriculture sector 
is almost completely informal, with an estimated  
92 percent of agricultural producers working without explicit and registered work contracts (Ajluni and Kawar 
2015). The high degree of informality means that social 
safety net programs often exclude farmers and others 
working in the agriculture sector. Indeed, in Lebanon, social 
protection services guaranteed under the national labor law 
and the National Social Security Fund are not available to 
farmers or informal workers, many of whom are women. 
Environmental Dimensions 
Water scarcity is often perceived as a limiting factor 
for agricultural expansion in Mashreq countries. The 
agriculture sector is the single largest user of total water 
withdrawals in Iraq and Jordan ( Table 2 , column 1) but 
not in Lebanon (where industry accounts for greater 
withdrawal). An alternative metric is agricultural water use 
as a share of total renewable water resources  
(Table 3, column 2). This share is the highest in Jordan 
and the lowest in Lebanon (FAO 2016). Some 43 percent 
of cropland in the Mashreq countries is irrigated (RICCAR 
2017). Though water is a scarce resource, agricultural 
water use efficiency remains very low in the three focus 
countries (Table 3, column 3). Iraq’s agricultural water use 
efficiency in 2015 was reported at US$0.1 per m3, behind 
that of Jordan (US$0.7 per m3) and Lebanon (US$1.2 per 
m3) (FAO 2018b). For comparison, the highest water use 
efficiency is reported in the Netherlands (US$55.3 per m3). 
While water scarcity may be a challenge at the national 
level, individual farmers may not worry about scarcity if CountryTotal Number of Refugees by 
Country of Asylum (2016)Total Number of Refugees by 
Country of Origin (2016)Total Number of IDPs Due to 
Conflict and Violence (2018)
Iraq 261,864 316,063 1,962,000
Jordan 685,197 1,933 —
Lebanon 1,012,969 4,740 11,000
 
Source: UNHCR 2017 and IDMC 2019. ÎTable 1 . Refugees and Internally Displaced Person (IDPs) due to conflict and disaster
 ÎTable 2. Agricultural water withdrawal and water use efficiency
Agricultural Water Withdrawal Water Use Efficiency
As % of Total Water 
WithdrawalAs % of Total Renewable 
Water ResourcesAgricultural Water Use 
Efficiency in US$/m3 
(Global Average of 1.1)Total Water Use Efficiency 
in US$/m3 (Global 
Average of 15)
Iraq (2016) 91.49 39.25 0.1 1.3 
Jordan (2016) 53.13 59.20 0.7 26.5 
Lebanon (2015) 38.04 15.55 1.2 23.3  
Source: FAO 2016.9
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and Challengesthey can access sufficient water by using groundwater 
resources, even though these resources are threatened by 
over extraction and declining quality. Modern technologies 
can improve water use efficiency and productivity; however, 
they need to go hand in hand with policies which will 
restrict over extraction and environmental rebound effect. 
Expanding agricultural production and exports needs to 
recognize water scarcity and to sustainably use scarce 
natural resources, specifically blue (irrigation) water . 
The EAT-Lancet Commission has strongly recommended 
against expanding irrigated agriculture within the Tigris-
Euphrates watershed since excessive water use has 
already led to declining water tables and soil salinization 
(Willett et al.  2019). Yet, modern technologies such as drip 
irrigation and hydroponics can multiply water productivity, 
allowing farmers to produce more with less water. Also, 
balancing competing demands for water and food by 
growing populations will be essential 
Water pollution and substandard water infrastructure are 
restricting governments from meeting the agriculture 
sector’s water demands. In Lebanon, most wastewater 
is discharged into watercourses and the sea without 
any treatment. Few industries pretreat their effluent, so 
harmful waste is discharged into the sewer system or the 
environment. Bacteriological contamination is affecting 
the water resources in agricultural areas, and the runoff 
and infiltration of fertilizer and pesticide residues further 
degrades these water resources. 
Unsustainable use of agricultural inputs including 
fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides is damaging the 
current export potential and long-term sustainability of 
agriculture. Lebanon, for example, reports higher levels 
of fertilizer use than countries with similar agroclimatic 
conditions. Fertilizer overuse can reduce yields over 
the long term. Excessive and inappropriate (ill-timed) 
application of pesticides reduces the quality of production 
and limits exports to markets that impose strict food 
safety and sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards. 
The absence of a robust public extension service and 
farmers’ de facto reliance on private sector input providers 
contribute to this overuse (McKinsey 2018). 
Arable land is another key limitation to agriculture in Iraq, 
Jordan, and Lebanon and is threatened by desertification. 
Declining soil fertility is a pervasive problem for agriculture 
in Mashreq. For example, in Iraq, widespread desertification 
affects 75 percent of the nation’s land and has resulted 
in the loss of about 100,000 km² of arable land annually, 
forcing many Iraqis to abandon their land (Gibson 2019). 
Declining soil fertility, high soil salinity, erosion, and 
expanding sand dunes are serious problems for agriculture 
(IAU 2012). While recent figures are not available for Jordan, most of Jordan’s arid and semiarid areas suffer 
from desertification (Al-Alawi 2007). Al-Alawi (2007) reports 
that 79.6 percent of Jordan’s land was desertified and 
another 11.2 percent is vulnerable to desertification. In 
Lebanon, desertification affects an estimated 40 percent of 
all land (Darwish et al.  2012). 
Climate change is already affecting Iraq, Jordan, and 
Lebanon. It has especially affected and will continue to 
affect temperature and precipitation patterns, raising the 
risk of extreme weather events including droughts, floods, 
and heat waves. The average temperature in the Middle 
East and North Africa region is expected to increase by 
up to 4.8oC by 2100, with a higher rate of warming in 
summer than winter. Total precipitation is projected to 
decline in the Mediterranean area and the upper Tigris 
and Euphrates Rivers (Lewis, Monem, and Impiglia 2018). 
Droughts will become more frequent and more intense due 
to biodiversity loss and lower soil moisture, both linked to 
climate change (Bocci, Smanis, and Gaaloul 2019). 
Climate change will directly affect agriculture and 
worsen the existing challenges the agriculture sector is 
facing by  undermining rural livelihoods and potentially 
leading to more fragility, displacement, and tensions. 
The expected impacts across farming systems in Iraq, 
Jordan, and Lebanon are presented briefly in Table 3 . 
Changes in agroclimatic conditions may include higher 
temperatures during the growing season, more days above 
threshold temperatures and during key plant development 
times, longer dry seasons, unpredictable rainfall, saltwater 
infiltration due to sea-level rise, decreased groundwater 
recharge, reduced surface water flows, and lower soil 
moisture and soil carbon (Lewis, Monem, and Impiglia 
2018). Crop yields in Middle East and North Africa could 
fall by 10–20 percent by 2050 under worst-case scenario 
models (Lewis, Monem, and Impiglia 2018). Traditional 
crops such as wheat, olives, and grapes are particularly 
affected by the higher temperatures and increased water 
stress associated with climate change (Bocci, Smanis, and 
Gaaloul 2019). Livestock productivity will fall due to less 
available animal feed, increased animal heat stress, and 
a higher risk of infection and disease (Lewis, Monem, and 
Impiglia 2018). 
Climate change will disproportionately affect small-
scale farmers.  According to the Global Commission 
on Adaptation (2019), without adaptation, there may be 
significant production declines since “climate change 
may depress growth in global agriculture yields by up to 
30 percent by 2050 with the strongest impacts on small 
farms.” Small-scale farmers are already among the poorest 
and most marginalized in Mashreq. Small-scale farmers 
directly depend on the climate and natural resources 
for their livelihoods but generally have less access 10
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonto resources, markets, extension services, and social 
protection systems than larger farmers. This makes them 
more vulnerable to the effects of climate change and more 
susceptible to pressures to migrate out of agriculture and 
rural areas. On- and off-farm livelihood diversification may 
be needed to offset the loss in production and income. 
This diversification will affect on-farm gender dynamics, 
increasing the role and responsibilities of women, as men 
more frequently pursue off-farm employment, including via 
migration. These shifting family and social structures may 
also increase reliance on child labor (Lewis, Monem, and 
Impiglia 2018).
Adapting to climate change in the agriculture sector and 
promoting climate-smart agriculture (CSA) practices 
may yield economic, social, and environmental benefits.  
CSA is an integrative approach to address the interlinked 
challenges of food security and climate change. It explicitly 
aims to (a) sustainably improve agricultural productivity, 
increase farm incomes, strengthen food security, and 
promote development in an equitable manner; (b) adapt and build the resilience of agricultural and food security 
systems to climate change at multiple levels; and  
(c) reduce and/or remove greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions from agriculture whenever possible. According 
to the Global Commission on Adaptation (2019), “Investing 
in adaptation, and in the innovation that comes with it, . . 
. can provide a triple dividend: it avoids economic losses, 
brings positive gains, and delivers additional social and 
environmental support.”. The return on investment in 
resilience to climate change is high and positive, estimated 
from 2:1 to 10:1. Promising areas for investment include 
early warning systems, climate-resilient infrastructure, and 
improved dryland crop production. Moreover, efforts to 
improve water allocation to more efficient uses could, even 
under conditions of climate change, yield better economic 
performance (Global Commission on Adaptation 2019). 
Furthermore, climate-smart practices can provide low-cost 
mitigation opportunities since the agriculture sector is also 
a significant source of GHG emissions. 
Common Challenges to the Agri-food  ÎTable 3. Exposure to climate change and expected impacts across  
farming systems in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
Farming System Exposure Impact/Sensitivity
Irrigated  9 Increased temperatures
 9 Reduced supply of surface irrigation water
 9 Reduced groundwater recharge 9 Greater stress on water resources
 9 Increased demand for irrigation and water transfer
 9 Reduced yields when temperatures too high 
 9 Salinization from reduced soil leaching capacity 
 9 Reduced cropping intensity
 9 Reduced crop yields linked to soil erosion, floods, 
sea-level rise (Shatt al-Arab/Arvand Rud)
Highland mixed  9 Increase in aridity
 9 Greater risk of drought
 9 Possible lengthening of growing period
 9 Reduced supply of irrigation water 9 Reduced yields
 9 Reduced cropping intensity 
 9 Increased demand for irrigation
Rain-fed mixed  9 Increase in aridity 
 9 Greater risk of drought 
 9 Reduced supply of irrigation water 9 Reduced yields, especially olive and dairy milk 
 9 Reduced cropping intensity
 9 Increased demand for irrigation 
Dryland mixed  9 Increase in aridity
 9 Greater risk of drought
 9 Reduced supply of irrigation water 9 Reduced yields, especially wheat and barley
 9 Vulnerability to declining rainfall
 9 Transformation/reversion of agricultural land to 
rangeland
 9 Increased demand for irrigation
 9 Increased emphasis on barley production (despite 
reduced yields)
 9 Increased soil erosion 
Pastoral  9 Increase in aridity
 9 Greater risk of drought
 9 Reduced water for livestock and fodder 9 Reduced carrying capacity because of 
desertification
 9 Adoption of non-farm activities, exit from farming, 
and migration 
Source: Adapted from Bocci, Smanis, and Gaaloul 2019 and Lewis, Monem, and Impiglia 2018. 11
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and Challenges ÎFigure 4. 
Distribution of Land 
Holdings by Size 
and Area (Census 
Year: Jordan 2017 
and Lebanon 2010) 
Source:  FAO 2019.Sector in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
The common challenges that face the agri-food 
sector in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon are found at the 
farm level and extend throughout the value chain, 
with disproportionate effects on small farmers.  The 
key challenges in farming outlined in Table 4  may have 
disparate and disproportionate impacts on different types 
of farmers, mainly smallholder farmers as opposed to 
larger, commercial farmers. Farms are often small and 
land parcels are fragmented, making it hard for farmers to 
achieve economies of scale. 
Over 80 percent of both Jordan’s and Lebanon’s total 
number of agricultural landholdings are small farms of 
less than 2 ha. They make up only 14 percent of Jordan’s 
total agricultural area but 33 percent in Lebanon. Figure 4  
presents this distribution of farms in terms of total number 
and total area in Jordan and Lebanon; no comparable 
data are available for Iraq. The prevalence of smallholders, 
who are often nonprofessional and noncommercial, 
creates logistical complexities, increases transportation 
costs, and raises overall cost of production. Smallholder 
farmers are more likely to follow out-of-date agricultural 
practices, decreasing their resilience to climate and 
other shocks. This highlights the importance of access 
to quality public extension services. Small-scale farms 
have limited capacity to know about or invest in modern 
farming technologies. They are also poorly positioned 
to access markets, and when they do, they have weak 
bargaining power, as the links between agri-businesses and 
producers are weak. Distorted quality-price relationships 
discourage farmers from improving the quality of 
agricultural products. Smallholder farmers face additional 
challenges in reaching higher-value export markets. They need to overcome quality and food safety issues, yet they 
also tend to produce smaller volumes, which raises their 
transaction costs and offers less scope for them to cover 
their investment costs. Given their different starting points, 
smallholder and larger, commercial farmers also have 
different potentials for adopting digital technologies.
Agricultural Policy Frameworks in Mashreq 
The agri-food sector in Mashreq does not receive 
needed attention from policy makers despite its 
economic importance and potential to deliver greater 
benefits. The sector is underfunded and rarely seen as a 
priority in major economic policy reform and investment 
programs. Iraqi, Jordanian, and Lebanese governments’ 
relative expenditures on the agriculture sector are limited, 
reflecting a general neglect of the agriculture sector (Iraq 
2.8 percent, Jordan 0.7 percent, Lebanon 0.49 percent 
of total government expenditures in 2016) (AOAD 2018; 
Official Gazette of Iraq n.d.). Low public expenditure and 
foreign direct investment (FDI) in the agriculture sector has 
contributed to weak investment in agricultural research 
and poor performance of public extension systems in Iraq, 
Jordan, and Lebanon.  As a result, agricultural research 
is mainly conducted by universities, which may be driven 
by objectives (for example, academic publication and 
promotion) that may not match the sector’s needs. The 
lack of public extension services has meant that the private 
sector provides advice, driven by sales revenue and profit 
motives. There are also limited efforts by the public sector 
to provide quality control for private sector extension 
services. Moving forward, agriculture should be front and 
center for policy makers instead of an afterthought.
Jordan’s agriculture sector generally benefits from 
01020304050607080Share of Total (%)
Share of total numberLebanon Jordan Lebanon Jordan<1ha1–2 ha 2–5 ha 5–10 ha 10–20 ha 20–50 ha 50–100 ha 100–200 ha 200–500 ha12
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon ÎTable 4. Common challenges to the agri-food sector in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
1. Water scarcity and inefficient use of scarce water exacerbated by the climate change and natural hazards
 9 Agricultural water use efficiency remains very low in the three focus countries. Irrigation often suffers from inefficient on-farm 
water delivery and water losses. Major investments are needed to rehabilitate and upgrade irrigation infrastructure, extend 
the network of reservoirs that supply irrigation water, and increase water use efficiency and on-farm management through 
better technologies. Improved water use efficiency should be also accompanied with appropriate policies to safeguard against 
overexploitation. For example, Jordan’s water tariffs for irrigation are low, resulting in inefficient water use. Inappropriate farming 
practices and mismanaged water resources in the dry climate contribute to increasing rates of desertification.
2. Lack of knowledge about improved agricultural practices in rural areas due to weak public and private capacity for knowledge 
transfer and extension
 9 In all three countries, public and private systems for agricultural research, education, and knowledge transfer have only limited 
capacity to inform and motivate small-scale farmers to adopt modern farming technologies and improve fertilizer use efficiency. 
 9 The links between research and development (R&D), extension, and farmers are poor. Traditional extension systems have had low 
usage from farmers and often new production technologies, such as improved seed varieties, nutrient management, and pest 
control methods, are not reaching farmers. Farmers lack guidance on a range of topics, including crop planning calendars and 
international certifications for export. The challenge for extension providers is to find cost-effective ways to transfer information 
and knowledge to farmers and guide them in the technology adoption.
3. Limited access to agricultural machinery and post-harvest systems
 9 The large up-front cost of farm machinery and post-harvest systems often puts it out of reach of many smallholder farmers. Where 
machinery is available, it is often outdated. 
4. Weak and inefficient connections to the input and output markets, especially for small and fragmented farms
 9 Farmers have limited access to quality fertilizer, agrochemicals, seeds, livestock feed, and high-quality livestock breeds. Inadequate 
access to finance exacerbates these constraints. 
 9 Agricultural supply chains are dominated by various intermediaries with substantial market power. One source of market power lies 
in the fact that intermediaries are better informed about market conditions, especially the prices further down the supply chain.
5. Limited access  to rural finance and credit
 9 High interest rates and lack of collateral restrict the access of farmers to credit, further limiting their capacity to invest. Farms in 
Mashreq are overwhelmingly self-financed or informally financed given a lack of agricultural finance. For example, in Iraq, over 
60 percent of rural households report borrowing from friends and family compared with fewer than 3 percent from a formal 
financial institution, including MFIs (Global Findex Database 2017). Ir aq’s microfinance sector has been overwhelmingly focused 
on urban borrowers, who represent over 90 percent of clients. Most Iraqis agree that all types of finance, including microfinance, 
are desperately needed in rural areas. However, in the past few years, the Iraqi financial sector has evolved, creating potential for 
far-reaching changes. In Lebanon, farmers have traditionally secured inputs on a credit basis, repaying the input supplier the full 
price of the inputs at the time of harvest. In Lebanon, before the current financial crisis, the agriculture sector accounted for only 
1 percent of all commercial bank loans. This low rate of lending resulted from a mismatch between terms/conditions of loan 
products and needs of agricultural borrowers, mainly smaller ones; high collateral requirements; high interest rates; and a lack 
of loan products structured to account for agricultural seasonality (DAI 2014). Similarly, in Jordan, access to finance is out of 
reach due to factors such as high interest rates, insufficiently flexible repayment terms offered by lenders, long waiting periods to 
receive loans, and a lack of guarantee mechanisms. The banks and microfinance institutions (MFIs) provide very limited finance to 
agricultural producers, who rely almost exclusively on the state-owned Agricultural Credit Corporation. 
6. Low food safety and traceability
 9 Due to low traceability and food safety standards, countries do not maximize their export market access under a number of 
favorable trade agreements. 
7. Demographic challenges 
 9 Demographic challenges reduce agricultural lands and put more pressure on already scarce water resources. Urbanization and 
population growth are putting severe strains on dwindling natural resources. The population of the Arab countries, estimated at 
approximately 407 million (2016), with 100 million considered to be in poverty, is expected to reach approximately 635 million by 
2050. With a total population of 6 million in 2017, Lebanon’s population has almost doubled since 2000. With a total population of 
9.7 million in 2017, Jordan’s population has grown very rapidly, increasing more than 10 times in 55 years. The largest increase in 
both countries took place during the last decade, especially because of the large influx of displaced people since the Syrian Crisis 
started in 2011.13
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and Challengesfavorable government policies and faces few legal and 
regulatory constraints to growth compared to Iraq and 
Lebanon. Jordan earned a score of 50.23 on the Enabling 
the Business of Agriculture index in 2019, reflecting a 
reasonable enabling environment for the agriculture sector 
in relation to regulatory good practices that affect farmers 
(World Bank 2019d). Jordan has recently adopted reforms 
related to accessing finance, which improved its index 
score in recent years. This generally favorable enabling 
environment for the agriculture sector is echoed in other 
assessments (Myers 2012).  Iraq earned a lower score of 
22.62 on the Enabling the Business of Agriculture index in 
2019, reflecting room for improvement. Details of Jordan’s 
and Iraq’s performance are tabulated in Table 5 . While the 
Enabling the Business of Agriculture index is not available 
for Lebanon, the enabling environment for the agriculture 
sector and its resultant growth are understood to be 
marked by governmental neglect rather than intensive and 
burdensome constraints imposed on the sector. 
In recent years, Jordan’s government has taken steps 
to improve its enabling environment for the agriculture 
sector by adopting regulatory good practices. Jordan has 
pursued both umbrella strategies and sectoral strategies to 
address the challenges limiting the agriculture sector and 
to increase the involvement of private sector actors therein. 
The umbrella strategy is known as ‘National Agenda, 
Jordan Vision 2025’. To this, there is a sectoral strategy 
that has emerged, the National Strategy for Agricultural 
Development (NSAD) 2016–2025. Agriculture has also 
been targeted in government growth strategies with 
interim deadlines: Jordan Economic Growth Plan (JEGP) 2018–2022 and Government Priorities 2019–2020 (in the 
Footsteps of the Renaissance). The NSAD 2016–2025 is 
Jordan’s second-ever strategy for the agriculture sector and 
sets out ambitious growth and efficiency targets. Key goals 
of the NSAD include increasing agricultural GDP growth to 
22.3 percent, increasing agriculture’s share of exports by  
24 percent, and increasing irrigation efficiency by 
expanding the area of land irrigated by drip irrigation. The 
JEGP 2018–2022 similarly emphasizes agriculture as a 
major engine for growth. Within the agriculture sector, the 
plan proposes 12 government reforms, 21 projects, and 
2 investment opportunities, at a total estimated cost of 
US$639 million. Jordan’s new National Agriculture Strategy 
2020–2025 sets out an ambitious and transformative 
agenda for the agri-food sector.
A strong agriculture sector has recently been viewed as a 
critical element of the Iraqi government’s vision of a more 
diversified economy that is less dependent upon energy 
resources.  The agri-food sector has recently received more 
attention as a source of jobs, growth, and social stability. 
Under the economic development plan for 2013–2017, 
agriculture was identified as one of five sectors of focus 
for investment intended to diversify sources of growth and 
reduce economic inequality between urban and rural areas 
of the country. Investment in the agriculture sector was 
further targeted as a way to reduce dependence on grain 
imports, with an objective to increase domestic production 
to 6 million metric ton of wheat and 1.2 million metric tons 
of barley by 2017 (Salman 2013). The more recent National 
Development Plan 2018–2022 set out four objectives 
for the agriculture and water resources sector, including 
 ÎTable 5. Enabling the business of agriculture - Jordan and Iraq scores (0–100) by 
index and indicators (2019)
Index or Indicator Jordan Iraq
Enabling the Business of Agriculture (Overall) 50.23 22.62
Supplying Seed 60.47 14.81
Registering Fertilizer 76.42 0.00
Securing Water 10.00 0.00
Registering Machinery 60.05 22.46
Sustaining Livestock 26.67 48.33
Protecting Plant Health 80.00 20.00
Trading Food 68.19 55.39
Accessing Finance 20.00 20.00
Note: Indicators are as follows: 
 9Supplying seed: Time and cost to register a new cereal variety and the quality of the seed regulation. 
 9Registering fertilizer: Time and cost to register a new chemical fertilizer product and the quality of the fertilizer regulation. 
 9Securing water: Requirements for water information access and opportunities to participate in water resources management decisions. 
 9Registering machinery: Time and cost to register a two-axle, four-wheel-drive agricultural tractor. 
 9Sustaining livestock: Quality of the regulations for manufactured feed and veterinary medicinal products. 
 9Protecting plant health: Quality of phytosanitary regulation. 
 9Trading food: Time and cost to obtain documents to trade agricultural goods and the quality of food regulation system. 
 9Accessing finance: Measures laws and regulations on the use of warehouse receipts and inclusive finance.14
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanona targeted increase in the contribution of agriculture to 
GDP from 4.5 percent in 2015 to 5.2 percent in 2022 and 
raising the growth rate of the sector to 8.4 percent annually 
(Ministry of Planning n.d.).  Iraq’s second Poverty Reduction 
Strategy (PRS2) 2018–2022 aims to reduce poverty 
including by promoting income generation of income 
generation from agriculture projects. 
The Iraqi government has subsidized farm inputs and 
applied price controls to strategic crops for decades, 
which has distorted agri-food markets. The government 
determines which crops can be grown, the price of inputs, 
and final harvest prices. Publicly financed state-owned 
enterprises dominate input supply chains and output 
markets, and the food system is dominated by two publicly 
subsidized and managed programs. The Public Distribution 
System (PDS), with a US$1.43 billion budget in 2019, 
provides a ‘food basket’ to each Iraqi family. The second 
public program is the US$1.25 billion Wheat and Barley 
Purchase Program, which buys wheat and barley straight 
from farmers at double the international prices. 
Iraq’s Ministry of Trade maintains a near complete 
monopoly on importing basic commodities such as 
wheat, rice, oil, and pulses, inhibiting agri-food market 
development.  The Ministry of Trade releases these 
commodities at highly subsidized prices (no transport 
and distribution costs are applied) into the local market 
through the PDS. The mass supply of these commodities 
lowers their market price. The high prices the government 
pays for some domestic commodities distort the market 
and limit private sector investments and innovations. 
A key challenge for Iraq’s food system is to develop the 
policy framework that creates the right balance between 
economic efficiency and risk mitigation to avoid a national 
food crisis.
The Lebanese government adopted a laissez-faire 
attitude to the agriculture sector following the country’s 
civil war, but more recently has taken steps to promote 
investment in the agriculture sector, notably by targeting 
access to finance.  This hands-off approach was reflected 
in the prioritization of public investments and promotion 
of the financial and real estate sectors, while investment in 
agriculture and rural communities was limited. Agricultural 
access to finance had been limited due to the short loan 
periods offered and high interest rates charged by banks 
and farmers’ general lack of management training and 
collateral. To expand access to finance, the government 
directed its public stimulus programs through the country’s 
private banking sector, as Lebanon does not have a 
public agricultural bank. Kafalat, a quasi-public financial 
company, launched in 2000 with a mandate to assist 
SMEs in selected sectors including agriculture to access 
commercial bank finance through the provision of loan guarantees. In recent years, Kafalat also introduced the 
US$30 million iSME Program to expand equity investment 
in sectors including agriculture and agri-food. Additionally, 
the Lebanese government has offered subsidized loans to 
support the real economy, including the agriculture sector; 
subsidized loans are funded through the Lebanese central 
bank or Banque du Liban (BdL) . The government offers 
subsidies for selected agricultural inputs (chemical inputs, 
financing via subsidized loans, and loan guarantees) and 
final products (wheat and tobacco) and provides some 
limited control of the prices consumers pay for food. Yet, 
the sector is largely left to the market and the private sector 
(Bahn, Nisr, and El Labban 2018). 
The overall policy environment is marked by an absence 
of comprehensive regulations for agriculture in Lebanon.  
The agriculture sector largely but not exclusively falls under 
the authority of Lebanon’s Ministry of Agriculture, which 
regularly develops strategy documents to guide its work in 
supporting the growth and development of the agriculture 
sector. In 2020, the Ministry of Agriculture prepared 
the National Agriculture Strategy 2021–2025. Policy 
coherence in Lebanon is at times missing, in part due to 
lack of coordination across governmental institutions. For 
example, the Ministry of Agriculture Strategy 2015–2019 
explicitly acknowledges the persistent lack of coordination 
and cooperation due to dispersed and at times overlapping 
responsibilities and mandates of public, private, donor, and 
civil society organizations (Bahn, Nisr, and El Labban 2018). 
Looking forward, the national strategies across the focus 
countries aim to improve agricultural productivity and 
water use efficiency and increasing agricultural exports 
and GDP . The key goals of Jordan’s NSAD 2016–2025 
include increasing agricultural GDP growth to 22.3 percent, 
increasing agriculture’s share of exports by 24 percent, and 
expanding the area of land under drip irrigation. Jordan’s 
Agricultural Sector Advancement Plan (2018–2022) 
focuses on (a) maximizing the value added of the sector, 
(b) transforming toward commercial agriculture, and  
(c) increasing the sector’s contribution in combating 
poverty and unemployment in the difficult economic 
conditions. Jordan’s National Agricultural Development 
Strategy for 2020–2025 aims to modernize the agri-food 
sector and integrate the digital agriculture solutions. 
Lebanon’s Ministry of Agriculture has adopted a strategy 
for 2021–25 with five key pillars: (a) restoring the 
livelihoods and productive capacities of farmers and 
producers, (b) increasing agricultural production and 
productivity, (c) enhancing efficiency and competitiveness 
of agri-food value chains, (d) improving climate change 
adaptation and sustainable management of agri-food 
systems and natural resources, and (e) strengthening 
the enabling institutional environment. The strategy also 
identifies the need to improve and modernize digital 15
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and Challengesservices to farmers as one of the flagship programs. 
Iraq’s PRS2 2018–2022 aims to reduce poverty, including 
promoting income generation from agriculture projects. 
These strategies have a particular focus on rural women. 
Current Crises and Agriculture in 
Mashreq: Political Instability and 
COVID-19
Political events in Iraq and Lebanon in mid to late 2019, 
combined with economic shocks, have compounded the 
challenges facing their respective agriculture sectors. 
In both Iraq and Lebanon, popular protests resulted in 
the resignation of their respective prime ministers and 
governments in late 2019. Iraq depends heavily on oil 
revenues for foreign exchange revenue and to finance 
government expenditure. It has felt pressure from the sharp 
decline in oil prices in early 2020, reducing fiscal revenue and 
making the government’s ability to pay for agricultural and 
food subsidies unclear (FAO, WFP , and World Bank 2020). 
In Lebanon, popular protests against the government were 
linked to an ongoing economic and financial crisis and a 
devaluation of the local currency on the informal market, 
which had multiple effects on the agriculture sector. A 
currency crisis limited imports of inputs including seeds and 
was expected to reduce the competitiveness of Lebanese 
agricultural products on export markets in the short term. 
Financial arrangements between agricultural input suppliers, 
farmers, and other actors have shifted, and informal credit 
mechanisms have been cancelled in favor of cash-only 
operations, limiting farmers’ ability to plant on credit as in 
the past. Agricultural production was projected to decrease 
(plant production by 47 percent; animal production by  
26 percent) and agricultural GDP to decrease by 38 percent 
in 2020 as a result of reduced use of inputs due to absence 
of credit facilities, currency devaluation, and reliance on 
imported inputs (estimates by the Centre de Recherches 
& d’Etudes Agricoles Libanais [CREAL]). As of early 2020, 
CREAL also estimated that farmers owed US$80 million 
to input retailers, whereas retailers owed US$60 million to 
banks, importers, and wholesalers. However, the currency 
devaluation and the banking crisis have renewed interest in 
Lebanon’s productive sectors and especially in agriculture 
given its potential to replace imports. According to the 
World Food Programme (WFP) (2020), the price of the basic 
consumer basket increased in Lebanon by 183 percent 
between October 2019 and December 2020.
The impacts of COVID-19 have reinforced calls for 
revitalizing and rethinking the agriculture sector. COVID-19 
has already had a tremendous negative impact on jobs 
worldwide. Across Mashreq, fewer than 33 percent of all 
jobs can be done from home, with 32 percent in both Iraq 
and Lebanon and 24 percent in Jordan (World Bank 2020d). Overall impacts, including disruptions in the food trade and 
supply chains, reduced production, increased post-harvest 
losses, and food logistics breakdowns, have been felt in all 
three countries, though to a varied extent. The corresponding 
food inflation stemming from these aggravating factors also 
varies: from deflation in Iraq (1.4 percent annualized as of 
August 2020), to a moderate increase in Jordan (3.3 percent 
annualized as of October 2020), to hyperinflation in Lebanon 
(433 percent annualized as of September 2020), where it 
builds on the substantial food price increases due to the 
deterioration of the macroeconomic conditions. COVID-19 
places a large proportion of the vulnerable population at a very 
high risk of hunger and undernourishment and could lead to 
the failure of all protective and precautionary measures and 
the collapse of social safety nets. While country-level figures 
are not available, the WFP has estimated that COVID-19 could 
push an additional 130 million people into acute hunger by 
end-2020—nearly a doubling from pre-COVID projections—
with the worst effects felt in Africa and the Middle East 
(Anthem 2020). 
COVID-19 has led to multiple shocks to the agriculture 
sectors across Mashreq.  Therefore, both COVID-19 
and the financial crisis are threatening Lebanon’s overall 
food security, demonstrating a need to rethink the food 
system. Shocks that undermine food security and worsen 
service provision can contribute to a breakdown of the 
social contract, posing serious threats to the region. Such 
shocks can have an adverse impact on fragility and the 
risk of conflict within Mashreq. COVID-19’s impact on Iraq’s 
agri-food sector is already tangible, particularly after all 
agricultural imports from Iran (mainly vegetables) were 
banned in early 2020, contributing to a price shock. Prices 
for tomatoes, cucumber, and potatoes increased by  
100 percent in Baghdad within one week, from March 9 to 
March 16, 2020, according to the Ministry of Agriculture. In 
contrast, Jordan’s agriculture sector and food supply chains 
seemed better positioned to weather the shocks due to 
early public action to maintain domestic and foreign market 
access, extend loans to farmers, and protect the health of 
agri-food workers. Even so, price increases of imported 
goods over the longer term are expected (FAO and WFP 
2020). Both Jordan and Lebanon are expected to suffer 
from significant reductions in remittances exacerbated by 
COVID-19, which will reduce receiving households’ capacity 
for productive investment (including in agriculture) and also 
for consumption (including food) (Cochrane 2020). Box 2  
provides information on distorted value chains in Lebanon. 
The cumulative threat posed by COVID-19 to Lebanon’s food 
security is significant given its reliance on agricultural and 
food imports, the current economic and monetary crises, 
and the capital control measures hindering the payment of 
suppliers. 16
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
 ÎBox 2. Distorted Value Chains in Lebanon, Exacerbated by Financial Crisis and 
COVID-19
In Lebanon, there are different ways that large and small farmers secure agricultural inputs, with small farmers 
paying a higher total cost. Prior to the current crises, larger farmers had access to capital and secured discounts of up 
to 30 percent on inputs (seed, fertilizer, and so on) by paying cash on delivery. Smaller farmers without access to capital 
typically secured inputs on a credit basis, repaying the input supplier the full price of the inputs at the time of harvest. 
Lebanon’s monopoly laws prevent small farmers from organizing into marketing cooperatives and importing inputs at 
a more competitive price. The law grants exclusive rights for imported inputs to the sole agent.1 Because of Lebanon’s 
financial crisis that began in 2019, and worsened by the COVID-19 impacts, this arrangement has been cancelled in favor 
of cash-only operations, limiting farmers’ ability to plant on credit as in the past. Estimates suggest that this will cause 
agricultural production and GDP to decrease because farmers reduced input use due to currency depreciation, absence 
of credit facilities, and a need to rely on more expensive imported inputs.
The wholesale market ( hisbeh ) structure for fresh fruits and vegetables is challenging to farmers, particularly small 
producers. Farmers typically deposit their products with one of many agents ( wokala ) at the wholesale market and return 
approximately 10 days later for payment. These are consignment sales with prices fixed by the wholesaler according 
to market conditions, with the wholesaler taking an 8–15 percent commission on sales. Payment is made based on 
volumes and prices, with a fee imposed for disposing of any unsold products. The system is based on trust, with no 
formal receipts provided. Farmers report that the agents take advantage of them and do not pay them what is due. Yet, 
the dominance of the hisbeh and the lack of transparency in the system leave farmers and damans discontented and 
with no practical alternatives.2 Because of this, there is a strong incentive for sellers to bypass wholesale markets with 
direct sales to retailers or even consumers. Yet, interviews with wholesale market operators and the distributors and 
wholesalers who buy from them indicate that the vast majority of neighborhood grocery shops, larger families, and some 
restaurants get the majority of their produce through these operators (DAI 2014). 
a Interview with Ali Ismail, conducted November 18, 2019.
b Interview with Ali Ismail, conducted November 18, 2019.17
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and Challenges
 ÎChapter 2  
Opportunities from Digital 
Agriculture - Which Digital Agriculture 
Technologies Can Help Improve 
the Agri-food System Outcomes in 
Mashreq?  
Key Messages
 ÎDigital technologies of particular relevance in the Mashreq 
countries are oriented toward resource efficiency and improved 
climate resilience, youth employment, access to knowledge, trade, 
financial inclusion, improved traceability and food safety, and 
improved public services. 
 ÎSelected digital technologies may be particularly relevant to 
improving the performance of the agri-food sector and its response 
to shocks or crises, for example, the COVID-19 pandemic.
 ÎDigitally transforming the agri-food sector comes with risks that 
need to be understood and appropriately managed as with other 
major technological changes. Ensuring that small farmers and 
small businesses benefit from digital innovation as much as larger 
operators is imperative.
 ÎDigital innovations should not deepen the inequalities for women, 
youth, refugees, and other vulnerable groups that may lack equal 
access to technologies and skills. 
19
Digital technologies offer new opportunities for 
developing the agri-food sector in Mashreq, for job 
creation, and for increased incomes, making it even more 
important for policy makers in Mashreq to prioritize the 
sector and to provide leadership for its transformation. 
With increased competition for land, scarcity of water, 
and high transportation costs, agriculture in Mashreq 
will need to shift toward high-value, high-tech, and water-
efficient crops and production systems. Digital agriculture, 
a term synonymous with e-agriculture or information and 
communication technology (ICT) in agriculture, refers to 
the use of digital technologies in agriculture or the wider 
agri-food sector. Digital technologies can be harnessed to 
raise on-farm productivity, address resource use efficiency 
challenges, and build climate resilience (Trendov, Varas, 
and Zeng 2019). Digital technologies can make the agri-
food sector more efficient, inclusive, and environmentally 
sustainable, thereby increasing benefits for farmers, 
consumers, and society at large. They can help overcome 
information asymmetries and reduce inefficiencies caused 
by relying on market intermediaries. Farmers’ decision-
making may be enhanced through better agronomic data, 
weather data, and price information, ultimately increasing 
farmer profits and incomes (World Bank 2019b). Access to 
information can also promote the inclusion of marginalized 
rural producers in markets. Female farmers can benefit 
from tools that encourage knowledge and information 
sharing. Digital agriculture requires that users develop 
new skills, and it provides opportunities for more diverse 
and remunerative employment. e-Government can help 
improve the transparency and efficiency of public services 
by digitizing land tenure mapping and registration, subsidy 
distribution, weather forecasting, and water resource 
management. Selected digital technologies may be 
particularly relevant to supporting how well the agri-food 
sector performs in response to shocks or crises, for 
example, the COVID-19 pandemic. A wide range of digital agriculture applications exist, 
and those that can operate at low and medium internet 
connectivity are especially well suited to connect 
smallholders along agri-food value chains. The increased 
capacity to capture, analyze, and exchange data relevant 
to agriculture or the food system more broadly is at the 
core of the digital revolution within the agriculture sector. 
This enables evidence-based decision-making processes 
and improves efficiency, equity, and sustainability of the 
food system. Digital agriculture spans a range of tools 
including sensors; robots; blockchain, a distributed ledger 
technology (DL T) that facilitates the process of recording 
transactions and tracking assets in a business; cloud-
based technologies; computational decision and analytical 
tools; and digital communication tools. Based on the data 
management type, digital technologies can be grouped 
largely into four categories: collection, storage, analysis, 
and distribution. Digital agriculture technologies are 
producing ever-larger volumes of data including high-
resolution soil data, site-specific weather maps, aerial 
imagery, nutrient applications, animal productivity and 
health records, and e-commerce platforms to facilitate 
agri-food trade. Both integrating data and real-time data 
transfer can connect value chain segments. The data can 
be transferred via mobile or broadband connections to 
cloud-based services ( Figure 5 ). Many digital agriculture 
technologies can be deployed even in low-connectivity, 
rural environments (World Bank, 2019j). Second generation 
(2G) networks are essentially restricted to voice and 
text messaging, while third generation (3G) and fourth 
generation (4G) networks allow for broader applications 
and use of smart phones. Even in poorly connected rural 
contexts, or with marginalized groups that have less 
access to information and markets, sophisticated offline 
digital agricultural technologies can provide opportunities 
to support poor or illiterate farmers (World Bank 2019j). ÎChapter 2  
Opportunities from Digital Agriculture - Which Digital 
Agriculture Technologies Can Help Improve the 
Agri-food System Outcomes in Mashreq?  
This chapter presents the digital technologies that offer a potential contribution 
to transform the agri-food sector in the Mashreq countries, highlighting those 
technologies best suited to the challenges and opportunities for the agri-food sector 
in the focus countries. After a brief introduction to digital agriculture, the various 
technologies and platforms are reviewed thematically. Current examples from other 
country contexts are used to illustrate this potential.
20
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon ÎFigure 5. 
Categories of 
Digital Agriculture 
Devices by Access 
and Penetration 
Needs
Source: World Bank 2019j.
High mobile access Low mobile access
Low internet
penetrationLow connectivity
for nascent 
technologies
Mobile
payments
(e-wallet)
Mobile
weather alerts
& extension
(SMS, Apps)
E-mechanization
(Hello Tractor)
Farmer
information
through videoE-platform
(input, output,
credit marketplace)
Wearther index
insurance/
remote sensing
E-pest and disease
surveillance
Weather index
insurance/
remote sensingRemote sensing
(in situ and
diagnostic)Farm robotics
Controlled
environment
agricultureProduction
forecasting and
optimization
Blockchain
for value chainFarm-to-fork
responsive food system
Supply chain Tools
Portable soils
sensorsPrice forecastingPrecision agriculture
Farm Management
software (Field
monitoring platforms)Intermediate connectivity
for transitional
technologiesHigh connectivity
for advanced
technologies
High internet
penetration
The digital transformation of the agri-food sector 
also comes with risks that need to be understood and 
appropriately managed, as with any major technology 
change.  Negative distributional impacts are one concern. 
The World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends  
(World Bank 2016), for example, provides an overview of the 
various risks related to internet use, including inequality in 
access and affordability; concentration of market power of 
e-commerce platforms, social networks, and search engines; 
data privacy and consumer protection; and cybersecurity. 
Digital technologies may displace agricultural labor with 
labor-saving technologies ( Box 3 ). Such technologies may 
include harvesting robots, driverless tractors, sprayer 
drones, artificial intelligence (AI) to manage chemical and 
fertilizer application, and precision dairy farming (Gallardo 
and Sauer 2018). On the other hand, automation within 
the agriculture sector could create high-skilled, high-
paying jobs such as managing and maintaining robots 
or analyzing and interpreting data collected from digital 
sources and AI (Gallardo and Sauer 2018). Another risk 
of adopting digital technologies in agriculture relates to 
resource use. Trying to optimize resource use, especially 
for scarce resources such as groundwater, may perversely 
lead to their expanded use (known as rebound use) if use 
limits are not imposed (Perry 2011; World Bank 2021). 
Additionally, it is important to ensure equity in the benefits 
of digital transformation, for example to help small farmers 
and small businesses to benefit from digital innovation in 
the same way that larger operators will. Furthermore, digital 
innovations should not deepen the inequalities for women, youth, refugees, and other vulnerable groups as they may 
not have equal access to technologies and may end up on 
the losing side of the sector’s digital transformation.
Digital Technologies to Improve 
On-Farm Efficiency, Equity, and 
Environmental Sustainability
Digital technologies can increase on-farm productivity 
and address the challenges of resource use efficiency 
and adapting to climate change, thereby promoting 
food security and sustainable development.  These 
digital technologies include, for example, e-Extension 
services, precision agriculture, and matching markets for 
mechanized services and other inputs. By optimizing and 
reducing the input usage such as water, energy, fertilizers, 
and pesticides, digital technologies generate climate 
benefits. Yet, digital technologies could also accelerate 
natural resource depletion and increase the absolute value 
of GHG emissions via the rebound effect if efficiency gains 
lead to increased use (Perry, 2011; World Bank 2021). 
There are equity concerns that using advanced digital 
technologies in the agriculture sector may widen the digital 
divide if smallholders are unable to make use of these 
technologies due to the high cost and specialized skills 
needs. Examples of technologies for improving on-farm 
efficiency and evaluation of their impact on efficiency, 
equity, and environmental sustainability are provided in 
Table 6 . For a detailed description and examples, refer to 
World Bank 2021.21
Chapter 2 Opportunities from Digital Agriculture
 ÎBox 3. Digital Technologies’ Impact on Jobs
Many digital technologies may be labor enhancing since they increase the efficiency of agricultural labor and the 
productivity of agricultural operations by lowering production costs, increasing yields, reducing loss and waste, and 
providing higher revenues. However, while evidence is scarce, the emerging data showcase that increased use of digital 
technologies in the agriculture sector leads to displacement of manual/low-skilled jobs; hence, people less trained/
educated are at risk of losing such jobs (Gallardo and Sauer 2018, World Bank, 2021). Given a relatively low level of 
education for farmers in analyzed countries, this risk of displacement is potentially high. This is most likely to apply to 
selected technologies and wealthier farms. For example, capital-intensive enterprises might use robotic technology for 
tasks such as weeding, harvesting, and cow milking instead of manual labor.
At the same time, the knowledge base for developing and operating digital technologies could represent new 
employment opportunities that may be particularly attractive to youth. Therefore, modernization of the agriculture sector 
itself can create more productive, more skill-intensive, and remunerative and competitive jobs in the agri-business sector 
and along value chains and create new markets for agriculture products. Digital technologies can even be designed 
to enable smallholder farmers with limited knowledge to learn and upgrade their skills as they use them. This can 
encourage inclusion rather than displacement of low-skilled smallholders and help raise their productivity. 
Source: Gallardo and Sauer 2018, World Bank 2021.
 ÎBox 4. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Applications for Agriculture
AI refers to artificial intelligence, the ability of computerized systems to think and act like humans, including the ability 
to scan the environment, learn from it, and take responsive action. AI can simulate human abilities including reasoning, 
language, perception or vision, and spatial processing. There are three major types of AI applications: basic AI, with 
examples including credit scoring or online matching; advanced AI, with examples including facial and speech recognition; 
and autonomous AI, which is not widely available in commercial applications. AI can build on rules-based or machine 
learning algorithms that allow more sophisticated parsing and learning from data, including richer data sets including 
unstructured data like images, audio, and texts. Basic AI is already used in emerging economies to provide financial 
services to underserved or unserved populations through credit scoring, using nontraditional data, and targeted advertising. 
In the agriculture sector, the Nuru machine learning app identifies leaf damage recorded through photos from farms in 
Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania and transmits the information to relevant authorities that monitor invasive pests. This 
limits adverse impacts on farm revenue and food security. AI applications also show promise at other stages within the 
value chain, for example, through online marketplaces. AI-driven efficiencies in public services delivery could similarly 
benefit the agri-food sector. Risks associated with using AI in emerging markets—regardless of the economic sector—
include a widened digital and technological divide; transformation of job requirements and disruption of traditional job 
functions; and privacy, security, and public trust. 
Source: Strusani and Houngbonon 2019.22
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
Digital technologies can improve the quantity and quality 
of agricultural output while using less inputs (such as 
water, energy, fertilizers, and pesticides), increasing 
efficiency by performing farming practices remotely, 
and achieving positive environmental effects through 
lower input (fertilizer and pesticides) use (World Bank, 
2019b). Controlled-environment agriculture (greenhouses, 
indoor farms, and vertical and hydroponic farms) 
increasingly uses digital technologies including sensors, 
robots, and digital communication. More advanced digital 
agriculture approaches such as precision agriculture 
leverage digital, mobile, Internet of Things (IoT), and 
cognitive technologies by relying on tools including global 
positioning system (GPS) enabled guidance, control 
systems, sensors, robotics, drones, autonomous vehicles, 
variable-rate technologies; automated hardware, telematics 
(that is, an interdisciplinary field that encompasses 
telecommunications), electrical engineering, computer 
science, and vehicle technologies; and software. Precision 
agriculture practices for livestock farming include sensors, 
radio frequency identification (RFID), and automated or 
robotic milking and feeding systems. As precision agriculture technologies become easier to 
implement and more affordable, they could help raise 
incomes on smaller farms.  Predictive analytics  software 
and/or AI analyze data to provide farmers with guidance 
on crop rotation, optimal planting times, harvesting times, 
and soil management. Goldman Sachs estimates that 
yields can rise by 15–20 percent due to more targeted 
fertilizer application, 13 percent due to better planting, 
4 percent due to more precise spraying, and 10 percent 
due to precision irrigation. Smart irrigation systems with 
optimized fertigation (fertilization via irrigation) water use 
are particularly beneficial for Mashreq countries given the 
water scarcity and inefficient water use. Sensor-based 
irrigation can use sensors embedded directly in trunks of 
fruit trees while remote sensing via satellites or drones can 
assess water productivity, cropping intensity, and equity 
in water distribution within large-scale irrigation schemes. 
Farmers can benefit from the data-driven, machine 
learning solutions for orchard growers to track the health 
status of trees using AI, IoT multi-sensor data, and drone 
imaging. Yet, affordability and lack of technical expertise 
are restricting the adoption of some on-farm digital 
technologies. For example, the cost of fertilizer spraying 
drones starts at around US$4,000, while a professional 
automated mapping drone can cost up to US$25,000.
 ÎBox 5. Digital management of water resources in agriculture
Expanding water-efficient agricultural production is an important goal for water-scarce countries, but the use of partial 
productivity measures (crop per drop) can be misleading and the exact definition of water is often unspecified—is it 
water extracted, water applied, or water consumed? Moreover, the crop per drop measure is rarely if ever an indicator 
that farmers will seek to maximize in their production decisions. Smart irrigation systems incorporating Internet of 
Things ( IoT) and remote sensing technologies may be one option to move toward more water-efficient agricultural 
production that accounts for farmer incentives. High-resolution satellite images used along with specific algorithms can 
determine spatial and temporal variability of agricultural water and land productivity. For example, Water Productivity 
through Open access of Remotely sensed derived data portal (WaPOR1) of the Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) of the UN can compute and map key variables related to water and agriculture, such as evapotranspiration, 
biomass production, and water productivity. In the field, remote sensors can measure water use and monitor net 
withdrawals of groundwater, and the resulting data can inform sustainable targets for irrigation water management 
and water allocations to system users. Then, farmers’ or landholders’ water pumps can be integrated into the smart 
irrigation systems, allowing for real-time metering and even remote shutoff if the water user has exceeded his/her 
water allocation (World Bank, 2018, 2019e). In an example from India, the Nano Ganesh irrigation system uses digital 
applications that allow farmers to use their mobile phones to control their irrigation pumps remotely and save time, 
energy, and water (Tulsian and Saini, 2014). Digital tools support the physical improvement of irrigation management at 
the farm level and can strengthen information exchange at basin or regional levels between irrigation schemes. Water 
users, managers, and authorities can be linked through an effective communication system, allowing for knowledge 
transfer and developing irrigation management technical skills at the different scales within a basin (FAO and IWMI 
2020).
1 https://wapor.apps.fao.org23
Chapter 2 Opportunities from Digital Agriculture ÎTable 6. Common On-farm Challenges and the Impacts of the Potential Digital 
Technology Solutions on the Efficiency, Equity, and Environmental Sustainability 
Examples of Digital Enabler Efficiency Equity Environmental Sustainability
Challenge: Water scarcity and inefficient use of scarce water and land resources exacerbated by climate change
 9Digital technologies to 
improve natural resource 
use efficiency such as 
smart irrigation systems 
with optimized fertigation, 
precision agriculture, robots, 
sensors, remote sensing 
(satellite and drones), 
robotic milking, and feeding 
systems. 9Limit the use of external 
inputs (fertilizer and 
pesticides). 
 9Optimize the use of scarce 
resources like water and 
land.
 9Provide farmers accurate, 
timely, and location-specific 
weather information. 9Create more attractive and 
competitive jobs for youth.
 9Strengthen climate change 
resilience and adaptation 
through improved use of 
irrigation systems.
 9May include the 
displacement of labor with 
labor-saving automated 
technologies.
 9May lead to inequality and 
competitiveness decrease if 
digital technologies require 
substantial investments and 
certain skills. 9Reduce ecological footprint, 
for example, smart irrigation 
systems can reduce/optimize 
water use and lower the risk of 
soil salinity.
 9May perversely lead to 
expanded use of resources, 
such as groundwater, if limits to 
their use are not imposed
 9May lead to decreased return 
flows and thus less water 
available for downstream users, 
thus creating a new negative 
externality for them.
 9May generate GHG emissions 
related to energy-intensive 
data storage or the waste of 
electronic or digital materials.
Challenge: Vulnerability to natural hazards
 9Digital technologies to 
improve risk mitigation such 
as automated early warning 
systems related to weather, 
pests, and diseases. 
Digitally enabled smart 
contracts for weather-
related risks. 9Reduce risks from such 
external threats as pests 
and weather. 
 9Increase efficiency of risk-
prevention strategies. 
 9Improve efficiency of 
payouts with only marginal 
transaction costs. 9Reduce damage and loss 
from natural hazards.
 9Reduce inequalities 
through lower transaction 
costs, which makes these 
contracts inclusive for 
smallholders. 9Result in a more sustainable 
use of agricultural inputs and 
climate resilience. For example, 
prevention of spreading of pests 
through early warning system 
can reduce a need for pesticides.
 9Facilitate adaptation to climate 
change if improved weather 
forecasts are made accessible to 
producers.
Challenge: Lack of knowledge due to weak extension services
 9E-extension services 
through multiple channels 
such as video, IVR, SMS, 
and radio. 9Facilitate knowledge 
transfer and skill acquisition 
at low cost. 9Reduce spatial, social, and 
economic divides.
 9Empower smallholders by 
providing access to data 
and knowledge. 9Improve knowledge about 
climate-smart and sustainable 
practices.
Challenge: Limited access to the agricultural machinery and agricultural services
 9Digital platforms for 
improved physical and 
human capital allocation. 9Increase the technical 
and allocative efficiency 
of capital (machinery, 
equipment, and so on) or 
match agricultural services 
provider.  9Empower smallholders by 
providing access to physical 
and human capital. 9Reduce GHG emissions 
through improved energy and 
material use in processing, 
storage, and transportation, 
especially for products 
requiring cold chain.
 9May result in increased GHG 
emissions due to improved 
farmers’ access to machinery.
Note: For the detailed description and examples, refer to World Bank 2021.24
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonDigital Platforms for Improved Physical Capital 
Allocation in the Agri-food Sector 
Digital platforms can improve access to agricultural 
machinery and agricultural services. Due to the high cost 
associated with some agricultural equipment, alternatives 
to direct purchase such as leasing arrangements, contract-
based provision, and/or cooperative approaches may be 
more appropriate, especially by smaller farmers. Contractors 
typically target two groups of customers: (a) small farms 
that face high costs to mechanize individually and (b) farms 
whose owners lack management skills or time to apply 
the technology. Cooperative approaches including joint 
investment or sharing equipment may be best suited to 
equipment that is not required on a continuous or permanent 
basis, for example, precision guidance, soil sampling, 
variable-rate fertilization, and yield mapping (Kutter, et 
al., 2011).  Digital platforms can create new and efficient 
markets for machinery rentals through (a) providing more 
affordable access to physical capital for smallholder farmers 
and (b) putting underused assets to work by matching 
suppliers of machinery rental services with farmers wanting 
these services, just as Uber matches drivers with customers 
for taxi services. As the marginal cost of matching buyers 
and sellers through digital platforms is extremely low, they 
have the potential to reduce unit costs of machinery rental 
services through saved transaction and search costs (World 
Bank, 2019b). For example, Hello Tractor  brings tractor 
services through its mobile platform to farms upon request. 
With a model similar to that of Uber, Hello Tractor leverages 
the sharing economy to improve farm productivity through 
tractor rental. Instead of purchasing the machinery at a huge 
up-front investment, the service creates an opportunity for 
tractor owners to earn additional income when their fleet is 
idle and for renters to free up part of their financial resources 
by purchasing tractor services on demand. A similar 
approach is used by DigiCow, which developed a platform 
to connect animal health and veterinary care providers with 
small dairy animal owners through a mobile application 
that works like Uber. This has led to a significant increase in 
service availability for dairy animal owners. The service time 
is reduced from two days to two hours, leading to significant 
improvement in animal health. However, the experience of 
digital platforms serving the agriculture sector has not been 
uniformly positive, and some platforms have failed or failed 
to scale up for a variety of reasons (FAO, IFPRI, and OECD 
2017; World Bank 2016).Digital Technologies to Improve Access to 
Knowledge and Facilitate Evidence-Based Decision-
Making for Improved Farming Practices
E-extension services can help overcome constraints of 
traditional extension services and provide cost-effective 
ways of reaching a greater number of farmers at lower 
cost. E-extension can help provide relevant and real-time 
access to information on how farmers can resolve general 
and highly specific problems ranging from sustainable 
farming practices, climate-smart solutions, and market 
access (World Bank 2019b). Digital technologies can 
be used as a complement to field advisory visits, rather 
than a complete substitute.  Meta-analyses suggest that 
transmitting agricultural information through mobile 
technologies can increase yields by 4 percent and adoption 
of recommended agrochemical inputs by 22 percent in 
Sub-Saharan Africa and India (Fabregas, Kremer, and 
Schilbach 2019). Given the low and rapidly declining cost 
of information transmission, benefits likely exceed costs 
by an order of magnitude. Messages could be customized 
on the basis of farmer characteristics, such as education 
or financial circumstances. For example, FarmStack by 
Digital Green delivers location and time-specific advice to 
farmers to boost sustainable agricultural productivity, rural 
livelihoods, resilience, and nutrition outcomes. FarmStack 
combines information such as weather forecasts, market 
prices, soil health, and irrigation availability with in-built 
mechanisms to push advisories to farmers across multiple 
channels (for example, face-to-face, video, interactive voice 
response [IVR], short message service [SMS], and radio). 
AccessAgriculture hosts more than 200 videos in over 
80 languages. Agrocares  is a Dutch firm providing digital 
services ranging from crop growth monitoring and insect 
scouting to managing soil fertility and animal feed. 
E-extension can be provided by both private and public 
sectors, yet vetting private sector e-Extension services is 
needed to address data integrity and avoiding intentional 
falsification of data by malicious actors (World Bank 
2021). While there are various forms of e-Extension, many 
are fairly recent, and evaluation is still ongoing to identify 
which forms of agricultural e-Extension services work 
best and under what conditions (World Bank, 2019b). The 
adoption of digital e-Extension services is limited in many 
countries due to lack of country-specific content and 
services for the agriculture sector in local languages. 25
Chapter 2 Opportunities from Digital AgricultureCapacity development programs delivered online or 
through distance learning are particularly appropriate 
to mitigate the restrictions posed by COVID-19.  For 
example, to mitigate COVID-19’s impact, China Agricultural 
University and the National Engineering Research Center 
for Information Technology in Agriculture (NERCITA) in 
Beijing launched the New Farmer Lecture Series online 
training courses for farmers. Some 12,000 farmers 
participated in the first series of lectures, which lasted  
4.5 hours and covered topics ranging from preventing pest 
infestations to smart agricultural services and equipment. 
The tailor-made content from agronomists was delivered 
via a livestreaming platform.1 
Digital Technologies to Improve Risk Mitigation
Enhancing management and efficiency and mitigating 
risk are possible by combining remote sensing and big 
data. Novel applications, when these are  combined,  include 
automated early warning systems for crop or livestock 
health related to weather, pests, and diseases that can 
facilitate proactive and timely management responses. 
For example, the World Bank Agriculture Observatory is 
accessing ground-based hydrometeorological data (sparse 
in most developing countries) and high-density weather 
satellite radar platforms and applying machine learning to 
generate a continuous weather surface across the earth’s 
croplands (World Bank, 2019b). The resulting weather 
data comprise 7 billion data points generated daily by 1.5 
million virtual weather stations across the world. These are 
updated four times a day, to generate ‘real-time’ weather 
data at intervals of 9 km across global agricultural land. 
This data surface represents a disruptive approach to 
the traditional method of relying solely on ground-based 
hydrometeorological stations that need to be procured, 
installed, calibrated, and maintained even before the data 
are accessed, analyzed, and synthesized. By coupling the 
high-resolution weather surface with cropping calendars, 
it is possible to make real-time assessments of crop 
performance and take proactive risk mitigation interventions 
and provide decision support. These interventions span 
the entire value chain, comprising farmers, input suppliers, 
logistics providers, markets, and policy makers. Because 
early projections of crop yield anomalies are possible at the 
subnational, national, regional, and even global level, the 
World Bank Agriculture Observatory platform can provide 
early warning of potential food shocks several months in 
advance of normal harvest periods. Information and analysis 
from the World Bank Agriculture Observatory are guiding the 
design and implementation of agriculture projects. National 
Agriculture Observatories are in operation or are being set 
up in Ethiopia, Kenya, the Russian Federation, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe, in close collaboration with national agricultural 
and meteorological agencies.
1  https://stories.pinduoduo-global.com/articles/china-springs-into-action-
to-kickstart-food-production-after-covid-19 .Digital technologies delivered through smart contracts 
can provide a risk mitigation tool that is flexible, low-
cost, secure, and highly customizable to a multitude of 
risks and payouts (large and small), with only marginal 
transaction costs (World Bank, 2019b, 2021).  Access 
to financial risk mitigation tools for weather-related risks 
is limited or out of reach for many farmers and small- to 
medium-size businesses in the focus counties. Smart 
contracts can address these constraints and allow 
performing credible transactions without third parties. They 
are traceable and irreversible. Smart contracts contain all 
the information about the contract terms and execute all 
envisaged actions automatically. They work as follows: 
at first, assets and contract terms are coded and put into 
the blockchain. This contract is distributed and copied 
multiple times between the nodes of the platform. After 
the trigger (that is, delivery of a product to a predefined 
location) happens, the contract is performed in accordance 
with its terms. The program checks the implementation of 
the commitments automatically. Smart contracts can be 
used for weather-based crop insurance. A smart contract 
could then read these data and trigger a payment in case of 
persistence of bad weather. Smart contracts provide  
(a) security, as a smart contract cannot be altered;  
(b) economy and speed, as most processes are automated 
and most intermediaries are eliminated; and  
(c) standardization, as there is a wide range of smart 
contract types that would fit the parties’ needs. There 
are also many emerging digital risk mitigation tools. 
However, structural reforms, both in agriculture and in the 
financial sector, including improving access to finance and 
developing insurance markets, still need to be implemented 
for enabling complex product offerings.
Digital Technologies to Facilitate Trade 
and Financial Inclusion
This section describes how digital technologies can 
facilitate trade by linking farmers to the upstream and 
downstream markets, increase food safety, and support 
financial inclusion of smallholders. Common agri-food 
trade and fintech-related challenges and the impacts of the 
potential digital technology solutions on efficiency, equity, 
and environmental sustainability are provided in Table 7 .
Digital marketplaces for agricultural products can directly 
link producers to consumers via e-platforms, potentially 
shorten agricultural value chains, provide access to 
new markets, improve price transparency, reduce food 
loss, and offer new business opportunities for small 
agricultural producers and SMEs (World Bank 2019b).  
Lowering information-related transaction costs through 
digital technologies helps expand access to input and 
output markets—and reduce information asymmetries and 26
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon ÎTable 7. Common Agri-food Trade and Fintech-Related Challenges and the 
Impacts of the Potential Digital Technology Solutions on the Efficiency, Equity, and 
Environmental Sustainability
Examples of Digital Enabler Efficiency Equity Environmental Sustainability
Challenge: Connections to input and output markets remain weak and inefficient for small and fragmented farms
 9Digital technologies to deliver 
market information and 
access such as e-commerce 
platforms and market price 
databases.
 9Digital platforms to optimize 
the performance of value 
chain aggregators and 
logistics. 9Reduce transaction costs:
s For information, decision-
making, supervision, and 
enforcement.
s In downstream and upstream 
markets by facilitating price 
discovery.
 9Reduce reliance on market 
intermediaries and middlemen 
due to low search costs.
 9Accelerate matching buyers and 
sellers and reduce cost and time 
of each transaction.
 9Improve post-harvest storage 
management for both inputs and 
outputs, cold chain management, 
and transportation.
 9Empower points of aggregation 
by bringing producers, 
aggregators, and buyers to one 
platform. 9Narrow spatial divides and 
disadvantages of remoteness by 
lowering hurdles to information, 
services, and markets. 
 9Reduce the social divide 
preventing women from 
accessing downstream and 
upstream markets. 
 9Increase smallholder profits by 
lowering transaction costs to lift 
farmgate output prices.
 9May create or widen a digital 
divide between small and large 
farmers due to low literacy skills 
of smallholders.
 9Enable farmers to access 
cheaper services for processing 
their production through 
diffusion of a large number of 
mobile processing units (shared 
via digital platforms). 9Decrease GHGs across 
supply chain segments 
by increasing logistical 
infrastructure efficiency.
 9Enable farmers/processors to 
reduce food loss by improving 
storage planning and linking 
agricultural sensors with 
transport management and 
processing systems.
 9Change relative output 
prices and access to new 
markets, leading to on-farm 
shifts in resource allocations 
and new incentives for 
quality improvements and 
environmental sustainability.
Challenge: Limited access to rural finance and insurance
 9Digital technologies to 
deliver financial inclusion 
and risk management by 
using big data analytics and 
remote sensing to assess 
farmers’ creditworthiness for 
financing. 9Reduce the time and cost 
of establishing farmer 
creditworthiness by improving 
their credit history (access to 
databases with more information 
on potential clients).
 9Establish mobile digital footprint 
data to reduce transaction costs 
and accelerate loan application 
processing, especially for 
customers in remote areas.
 9Improve insurance products 
to serve as a de-risking factor 
for small-scale agriculture 
investment. 
 9Improve subsidized access 
to high-quality inputs through 
e-vouchers. 9Overcome rural isolation by 
reducing the transaction costs 
of depositing and withdrawing 
savings in formal institutions. 
 9Accelerate access to friends’ 
and family’s savings in times 
of need. 9Increase climate resilience by 
reducing risks of smallholders 
associated with natural 
hazards and market risks 
through access to insurance 
coverage, yield prediction, 
and smart contracts.
Challenge: Low food safety and traceability
 9Digital technologies such 
as food sensing, DL Ts, and 
e-platforms. 9Reduce transaction costs 
associated with the food safety 
and quality requirements’ 
compliance between different 
principals and agents across 
value chains. 9Facilitate fair trade by informing 
about food production 
practices and environmental 
impacts. 9Ensure better traceability 
of environmentally certified 
production.
 9Enable food loss reduction  
in agri-food systems.
Note: For detailed description and examples, refer to World Bank 2021.27
Chapter 2 Opportunities from Digital Agricultureinefficiencies caused by reliance on market intermediaries 
and middlemen (Aker and Fafchamps 2015; Nakasone 
et al.  2014; World Bank 2021). Price transparency will 
further provide benefits to consumers who may identify 
lower prices more easily. The power of e-platforms is 
that they match producers and consumers at nearly no 
cost. This has the potential to sharply reduce past market 
failures and profoundly reshape market access and value 
chains. In China, for example, 9.85 million online shops 
operated by rural farmers who employed over 280 million 
people reached a total online sales volume of agricultural 
products of over CNY 240 billion in 2017 (about US$36 
billion), representing a 53.3 percent year-on-year increase 
(Department of Market System Development, China 
Ministry of Commerce). In June 2018, the Alibaba Group 
announced its plan to expand the coverage of its rural 
initiative ( Rural Taobao ) to 1,000 counties (representing 
68 percent of all Chinese counties) and 150,000 villages 
in the next three years (Hsu 2018). In Africa, e-Soko, an 
online mobile-based marketplace for agricultural products, 
publishes daily prices of agriculture crops for wholesale 
and retail which strengthens farmers’ bargaining power 
and addresses information asymmetries. e-platforms 
can also reduce food waste. For example, Twiga reduced 
post-harvest losses in Kenya to 5 percent, compared to 
30 percent at informal markets ( Box 6 ). E-commerce 
platforms are predominantly used to shorten food 
supply chains at the national level. Yet, a lack of explicit 
international guidance to assist national regulators 
regarding e-commerce, food trade, and consumer 
protection hinders the growth of food-related e-commerce 
that crosses international borders (WHO 2019). The international Codex Committee on Food Labelling has 
been working on guidance on the labelling of foods 
sold through internet/e-commerce. Efforts to develop 
international guidance are under way. In 2019, the Codex 
Committee on Food Labelling launched discussions 
to develop guidance on labelling of foods sold through 
e-commerce (WHO 2019).
E-commerce may prove another solution to support 
agri-food producers by shortening supply chains, to 
respond to COVID-19’s disruption in traditional markets.  
COVID-19 has accelerated the shift in sales of products, 
including food, toward digital marketing and sales 
platforms, and this shift is predicted to persist to some 
extent post-crisis. Serbia2 and Croatia3 have taken action 
to keep short supply chains functioning and improve 
the structural issues linking farmers to markets in both 
countries through digital approaches. In China, when 
wholesale markets closed  due to COVID-19, Pinduoduo 
Inc. (PDD), an e-commerce platform supporting 585 
million active buyers, created a sales channel on its app 
specifically for farmers. PDD also hosted livestreaming 
sessions featuring community leaders and farmers who 
introduced their local specialties to a wider audience.4 
COVID-19 has increased farmers’ willingness to go digital. 
For example, a 2019 pre-COVID-19 McKinsey Survey of 
European farmers found that approximately 30 percent 
wanted to use digital channels for purchases, while a 
post COVID-19 survey showed 69 percent willing. Across 
Europe, that adds up to almost 4 million more farmers 
who say they are ready to use online channels as their 
main sources of ordering (McKinsey 2020).
2  https://pijaca.minpolj.gov.rs .
3  https://trznica.mps.hr .
4  https://stories.pinduoduo-global.com/articles/livestreaming-hogs-the-
limelight-amid-pandemic-shutdown.
 ÎBox 6. Twiga Foods1 Platform
The Twiga Foods platform uses mobile phone technology to match supply and demand, aggregating market participants 
and finding buyers for farmers’ produce in Kenya’s large but highly fragmented fruit and vegetable market. Twiga’s 
e-commerce platform enables vendors to order fresh produce when needed from farmers across Kenya. The system is a 
win for both sides—farmers have guaranteed access to a fairly priced, transparent, mobile marketplace while vendors can 
consistently source high-quality produce that Twiga conveniently delivers to their doorstep for free. By increasing efficiency 
in the supply chain, Twiga reduces waste and ultimately reduces food prices for end use consumers. The company 
operates collection centers across the country, in addition to a central pack house with cold storage facilities. They 
mobilize trucks and vans for swift collection and distribution of produce. The smooth logistics system limits Twiga’s post-
harvest losses to 5 percent, compared to 30 percent in informal markets, where farmers typically sell produce. Since it 
launched operations in 2014, Twiga has grown and now works with over 13,000 farmers and 6,000 vendors in Kenya. The 
company initially started off matching vendors to banana farmers but now works with other produce such as tomatoes, 
cabbage, mango, potato, and onion. Farmers who sign up with Twiga receive payments within 24 hours. Twiga is proving 
that smart use of technology and innovative business models can vastly improve large and inefficient agricultural markets.
1 https://twiga.com  28
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonDigital Platforms to Optimize the Performance of 
Value Chain Aggregators and Logistics
Digital technologies can also improve agricultural 
supply chain organization and management by 
optimizing aggregators’ performance, which limits 
value chain disruptions from COVID-19. Smallholder 
farms increasingly turn to aggregators such as farmer 
cooperatives and organizations that use digital tools to 
improve collection, transportation, and quality control. 
A single platform that gathers producers, aggregators, 
and buyers can increase transaction volumes, raise 
prices for farmers, create enterprise opportunities for 
the aggregators, and deliver traceable and better-quality 
produce to buyers. Digital platforms are especially useful 
in deep rural areas as coordination between producers, 
truckers, and warehouse owners and aggregate traders is 
needed to get products to market. For example, TruTrade 
collects and aggregates data on farm produce on a 
digital platform, which is used by a network of village 
aggregators and buyers to market and sell produce across 
Kenya and Uganda. During the COVID-19 pandemic, 
TruTrade has focused on keeping supply chains open, 
framing emergency food system response initiatives, and 
training agents and farmers on COVID-19 awareness and 
preventative measures to promote safe sourcing. Similarly, 
the ‘Kisan Rath’ mobile app has facilitated transporting 
grains and perishable foods during COVID-19 lockdowns. 
Consignors (farmer, farmer producer organizations [FPOs], 
buyer/trader) post a requirement for transportation, 
which is disseminated to transport aggregators, who in 
turn interface with truckers and fleet owners to obtain 
a competitive quote and then pass back the quote and 
trucker details to the consignor. The consignor directly 
negotiates offline with the trucker to finalize the deal. After 
the trip, the user rates the trucker in the app, establishing 
a feedback mechanism to improve transport services and 
to inform consignors’ future decisions.5 Similar platforms 
were not identified in the focus countries.
Digital Technologies to Improve Traceability and 
Quality Control
The range of digital technologies improving value chain 
transparency and traceability includes food sensing 
technologies, blockchain (distributed ledger), and 
e-platforms (World Bank 2019b).  Barcodes and digital 
scanners have been used to improve traceability since the 
1970s, and they have been improved by higher-capability 
coding systems (for example, DataBar and RFID chips) 
(GS1, n.d.). DL Ts, such as blockchain, have promised to 
increase efficiency and transparency in agricultural supply 
chains by improving product traceability and integrity, 
5  http://agriadda.in/kisan-rath-mobile-app-to-facilitate-transportation-of-
food-grains.contract certainty, and compliance with SPS requirements 
(Box 7 ). Blockchain technology prevents data from being 
improperly altered, ensuring transparency and building 
trust among retailers and consumers located at the end 
of decentralized supply chains (The Seam 2019). For 
example, Carrefour, a supermarket chain based in France, 
uses blockchain to provide consumers with detailed 
information on chicken for sale, such as veterinary 
treatments, freshness, and other metrics (Jouanjean 2019). 
American retailing giant Walmart uses the IBM Food Trust 
platform to track fresh produce, including lettuce and 
spinach (Corkery and Popper 2018) and shrimp exports 
from India, to its points of sale in the United States, to 
ensure that the seafood meets strict US food standards 
(Cant 2019). Improving traceability of food products can 
also reduce expenses associated with food safety issues, 
which are particularly important in low- and middle-income 
economies where food-borne illnesses cost US$110 billion 
each year (Jaffee et al.  2019). 
Digital Technologies to Deliver Financial Inclusion 
and Risk Management 
Digitization of transactions and payments can improve 
the inclusion of formerly unbanked and vulnerable 
farmers into credit markets. Financial services and risk 
management delivered via digital technologies can include 
digital payment systems, mobile phone-based financial and 
insurance products, and big data analysis that can reduce 
the cost of credit and weather-based crop insurance. 
Currently, only a minor share of smallholder farmers have 
access to formal credit in the three focus countries. Big 
data and advanced analytics can significantly reduce the 
cost of establishing farmer creditworthiness and assessing 
insurance risk. These lower costs can potentially lower 
interest rates and insurance premiums for farmers, thereby 
increasing access to these financial services. They can 
also allow smallholder farmers to overcome rural isolation 
and access friends’ and family savings in times of need. 
Remote sensing technologies can reduce the monitoring 
costs of traditional insurance contracts, improve the 
contracts available for smallholder farmers, and reduce 
their costs (World Bank 2021). Many studies show that 
digital financial solutions have a positive and significant 
effect on annual household input use, agricultural 
commercialization, and household income (Jack and Suri 
2011; Kirui et al.  2013). Farmdrive in Kenya and Harvesting 
in Uganda are examples of companies using data analytics 
to assess farmers’ creditworthiness for financing. Kenya’s 
M-Pesa represents a prominent example of financial 
inclusion through digital technology ( Box 8 ). This mobile 
phone-based payment system was introduced in 2007 and 
had already reached 65 percent of Kenyan households by 
2009, which lifted an estimated 2 percent of rural Kenyan 29
Chapter 2 Opportunities from Digital Agriculture
 ÎBox 8. Financial Inclusion through M-Pesa Platform
M-Pesa is a digital financial solution that is now being replicated worldwide. Safaricom is a telecommunication company 
that pioneered this digital solution. It has 26 million subscribers or near universal coverage in Kenya. Safaricom outlets 
and franchisees deliver payment and financial services in remote corners of the country. Kenya has 7 million smallholder 
farms, and 90 percent of these farmers own mobile phones. Nearly 68 percent of the farm value after leaving the farm 
goes to brokers, intermediaries, and logistics. Only 1 percent of the smallholders get access to credit. Many national and 
international processors and buyers of commodities are struggling to get the desired quantities of good-quality produce, 
thus limiting development of SMEs and agribusiness enterprises in Kenya. Involvement of Safaricom to invest in a digital 
platform analogous to M-Pesa has the potential to transform Kenyan agriculture. M-Pesa allows digital contracting 
between farmer and buyer, to use apps for improved just-in-time logistic services, and to create digital markets to engage 
some 300,000+ farmers on this platform. 
Source:  World Bank 2019b,k.
 ÎBox 7.  Blockchain Technologies for Improved Traceability
Blockchain is a shared Distributed Ledger Technology (DL T) that facilitates the process of recording transactions and tracking 
assets in a business network. An asset can be tangible or intangible (for example, intellectual property such as patents, 
copyrights, or branding). Virtually anything of value can be tracked and traded on a blockchain network (Sylvester 2019).
Blockchain technology is receiving increasing attention as a mechanism to ensure food traceability. Blockchain in the food retail 
industry helps mitigate risks of food fraud and safety by offering enhanced traceability and better auditing around the sourcing 
of products and ingredients, shipping dates, and expiration dates. Increased transparency and better auditing would empower 
the supply chain to be more responsive to any food-borne illness outbreaks and other recalls, as blockchain makes it significantly 
easier to track issues, recall products, and issue warnings in a more timely and accurate manner. Tampered products can be 
easily identified and isolated, preventing expensive product recalls, and for contamination, only unsafe products need to be sent 
to a landfill, keeping safe products on store shelves. This would reduce food waste and food adulteration (estimates suggest 
that one in ten food products is adulterated or mislabeled). Walmart has already completed two pilots using blockchain to 
improve food safety. In one pilot, the retail giant conducted a trace-back test on mangoes in one of its stores. It took almost 
seven days to trace the fruit back to its original farm using traditional methods. By using blockchain, Walmart was able to access 
the information in 2.2 seconds (Walmart Corporation 2018). This demonstrates that blockchain can be effectively used to 
track product quality, which is especially important for group sales (for example, cooperatives), to remunerate group members 
according to quality. Blockchain is suitable for certification and fair-trade schemes. Food loss in food systems could be reduced 
by up to 30 million tons annually using blockchain-enabled traceability to monitor information in half of the world’s supply chains 
(WEF 2018). The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) is developing an online, blockchain-supported 
marketplace and a smart food loss management system (Annovazzi-Jakab 2019).
Blockchain technology can also speed up transactions, enabling farmers to be paid more rapidly and preventing coercion 
and retroactive payments, common in the food industry. It can eliminate intermediaries and enable growers’ direct 
connection with retailers, food service operators, and even consumers. Blockchain can potentially build trust by making 
contracts more readily enforceable and flexible (pay-per-use approach) and make money transfers more transparent, faster, 
and cheaper. Small producers are likely to benefit from fairer prices and a wider consumer base. 
Blockchain also has disadvantages as an infant technology that is relatively unstable, expensive, complex, unregulated, and 
selectively distrusted. Across its many applications, blockchain remains stuck at an initial stage in the product lifecycle (with a 
few exceptions) (McKinsey 2019). Most proofs of concept (POCs) are in the pioneering mode (or being wound up) and many 
projects have failed to get to more advanced funding rounds. From a regulatory standpoint, this means that the standards are 
underdeveloped and not yet mature to replace the law. In a few cases, doubts about its commercial viability have been raised. 
There are currently many types of blockchain in both software and operational design, so its interoperability (the possibility of 
having different types of blockchain talk to each other) has to be addressed. Among various operators, IBM is piloting crypto-
anchors to avoid this problem that allows a one-to-one unalterable link between products and their blockchain by embedding 
plant DNA and/or edible shade of magnetic ink and digital fingerprints into food and agricultural inputs. 
Source: World Bank 2019k.30
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonhouseholds out of poverty through financial inclusion. 
Interoperability, the possibility of paying and receiving funds 
from banks, internet, and mobile platforms, is becoming 
standard which further facilitates the use of digital 
payments.
Digital Technologies to Deliver 
e-Government for Improved Public 
Services 
This section describes how digital technologies can 
improve the delivery of public sector services to the 
benefit of the agri-food sector. Table 8  presents common 
governance challenges and the impacts of the potential 
digital technology solutions on efficiency, equity, and 
environmental sustainability. 
Digital technologies can help reduce costs and increase 
efficiency and transparency of all public services, 
including those related to the food system (World 
Bank 2019b). Digital government, or e-government, 
can transform the public sector’s relations across three 
modalities: Government-to-Citizen (G2C), Government-to-
Business (G2B), and Government-to-Government (G2G). 
E-Government can support the public sector in digitizing 
information related to the agriculture sector such as land 
tenure mapping and registration, subsidy distribution, 
e-Extension, early warning systems, environmental 
monitoring, and dissemination of statistics. Governments, 
for example, can use digital ID systems to effectively 
target input and cash subsidies to farmers, establish 
reliable systems that record agricultural asset ownership, 
create digital farmer profiles to improve service delivery, 
and open up new economic opportunities for the poor. 
For example, Estonia’s public administration applies a 
principle of digital-by-default (OECD 2019). Currently, 
99 percent of Estonia’s public services are online, and 
98 percent of Estonian nationals use e-IDs that produce 
more than 10 million digital signatures per year. The 
use of the data exchange layer X-Road saved Estonian 
administration 804 working years compared to previous 
calendar years, and it is estimated that using the 
electronic signature saves 2 percent of the Estonian GDP 
each year.6 Estonia reduced the time spent on applying 
for agricultural subsidies from 300 minutes to 45 minutes 
by using digital technologies (Kärner 2017). In 2011, the 
Nigerian government spent approximately US$180 million 
in public funds intended to support 600,000–800,000 
smallholders, yet little money ever reached the intended 
beneficiaries (Grossman and Tarzai 2014). In 2013, 
with the e-wallet digital payment system, the Nigerian 
government reached 4.3 million smallholders at a cost 
of approximately US$96 million, showing that digital 
6 https://www.x-tee.ee/factsheets/EE/#eng .technologies increased efficiency by 5–7 times (IFAD 
2013). This demonstrates how the e-wallet program 
in Nigeria reached a higher number of recipients with 
lower cost and leakage through an e-wallet program 
for subsidized fertilizers. International organizations 
are using digital payments for efficient distribution of 
assistance. For example, the WFP’s recent advances in 
biometric beneficiary registration and verification allow 
Syrian refugees living in Jordan to purchase food using 
an eye scan. Digital public services can be bundled in one 
system, such as the Integrated Administration and Control 
System of the European Union (EU) ( Box 9 ).
Digital delivery of public services may be one area 
for rapid transformation given the economic shocks 
caused by COVID-19.  Digital or virtual extension services 
provided in local languages could communicate necessary 
agricultural information to farmers, expanding to include 
new information on personal hygiene and safe handling 
of food products. Such services would ideally be delivered 
free of charge and through official channels, to avoid 
mistrust. Digital delivery of market information and pricing 
platforms could allow for transparency while reducing 
physical contact among essential workers. Frequent 
digital monitoring and/or real-life crowdsourcing of food 
prices can allow for taking legal action against any vendor 
manipulating prices during the crisis. Providing social 
safety net payments digitally would improve efficiency and 
reduce human contact; for example, the use of e-vouchers 
could provide efficient public support to the vulnerable 
population.
Digital Technologies to Improve Food Control
Public actors can use digital technologies, including 
DLT , to improve food control systems.  Food safety 
data collected through the use of remote technologies 
can inform the development of risk-based strategies for 
inspection along food chains (WHO 2019). These offer a 
more efficient use of public funds for food safety control 
than universal inspection. Box 10  presents an example 
of successful development of digital traceability systems 
in the livestock sector. Using e-certification for electronic 
transmission of SPS data can improve the accuracy and 
reduce the cost of international food trade, compared to 
traditional paper-based systems. While only five countries 
have adopted fully paperless e-certification systems for 
SPS control, international efforts are being made to expand 
the use of e-certification by developing countries (WHO 
2019). Additional information on DL T is available in the 
subsection on digital technologies to improve traceability 
and quality control.31
Chapter 2 Opportunities from Digital Agriculture ÎTable 8. Improving Public Services and Monitoring Systems through Digital Technology 
Solutions and Their Impact on Efficiency, Equity, and Environmental Sustainability
Examples of Digital Enabler Efficiency Equity Environmental Sustainability
 9 Digital payments for public 
support. 
 9 Digital ID system for farmers.
 9 Rural e-cadaster to support 
land survey and facilitate 
open, transparent access to 
land records for all.
 9 Web-accessible systems to 
facilitate open, transparent 
access to data such as 
land use maps, soil maps, 
weather information, and 
yield prediction. 9 Streamline and automate 
administrative processes 
and enhance regulations 
transparency.
 9 Support farmer identification 
and verification.
 9 Streamline the 
administration of state 
support payments (for 
example, input and cash 
subsidies).
 9 Facilitate farmer access 
to services (for example, 
e-Extension).
 9 Reduce the cost and effort 
of data collection through 
digital ID systems.
 9 Establish reliable systems 
that record agricultural asset 
ownership.
 9 Make the land market more 
efficient by transparently 
identifying available land.
 9 Reduce the cost of 
registering/renting land 
parcels. 9 Support resilience of 
vulnerable communities 
during economic shocks 
(for example, COVID-19 
impacts) through digital 
provision of social safety 
net payments. 9 Improve knowledge about 
climate-smart practices 
and pest management 
through e-Extension 
services.
 9 Digitized monitoring 
systems through digital 
registries, remote sensing 
technologies, and digital 
early warning systems. 9 Facilitate statistical surveys 
(census).
 9 React and respond quickly 
in case of animal and food-
borne diseases.
 9 Increase efficiency of 
tracking land use change/
level of degradation and 
water use and availability 
through remote sensing.
 9 Identify the most efficient 
options for achieving a given 
policy/service objective.
 9 Enable a fast and more cost-
effective monitoring and 
overall policy evaluation. 9 Allow small farmers 
to use knowledge of 
natural resources to their 
advantage, increasing their 
productivity and building 
climate resilience.  9 Inform environmentally 
sustainable policies and 
more rational use of 
natural resources including 
soil and water.
Note: For detailed description and examples, refer to World Bank 2021.32
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonLand e-Registries
Digital land information systems can also improve 
cadastral data.  Cadastral maps often differ from the 
reality on the ground, constraining agricultural land market 
development and farm enlargement. Governments can 
consider initiating a mass assessment of the existing 
cadastral maps and implementing a systematic resurveying 
of land parcels to update digital cadastral maps or modify 
existing maps. Applying digital technologies can also 
improve land market functioning, for example, by reducing 
time and cost related to land use permitting and registration 
and improving transparency. Land use permits can be 
digitized and the application process automated can reduce 
times for filing and approval and increase transparency. 
Similarly, cadastral databases that are open to the public can 
help make the land market more efficient by transparently 
identifying available land and reducing the cost of 
registering land parcels (Woetzel et al.  2018).  For example, 
agroecological zoning in North Macedonia categorizes land 
into land resource mapping units, each having a unique 
combination of landform, soil and climatic characteristics, 
and/or land cover, with units having a range of potential and 
constraint for agricultural land use.Digital Technologies for Monitoring and Evaluation
Digital technologies also offer a broad spectrum of 
tools and data availability to enhance monitoring and 
evaluation of outcomes in agriculture.  The uptake of 
digital tools and consequent data generation in agriculture 
can help enable a more cost-effective monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) of results. For example, satellite earth 
observation provides unbiased, consistent, and timely 
information on whether investments in agricultural 
development take place in a sustainable and effective 
manner. Enhanced aerial imagery that allows plot-level 
monitoring; drone-based inspections; and sensor-
based plant, water, and soil analyses are some of the 
approaches that have been used and continue to be 
developed. Globally, remote sensing technologies already 
and significantly reduce the cost and time required to 
monitor land cover and land use, elevation, soils and 
watersheds, particularly in remote areas (OECD 2019). 
For example, using a combination of digitally integrated 
satellite imagery, topographical maps, soil maps, cadastral 
information, climate data, and computerized models of 
biomass production can provide real-time information 
on changes in land use at high levels of resolution. This 
 ÎBox 9. The Integrated Administration and Control System of the EU
To ensure transparency in administration, control, and execution of agriculture and rural development support schemes 
in line with the established policy goals, EU member states are tasked with establishing the Integrated Administration and 
Control System (IACS). In physical terms, IACS consists of a number of computerized and interconnected databases. 
The interconnected databases include information on farmers and farms, land registry, payment entitlements, and animal 
registry. In particular, the three main databases are (a) the Farm Registry, (b) the Land Parcel Identification System (LPIS), 
and (c) the Animal Registry. These databases enable effective and efficient processing of agriculture support applications, 
carry out administrative controls, facilitate the selection for physical on-the-spot controls, and calculate the subsidy, which 
will be accounted and executed by the Paying Agency. In practice, based on the experience of recent accessions to the EU, 
the new member states required 3–5 years to develop an IACS with its integral components until it was fully operational. 
Source: World Bank 2021.
 ÎBox 10. Digital Traceability in the Livestock Sector - Uruguayan Example
Uruguay successfully developed digital traceability systems in the livestock sector. The country is a net food exporter 
and its agriculture sector (crops, livestock, and forestry) is an economic driver and contributor to GDP and employment. 
Uruguay has become a leading meat exporter. It has developed a National Agricultural Information System that helps 
integrate across agriculture, natural resource management, and new climate-related information from 32 national 
agencies in an online state-of-the-art platform tailored to different users’ needs. Farmers’ access to the internet allows 
early warning systems for livestock management, an agrochemical control system, rural risk assessments, soil and land 
use plans, water studies for irrigation, and remarkably precise climate forecasts. The system also includes a livestock 
traceability system, which was initially motivated by an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in 2000 and 2001, leading 
to the replacement of the paper-based system that had been in place for the previous 30 years. The new system allows 
monitoring of individual heads of livestock associated with each individual farmer, based on his/her national ID.
Source: World Bank 2019b. 33
Chapter 2 Opportunities from Digital Agriculture
information in turn provides the analytical base for deciding 
how best to respond to land degradation. Efforts to use 
digital technologies to improve both the collection and 
the publication of accurate and timely data specific to the 
agriculture sector would be useful in developing evidence-
based policies and programs (World Bank, 2021).
Remote sensing could enable compliance checks of the 
implementation of agricultural policies. For example, 
under the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) for 
2014–20, national paying agencies were required to 
perform yearly on-the spot checks for at least 5 percent of 
beneficiaries. Under the new CAP , administrators will move 
toward new ‘data-intensive’ compliance approaches based 
on high rates of remote monitoring (near 100 percent). 
Remote-sensing-based spot checks can drastically reduce 
the administrative costs associated with policy monitoring. 
One study showed that using satellite data to monitor land 
conversion under the US water quality trading program 
reduced an administrator’s time from 10 hours for on-site 
visits to 15 minutes.
Remote sensing may offer a particularly powerful and 
cost-effective means to assess agricultural production 
in inaccessible areas, such as the conflict-affected areas 
of Iraq, across a wide scale and over time.  The potential 
uses of the satellite data include targeting (identifying 
areas needing assistance), analyzing adaptive and coping 
strategies in conflict-affected areas, improving design 
of future agricultural surveys, and assisting ongoing 
humanitarian programs; analyzing (assessing the impact 
of conflict on household incomes); and advance planning 
(identifying suitable areas for development assistance, 
identifying farmer input needs under rehabilitation 
activities, and improved planning of international 
assistance). ÎChapter 3:  
State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in 
Mashreq - What Is the Status of Digital 
Agriculture and Its Enabling System in 
Mashreq?  
Key Messages
 ÎThe digital economy in Jordan and Lebanon is more advanced, while it is still 
emerging in Iraq. All three countries can leapfrog into digital development given the 
transformative potential of digital technologies and prioritization by national strategies.
 ÎSignificant improvements in digital infrastructure use over the past decade create 
a favorable condition for applying digital innovations in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon. 
Specific attention should be given to vulnerable populations in rural areas which face 
inequalities and impediments in digital access, especially in Iraq.
 ÎIn Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, digital technologies could create a new momentum for 
economic development by accelerating the structural transformation process and by 
supporting the transition toward a more commercially oriented, competitive, and export-
oriented agriculture and agri-business sector. 
 ÎEarly stage results indicate that digital technologies show promise in advancing the 
digital transformation of the agriculture sector in the Mashreq focus countries, and the 
countries have supportive economic and sector development strategies for this digital 
transformation.
 ÎA dynamic development of digital agriculture in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon has 
been limited by low awareness and understanding of digital technologies and their 
applications’ potential in the agriculture sector, limited interest among public and 
private sector agents, mismatch between the language used by technologies (English) 
and those understood by some farmers, and inadequate access to finance and data. 
 ÎSuccessfully deploying digital applications in Mashreq requires greater awareness and 
timely, localized, and customized information addressing specific farming concerns in a 
comprehensible format and in the local language.
35
Digital Readiness 
The digital economy in Iraq is emerging, while it is more 
advanced in Jordan and Lebanon.  The World Bank’s MNA 
Tech Initiative reviewed the digital economy, that is, the 
economy that is based on digital computing technologies, 
across Middle East and North Africa countries, awarding 
scores (0–10) and rankings across five pillars: digital 
infrastructure, digital platforms, digital financial services, 
digital entrepreneurship, and digital skills (Table 10). The 
pillars are constructed based on a number of indicators 
presented in Appendix 2. For instance, the digital 
infrastructure pillar is based on indicators on quality, 
affordability, market competition, government ownership, 
and legal frameworks, whereas digital skills is based on 
internet use, social media, and other required skills. Iraq 
performs below the Middle East and North Africa average 
on each of the five pillars and is deemed ‘emerging’ 
according to the World Bank’s analysis. Jordan performs 
near or above the regional average and is deemed 
‘advanced’ except for the Digital Financial Services 
pillar. Lebanon’s performance is mixed, earning a rating 
of ‘advanced’ on three pillars, falling below the regional 
average on both digital infrastructure and digital financial 
services, so it is ‘emerging’. The detailed, per-country 
indicator results are presented in Appendix 2. 
All three countries can leapfrog into digital development 
given the transformative potential of digital 
technologies and prioritization by national strategies. 
The Iraqi government has made digitization an explicit 
priority and has encouraged public-private partnerships, 
in its Iraq Vision 2030 development plan. The draft of the 
National Strategy for Food Security of Iraq has a section 
on monitoring food security as part of an early warning 
system. Jordan’s REACH2025 digital economy action 
plan seeks to transform the country into a regional hub for ICT, stimulating additional GDP growth and creating 
new jobs and businesses (Oxford Business Group 2018). 
Lebanon’s government previously promised to digitize its 
government services and develop a new telecom sector 
policy by revising Telecom Law 431 as a way of promoting 
a digital economy. The international development 
institutions’ policy is also moving toward strengthening 
the digital economy. The need for digital development 
is even more urgent due to the adverse impacts of the 
COVID-19 pandemic.
Digital Infrastructure 
Significant improvements in mobile penetration over the 
past decade create a favorable condition for applying 
digital innovations in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon.  
According to TeleGeography, Lebanon reported 58 percent 
fixed broadband household penetration, while Jordan’s and 
Iraq’s comparable figures were 25 percent and 17 percent, 
respectively. In contrast to the fixed broadband values, 
internet use has rapidly increased in the last decade ( Figure 
6b, ITU 2019a). For mobile penetration (number of cellular 
subscriptions per 100 people), Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon 
currently lag the Middle East and North Africa regional and 
global averages, with mobile cellular subscriptions per 100 
inhabitants reported at 95 in Iraq, 87.6 in Jordan, and 64.5 
in Lebanon in 2018. In the Middle East and North Africa, 
the comparable figure was 108.5 per 100 inhabitants. 
Smartphone use among adults was reported at 86 percent 
in Lebanon and 85 percent in Jordan (Pew Research Center 
2019), while figures are unavailable for Iraq. In Iraq, mobile 
broadband penetration lags behind the regional average, as 
does the share of the population with 4G network coverage. 
However, 93 percent of Iraq’s population is covered by 3G  ÎChapter 3  
State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in Mashreq - 
What Is the Status of Digital Agriculture and Its 
Enabling System in Mashreq?  
 
This chapter addresses the enabling environment and the state of digital readiness in 
Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, which form the foundation for a digital transformation of 
the agri-food sector. Then, the chapter examines the status of digital agriculture in the 
focus countries, with contemporary examples. 
36
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonnetworks, on par with the regional average (World Bank 
2019i). In Jordan and Lebanon, access to 3G and 4G 
networks is high (over 95 percent). In Iraq, a recent increase 
in security and stability across broader geographic areas 
has permitted new fiber optic cables to be installed and has 
led to a growth in mobile broadband subscribers. However, 
recent politically motivated service interruptions have 
raised concerns about reliability and volatility. 
Decreases in the average cost of mobile data can foster 
the adoption of digital technologies and increase digital 
inclusion. Based on the Worldwide Mobile Data Pricing 
Survey for the cost of mobile data in 2020, Iraq, Jordan, and 
Lebanon ranked 146, 40, and 132 among 228 countries, 
respectively. A higher rank reflects more expensive service. 
The average cost of 1 GB of mobile data is lower in Mashreq 
(Iraq US$4.20, Jordan US$1.03, and Lebanon US$3.82, per 
month in 2020) than the regional average (US$4.46 per 
month). In fact, in Jordan the average cost of mobile data is 
even less than the global average (US$1.56 per month).7 
Vulnerable populations face inequalities and impediments 
to digital access, especially in Iraq, compared to Jordan 
and Lebanon. The digital infrastructure in rural areas is 
usually less developed than in urban areas, with limited 
network coverage, lower smartphone ownership, and lower 
overall digital skills and awareness. These impediments are 
further complicated in Iraq with its recent history of internal 
and external conflicts. Inequalities in digital access between 
7 https://www.cable.co.uk/mobiles/worldwide-data-pricing .urban and rural areas are high in Iraq, where a much smaller 
portion of the rural population is yet to be connected to 
high-speed broadband networks. There is a significant gap 
in extending high-speed broadband networks to Iraq’s rural 
population, and an estimated 8.8 million rural Iraqis lack 
such connection ( Figure 7 ). 
Internet access reflects gender disparities, and the digital 
gender divide in Mashreq is one of the widest in the 
world. Without closing this divide, digital transformation 
threatens to become less of an opportunity and more of a 
barrier. In Iraq, it is estimated that only 72 women use the 
internet for every 100 men, a gender gap of 28 percent, and 
only 89 women use mobile phones for every 100 men, a 
gender gap of 11 percent (World Bank 2020e). In Lebanon 
and Jordan, the internet gap is smaller at 10 percent, but 
the mobile phone gap is larger than in Iraq: 17 percent 
(Lebanon) and 21 percent (Jordan). 
The digital divide means young women do not have 
access to or cannot excel in digital jobs, compared with 
young men. The limited access to technologies inhibits 
what is available in rural areas and widens existing gender 
inequalities. Low-skilled and rural women can also benefit 
from this digital transformation as opportunities for 
outsourcing and platforms connecting small-scale farmers 
and craftspeople emerge. ÎTable 9. Digital Economy Performance by Pillars
Digital Economy Values (0–10)
Pillars Iraq Jordan LebanonMiddle East and 
North Africa 
AverageMiddle East 
and North 
Africa Average 
Excluding Gulf 
Cooperation 
Council (GCC)
1. Digital Infrastructure 3.83 5.85 4.55 5.01 4.17
2. Digital Platforms 4.08 5.02 6.01 5.44 4.81
3. Digital Financial Service 3.47 3.98 4.49 5.34 4.39
4. Digital Entrepreneurship 2.95 5.59 5.10 4.18 3.55
5. Digital Skills 2.83 5.13 5.45 4.68 3.94
Source:  MNA Tech Initiative (World Bank 2019e, 2019f, 2019g).37
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in MashreqDigital Finance
Government e-payments systems are at a nascent stage 
in Iraq and at an emerging stage in Jordan and Lebanon.  
EIU (2018) scored and ranked 73 countries based on their 
enabling environment for adopting government e-payments 
systems. E-Payments systems include functions such as 
income tax payments and refunds, obtaining and paying for 
an ID card, government social safety net payments, value 
added tax (VAT)/sales tax payments and refunds, company 
registration and fees payments, payments for goods and 
services, and disbursement of loans. Iraq’s performance 
yields the lowest score (9.8) among all 73 countries 
assessed. Jordan’s score of 45.1 translated into in a rank 
of 65, and Lebanon’s score of 39.9 resulted in a rank of 
70 (EIU 2018). Despite its low ranking, Iraq’s e-payments 
ecosystem is undergoing remarkable changes. See the 
section on e-Governance for further details.Lebanon and Jordan perform moderately with respect 
to e-commerce, while Iraq is at an emerging stage.  The 
2019 UNCTAD Business-to-Consumer E-commerce Index 
ranked Iraq 131, Jordan 87, and Lebanon 68 among  
152 countries globally. The UNCTAD Business-to-
Consumer E-commerce Index measures an economy’s 
preparedness to support online shopping. Several digital 
payments mechanisms are currently in place and widely 
used in Jordan well beyond the agriculture sector. For 
example, E-Fawatircom is a widely used digital payments 
platform that allows users to pay fees and transfer money 
directly from commercial bank accounts. E-Fawatircom 
has been supported by the Central Bank of Jordan and 
adopted by the Jordanian government, even allowing users 
to pay for public utilities bills. Elsewhere, Zain Telecom 
offers a service called Zain Cash, a mobile phone-based 
application that enables the digital payment of bills. In 
Iraq, the number of digital storefronts on Facebook and 
Instagram are growing daily. In addition to these mainly -101030507090110130150
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Iraq Jordan Lebanon Middle East & North Africa World0102030405060708090
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018a b ÎFigure 6.  
a. Mobile Cellular 
Subscriptions (per 100 
people);  
b. Individuals Using the 
Internet (Percentage of 
Population)
Source: World Development 
Indicators1, ITU World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators 
database.
1  World Development Indicators. 
https://databank.worldbank.
org/source/world-development-
indicators
 ÎFigure 7. Population 
to Be Connected to 
High-Speed Broadband 
Networks (millions)
Source: MNA Tech Initiative.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40IraqJordanLebanon
To be connected Connected38
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonregional outlets, Amazon and eBay are both available. Iraq’s 
first private digital payment card was launched in 2019 by 
Lebanese fintech startup NymCard, collaborating with Visa, 
to serve the underbanked Iraqi population. The card can be 
requested through a mobile app and enables users to make 
online purchases on both local and international websites, 
using a digital ‘Know Your Customer’ (KYC) process. The 
rapid rise of e-commerce from a negligible base and the 
growing use of mobile phones for transactions both point 
to latent unmet demand. In Iraq, the relative sophistication 
of the population with digital financial services compared 
with the low quality of formal financial services may lead 
to a leapfrogging, similar to mobile phone services over 
landlines in Sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank 2020a). 
A growing share of Mashreq’s rural population used 
digital technologies for financial services or e-commerce 
recently; however, there is still untapped potential for 
growth and digital financial inclusion ( Figure 8 ). Even 
though fintech is increasing in urban areas, a minority of 
Iraqis ages 15 or older and living in rural areas had used 
financial services or digital payments technologies by 2017. 
Only 12.9 percent of rural Iraqis received digital payments, 
though this figure rose sharply from 2014 (3.5 percent). 
Similarly, only 8.7 percent of rural Iraqis had made digital 
payments and very few rural Iraqis had used the internet 
for online purchases (4.5 percent) or bill payment (8.2 
percent) or used a mobile phone or internet to access a 
financial account (3.4 percent). In Lebanon, approximately 
21.0 percent of rural Lebanese received digital payments 
during 2017. More rapid growth was reported in the share 
of rural Lebanese making digital payments, rising from 
13.7 percent to 24.3 percent in 2017. Fewer rural Lebanese 
had used the internet for online purchases (15.3 percent) 
or bill payment (4.6 percent) or used a mobile phone or 
internet to access a financial account (4.8 percent). In 
Jordan, approximately 32.1 percent of rural Jordanians received digital payments, more than tripling since 2014. 
Only 11.2 percent of rural Jordanians had made digital 
payments within the previous year, up from 6.0 percent in 
2014. Very few rural Jordanians had used the internet for 
online purchases (5.9 percent) or bill payment (1.6 percent) 
or used a mobile phone or internet to access a financial 
account (3.1 percent) (World Bank 2020b). 
While there is a positive increase in the use of digital 
financial services and e-commerce in recent years, there 
is still a need to increase digital financial inclusion in 
these countries. The rapid expansion of mobile money 
wallets and e-commerce transactions may lower the risks 
and the friction of financing along the value chain and 
connect smallholders to markets (World Bank 2021).
Human Capital 
Youth literacy rates are increasing, yet gender disparities 
in literacy still exist for adult women in Mashreq 
countries.  Youth literacy rates exceed adult literacy rates in 
all three focus countries, which may favor youth compared 
to adults in their ability to use digital technologies. Total 
youth literacy rates were reported at 52.3 percent in Iraq 
(2013), 99.1 percent in Jordan (2012), and 99.2 percent 
in Lebanon (2009). Adult literacy rates are significantly 
higher in Jordan and in Lebanon than in Iraq. The latest 
estimates indicate that adult literacy was 97.9 percent in 
Jordan (2012 figure) and 91.2 percent in Lebanon (2009) 
but only 43.7 percent in Iraq (2013), which falls well 
below the average adult literacy rate across Middle East 
and North Africa countries (79.6 percent) (2016) ( Table 
10). This low performance is perhaps understandable 
considering Iraq’s recent history of extended conflict, which 
disrupted the educational system. Adult female literacy 
rates are below those of adult males in all three countries. 
This observation also holds among youth in Iraq but not 
 ÎFigure 8. Usage 
Rates of Digital 
Technologies 
for Financial 
Services by Rural 
Population in 
Mashreq
Source: World Bank 2020b.2.44.58.2
3.410.6
3.618.5
3.512.9
3.4
39
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in Mashreqin Jordan or Lebanon, where young women have slightly 
higher literacy rates than male youth. Thus, women may be 
disadvantaged in adopting and using digital technologies. 
Farmers and agricultural operators in the focus countries 
tend to have less education. Literacy figures specific for 
rural populations are not readily available, but since these 
communities have generally lower education levels, the 
national figures in Table 10  likely overestimate literacy rates 
among agricultural communities in the three countries. 
In Jordan, illiterate farmers manage nearly 5 percent of 
Jordan’s agricultural areas; those with only the ability to 
read and write control another 13 percent of agricultural 
areas; and those with an elementary-level education control 
33 percent of agricultural land. The remaining agricultural 
lands are managed by farmers with a secondary education 
(20 percent), an intermediate diploma (4 percent), or a 
university-level education (24 percent) (Department of 
Statistics 2017b). In Lebanon, 16 percent of farmers are 
illiterate; another 61 percent of farmers have only primary-
level education but control 60 percent of the total utilized 
agricultural area in the country (Lebanese Ministry of 
Agriculture, 2012). No comparable information is available 
for Iraq.
Internet use is increasing in all three countries and digital 
skills among Jordanians and Lebanese exceed the Middle 
East and North Africa average, while the Iraqi population 
falls short of it  (World Bank 2019i, 2019j, 2019k; Appendix 
2). According to the World Bank’s MNA Tech Initiative, 
Iraq’s underperformance is based on the low share of 
internet users among the general population and limited 
rates of social media use (below 50 percent). Farmers 
have lower literacy and education rates compared to the 
wider population, which may be a barrier to their adoption 
of digital technologies. In terms of internet use, Jordan 
and Lebanon report usage rates higher than the Middle 
East and North Africa regional and global averages, while 
Iraq is on par with the global average as of 2017. All three 
countries have recorded significant increases in internet 
subscriptions from 2010 to 2017 ( Figure 6 b) (World Bank 2019a). In 2018, the population using the internet 
increased to 75 percent in Iraq. Internet use among adults 
was 87 percent in both Jordan and Lebanon in 2018 (Pew 
Research Center 2019). Iraq was not included in that study. 
The Knowledge Economy Index (KEI) identifies Jordan 
as an intermediate knowledge economy, while Lebanon 
is categorized as an early knowledge economy.  The KEI 
is a measure of the ability of an economy to grow through 
innovation, and again the countries under consideration 
perform moderately. The KEI scores countries on a scale 
of 0–10; it assessed 38 countries as of 2019, including 
Jordan (score value: 4.43) and Lebanon (score value: 4.07). 
Between 2011 and 2018, the index reported improvements 
in Jordan’s ICT infrastructure and institutions for innovation 
but declines in performance related to the innovation 
system and skills for innovation. Lebanon improved its 
performance in ICT infrastructure but showed a worsening 
performance in institutions for innovation, skills for 
innovation, and innovation system from 2011 and 2018. No 
assessment is reported for Iraq (EBRD 2019). 
Digital Entrepreneurship 
The ecosystem for digital entrepreneurship is at 
the intermediate level in Jordan and Lebanon while 
Iraq’s digital ecosystem is nascent.  In the Global 
Entrepreneurship Index, Jordan ranked 63 while Lebanon 
ranked 66 among 137 countries in 2019. The Global 
Entrepreneurship Index measures both the quality 
of entrepreneurship and the extent and depth of the 
supporting entrepreneurial ecosystem in 137 countries. 
The Jordanian government intends to spur investment 
and bolster the entrepreneurial ecosystem through the 
Innovative Startups and  SMEs Fund (ISSF). Lebanon’s 
ecosystem for digital technologies was accelerated by 
targeted public funding and the presence of various 
incubators and accelerators (for example, Berytech, 
Speed@BDD, Flat6Labs, Smart ESA, and Talal and 
Madiha Zein AUB Innovation Park [AUB-iPark]). The 
Lebanese government has supported investment in the  ÎTable 10. Comparative Literacy Rates in Focus Countries
CountryAdult (%) Youth (%)
Total Female Male Total Female Male
Iraq 43.7 38.0 53.0 52.3 48.6 57.0
Jordan 97.9 97.4 98.4 99.1 99.2 99.0
Lebanon 91.2 88.1 94.3 99.2 99.3 99.2
Source:  World Development-Indicators.1
Note: Youth are defined as people ages 15–24. Adults are defined as people ages 15 and above.
1 https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators40
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanonknowledge economy through incentives offered under 
the Banque du Liban  Circular 331, which provided US$400 
million for commercial banks to channel for equity 
investment, accelerators, incubators, funds, and start-
ups. This increased the quantity and value of technology 
investment in the country (Babin 2018). Given Lebanon’s 
current fiscal climate, it is unclear whether Circular 331 
can be extended or expanded. Beirut Digital District 
offers a business environment designed to foster digital 
start-up firms and to encourage entrepreneurship (BDD 
2019). The AUB-iPark, launched in 2019, supports start-up 
ventures promoting innovation and entrepreneurship, 
including digital solutions (AUB 2020). There are no data 
on the number of start-ups or venture capital investors 
in Iraq (World Bank 2019i). Digital entrepreneurs in Iraq 
note that business start-up and growth are hampered 
by regulatory obstacles and complexity, especially with 
registration and tax payments.8 One way to foster digital 
entrepreneurship is by establishing technology transfer 
offices in major research institutions that examine market 
demand and seek solutions inside academia. Box 11  
presents a successful case study on facilitating digital 
entrepreneurship and technology transfer at Unicamp 
(University) in Brazil.
8  Interview with Mohammed Khudairi. Iraq Energy Institute, Iraq’s New 
Digital Economy; February 2019. https://iraqenergy.org/2019/02/03/
creative-disruption-voices-new-digital-economy-part1 .Rising interest in agri-tech entrepreneurship has 
led to the creation of sector-specific incubators and 
accelerators in the region.  In Lebanon, Berytech launched 
the Agrytech Accelerator, a yearly, 3-phase program through 
which Berytech supports start-ups with innovations 
across the agri-food sector, offering them the resources, 
knowledge, and funding to scale their ideas and grow into 
an international business with global impact (Agrytech 
2020). Some of the start-ups supported by Berytech and 
Agrytech incorporate digital technologies. Similarly, Jordan’s 
entrepreneurial ecosystem now includes Hassad, a private 
accelerator that is dedicated to developing agriculture sector 
start-ups. There are no data on the number of start-ups or 
venture capital investors in Iraq (World Bank 2019i), and 
no specialized sectoral incubators have been created yet 
(unlike in Lebanon and Jordan). Iraq continues to witness 
contributions of private sector actors in the ecosystem, such 
as co-working spaces (The Station, Tech Hub in Erbil, Fikra 
Space, Mosul Space, and The Lab) and incubators  
(51 Labs and Noah’s Arc). In Lebanon and Jordan, start-ups 
that are innovating in agriculture sector digital technologies 
are clustered, designing solutions to reduce the use of 
scarce resources or to improve market access for farmers 
by connecting them to consumers. 
 ÎBox 11. From University to Industry - Technology Transfer at Unicamp in Brazil
Brazil has dramatically increased technology transfer and innovation by establishing the first technology transfer office 
at a Brazilian university. Called Inova, this technology transfer office was established in 2003 by the State University of 
Campinas (Unicamp), a multidisciplinary university with more than 31,000 students and 20 research units. Unicamp 
pursues a variety of technologies in many fields. By 2007, Inova was the most frequent patentor and licensor in Brazil. In 
only two-and-a-half years, it signed 128 technology transfer agreements, licensed 45 technologies to private companies 
and the government, and applied for 153 new patents, 22 trademarks, and 24 software registrations. Its technology 
transfer agreements will last for more than 10 years, and they have already generated royalties for the university ranging 
from 1.5 to 10 percent of the net income from the licensed technology. Unicamp grants inventors 33 percent of royalty 
and licensing income. Inova is driven by market demand. Instead of selecting Unicamp’s technologies and offering them 
to the market, Inova examines market demand and seeks solutions inside the university. The technology transfer team 
comes from private institutions and has business skills. They are not researchers. Meanwhile, the government provides 
many incentives to companies, such as tax benefits to companies that pay royalties and those that invest in research 
and development, within or outside the company; compensation for taxes on royalties paid abroad during the execution 
of technology transfer contracts; tax exemptions for fees paid to maintain patents, trademarks, and cultivar registrations 
abroad; and sponsorship/subsidy of 60 percent of the salary of a scientist hired by a company. These coordinated efforts 
will increase patenting and technology transfer in Brazil, strengthen the relationship between public institutions (where 
Brazilian research is mainly concentrated) and private companies, and contribute strongly to innovation. Other public 
universities and research centers have been studying Inova’s model to emulate it. 
Source: Di Giorgio 2007.41
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in MashreqBolstering the agri-tech entrepreneurial ecosystem 
requires developing multi-stakeholder partnerships 
capable of implementing new innovative initiatives.  For 
example, the DigitalAG4Mashreq Innovation Facility (in 
design stage) would accelerate technological adoption in 
the agri-food sector by providing the necessary financial 
and technical support to leverage collective action, act as 
an effective communication and support tool encouraging 
stakeholder coordination, raise awareness, and disseminate 
knowledge.
Regulatory and Legal Framework 
The regulatory framework for digital technologies is not 
yet complete in Mashreq countries. Jordan and Lebanon 
have already adopted a legal framework for preventing 
cybercrime. All three countries have a draft legal framework 
for data protection and online privacy and for electronic 
transactions and e-signature required for digital financial 
services. Yet, the three countries have not adopted a 
framework for consumer protection when making online 
purchases (World Bank 2019e, 2019f, 2019j).  Lebanon has a 
legal framework establishing intellectual property rights (IPR), 
including for digital technology development that could be 
applied in the agriculture sector. But the IPR complexity and 
high cost has led entrepreneurs and academics to avoid its 
use, favoring alternative mechanisms. Alternatives to formal 
IPR protections include secrecy, exploitation of lead-time 
advantages, technical complexity, and use of trust-based 
relationships. Several institutions including the United Nations 
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UN-
ESCWA) and Lebanese academic institutions have also taken 
steps to protect intellectual property and foster innovation 
and technology transfer, for example, by developing policy 
templates that research institutions could adopt (UN-
ESCWA and CNRS-L 2017). Setting up the needed digital and 
regulatory framework is essential for protecting the rights of 
both consumers and developers and facilitating the digital 
microfinance industry.
There is a diverse ownership pattern for mobile and 
fixed broadband markets among focus countries.  Iraq’s 
government does not own the mobile and fixed broadband 
markets, while Jordan’s government owns approximately 
20 percent of mobile and fixed broadband markets (World 
Bank 2019j). Lebanon’s government owns all of the mobile 
and fixed broadband markets. See Appendix 2 for more 
detailed information.Status of Digital Solutions in the Agri-
food Sector in Mashreq
In Mashreq, digital technologies could be harnessed to 
address the immediate needs posed by COVID-19 and 
create a new momentum for economic development by 
accelerating the structural transformation process and 
supporting the transition toward a more competitive 
and export-oriented agri-food sector. The digital 
transformation is applicable to all stages of the agri-food 
value chain. Smart use of data enables potential efficiency 
gains to materialize, information to flow, and more 
evidence-based decision-making to improve sustainability 
within the food system. Mashreq countries face a risk 
associated with the non-adoption or low adoption of 
digital technologies as their agriculture sectors can lose 
competitiveness and fall further behind other countries.  
A lack of competitiveness has already limited agricultural 
producers in Mashreq from exporting their products to 
more lucrative markets. 
COVID-19 heightens the potential risks to the stability 
of food supply chains and exacerbates any poorly 
performing elements of the value chain, but digital 
technologies can facilitate agri-food supply by optimizing 
agri-logistics, improving price information, and informing 
planting decisions. Countries with a larger share of 
subsistence agriculture or with greater internet penetration 
are better able to deal with the negative impacts of 
containment (for example, lockdowns to limit COVID-19 
spread) (World Bank, 2020d). However, the Middle East 
and North Africa region is among the hardest hit regions 
globally as subsistence agriculture is limited and internet 
penetration is far from complete. In the midst of the 
COVID-19 crisis, promoting appropriate digital technologies 
within targeted value chains will require prioritization in 
the face of very limited time and resources to act. The 
most useful value chains to select would be those that (a) 
support continued production of food products that are 
vulnerable to extensive disruption (for example, fresh fruits 
and vegetables  and other perishables) and (b) target the 
livelihoods and consumption of vulnerable communities 
including, rural and agricultural communities. This section 
presents digitally enabled solutions that can potentially 
address common challenges to the agri-food sector in 
Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, focusing on solutions related to 
production, trade, and e-Government. 42
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonDigital Technologies to Improve On-farm Efficiency, 
Equity, and Environmental Sustainability
A range of precision agriculture technologies have 
been introduced in recent decades to improve the 
productivity of major crops and livestock systems 
in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, but adoption has been 
limited. Digital technologies are being introduced to 
Jordan’s and Lebanon’s agriculture sector, but these 
technologies are being adopted within the private sector 
by larger, higher-value, and/or export-oriented production 
agriculture producers and enterprises. These larger 
producers are better able to absorb the cost of investment 
in digital technologies and their operation. While there is 
evidence that Iraq initiated the use of digital technologies 
in agriculture as early as the 1970s, these systems 
deteriorated or were destroyed due to conflicts. For 
example, Iraq’s Dujailah Project applied digital technologies 
within an integrated agro-industrial complex as early 
as the 1970s. The project devoted over 20,000 ha to 
cultivating cereal crops, mainly wheat and barley. Activities 
related to irrigation, drainage, and maintenance were fully 
computerized, and the system control center included 
data collection and communication, data processing and 
information generation, control, display and supervision 
of output, and operation. Today, it is not operational as a 
singular project as parts of the system are out of order 
(notably the system control center), but the irrigation and 
drainage channels remain operational. 
Digital technologies are particularly used for improved 
irrigation and hydroponic production in Jordan, while 
vineyards and wineries in Lebanon are actively using 
digitally enhanced precision agriculture technologies 
to assess growing conditions and vine performance. 
In Jordan, the largest uptake of digital technologies on 
farm is the application of imported irrigation-related 
technologies such as sensors. The focus on irrigation 
is reasonable, given the scarcity and relatively high cost 
of water.9 Digital technologies that control irrigation, 
fertilization, temperature, and humidity are used in many 
initiatives to develop soilless agriculture, led by Jordan’s 
Ministry of Agriculture.10 Large, private farms are also 
pursuing initiatives to digitize agricultural operations to 
control irrigation, fertilization, temperature, and humidity. 
Such technologies have been implemented by Abu 
Seido Farms in Deir Alla/Balqa, Jabali Farms in Giza/
Amman Governorate, Abu Ghanam Farms in North 
Shouneh/Irbid Governorate, and the Hashemite Fund 
for Badia Development in Al-Mafraq Governorate. These 
technologies were supported with funding from the 
9  Interview with Mohamed Al Afranji, conducted January 13, 2020.
10  Such projects are currently being implemented at Al-Hussein Station  
in Al Balqa Governorate; Al Wala Agriculture Station in Madaba 
Governorate; North Shouna Station in Irbid Governorate; and Al Hassan 
Agricultural Station in Tafila Governorate. Personal communication with 
Eng. Muhammad Tuwaiq, conducted November 19, 2020.Embassy of the Netherlands in Amman.11 In Lebanon, 
vineyards and wineries are actively using digitally enhanced 
precision agriculture including drone- and sensor-based 
IoT technologies to assess growing conditions and 
vine performance. For example, Domaine des Tourelles 
winery is using drone technology to relay high-definition 
imagery for monitoring water stress and wood diseases.12 
Large-scale potato producers in Lebanon oriented to 
food processing and export have invested in advanced 
precision agriculture technology.13 In Jordan and Iraq, the 
use of digital images or drones in the agriculture sector 
is limited due to security concerns and the need for legal 
permissions.
The environmental impacts of digital technologies adopted 
by the agriculture sector in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon 
are as yet unknown. While digital technologies may offer 
important environmental benefits, including optimizing 
scarce inputs including water and energy, they may also 
generate new streams of resource use and waste, including 
GHG emissions related to energy-intensive data storage or 
the waste of electronic or digital materials. The importance 
of this impact on the development of digital agriculture—
particularly in the context of Mashreq countries—and 
opportunities to mitigate these impacts remain areas for 
future inquiry. 
Several private sector vendors are currently offering 
digitally enhanced agriculture technologies to the market 
in Jordan and Lebanon.  In Jordan, private companies 
import precision agriculture technologies for the high-value 
and export-oriented firms, but there is a lack of local firms 
providing mobile applications for operations management 
or blockchain solutions in local languages.14 Similarly, in 
Lebanon, several companies sell precision agriculture 
technologies. For example, Robinson Agri and Unifert sell 
digitally enhanced drip irrigation systems offering remote 
control and multiple irrigation programs to the market,15 
and George Hawa imports the Electrocoup  digitally 
enhanced pruning system, which allows orchard and 
vineyard owners and managers to review data on pruning 
practices and improve their field operations.16 Jallad, the 
agent for Caterpillar and John Deere in Lebanon, offers  
tractors and other large machinery that can be equipped 
with precision agriculture functionality (GPS tracking and 
steering, variable-rate applications, and so on) for purchase. 
However, few such tractors or machines with these precision 
agriculture applications are currently being sold in Lebanon, 
11  Personal communication with Eng. Muhammad Tuwaiq, conducted 
November 19, 2020.
12  Personal communication with Faouzi Issa of Domaine des Tourelles, 
conducted October 15, 2019.  
13  Interview with Moussa Sawan of Jallad Group, conducted January 22, 2020.
14  Interview with Mohamed Al Afranji, conducted January 13, 2020. 
15  Personal communications with Nour Nahouli of Robinson Agri and B. 
Basta and Antoine Slim of Unifert, conducted October 3, 2019.
16  Personal communication with Patrick Hawa of George Hawa, conducted 
October 3, 2019.43
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in Mashreqand the lack of sales could be due to high costs, relatively 
small farm sizes that minimize economies of scale, and 
limitations to digitally enhanced services including data 
transfer.17 Automated irrigation systems that incorporate 
digital technologies are available on the Lebanese market, 
but the biggest uptake has been among non-agricultural 
users. Notably, the landscape industry is applying these 
technologies at the consumer level (for example, in the 
gardens of large villas) and within the sports industry (for 
example, at golf courses and on football fields). Lebanese 
smallholders have not yet adopted automated irrigation 
systems, preferring to maintain their traditional irrigation 
practices. The purported reasons for this non-adoption 
include gaps in farmer know-how, complexity of the available 
technology, a lack of consistent power supply in rural areas 
to run pumps and controllers, a lack of incentives to adopt 
the technology,18 and a lack of financing. No information is 
available about comparable commercial offerings in Iraq.
In Jordan and Lebanon, additional digital technologies 
are under development by start-up companies, with 
plans for commercial sale in the future.  In Jordan and 
Lebanon, the domestic start-up space is largely focused on 
developing technologies that are appropriate to small- and 
medium-size farmers. Large-scale farmers tend to import 
technology directly from outside. For example, a Jordanian 
start-up company has developed devices that can provide 
early detection of red palm weevil larvae inside palm trees. 
A device attached to a palm tree can assess whether the 
tree is infected by either listening to the sound produced as 
weevils eat the insides of the tree or by capturing vibrations 
from inside the tree. Measurements are then analyzed using 
algorithms to distinguish noises and vibration caused by 
weevils compared to other sources.19 In Lebanon, IOTree is a 
start-up using digital solutions to target pests attacking tree 
crops found throughout the Middle East and North Africa 
region (Berytech 2019). IOTree physically captures the med 
fly and other pests, using smart traps that are connected 
via a wireless network (Executive Bulletin 2019). IOTree 
also offers a platform to send alerts via SMS or mobile 
application to farmers, informing them of the optimal time to 
spray pesticides (Berytech 2018). The system uses a deep 
learning algorithm and machine vision to detect, classify, 
and count different types of pests (Executive Bulletin 
2019). LifeLab BioDesign, a Lebanon-based manufacturer 
of vertical hydroponic systems, aims to develop a system 
that will enable hydroponic growers to control inputs and 
manage their inventory; predict production yields, coordinate 
sales with end users, and facilitate payments; and 
incorporate machine learning to optimize production.20 
17  Personal communication with Moussa Sawan of Jallad Group, conducted 
October 3, 2019.
18  Interview with Hadi Jaafar of the American University of Beirut, 
conducted February 5, 2020.
19  Personal communication with Ashraf Amayreh, conducted October 22, 2019.
20  Personal communication with Ali Makhzoum of LifeLab BioDesign, 
conducted September 18, 2019.Academic institutions are pursuing research that 
explores the application of digital technologies to the 
agriculture sector, though some research will take time 
to roll out.  For example, Yarmouk University of Jordan has 
digitized irrigation, fertilization, and control of temperature 
and humidity in its greenhouses in Irbid Governorate; 
this work is made possible by a grant from the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID). In 
Lebanon, Chateau Kefraya has partnered with a private 
ICT company Libatel, Ogero Telecom (Lebanon’s largest 
telecom operator), and Université Saint-Joseph ESIAM 
to develop a ‘precision viticulture’ system, which relies on 
a wireless agriculture sensor network to gather soil and 
climate information at lower cost and to track the effect 
on grape production in real time (Libelium 2017). Soil 
and climate information include humidity, temperature, 
atmospheric pressure, solar radiation, soil humidity, soil 
temperature, and luminosity. The use of wireless sensors 
has replaced more expensive and time-consuming 
manual collection of the data and facilitates real-time 
data analysis on a backend platform that is accessible 
by computer or smartphone. Data can be used by the 
winery’s agricultural engineers to inform their decisions (for 
example, to optimize irrigation) and to react to changing 
climatic conditions. Ogero is developing an IoT-LoRaWAN21 
network in Lebanon, which transmits the data gathered 
by the sensors to the Kerlink Gateway; from there, the 
data are sent via 3G through SIM card to a cloud platform 
and to Libatel private servers, where a dashboard and 
applications are developed (Libelium 2017). Libatel used 
the project as a proof of concept as part of its bid to 
support Ogero’s deployment of a nationwide IoT network in 
Lebanon (Kerlink 2017). Elsewhere, the American University 
of Beirut is developing a mobile-based application to 
assess agricultural water use based on satellite data and 
an automated irrigation system linked to soil moisture 
sensors, weather station data, and evapotranspiration data. 
Both the mobile application and the automated irrigation 
system are under development and several years away 
from commercial adoption.22 Additionally, in Lebanon, 
within the public sphere, the National Center for Remote 
Sensing at the National Council for Scientific Research of 
Lebanon ( Conseil National pour la Recherche Scientifique , 
CNRS-L) has a range of digital field instruments available 
for use by academic research partners, including 
universities and the Lebanese Agricultural Research 
Institute (LARI).  Examples include soil moisture sensors, 
advanced drones equipped with infrared sensors, and 
a field spectroradiometer used to produce spectral 
signatures of different crops. These instruments do not 
appear to be available for use by individual farmers or 
private sector actors.
21  LoRaWan stands for Long Range Wide Area Network.
22 Interview with Hadi Jaafar of the American University of Beirut, 
conducted February 5, 2020.44
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonDigital Technologies to Improve Access to Knowledge 
and Facilitate Evidenced-Based Decision-Making for 
Improved Farming Practices
Digital platforms for knowledge dissemination could 
improve the quality of extension services in Mashreq.  
Current extension services are insufficient to meet 
farmers’ needs, offering limited farm visits and outdated 
information. e-Extension can target animal diseases and 
pest control, and pest control poses particular challenges 
to Mashreq’s fresh fruit and vegetables production. 
Farmers in Mashreq have low usage of current extension 
systems. New production technologies often do not reach 
farmers and lack relevant agriculture sector information, 
including needed production calendars for local and 
(potential) export markets. Global resources are often 
available only in English, limiting their use and uptake in 
Jordan, Iraq, and Lebanon. Local language content related 
to the agriculture sector is largely missing. Achieving 
successful results in Mashreq requires e-Extension 
services to provide timely, localized, and customized 
information addressing specific farming concerns in a 
comprehensible format and in a local language such as 
Arabic. 
The public sector employs several digital technologies 
to generate publicly accessible information required 
for evidence-based decision-making in the agriculture 
sector. For example, the National Center for Remote 
Sensing, a division within CNRS-L, hosts the Open-Access 
Geospatial Portal Database and the Sustainable Natural 
Resource Management Platform and Early Warning 
System (SuNaR), providing crop classification and crop 
yield estimations. The Open-Access Geospatial Portal 
Database23 allows users to create and download thematic 
maps with information on soils, land use and land 
cover, watersheds, and disaster events (flood hazards, 
desertification, forest fires, and so on). This database 
serves Lebanon’s public institutions that support the 
agriculture sector, including the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Green Plan, and the Central Administration of Statistics. 
Drought estimates based on satellite imagery are regularly 
published in partnership with the Arab Center for the 
Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands (ACSAD). SuNaR 
produces and stores geo-information for emergency 
operations, prevention and preparedness actions, 
and disaster risk reduction programs. In cooperation 
with the FAO, SuNaR has produced an agricultural risk 
assessment and profile to enhance Lebanon’s agriculture 
sector resilience (Abdallah et al. , 2019). Remotely sensed 
imagery from the center has been used to produce crop 
classification (Awad, Alawar, and Jbeily 2019) and crop 
yield estimations, for example, wheat biomass mapping 
(Nasrallah et al.  2018) and potato yield estimation for 
23 http://rsensing.cnrs.edu.lb/geonetwork/srv/eng/search .the Bekaa region (Awad 2019). 24 The LARI-LEB App for 
Lebanon was recently developed by the International Water 
Management Institute (IWMI), FAO, and LARI to provide 
advice on climate-smart and agriculture solutions.
The public sector in Mashreq countries uses digital 
technologies to develop weather forecasts to 
inform farming practices and disaster risk reduction 
strategies. Iraq’s Agricultural Meteorological Center was 
established in 2008 to operate and manage the Ministry 
of Agriculture’s meteorological network. It provides 
agricultural meteorological services such as real-time 
data, information, analysis, and consultations and 
recommendations to beneficiaries (farmers, researchers, 
and extension agents). Its overall objective is improving the 
use of climate and natural resources data in agriculture and 
reducing risks and losses. Lebanon has a more advanced 
early warning system, established in 2017 by LARI to 
alert farmers to potentially destructive climatic conditions 
and adapt their farming practices. LARI monitors 
changes in microclimate throughout the country using an 
agrometeorological weather station and forecasts weather 
patterns using a Dacom Farm Intelligence model. Forecast 
information is then translated into agriculturally relevant 
Arabic language text that reaches farmers through SMS 
broadcast messages, a smartphone application, and the 
LARI website. 25 Farmers can then use the information to 
manage impacts on their farming activities. For example, 
an SMS can tell farmers of a possible rain event, which 
informs when they should sow winter wheat. 26 In 2019, 
the Chamber of Commerce for Industry and Agriculture in 
Zahle (CCIAZ) launched the AgVisor digital application that 
notifies farmers of interventions to combat crop pests and 
diseases. With these advances, Lebanese farmers have 
recently adopted digital applications to access weather 
forecasts and inform their production plans such as 
planting, pest treatments, and fertilization.27
E-extension services are currently underdeveloped in the 
focus countries, but efforts are emerging.  For example, 
Lebanon’s Ministry of Agriculture oversees a network of 
31 agricultural centers located throughout the country, 
with more than 100 technical staff who provide farmer 
visits, seminars, and on-farm demonstrations reaching 
over 8,000 farmers in 2018. However, it is unclear if any 
of these activities included an e-Extension component 
(WARD 2018). Iraq’s Directorate of Agricultural Extension 
and Training has implemented a project using mobile 
applications to communicate with farmers. Fifteen 
extension centers across the country provide information 
24 Personal communication with Dr. Ghaleb Faour of CNRS-L, conducted 
February 2020.
25 http://www.lari.gov.lb/forecast .
26 Personal communication with Dr. Ihab Jomaa of LARI, conducted 
February 2020.
27 Personal communication with Said Gedeon of CCIAZ, conducted January 
7, 2020.45
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in Mashreqto farmers related to the main farming activities within that 
governorate. The application provides recommendations 
on dates for different agricultural practices, use of 
herbicides and insecticides, and other techniques to 
improve productivity. Application information can help 
farmers anticipate and respond to pest attacks, crop 
failures, and climatic changes through timely weather-
based agro-advisory messages. 
Remote sensing and digital modelling are increasingly 
used to assess agricultural water use efficiency and 
the impacts of climate change in all three countries. 
AquaCrop is a digital model of climate change scenarios 
that has been applied in several Middle East and North 
Africa.  AquaCrop has produced several scenarios 
to assess the need and potential for climate change 
adaptation in Iraq, specifically its agriculture sector, to 
determine the effects on evapotranspiration and water 
productivity. UN-ESCWA used AquaCrop scenarios for 
the recommendations of new techniques and methods 
for monitoring, planning, and creating strategies for water 
use efficiency and increased agricultural productivity 
for key crops in Iraq. Whether digital technologies are 
included is unclear (UN-ESCWA 2019). Similarly, in Jordan 
and Lebanon, remote sensing technologies are used to 
estimate evapotranspiration for monitoring agricultural 
water use. In Lebanon, the public sector, through the 
National Center for Remote Sensing at CNRS-L, has 
developed smart irrigation tools based on remote sensing, 
though their use appears oriented to other public sector 
actors involved in irrigation, such as (a) the SEBALI 
evapotranspiration system (Mhawej et al.  2020), developed 
in partnership with the FAO by the North Lebanon Water 
Establishment; and (b) the Satellite for Irrigation Scheduling 
(SAT-IRR) tool, developed under the EU-funded CHAAMS 
project.28 Employees from the Bekaa Water Establishment 
and the Litani River Authority, both in Lebanon, were 
trained to use the SAT-IRR tool.29 The Litani River Authority 
manages the major water source for the Bekaa Valley, 
Lebanon’s agricultural breadbasket, and uses digital 
technologies including software programs to control water 
flows and detect overpumping from groundwater sources 
by agricultural users.30
28 For more information, see http://www.eranetmed-chaams.org .
29 Personal communication with Dr. Ghaleb Faour of CNRS-L, conducted 
February 2020.
30 Personal communication with Mohammed Yunis of the Litani River 
Authority, conducted February 2020.Digital Technologies to Deliver Market Information 
and E-commerce
Several web-based applications have been introduced 
to support agri-food marketing by sharing information 
on prices in Mashreq. In Jordan, web-based applications 
on prices have proven very popular. For example, the 
Wholesale and Vegetable Market of the Greater Amman 
Municipality maintains a website31 that displays the 
quantities of local and imported fruits and vegetables 
and the prices traded in the market (highest, lowest, 
and majority). The Jordanian Exporters and Producers 
Association for Vegetables and Fruits (JEPA)32 also 
operates a website containing price data, including the 
local prices in the country of origin and market prices 
in the countries importing fruits and vegetables. It also 
details information and standards required by exporters. 
In Iraq, the Directorate of Agricultural Extension and 
Training works through 15 extension centers across 
the country and uses mobile applications to provide 
price information to reduce market distortions and help 
them plan production. In Lebanon, the AgVisor digital 
application launched by CCIAZ in 2019 allows farmers to 
compare prices across different crops and markets. The 
platform also offers a directory of actors in agriculture 
value chains. However, AgVisor faces challenges 
particularly related to collecting and updating its data 
and to its long-term financial sustainability.33 While it 
appears that AgVisor has successfully disseminated 
price information, it is unknown whether farmers have 
effectively used that information to obtain higher market 
prices.34 
Wider adoption of digital marketplaces can reduce 
price manipulation.  For example, in Jordan, current 
practices within wholesale markets allow for 
manipulation, with traders (dallal) buying the same 
goods multiple times to artificially raise the prices. 
Farmers are paid the initial lowest price while the 
trader retains the margin between the lowest and 
highest prices obtained.35 For digital marketplaces 
to be widely adopted and to meet their potential for 
significant growth, policies and investments are needed 
to eliminate the main constraints. These constraints 
to faster adoption of e-marketplaces include a lack of 
knowledge and skills, low trust in online transactions, 
and limited logistics infrastructure, such as storage and 
transportation of fresh produce. 
31 http://www.awm.gov.jo/dotnet/aboutus.aspx .
32 http://www.jepa.org.jo .
33 Personal communication with Said Gedeon of CCIAZ, conducted January 
7, 2020.
34  Interview with Ramy Boujawdeh of Berytech, conducted December 20, 2019.
35  Interview with Issa Halabi, conducted October 8, 2019.46
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
 ÎBox 12. An Online Marketplace Connecting Farmers with Businesses and with 
Consumers in Jordan
In Jordan, Ghoorcom seeks to address market access challenges including high margins captured by middlemen, 
unorganized and costly logistics and transport, delays in payment to farmers, nontransparent pricing, and lack of 
appropriate quality monitoring (including meeting export requirements). An e-wallet system is used to integrate 
payments between farmers and retailers. On the B2C side, Ghoorcom prepares, brands, and delivers food products 
(currently fruit products including fruit baskets) to retailers and to individual consumers (including corporate entities) in 
Amman. It markets its products via social media platforms, newsletters, and blogs. Ghoorcom also operates Ghoorcom 
Academy, offering training programs in financial inclusion, education, and agro-tourism. Ghoorcom’s founders benefitted 
from business incubation service providers, including Amman Chamber of Commerce, Shamal Start, The Tank, and Injaz 
(Oqeili 2019). However, their site is only in the English language, limiting its popularity among farmers. The site data 
indicated only 600 users as of late 2019.
Private and public sector initiatives have sought to 
establish web-based applications for the marketing of 
agri-food products, linking producers and consumers. 
Ghoorcom launched in Jordan in 2017 as an online 
marketplace connecting farmers with businesses 
(B2B) and with consumers (B2C). Jordan also has 
the Open Market website36 that focuses on popular 
food products but also sells electronics. There is only 
limited evidence of digital technologies being used to 
facilitate e-commerce in Iraq’s agriculture sector. In 
Iraq, as in Lebanon and Jordan, informal Facebook and 
WhatsApp groups are used sporadically for agri-food 
e-commerce. Lebanon’s e-commerce market—generally 
not restricted to agriculture—was recently assessed 
as growing slowly and facing challenges related to 
weak internet penetration, the persistence of cash-on-
delivery payments (El Amine 2017), a lack of secure 
online payment mechanisms, and popular mistrust 
of online purchasing (Rahal 2013). Nevertheless, the 
Ministry of Agriculture has developed the ‘Olive App’ 
(              ) smartphone application for promoting and 
marketing Lebanese olive oil. The app will connect olive 
oil producers with consumers and other stakeholders in 
the value chain.37
International development organizations are 
strengthening e-commerce within the agri-food value 
chain and improving the role played by cooperatives . 
For example, the International Labour Organization 
(ILO) has been planning to launch a website and an app 
for Lebanon’s Federation of Cooperatives, designed to 
improve the functioning of agricultural cooperatives and 
facilitate market access for farmers. The website will 
track the payment of dues to the cooperatives and into 
the federation and allow farmers to upload information 
on what they have available for sale and buyers to make 
36 https://jo.opensooq.com .
37 Personal communication with Mariam Eid, Head of Department of Agro-
Industry, Ministry of Agriculture, February 2020.purchases through the app. Though the app is not 
intended to facilitate delivery, it is linked to a GPS. The 
app should eventually be managed by the Federation of 
Cooperatives, and all cooperatives and farmers will be 
given access to the app as potential sellers. Individual 
agricultural cooperatives will play a role in vetting 
information posted by farmers. The app is tied to the 
launch of the website (Bahn, Bayram, and Abou Jaoude 
2019). In Jordan, an ongoing EU project is supporting the 
development of a digital agriculture platform, including 
access to finance and connection to input suppliers.38
The mixed performance of digital platforms serving 
agriculture suggests that policy makers and other 
relevant actors should consider their experiences as 
they work to develop and implement similar platforms 
in the region, since not all e-commerce attempts lead 
to successful outcomes.  For example, Beyond Organic 
initially operated delivery-based sale of organic fresh fruits 
and vegetables (FFV) to consumers in Greater Beirut, 
receiving and managing consumer orders via a WhatsApp 
platform. However, the company closed this sales channel 
in early 2019, opting to sell instead through farmers’ 
markets. This company has returned to WhatsApp sales 
since COVID-19 led to the closure/suspension of farmers’ 
markets in Lebanon. In Jordan, a potential limitation to 
adopting digital technologies that would directly facilitate 
market access by producers of FFV is the incorrect belief 
among some producers that they are legally required 
to sell their products through the wholesale market.39 
In fact, there is no such legal requirement. Wholesale 
markets in Amman, Zarqa, and Irbid received 50 percent 
of locally produced vegetables and 56 percent of locally 
produced fruits in 2017, with the remainder sold directly 
to retail markets, supermarkets, and exporters (Ministry of 
Agriculture of Jordan 2017). Accordingly, there is no legal 
restriction on the sale of agri-food products through an 
online platform. 
38 Interview with Mohamed Al Afranji, conducted January 13, 2020.
39 Interview with Issa Halabi, conducted October 8, 2019.زيت لبنان 47
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in MashreqApplying digital technologies alone may have a limited 
effect on expanding market access to Lebanese farmers, 
unless constraints related to finance and regulations are 
addressed.  Crop farmers selling to wholesale markets have 
typically engaged in informal credit arrangements with 
both input suppliers and wholesale purchasers. The input 
suppliers provided seeds, fertilizers, and so on, on credit 
and received payment at the end of the agricultural season. 
The wholesale purchasers could then pay upon receipt of 
the produce. These informal financial arrangements served 
to limit the ability of a farmer to shift among input suppliers 
or wholesale purchasers, even when farmers were aware of 
price advantages elsewhere in the market.40 The extent to 
which these informal credit arrangements persist and thus 
limit the impact of digital disruption is unclear in light of the 
country’s current economic and financial crisis. 
Digital Platforms to Optimize the Performance of 
Value Chain Aggregators and Logistics 
Lebanese and Jordanian entrepreneurs are making use 
of digital technologies to coordinate the transportation 
of agricultural products between small farmers and the 
market. In Jordan,  Ghoorcom has launched an app to 
facilitate transportation logistics, allowing farmers to order 
pickup and track their products. In southern Lebanon, 
small farmers can contact local transportation providers 
via WhatsApp and pay a small fee for moving their fresh 
products to the wholesale market in Saida, a distance of 
around 40 km for a fee of LBP 1,000 per box of produce.41 
No information is available about similar initiatives in Iraq. 
40  Interview with Ramy Boujawdeh of Berytech, conducted December 20, 2019.
41 Interview with Ali Ismail, conducted November 18, 2019.Digital Technologies to Improve Traceability and 
Quality Control 
Adopting digital technologies to improve traceability in 
Jordan, Iraq, and Lebanon could help expand exports 
to more demanding and lucrative markets. Food safety 
standards are a major restriction for exporting agricultural 
products from Jordan and Lebanon to European and 
Gulf markets. In Lebanon, there is limited traceability of 
agricultural products back to farms. In Jordan, the recent 
‘EU-Jordan Agricultural Twinning Project’ sought to expand 
exports to the EU, but the project failed due to project-level 
challenges and lack of traceability ( Box 13 ). Applying digital 
technologies to improve traceability would expand access 
to this valuable market while offering concurrent benefits 
of economic efficiency and improved food safety. For 
example, producers can use digital technologies to ensure 
compliance with maximum residue levels for pesticides in 
and on food products and standards preventing microbial 
contamination, required for imports into the EU. 42 Using 
digital technologies for improved traceability may be the 
most promising for products and value chains that are 
more susceptible to food safety risks, including perishable 
fruits and vegetables and animal-based products, or those 
that raise sustainability concerns (for example, seafood). 
If maintained over the longer term, digital traceability 
systems could assist and guide producers in improving 
the quality, food safety, and sustainability standards of 
their production. Moving directly from very rudimentary 
technologies to digital technology adoption for improved 
traceability may be an opportunity to leapfrog over 
intermediary technologies.
42 https://www.cbi.eu/market-information .
 ÎBox 13. EU-Jordan Agricultural Twinning Project
The EU applies stringent traceability standards on all products entering the common market. To address this, the 
‘EU-Jordan Agricultural Twinning Project’ sought to increase exports of animal products from Jordan to the EU by 
improving traceability, specifically animal health information. Several challenges contributed to the project’s failure. First, 
Jordan’s Ministry of Agriculture used the project’s digital technologies to distribute subsidized feed for large and small 
ruminant animals (cows, sheep, and goats) rather than developing traceability requirements. Jordanian producers of 
animal products generally rely on government-subsidized animal feed to reduce their costs of production. To access 
subsidized feed, farmers were required to provide documentation for approval by the Ministry of Agriculture and project 
staff and later deposit with the Ministry of Trade. Specifically, the limited project and staff resources were used to 
validate documents related to feed subsidies leaving little time to collect health data required for traceability, and project 
resources were insufficient to hire additional staff for health data tracking. Software was also problematic, since the 
original software used under the project was programmed in Italian. The software eventually failed and there was no 
local expert to fix it and no funds to hire an Italian-speaking programmer. The Electronic Transformation Directorate at 
the Ministry of Agriculture later built a new software that is still functional. Finally, the project failed to account for legal 
barriers and did not include the required legislative amendments to establish the traceability system, especially those 
related to the registration and licensing of animal farms. Ultimately, while the project yielded a usable animal inventory, it 
lacked health data necessary for traceability to support expanded exports of animal-based products. This case highlights 
the importance of holistic project planning that considers the multiple functions of digital data and platforms; looks 
beyond technology to the legal and regulatory requirements; and addresses practical concerns like staff resources, 
training, and capacities.48
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonAgri-food exporters and public sector agents in Jordan 
and Lebanon have recently begun adopting digital 
technologies to improve their traceability systems to 
improve food safety and/or facilitate trade.  In Lebanon’s 
private sector, adoption is greatest among exporters that 
have also adopted quality management systems such as 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) and 
that are exporting to large food retailers or to European 
markets.43 Within the public sector, the Ministry of Agriculture 
created the Lebanese National Food Establishments 
Registry database to improve monitoring and tracking of 
food safety within food establishments ( Table 1 1). 
Efforts to use digital technologies to improve the cold 
chain for fresh and processed food products demonstrate 
increasing private sector demand.  In Jordan, sensors 
and data loggers are already placed in trucks to monitor 
temperature and humidity levels within trucks moving fresh 
goods for export.44 In Lebanon, efforts to use RFIDs showed 
early promise and had the support of the agri-food industry. 
Bel Group in Lebanon faced cheese distribution problems, so 
they supported a student-led start-up fostered by Agrytech 
to help them ensure that its imported processed cheese 
products were subject to minimal temperature fluctuation 
when distributed via multiple wholesalers. These efforts came 
to a halt when the team was dissolved, but the underlying 
problems and interest of the private sector in this area 
remain.45
43 Personal communication with Said Gedeon of CCIAZ, conducted January 
7, 2020.
44 Interview with Issa Halabi, conducted October 8, 2019.
45 Interview with Ramy Boujawdeh of Berytech, conducted December 20, 2019.Digital Technologies to Deliver Financial Inclusion 
and Risk Management 
While it does not appear that any digital financial services 
and risk management tools have been developed 
specifically for the agriculture sector in Iraq, Jordan, 
and Lebanon, their potential is growing. As discussed in 
Chapter 3, more Iraqis, Jordanians, and Lebanese living 
in rural areas used digital technologies related to financial 
services or digital payments by 2017. This trend indicates 
that there is significant room for growth in this area and it 
can serve as a basis to bring tailored credit and insurance 
services to Lebanese farmers (World Bank 2020b). 
Changes in the structure and role of the financial sector 
and its institutions in Mashreq countries may be required 
to widely use digital technologies to expand access 
to finance within the agriculture sector (including for 
agribusinesses and e-businesses). In the particular 
and extreme case of Lebanon, changes to and within the 
commercial banking sector since late 2019 have imposed 
informal capital controls that have further limited access 
to finance (investment, operational, and trade finance) 
and eroded popular trust in commercial banks. Many 
online banking operations, such as transfers, have been 
prohibited, and customers, including business clients, 
have been forced to conduct counter operations for tasks 
as simple as cash withdrawals. Commercial banks have 
ceased offering subsidized loans supported by public loan 
guarantees through Kafalat, including to the agriculture 
sector. Peer-to-peer lending may be a more acceptable 
and realistic path to fill the immediate gap in financing 
from commercial banks, particularly at a moment of 
glaring need. Yet, it is unclear whether Lebanon’s regulatory 
structure permits such digitally enhanced financial tools to 
fill the gap.  ÎTable 11. Government Digital Platforms Performance
Indicator Iraq Jordan Lebanon Data Source
National ID coverage (age 18+) — — 97% Identification for 
Development 
(ID4D) indicatorsID database digitized Yes Yes Yes
Digital authentication enabled — Yes Yes
e-Government Development Index 0.34 0.56 0.55 United Nations 
(UN) e-government 
database (Scale: 
0 to 1)Online Services Index 0.32 0.49 0.47
e-Participation Index 0.48 0.69 0.12
Share of population (age 15+) citing lack of 
necessary documentation as a reason for not 
having a financial account (2017)23% 9% 0% Global Findex, 
World Bank
Definition: E-Participation Index (EPI) is a measure of the extent to which online services facilitate ‘provision of information by 
governments to citizens (e-information sharing), interaction with stakeholders (e-consultation), and engagement in decision-making 
processes (e-decision making)’ (UN 2019b).49
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in MashreqDigital Technologies to Deliver E-government for 
Improved Public Services in Mashreq
Jordan and Lebanon offer better government digital 
platforms than Iraq, based on a performance assessment 
(Table 11 ). Iraq’s performance, while lagging, could address 
gaps and build on existing platforms. Iraq’s Citizen E-gov 
portal offers limited functions, allowing citizens to only 
register complaints or requests. Iraq lacks an online access 
point for transaction services such as taxation, benefits, 
or identification. Iraq allows using bank transfers to make 
income tax payments but requires certified checks from an 
Iraqi bank to make pension contributions. 
The citizen-state relationship could be supported by 
improving e-government functions and e-payments for 
government-related services (EIU 2018).  To do so, Iraq 
could build on emerging platforms. Since 2017, International 
Smart Card, an Iraqi public-private joint venture, has 
supported electronic payments of government benefits, 
which beforehand had been wholly in cash. The system now 
reaches over 7 million Iraqis who can access government 
salaries and pensions electronically, usually linked to a 
biometric smart card. 46 Additionally, since early 2017, 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
and Zain Cash, a mobile wallet, have collaborated to deliver 
cash assistance through mobile money transfers. Although 
the journey ahead may be long, Iraq could target some 
quick wins by implementing some common government 
e-payment facilities (EIU 2018).
Mashreq countries have started delivering several 
public services through digital technologies related to 
the agri-food sector, but there is potential to increase 
the efficiency, accountability, and environmental 
sustainability of public payments in all focus countries.  
Lebanon’s National Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP), 
launched in 2012, uses e-cards to transfer funds and 
support food purchases by poor households. The program 
was expanded in early 2020 in response to shocks 
including COVID-19 (Bou Khater 2020). In Jordan, public 
support is not provided through digital technologies, 
but experience from the nongovernmental organization 
(NGO) sector shows promising results. Making Cents 
International and BanQu have formed a partnership using 
blockchain technology to deliver digital economic identities 
to refugees, migrants, and undocumented and remote 
populations for delivering social, financial, and health 
services (FHI 360 2018). Available evidence indicates that 
the program has been extended through 2020, targeting 
2,000 refugees in both Jordan and Lebanon (Making Cents 
International 2019). For agricultural subsidies, the National 
Center for Remote Sensing in Lebanon used very-high-
resolution satellite imagery to produce a wheat production 
map that has been used by the Ministry of Economy and 
46 Financial Times; April 2019.Trade in implementing its wheat subsidy program.47 The 
remote sensing validation reduced fraudulent claims. 
However, digital payments were not used for subsidy 
payments and the check-based system that was used 
created delays in payments; as smaller farmers were less 
able to bear the delay, they tended to sell their wheat to 
larger farmers who then received the subsidy. If digital 
payments could be installed that speed the payment to 
farmers, this could represent an opportunity to reduce 
inequalities in the subsidy system.48 In Iraq, field inspection 
of seeds produced for strategic crops has applied digital 
technologies by issuing electronic certificates. Iraq’s 
public food distribution program is being digitized through 
biometrically protected smart cards. Iraq’s agricultural 
subsidy program could be revised to prioritize payments 
to farmers using improved digital technologies that use 
scarce resources more efficiently.  For example, subsidies 
could be directed to facilitate the adoption of smart 
irrigation as an efficient alternative to flood irrigation. 
Digital technologies are used by the public sector to 
estimate crop yields, measure water efficiency, and 
assess impacts of climate change.  Iraq’s National 
Program for Agro-Ecological Zones produced and digitized 
maps on land use and cover (arable land types, cultivated 
areas, and irrigated/rain-fed areas) and surface water 
resources. Additionally, Earth Observation for Sustainable 
Development (EO4SD) through the Sentinels, a launched 
fleet of satellites supporting the European EO Copernicus 
program, aims to support the Ministry of Agriculture 
and assess the extent of cultivated areas, the number 
of cropping cycles in a year, crop yields, and irrigation 
performance. This activity will help assess and monitor 
the status of and trends within the agriculture sector and 
adaptation and coping strategies in light of Iraq’s recent 
conflict. Lebanon’s Ministry of Agriculture regularly uses 
geographic information system (GIS) and remote sensing 
techniques to assess the vulnerability of the agriculture 
sector to climate change.49 The GIS-based land maps 
are currently available through the Ministry of Agriculture 
Department of Statistics and CNRS-L. The Ministry of 
Agriculture of Lebanon also uses the FAO’s AquaCrop crop 
growth modeling tool to determine crop water productivity 
and to assess the potential effect of climate change 
on agricultural production. In 2020, under a partnership 
with LARI, the Ministry of Agriculture is using the tool to 
develop optimal irrigation protocols for major strategic 
crops in different agricultural areas of the country.50 With 
the support of the FAO regional project ‘Implementing the 
2030 Agenda for Water Efficiency/Productivity and Water 
47 Personal communication with Dr. Ghaleb Faour of CNRS-L, conducted 
February 2020.
48 Personal communication with Dr. Salwa Tohmé Tawk, conducted May 30, 
2020.
49 Personal communication with Ralph Zughaib of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, conducted February 2020.
50 Personal communication with Maya Mhanna of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, conducted February 2020.50
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonSustainability in NENA’, Lebanon’s Ministry of Agriculture is 
preparing evapotranspiration maps and water productivity 
maps for selected crops. These maps will draw on the FAO 
Water Productivity Open-Access Portal (WaPOR), which 
uses remote sensing technologies to generate data.51 
Governments have used digital technologies for early 
warning of animal diseases, such as Iraq’s Directorate 
of Veterinary Services work to develop a geospatial 
surveillance and monitoring system.  The project started 
with the use of tracking systems and geospatial monitoring 
within hospitals and villages in most of the Iraqi provinces 
and poultry fields. The project uses Google Earth as a first 
stage and then a system of mapping GIS. By supporting 
surveillance and real-time reporting capacities in Iraq and 
improving communication between stakeholders, the 
system enhances early warning and response to animal 
disease occurrence with high impact on food security and 
livelihoods.
Jordan’s public sector accelerated the use of digital 
solutions to ease challenges arising from the COVID-19 
pandemic. Jordan launched an e-government program 
in 2001, setting the stage for deploying online e-services 
through the National Government Portal (including e-tax 
and a real estate registry), along with mobile services 
and official government websites. The principal public 
websites serving the agriculture sector include Jordan’s 
e-government website and the websites for the Ministry of 
Agriculture, the National Agricultural Information System, 
the National Agricultural Research Center (formerly the 
National Center for Agricultural Research and Extension 
[NCARE]), and the Agricultural Credit Corporation. These 
websites provide basic functionality and offer both offline 
and online services but reflect weak management and 
updating, have insufficient security tools for handling 
personal information, and do not offer features for 
users with special needs, according to an analysis by 
Abu Rumman and Szilágyi (2018). Due to the COVID-19 
pandemic, the Ministry of Agriculture launched an online 
application for import and export licenses through 
its website to protect the health of citizens during the 
COVID-19 crisis and facilitate and simplify the procedures 
for providing services for exporters, importers and all 
transit orders. Pressures imposed by COVID-19 may serve 
to accelerate the introduction of digital financial services, 
as in a case from Jordan (Box 14).
51 Personal communication with Maya Mhanna of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, conducted February 2020.Lebanon’s Ministry of Agriculture uses a range of web 
applications for internal use to facilitate its monitoring, 
inspection, and development responsibilities for 
agriculture, aquaculture, extension services, natural 
resources management, and food production.52 A brief 
overview of web applications in use at the Ministry of 
Agriculture as of February 2020 is provided in Table 12.  
The ministry is also implementing pilot activities for 
monitoring crop yields and measuring water efficiency 
using remote sensing technologies and for establishing a 
farmer’s registry system using GIS technology.53 Whether 
this system will be utilized for improving extension services 
delivery remains to be seen.
Iraq’s public food distribution program is being digitized. 
The efficiency of the Public Distribution Program which 
reaches 39 million Iraqi citizens has been hampered 
by manual, paper-driven processes. The government 
has been working with the WFP to implement a digital 
distribution system using biometrically protected smart 
cards. In 2019, the Minister of Trade has launched a pilot 
to cover 35,000 users, with hopes to expand to the whole 
population. The new approach could help limit fraud and 
raise efficiency and accountability and will also introduce 
huge swaths of the population to digital social services.
Using digital technologies to collect and disseminate 
available data on time has been identified as an 
opportunity in all three focus countries. This need is 
particularly acute in Iraq, where data gaps appear to be the 
largest. Moreover, providing timely and accurate data could 
also be helpful in identifying specific challenges facing 
the agriculture sector, which digital technologies could 
ameliorate. 
Digital Technologies for Monitoring and Evaluation 
in Mashreq
Digital technologies are increasingly used for monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) of outcomes in agriculture 
in Mashreq.  In the focus countries, remote sensing 
technologies are used for land use monitoring. For 
example, in Lebanon, satellite imagery was used to verify 
land parcels planted with wheat and thereby contributed 
to a cost savings of US$10 million for the country’s wheat 
subsidy program the first year it was applied. In addition to 
potential productivity gains and cost savings, monitoring 
via satellite technology enables governments to study 
how agricultural practices affect the ecosystem, develop 
better regulations, enforce sustainable land management 
practices, and address vulnerability to climate change. 
52 Personal communication with Randa Serhal of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
conducted February 2020.
53 Personal communication with Amal Salibi of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
conducted February 2020.51
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in Mashreq
 ÎBox 14. Case Study - JEDCO/REGEP E-wallets’ Experience Responding to the 
COVID-19 Pandemic
Rural Economic Growth and Employment Project (REGEP)  is an agricultural development project funded by the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for six years (2015–2021). The Jordan Enterprise Development 
Corporation (JEDCO) manages the project through the REGEP’s project unit that manages and monitors implementation 
of project activities and its progress and achievements in five governorates: Mafraq, Al Balqa, Jerash, Ajloun, and 
Madaba. REGEP develops agricultural projects to integrate small-scale farmers in value chains and help them acquire the 
needed funding in rural areas. It also works to enhance small farmers’ capacity building and competitiveness and their 
contributions to selected value chains in rural areas. The project consists of two closely linked technical components: 
 Î Value Chain and Enterprise Development,  which addresses key constraints in value chains to enhance access 
to high-value domestic and international markets, improve quality standards, and strengthen value chain links. A 
subcomponent, Support for Value Chain Upgrading and Business Model Innovation, with a window of 600 grants, will 
finance smallholder farmers, farmers associations, processors, and exporters to improve their business.
 Î Inclusive Rural Finance. This is implemented through the Central Bank of Jordan (CBJ) and supervised by JEDCO. 
CBJ established the Rural Finance Fund collaborating with the commercial banks and MFIs to provide loans to the 
target groups. So far, 499 grants with 1,910 total beneficiaries totaling US$1.4 million have been disbursed. During 
Q4 of 2019, 249 grants were approved to be distributed to small farmers, with 171 grants to groups and  
78 individual grants supporting productive agricultural projects in the five governorates, for a total value of 
US$827,800, with group grants valued at US$4,500 and individual grants at US$1,500. The submitted proposals 
involved entrepreneurial ideas for agricultural production projects, creating new job opportunities for youth and 
women while improving the standards of living in the fund-targeted governorates.
In March 2020, because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the government announced both a lockdown and movement restrictions, 
affecting the project’s progress, especially grant disbursement. To deliver the assistance from the JEDCO-provided fund, 
especially to small farmers who had the highest need, the project used e-wallet applications to transfer the grants to 
beneficiaries. A quick survey indicated that only 47 percent of beneficiaries in the project area had experience using this 
application. Accordingly, the project set specific criteria for selecting the e-wallet service provider (for example, commissions, 
agent network, and coverage). To begin implementation, disbursement was made to a sample of 51 grantees in two 
governorates (Jerash and Ajloun). The grants were transferred quickly to the beneficiaries through e-wallet applications at a 
preferential cost of 65 percent less than the ordinary cost. The experience is satisfactory, and JEDCO will complete the transfer 
procedures for the remaining beneficiaries in the other governorates over the coming days. A few grantees reported difficulty in 
signing up for e-wallets and receiving the money due to specific technical problems. 
To scale the initiative and spread the model, JEDCO will sign a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Jordan 
Payments & Clearing Company (JoPACC) to facilitate digital financial services (e-wallet) adoption. This will include setting 
up digital skills, awareness campaigns, and trainings to small farmers in the five governorates. 
Author: H. E. Dr. Bashar Al Zoubi, Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of JEDCO.52
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon ÎTable 12. Web Applications in Use at the Ministry of Agriculture of Lebanon
Lebanese National Food Establishments Registry database
Improves monitoring and tracking of food safety within food establishments. The database is accessible only by Lebanese ministries and 
public entities with a responsibility for food inspection and control. The database seeks to improve interministerial coordination, harmonize 
the categorization of food establishments (located at any stage of the food value chain), establish a common categorization and coding 
for food safety violations, exchange information on food safety inspection and control, act as a reference for annual food safety monitoring 
plans, and establish an interministerial alert system for risk communication. The database began through the Qualeb project, as a 
collaboration between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Economy and Trade.1 
Archiving and Document Workflow 
Automates paperwork and improves over a manual workflow, accelerating the transfer of documents between all the Ministry of 
Agriculture entities located in the Ministry of Agriculture headquarters and regional services and centers.  
Programs and Projects Service System (PPSS)
Handles all project data including objectives, activities, areas of intervention, targeted regions, and so on. Project managers can enter 
and update projects with the ability to upload attachments. The application allows funding agencies to be informed about the areas of 
interventions of each other to collaborate and avoid duplication.  
Agricultural Extension System (AES)
Provides electronic extension services to all the Ministry of Agriculture regional centers and all other users. This application allow 
users to enter and maintain extension documents by the Ministry of Agriculture and NGOs; collect information on NGOs and other 
extension service providers; gather information about extension activities undertaken by projects; classify the extension information, 
documents, activities, agricultural practices, and so on; provide communication and information and lessons learned among extension 
to farmers;  and generate and disseminate the required report.  
Fertilizers Module System (FMS)
Registers all fertilizers being imported and that might be eligible for a sampling process. The Ministry of Agriculture users can monitor 
fertilizer imports by establishment, date, fertilizer, or manufacturer on a day-by-day basis.  
Bees Management System (BES)
Enables the data management on bees in Lebanon with census data and information on diseases, tr eatments, holdings, and ID Cards 
for responsible people in the beekeeping field.  
Forestry Centers System (FCS)
Tracks and monitors citizen requests to register cutting, pruning, charring, and other requests in forests to issue licenses or grant 
approvals and track numbers, citizen name, and place. Also, the system allows keeping information of the seizure records and 
irregularities on fields. The request can be sent from regional centers to head office.  
Fishing License System (FLS) Application
Tracks licenses given to boats for fishing and other information needed internally. FLS has seasonal reports where months catch data is 
entered to be able to study the best months for catching.  
Cost of Production Statistics System (CPSS)
Supports data collection on the cost of production of different agricultural products, to analyze cost structures of agricultural activities. 
This survey covers major agricultural products (crops and livestock) products at the level of mohafazas (governorates).  
Agricultural Prices Statistics System (APSS)
Allows data collection and data processing for tracking and analyzing agriculture prices. Data are recorded on a monthly basis and 
entered according to mohafaza (governorate). Simple analysis of the data is carried out in terms of calculating averages that were 
recorded in the different mohafazas. Also, prices of agricultural products (wholesale and retail prices) are aggregated for Lebanon.  
1  Personal communication with Mariam Eid of the Ministry of Agriculture, conducted February 2020.53
Chapter 3 State-of-the-Art Digital Ecosystem in Mashreq
 ÎChapter 4:  
Which Public Actions Can Facilitate 
Broader Adoption of Digital 
Technologies and Harness Their 
Impacts on Food System Outcomes? 
Key Messages 
 ÎA key role for the public sector in facilitating broader adoption of digital 
technologies in the agri-food system is to identify the public goods, policies, 
investments, and societal benefits that digital agriculture will bring by 
increasing efficiency, equity, and environmental sustainability in agri-food 
systems.
 ÎThe public sector can achieve the development goal of digital transformation 
by facilitating and attracting private resources for investment that it can 
pursue through direct investment promotion; adjusting the regulatory 
and incentive frameworks for private sector investments; and forming 
partnerships with the private sector, donors, and NGOs. 
 ÎThe public sector should set forth a vision for digital agriculture and strive 
to provide the foundations—digital, non-digital, and legal—for a digital 
transformation of the agri-food sector.
 ÎEven though there is a tremendous opportunity for digital technologies to 
support a transformation of the agriculture sector in the focus countries of 
Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, they are only tools to support the achievement of 
the development goals, and their success will depend on the extent of the 
revitalization of the agri-food policy frameworks in Mashreq.
55
The public sector has an important role in identifying 
public goods, policies, and investments that will 
maximize the societal benefits of the increased 
efficiency, equity, and environmental sustainability in 
agri-food systems brought about by digital agriculture 
(World Bank 2021).  To achieve the development goal 
of digital transformation, the public sector can facilitate 
and attract private investment resources by promoting 
direct investment; adjusting the regulatory and incentive 
frameworks for private sector investments; and forming 
partnerships with the private sector, donors, and NGOs. 
The public sector can also use digital technologies to  
improve the efficiency, transparency, and accountability 
of public services. Public action to facilitate digital 
technologies adoption can contribute through three 
pathways: developing a vision, developing the foundation, 
and providing catalytic investments and policies. Table 14  
provides recommendations for different time frames. 
Vision and Strategy
The vision should include an aspirational statement and 
specific targets and actions to foster digital agriculture.  
The vision can be realized though a national agricultural 
strategy or stand-alone e-strategy. Table 13  presents 
a Digital Agriculture Moonshot Targets Framework for 
Mashreq that each country can use to define its targets for 
enabling the digital transformation of its agri-food sector. 
The strategy can also provide a policy framework for 
providing diverse extension and service delivery approaches 
to enable digital innovations and solutions to be developed 
for smallholders (World Bank 2019j). The strategy should 
identify the needed enabling environment for building 
partnerships since most of these solutions will require 
partnerships between input suppliers, service providers, 
and digital innovators. The strategy should adequately 
identify potential user needs, including language, content, 
and complexity, and different digital applications should be customized accordingly. It should explicitly promote 
gender-sensitive digital technologies in the region, in 
acknowledgement of women’s lack of empowerment within 
agriculture and the wider agri-food sector in Mashreq. Given 
this, the strategy should explicitly seek to address (and 
at a minimum, not to exacerbate) existing, gender-based 
inequalities. The preparatory work for developing a strategy 
should include a comprehensive review on how the current 
public support and policies for agriculture could be modified 
to improve farmers’ incentives to adopt digital technologies. 
For example, a review could identify problematic policies 
such as subsidies to farmers for fuel and electricity that 
reduce the marginal cost of pumping for irrigation and could 
disincentivize smart irrigation.
Foundation
To stimulate digital transformation in the agriculture sector, 
the government should enable the following foundations: 
digital and non-digital.
Expand rural network coverage to enable good-quality 
and predictable rural connectivity.  Public action is needed 
that improves the quality of infrastructure, including the 
speed of mobile and internet connectivity in rural areas, and 
reduces the use costs to end users, which may facilitate 
digital technologies adoption in the agriculture sector. 
Robust regulatory systems that provide certainty for 
investment serve as a necessary condition for expanding 
digital infrastructure in rural areas. Additionally, providing 
the enabling environment for network competition can 
help expand network coverage, including in rural areas. The 
public sector can lower infrastructure taxes and/or import 
duties on relevant equipment to reduce the cost of network 
installation and maintenance. Connectivity for smallholder 
farmers and service providers would enable better access 
to services and digital solutions. This entry point is 
particularly important for Iraq, where over 8.8 million rural 
residents lack broadband network connectivity. ÎChapter 4  
Which Public Actions Can Facilitate Broader 
Adoption of Digital Technologies and Harness Their 
Impacts on Food System Outcomes? 
The agri-food sector in the focus countries faces a range of challenges, which digital 
technologies may be well suited to address. Digital readiness and digital agriculture are in the 
early stages in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, but there is a forward movement and an opportunity 
to build on the established momentum. To facilitate a digital transformation of the agriculture 
sector and support improved efficiency, equity, and environmental sustainability, the public 
sector in the respective focus countries should consider action as described below.56
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and LebanonProvide non-digital complementary investments, 
including in rural roads and electrification.  These can 
address connectivity to markets and power supply 
constraints of network providers in rural areas. It is difficult 
to sell products on e-commerce platforms if there are no 
roads to markets or to sell high-quality fresh foods to online 
customers if there is no cold storage to preserve their 
freshness en route to distant markets. Rural electrification 
through renewable sources can help facilitate rural-based 
food processing and green growth.Catalytic Investments and Policies
Establish e-government systems for all public services 
and resources administered through ministries to improve 
efficiency, reduce cost, and increase transparency 
and accountability.  This can include gathering and 
disseminating statistics relevant to the agriculture sector, 
creating farmers’ digital identification, providing extension 
services, regulating land tenure and markets, and ensuring 
delivery of public support payments. Digital identification 
of farmers linked to land and livestock assets is a powerful 
bridge for farmers to access financial services, reduce fraud, 
and improve efficiency in delivering goods and services  ÎTable 13. Digital Agriculture Moonshot Targets Framework for Mashreq (Modified 
after World Bank 2019j).
Overall Target:  
EVERY FARMER, AGRIBUSINESS, AND PUBLIC SERVICE RELATED TO THE AGRI-FOOD SECTOR IS DIGITALLY ENABLED BY 2030.
Rural digital 
infrastructureDigital skills and literacyAgriculture digital 
platformsDigital agri-finance 
servicesDigital agri-
entrepreneurship
Universal internet 
coverage in rural areas is 
achieved.All 15-year-old students 
have basic digital skills 
and competencies.All farmers can prove 
their identity digitally 
through digital farmer 
IDs (public or private).Universal access to 
digital financial services 
in rural areas is achieved. The number of new 
digitally enabled 
agribusinesses is 
increased by x percent.
The number of agri-
technology firms created 
annually is increased by 
x percent. 
Affordable internet for 
all at less than 2 percent 
of GNI per capita is 
achieved.The number of 
graduated agri-food 
specialists with digital 
skills in the curriculum is 
increased by x percent.The Government 
Online Service Index is 
increased x times.Public support (for 
example, subsidies) 
provided through digital 
payments systems 
reaches x percent.Financing for 
agri-technology 
entrepreneurship 
reaches x percent of 
agriculture GDP .
Doubling of broadband 
connectivity by 2030 is 
achieved.The number of rural 
schools delivering digital 
education modules is 
increased by x percent.The number of 
farmers who regularly 
use the internet to 
access government or 
commercial services (for 
example, access weather 
and price information) is 
increased by x percent.The number of farmers 
who access insurance 
through digital solutions 
is increased by x percent.The food traded through 
digital tools is increased 
by x percent of value 
added.
The digital monitoring 
of water use in the 
agriculture sector is 
increased by x percent.The number of farmers 
using digital hardware 
(for example, sensors 
and drones, if allowed) 
and software to collect, 
assemble, process, and 
analyze data (gender 
disaggregated) reaches x 
percent.The number of farmers 
engaged in regional 
crowdfunding and 
peer-to-peer platforms 
for agriculture inputs, 
outputs, and financing 
reaches x percent.The number of farmers 
who made or received 
digital payments in the 
past year in rural areas 
(% age 15+) reaches x 
percent.The volume of food 
traded with digital 
traceability information 
systems is increased by 
x percent. 
Digitization of 
agriculture, land, and soil 
information is achieved. Basic mobile literacy 
(gender disaggregated) 
among all farmers is 
achieved.The number of farmers 
receiving agriculture 
extension (public and 
private) delivered 
through digital content 
and devices is increased 
by x percent.The number of farmers 
who used a mobile 
phone or the internet to 
access an account in 
rural areas (% age 15+) is 
increased by x percent.57
Chapter 4 Which Public Actions Can Facilitate Broader Adoption of Digital Technologies and Harness Their Impacts on Food System Outcomes? and for governments to better target agricultural support. 
Additionally, farmers’ identification can support start-ups 
and digital agricultural solution providers who spend about 
half of their initial business development efforts in profiling 
and identifying target farmers. Channeling input subsidies 
and other public payments through digital services can also 
provide a prompt support to smallholders and be used to 
mitigate impacts of crises like COVID-19. The public sector 
also has to develop its capacity to foster digital innovation 
and develop human capital.
Facilitate the deployment of smart irrigation and 
fertilizer management systems to foster environmental 
sustainability and efficiency. The public sector can 
(a) deploy remote sensing using evapotranspiration 
for groundwater monitoring, (b) use IoT technology 
for irrigation, and (c) use advanced remote sensing of 
soil moisture and soil surface temperature. Through 
e-Extension services, the public sector can advocate 
for improving irrigation and fertilizer application. This 
is particularly important considering water scarcity and 
GHG emissions from inorganic fertilizers in Mashreq 
countries. Even though modern technologies can 
improve water use efficiency and productivity, they 
need to go hand in hand with policies which will restrict 
environmental rebound effect.
Adopt diverse service delivery approaches to enable 
adaption of digital technologies by smallholders for 
contributing to equity.  Risk-averse smallholder farmers, 
a lack of information on the technology, and lack of 
trust in the technologies’ promised benefits constrain 
the digital technologies adoption (World Bank 2021). 
Evidence shows that a fundamental condition for 
farmers, particularly smallholder farmers, to adopt new 
technologies is that they should be profitable (Fuglie 
et al. , 2020). To reduce uncertainty about a practice’s 
effectiveness, the public sector can support piloting 
and knowledge exchanges. Public action facilitating 
digital agriculture technology adoption should target 
smallholders. If adoption is focused on farmers who can 
achieve the largest financial returns, there is lost potential 
for the large social and environmental gains that small 
farmers achieve. Public sectors can redirect subsidies 
and provide monetary incentives to support adoption of 
environmentally sustainable technologies. 
Invest in platforms for data collection and access from 
public and private sources.  Open data can advance 
innovation, serve as a platform for entrepreneurship, and 
increase transparency and accountability in the food 
system. This investment may accelerate the development 
of appropriate products and services for smallholders 
and develop a foundation of data for evidence-based policy making (World Bank 2021). Open data platforms 
can include national digital land use and soil maps, real-
time agricultural weather observatory and early warning 
systems, and market data.
Foster digital entrepreneurship to enable innovators 
in the digital space to operate and grow.  In parallel, 
invest in the enabling ecosystem at country, regional, and 
international levels for developing and supporting incubator 
and accelerator services targeting start-ups and private 
sector innovators in the agri-food sector. Public action can 
improve access to finance for start-up and early maturity 
agri-tech enterprises. Blended (public and private together) 
finance can provide financial support to high development 
impact investments that would be unlikely to attract 
financing on strictly commercial terms because their 
risks are high and their returns are either unproven or low 
compared with the level of risk. 
Invest in agricultural research and foster an innovation 
ecosystem, including through partnerships between 
academic programs and industries focused on digital 
agriculture technologies and innovation.  The public 
sector can support this by hosting events on disruptive 
agricultural technology and linking innovators with local 
and international investors and farmers through periodic 
forums, conferences, and industry network groups. In 
Iraq, public action could facilitate the foundation for 
incubation and acceleration services to develop digital 
technologies tailored to the needs of the local agriculture 
sector. The country’s innovation ecosystem appears to 
be at the earliest stages, suggesting there is a role for 
the public sector to lead the way in stimulating private 
interest and engagement. Iraqi policy makers could look 
to the successes of models in neighboring countries 
including Jordan and Lebanon. In Jordan and Lebanon, 
where an entrepreneurship ecosystem already exists, the 
public sector can help expand it rather than duplicate it, 
by promoting digital technology initiatives focused on the 
needs of the local or regional agriculture sector. 
Identify and foster needed skills for widespread use 
of digital technologies, spanning audiences from 
developers to businesses to small farmers and other 
end users.  Investment in skills development could take 
different forms, depending on the target audience. If 
targeting farmers and agricultural operators, the most 
needed skills may be those related to basic digital literacy, 
business and farm operations management, and use of 
customer-facing technologies. If targeting entrepreneurs 
and start-ups, the most needed skills may be related to 
business development and finance (World Bank 2019j). 
Incorporating more entrepreneurial and digital technology 
content in the curriculum of agricultural universities and 58
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanontraining institutes, together with faculty staff training, could 
help develop skill sets to foster digital development in the 
agri-food system. The public sector can also facilitate skill 
development for computer specialists and app developers.
Adopt policies on digital privacy, ownership, and data use 
to facilitate entrepreneurship and safeguard users.  While 
an increasing volume of data originating on-farm and off-
farm relies on cloud computing and transnational systems, 
there are concerns about data ownership and use. Digital 
policies and regulations should ideally strike a balance 
between protecting the privacy of individuals and firms that 
generate data while allowing for the use and aggregation 
of relevant data to inform other uses—including generating 
statistics, analysis, and management decisions. Ensuring 
data integrity and the accuracy of information services 
should serve to build trust among data users (World Bank 
2021). Good governance of data generated by farmers 
will build their trust in digital technologies. Additionally, improved integrity of all data relevant to the agriculture 
sector should support development of evidence-based 
policies, programs, and interventions. Supportive policies 
such as the ease of starting a business, tax policy, and 
patent protection can also help facilitate entrepreneurship.
Facilitate enabling policies for digital payment systems 
in rural and remote areas.  Digital payment systems are 
only successful if there is sufficient interest (and trust) 
from both entrepreneurs and customers to use this form of 
payment. Digital payments, including through e-commerce 
platforms, can help broaden an entrepreneur’s client base 
and allow farmers to more easily sell or purchase products 
on these platforms. An appropriate consumer protection 
framework, robust digital networks, and banking and 
telecoms policies that support digital financial services are 
all important components of a functioning digital payments 
system (Klapper 2017). ÎTable 14. Recommendations for Accelerating the Digital Technologies by Time Frame
IDENTIFY CLEAR TARGETS FOR THE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION OF  
THE AGRI-FOOD SECTORShort Term  
(1–2 years)Medium Term  
(2–5 years)
Develop an E-Agriculture Strategy with specific targets and integrate it into the overall 
agriculture sector and development strategies. The ‘Digital Agriculture Moonshot 
Targets Framework for Mashreq’ is presented in Table 13 .x
IMPROVE EFFICIENCY OF PUBLIC SERVICES AND PROVIDE PUBLIC GOODS
Collect foundational data and develop platforms such as
- Digital farmer IDs;
- Open access databases that would include digital land use and soil maps, yield 
predictions, real-time agricultural weather observatory, and market data; and
- E-government systems for all public services and resources administered, 
including subsidies distribution, rural cadaster, and so on.x
Provide incentives for deploying automated smart irrigation and fertigation  
systems to mitigate the adverse impacts of climate change and reduce  
pollution from fertilizers.x
Adopt diverse extension and service-delivery approaches (both digital  
and non-digital) to enable digital innovations and solutions to be tested and  
tried for smallholders.x
Develop digital surveillance technologies for early warning systems  
(including pests and diseases).x
Deploy digitally enabled traceability systems. x
CREATE AN ENABLING ECOSYSTEM FOR INVESTMENT AND RESEARCH SUPPORTING THE DIGITIZATION OF THE AGRI-FOOD 
SECTOR
Support the incubator and accelerator services targeting start-ups and private 
innovators in the agri-food sector.x
Encourage successful digital applications to be customized and offered in Arabic. x
Develop good-quality curricula for digital skills, innovation, and applications. x
Develop data policies that clarify data privacy, ownership, and sharing rules. x
Facilitate the last-mile internet delivery programs and payment systems in rural  
and remote areas.x
Link innovators with local and international investors and farmers through periodic 
forums, conferences, and industry network groups.x59
Chapter 4 Which Public Actions Can Facilitate Broader Adoption of Digital Technologies and Harness Their Impacts on Food System Outcomes? Conclusion and Next Steps
In conclusion, there is tremendous opportunity for digital 
technologies to support a transformation of the agriculture 
sector in the focus countries of Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon. 
Digital technologies can contribute to efficiency, equity, and 
environmental sustainability. However, they are only tools 
to support the achievement of the development goals, and 
their success will depend on the extent of the revitalization 
of the agri-food policy frameworks in Mashreq. Future 
extensions of this work should seek to identify the required 
policy and regulatory reforms to transform the agri-food 
system toward an inclusive, productive, resilient, and 
sustainable growth path in Mashreq.
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon60
 ÎBibliography
Abdallah, C., R. Der Sarkissian, T. Darwich, G. Faour, Saade, and 
M. Solange Koshoev. 2019. Assessing Agricultural Risk in 
Lebanon Combining Retrospective and Community-based 
Approaches with Temporal Dimensions Implementation. 21st 
EGU General Assembly, EGU2019.
Abu Rumman, N., and R. Szilágyi. 2018. “Overview of the 
Electronic Public Services in Agriculture in Jordan.” Journal 
of Agricultural Informatics  9 (2): 40–53. doi:10.17700/
jai.2018.9.2.433.
Ajluni, S., and M. Kawar. 2015. Towards Decent Work in Lebanon: Issues 
and Challenges in Light of the Syrian Refugee Crisis. Beirut, 
Lebanon: International Labour Organization (ILO). Retrieved from  
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---arabstates/---ro-
beirut/documents/publication/wcms_374826.pdf . 
Aker, J.C. and M. Fafchamps. 2015. “Mobile Phone Coverage and 
Producer Markets: Evidence from West Africa .” World Bank 
Economic Review  29 (2): 262-292. 
Al-Alawi, M. 2007. “Desertification in Jordan: A Security Issue.” In  
Environmental Change and Human Security: Recognizing and 
Acting on Hazard Impacts, edited by P . H. Liotta, D. A. Mouat, 
W. G. Kepner, and J. M. Lancaster, 81–102. Doredrecht, 
Netherlands: Springer..
Al-Haboby, A., C. Breisinger, D. Debowicz, A. H. El-Hakim, J. 
Ferguson, R. Telleria, and T. Van Rheenen. 2016. “The Role of 
Agriculture for Economic Development and Gender in Iraq: 
A Computable General Equilibrium Model Approach.”  The 
Journal of Developing Areas  50 (2): 431–451. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1353/jda.2016.0094 . 
Alkhafaji, H. 2018.  Iraq’s Water Crisis: Challenges and Solutions. 
Baghdad: Al-Bayan Center for Planning and Studies. 
Retrieved from http://www.bayancenter.org/en/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/980987665.pdf . 
Al-Shboul, M., O. Rababah, M. Al-Shboul, R. Ghnemat, and S. 
Al-Saqqa. 2014. “Challenges and Factors Affecting the 
Implementation of E-Government in Jordan.” Journal of 
Software Engineering and Applications  7: 1111–1127. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/jsea.2014.713098 . 
Annovazzi-Jakab, L. 2019. “Cutting Food Loss Where It Matters: 
Leveraging Digital Solutions for Greener Trade and Less Waste 
- UNECE’s Impact Initiatives.” Presentation at UN-ESCWA 
Regional Meeting on Promoting Food and Water Security in 
the Arab Region, Amman, Jordan, November 27–28, 2019.
Anthem, P . 2020. Risk of Hunger Pandemic as COVID-19 Set to 
Almost Double Acute Hunger by End of 2020.  Retrieved from 
https://insight.wfp.org/covid-19-will-almost-double-people-
in-acute-hunger-by-end-of-2020-59df0c4a8072 . 
AOAD (Arab Organization for Agricultural Development). 2018. Arab  
Agricultural Statistics Yearbook - Vol. 37. 
Awad, M. M. 2019. “An Innovative Intelligent System Based on 
Remote Sensing and Mathematical Models for Improving 
Crop Yield Estimation.” Information Processing in Agriculture  
6 (3): 316–325. doi:10.1016/j.inpa.2019.04.001.
Awad, M. M., B. Alawar, and R. Jbeily. 2019. “A New Crop Spectral 
Signatures Database Interactive Tool (CSSIT).” Data 4 (2): 77. 
doi:10.3390/data4020077.
Babin, J. 2018. “Financing Startups: The Shortcomings of Circular 
331.”  Le Commerce du Levant.  Retrieved from https://www.
lecommercedulevant.com/article/28739-financing-startups-
the-shortcomings-of-circular-331 . Bahn, R., and R. Zurayk. 2018. “Agriculture, Conflict and the 
Agrarian Question in the 21st Century.” In Crisis and Conflict 
in Agriculture, edited by R. Zurayk, E. Woertz, and R. Bahn, 
3–27. Wallingford, UK: CABI. 
Bahn, R., G. Bayram, and H. Abou Jaoude. 2019.  Economic 
Growth Assessment: Final Assessment Report: Performance 
Management and Support Program for Lebanon (PMSPL II). 
Arlington, VA: Social Impact, Inc. Available at https://pdf.
usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00TQ5W.pdf . 
Bahn, R., R. Nisr, and S. El-Labban. 2018. “Food Policy in Lebanon.” 
Reference Module in Food Science – Food Management, 
Policy, and Regulations. New York: Elsevier. doi:10.1016/
B978-0-08-100596-5.22365-2.
Bahn, R., T. Tell, and R. Zurayk. 2019. “Social Life, from Rural to 
Urban.”  In Societies of the Middle East and North Africa,  
edited by S. Yom, 33–78. Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
Berytech. 2018.  The Journey of Two Women in Agriculture 
Technology.  Retrieved from https://berytech.org/the-journey-
of-two-women-in-agriculture-technology/ . 
Bocci, M., T. Smanis, and N. Gaaloul. 2019. Assessment of the 
Impacts of Climate Change on the Agriculture Sector in the 
Southern Mediterranean: Foreseen Developments and Policy 
Measures. Barcelona: Union for the Mediterranean. Available 
at: https://ufmsecretariat.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/
Climate-Change-impact-on-Agriculture.pdf . 
Bou Khater, L. 2020. Poverty Targeting Is Not the Solution for 
Much Needed Social Policy. The Lebanese Center for 
Policy Studies. Retrieved from http://lcps-lebanon.org/
featuredArticle.php?id=280 .
Breisinger, C., O. Ecker, P . Al-Riffai, and B. Yu. 2012.  Beyond the Arab 
Awakening: Policies and Investments for Poverty Reduction 
and Food Security.  Washington, DC: International Food Policy 
Research Institute.
Byblos Bank SAL, Economic Research & Analysis Department. 
2019. “Lebanon This Week.” Issue 583. Byblos Bank: Beirut, 
Lebanon. 
Byblos Bank SAL, Economic Research & Analysis Department. 2019. 
“Lebanon This Week.” Issue 591. Byblos Bank: Beirut, Lebanon. 
Byblos Bank SAL, Economic Research & Analysis Department.  
2019. “Lebanon This Week.” Issue 604. Byblos Bank: Beirut, 
Lebanon.
Caiserman, A., D. Dumas, K. Bennafla, G. Faour, and F. Amiraslani. 
2019. “Application of Remotely Sensed Imagery and 
Socioeconomic Surveys to Map Crop Choices in the 
Bekaa Valley (Lebanon).” Agriculture  9 (3): 57. doi:10.3390/
agriculture9030057.
Cant, J. 2019. “Walmart Uses Blockchain Tech to Track Shrimp 
Supply Chains.”  Cointelegraph.  Accessed December 2, 2019. 
https://cointelegraph.com/news/walmart-uses-blockchain-
tech-to-track-shrimp-supply-chains .
Central Administration of Statistics. 2009.  The Multiple Indicators 
Cluster Survey, 2009. Retrieved from http://www.cas.gov.lb/
index.php/all-publications-en#the-multiple-indicators-cluster-
survey-round-3-2009-mics3 . 
Central Administration of Statistics et al.  2020. Labour Force and 
Household Living Conditions Survey 2018-2019 Lebanon.  
http://www.cas.gov.lb/images/Publications/Labour%20
Force%20and%20Household%20Living%20Conditions%20
Survey%202018-2019.pdf .
Cha, B. 2015. “Too Embarrassed to Ask: What Is ‘The Cloud’ and 
How Does It Work?” Vox. Retrieved from https://www.vox.
com/2015/4/30/11562024/too-embarrassed-to-ask-what-is-
the-cloud-and-how-does-it-work .61Chlouk, G. 2016. Economic Opportunities and Job Creation: Agriculture 
Sector. Retrieved from http://www.databank.com.lb/docs/
Economic%20Opportunities%20and%20Job%20Creation%20
-%20Agriculture%20Section%202016%20FAO.pdf . 
Christiaensen, L., L. Demery, and J. Kuhl. 2011. “The (Evolving) 
Role of Agriculture in Poverty Reduction - An Empirical 
Perspective.” Journal of Development Economics 96 (2): 
239–254. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.deveco.2010.10.006 . 
CNRS-L ( Conseil National pour la Recherche Scientifique ), 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN), and 
Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture. 2018. Vulnerability and Risk 
Assessment to Facilitate Planning for Disaster Risk Reduction 
and Climate Change Adaptation in Agriculture Sectors in 
Lebanon.  Beirut: CNRS-L. 
Cochrane, P . 2020. “Coronavirus: Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan Suffer 
Economic Pain Amid Falling Remittances.” Middle East 
Eye. Retrieved from https://www.middleeasteye.net/news/
coronavirus-egypt-lebanon-jordan-remittance-economy .
Corkery, M., and N. Popper. 2018. “From Farm to Blockchain: 
Walmart Tracks Its Lettuce.”  The New York Times. Retrieved 
from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/business/
walmart-blockchain-lettuce.html . 
Cornell University, INSEAD, and WIPO (World Intellectual Property 
Organization). 2019.  Global Innovation Index 2019: Analysis.  
Retrieved from https://www.globalinnovationindex.org/
analysis-economy . 
DAI (Development Alternatives, Inc.). 2014. Pome Fruit Value 
Chain Assessment Report: Lebanon Industry Value Chain 
Development (LIVCD) Project. Beirut, Lebanon: USAID/
Lebanon. Retrieved from https://dec.usaid.gov/dec/GetDoc.
Darwish, T., F. Chenini, and M. Achouri. 2012. Country Study on 
Status of Land Tenure, Planning and Management in Oriental 
Near East Countries: Case of Lebanon.  Food and Agriculture 
Organization, Regional Office for the Near East, Oriental Near 
East Sub-Region. Cairo, Egypt: FAO. Retrieved from http://
www.fao.org/3/a-as711e.pdf. 
Darwish, T., P . Zdruli, R. Saliba, M. Awad, A. Shaban, and G. Faour. 
2012. “Vulnerability to Desertification in Lebanon Based on 
Geo-information and Socioeconomic Conditions.” Journal of 
Environmental Science and Engineering B 1 (2012): 851–864.
Darwish, T., A. Fadel, B. Safaa, J. Ihab, A. Mohamad, H. Zeina, O. 
Halablab, and T. Atallah. 2015. “Potato Performance under 
Different Potassium Levels and Deficit Irrigation in Dry 
Sub-Humid Mediterranean Conditions.” International Potash 
Institute  43: 14–20. Retrieved from https://www.ipipotash.
org/uploads/udocs/e-ifc-43-potato-lebanon.pdf. 
Deichmann, U. K., A. Goyal, and D. K. Mishra. 2016. “Will Digital 
Technologies Transform Agriculture in Developing 
Countries? (English).” Policy Research Working Paper No. 
WPS 7669, World Bank Group, Washington, DC. 
Department of Statistics. 2017a. Jordan Statistical Yearbook. 
Amman. 
Department of Statistics. 2017b. Jordan Agricultural Census, 
Detailed Results. Amman.
Digital McKinsey. 2016. Digital Middle East: Transforming the 
Region into a Leading Digital Economy.  Retrieved from 
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/featured%20
insights/middle%20east%20and%20africa/digital%20
middle%20east%20transforming%20the%20region%20
into%20a%20leading%20digital%20economy/digital-middle-
east-final-updated.ashx. DLA Piper. 2020. Data Protection Laws of the World.  Accessed 
January 21, 2020. https://www.dlapiperdataprotection.
com/#handbook/.
EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development). 
2019. EBRD Knowledge Economy Index.  Retrieved from 
https://www.ebrd.com/news/publications/brochures/ebrd-
knowledge-economy-index.html. 
EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit). 2018. The 2018 Government 
E-Payments Adoption Ranking.  London: EIU. Retrieved from 
https://usa.visa.com/content/dam/VCOM/global/visa-
everywhere/documents/government-e-payment-adoption-
ranking-study-2018.pdf. 
Eklund, L., M. Degerald, M. Brandt, A. V. Prishchepov, and P . Pilesjo. 
2017. “How Conflict Affects Land Use: Agricultural Activity in 
Areas Seized by the Islamic State.” Environmental Research 
Letters  12 (5). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/
aa673a. 
El Amine, Y. 2017. “As E-commerce Slowly Grows in Region, 
Lebanon Lags Behind.” An-Nahar. Retrieved from https://
en.annahar.com/article/575838-as-ecommerce-slowly-
grows-in-the-region-lebanon-lags-behind.
EO4SD (Earth Observation for Sustainable Development 
Initiative). 2017. Satellite-Derived Information to Assess the 
Consequences of Armed Conflict on the Agriculture Sector 
in Syria. European Space Agency, Earth Observation for 
Sustainable Development Initiative. Available at https://www.
eo4idi.eu/publications/brochure/satellite-derived-information-
assess-consequences-armed-conflict-agriculture. 
Executive Bulletin. 2019.  Touch Partners with IOTree for the First 
NB-IoT Application in Lebanon.  Retrieved from https://
executive-bulletin.com/business/telecoms/touch-partners-
with-iotree-for-the-first-nb-iot-application-in-lebanon . 
Fabregas, R., M. Kremer, and F. Schilbach. 2019. “Realizing the 
Potential of Digital Development: The Case of Agricultural 
Advice.” Science  366: eaay3038 (2019). doi:10.1126/science.
aay3038.
Feder, G., and D. L. Umali. 1993. “The Adoption of Agricultural 
Innovations: A Review.” Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change 43 (3–4): 215–239. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/0040-1625(93)90053-A . 
FHI 360. 2018. The Atlas of Innovation for Economic Stability. 
Durham, NC: FHI 360. Retrieved from https://www.fhi360.
org/sites/default/files/media/documents/resource-
innovation-atlas-interactive.pdf . 
Figueroa, J. L., M. Mahmoud, and C. Breisinger. 2018. “The Role of 
Agriculture and Agro-Processing for Development in Jordan.” 
MENA RP Working Paper 5, Washington, DC and Cairo, 
Egypt: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). 
Available at: http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/
p15738coll2/id/132262 . 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 
2015.  Success Stories on Information and Communication 
Technologies for Agriculture and Rural Development. 
Bangkok, Thailand: FAO Regional Office for Asia and the 
Pacific. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4622e.pdf . 
FAO. 2016. AQUASTAT Main Database. Rome: FAO. Retrieved from 
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/data/query/results.html . 
FAO. 2017. Iraq Agriculture Damage and Loss Needs Assessment. 
Rome: FAO. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/a-i7810e.pdf . 
FAO. 2018a. Iraq: Restoration of Agriculture and Water Systems 
Sub-Programme 2018-2020.  Rome: FAO. License: CC BY-NC-
SA 3.0 IGO. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/ca1511en/
CA1511EN.pdf . Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon62FAO. 2018b. Progress on Water Use Efficiency - Global Baseline for 
SDG 6 Indicator 6.4.1.  Rome, Italy: FAO/UN-Water. License: 
CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/
CA1588EN/ca1588en.pdf . 
FAO. 2019a. “Development Flows to Agriculture.” FAOStat.  Rome: 
Food and Agriculture Organization. Retrieved from http://
www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/EA . 
FAO. 2019b. “Sustainable Development Goals: SDG Indicator 2.a.1 
- Public Investment in Agriculture.” FAOStat. Rome: Food and 
Agriculture Organization. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/
sustainable-development-goals/indicators/2a1/en/ . 
FAO. 2019c. “Credit to Agriculture.” FAOStat.  Rome: Food and 
Agriculture Organization. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/
faostat/en/#data/IC . 
FAO. 2019d. “Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).” FAOStat.  Rome: 
Food and Agriculture Organization. Retrieved from http://
www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/FDI . 
FAO and IWMI. 2020. Remote Sensing for Water Productivity. 
Technical report: capacity development series. Stakeholder 
mapping and needs assessment - Lebanon.  93 pp. Rome: 
FAO. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/ca7502en/
CA7502EN.pdf . 
FAO and UNICEF. (2019). Child Labour in Agriculture: The Demand 
Side.  Beirut, Lebanon: FAO and UNICEF. Retrieved from 
http://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/CA2975EN/ . 
FAO and WFP (World Food Programme). 2020. COVID 19: Jordan 
Rapid Food Systems Assessment, 23 April 2020.  Retrieved 
from https://reliefweb.int/report/jordan/jordan-fao-and-wfp-
rapid-food-systems-assessment-23-april-2020 .
FAO, IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development), UNICEF 
(United Nations Children’s Fund), WFP , and WHO (World 
Health Organization). 2019. The State of Food Security and 
Nutrition in the World 2019: Safeguarding Against Economic 
Slowdowns and Downturns. Retrieved from Rome, Italy: http://
www.fao.org/3/ca5162en/ca5162en.pdf .
FAO, IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute), and 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development). 2017. Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) in Agriculture: A Report to the G20 
Agricultural Deputies.  Rome, Italy: FAO. Retrieved from http://
www.fao.org/3/a-i7961e.pdf . 
FAO, Regional Office for the Near East (RNE). 2020. Building 
Resilient Farming Communities to Boost Local Economies 
and Create Decent Rural Employment. Cairo, Egypt: FAO 
Regional Office for the Near East. 
FAO, WFP , and World Bank. 2020. “Iraq COVID-19 Food Security 
Monitor Weekly Update – Issue 1, 14 April 2020.” Retrieved 
from https://reliefweb.int/report/iraq/iraq-covid-19-food-
security-monitor-weekly-update-issue-1-14-april-2020 .
Fuglie, K., M. Gautam, A. Goyal, and W. F. Maloney. 2020. 
Harvesting Prosperity: Technology and Productivity Growth 
in Agriculture. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-
1-4648-1393-1. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC 
BY 3.0 IGO.
Gallardo, R. K., and J. Sauer. 2018. “Adoption of Labor-
Saving Technologies in Agriculture.” Annual Review of 
Resource Economics 10: 185–206. doi:10.1146/annurev-
resource-100517-023018.
Ganti, A. 2019. “Multiplier Effect.” Investopedia.  Accessed July 
31, 2019. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/
multipliereffect.asp .
GAO (United States Government Accountability Office). 1984. 
“Multiplier Effect of the Agricultural Sector on the General 
Economy.” RCED-84-56. Washington, DC: GAO. Retrieved 
from https://www.gao.gov/products/RCED-84-56 . Gibson, G. 2019. “Effects of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria 
on Cropland Area.” Journal of Food Security 7 (1): 20–27. 
doi:10.12691/jfs-7-1-4.
Global Commission on Adaptation. 2019. Adapt Now: A Global 
Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience. Rotterdam, 
Netherlands: Global Center on Adaptation & World 
Resources Institute. Retrieved from https://gca.org/global-
commission-on-adaptation/report . 
Grossman, J. and M. Tarzai. 2014. “Serving Smallholder Farmers: 
Recent Developments in Digital Finance.” CGAP Focus Note 
94. Retrieved from https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/
researches/documents/Focus-Note-Serving-Smallholder-
Farmers-Jun-2014.pdf.
GS1. n.d.. “How We Got Here.”  GS1.  Retrieved from https://www.
gs1.org/about/how-we-got-here . 
GS1. 2019. Annual Report 2018-2019.  GS1. Retrieved from 
https://www.gs1.org/sites/default/files/gs1-annual-
report-2018-2019.pdf . 
GSMA. 2019. GSMA Mobile Connectivity Index. Accessed 
October 2, 2019. http://www.mobileconnectivityindex.
com/#year=2018 .
Haggblade, S., J. Hammer, and P . Hazell. 1991. “Modeling 
Agricultural Growth Multipliers.” American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics  73 (2): 361–374. doi: https://doi.
org/10.2307/1242720 . 
Haggblade, S., P . Hazell, and P . Dorosh. 2007. “Sectoral Growth 
Linkages between Agriculture and the Rural Nonfarm 
Economy.” In Transforming the Rural Nonfarm Economy - 
Opportunities and Threats in the Developing World , edited by 
S. Haggblade, P . Hazell, and T. Reardon,. 141–173. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Hamad, A. I. 2018. “The Use of Geographic Information System 
to Select Best Location for Oasis in West of Iraq.” Research 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Biological and Chemical Studies 9 
(4): 81–90. 
Hernandez, K., B. Faith, P . Prieto Martín, and B. Ramalingam. 2016. 
“The Impact of Digital Technology on Economic Growth 
and Productivity, and Its Implications for Employment and 
Equality: An Evidence Review.” IDS Evidence Report 207. 
Brighton: IDS. Available at https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/
opendocs/handle/20.500.12413/12659 . 
HKJ (The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan). 2014. Jordan’s Third 
National Communication on Climate Change. Amman: UNDP . 
Available at: https://www.undp.org/content/dam/jordan/
docs/Publications/Enviro/TNC%20jordan%20pdf.pdf . 
HLPE (High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition). 
2013. Investing in Smallholder Agriculture for Food Security. 
A Report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security 
and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security. 
Rome. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/a-i2953e.pdf . 
Hofste, R. W., P . Reig, and L. Schleifer. 2019. “17 Countries, Home 
to One-Quarter of the World’s Population, Face Extremely 
High Water Stress.” World Resources Institute Blog.  Accessed 
September 3, 2019. https://www.wri.org/blog/2019/08/17-
countries-home-one-quarter-world-population-face-
extremely-high-water-stress . 
Hsu, J. W. 2018. “Rural Taobao to Expand to One Thousand 
Counties.” Alizila: News from Alibaba Group.  Retrieved 
from https://www.alizila.com/rural-taobao-to-expand-to-a-
thousand-counties/ . 
IAU (Inter-Agency Information and Analysis Unit). 2012. “Climate 
Change in Iraq Fact Sheet.” ReliefWeb.  Available at https://
reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Climate%20
change%20In%20Iraq%20Fact%20sheet%20-%20English.pdf . 63IDAL (Investment Development Authority of Lebanon). 2017. 
“Agriculture Sector: 2017 Factsheet.” Beirut: IDAL. Available 
at: https://investinlebanon.gov.lb/Content/uploads/
SideBlock/171010012459018~Agriculture%20factsheet%20
2017.pdf . 
IDMC (Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre). 2019. GRID 2019: 
Global Report on Internal Displacement.  Geneva. Retrieved 
from https://www.internal-displacement.org/sites/default/
files/publications/documents/2019-IDMC-GRID.pdf . 
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2013. 
“Statement by Dr. Akinwumi Adesina, Honourable Minister 
of Agriculture and Rural Development, Federal Republic of 
Nigeria, Governor from Nigeria, at the 36th Session of the 
IFAD Governing Council.” 
IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2019. IOM 
Integrated Location Assessment III. https://reliefweb.int/
sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/IOM_DTM_Integrated_
Location_Assessment_III_Report.pdf .
ITC (International Trade Centre). 2019. “TradeMap.” Accessed July 
10, 2019. https://trademap.org/Bilateral_
ITC. 2020. “TradeMap.” Accessed August 3, 2020. https://
trademap.org
ITU (International Telecommunications Union). 2019a. 
“Statistics: Country ICT Data (Until 2018) – Mobile-Cellular 
Subscriptions (Excel).” Accessed October 2, 2019. https://
www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx .
ITU. 2019b. “Statistics: Country ICT Data (Until 2018) – Fixed-
Broadband Subscriptions (Excel).” Accessed October 2, 2019. 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx .
ITU. 2019c. “Statistics: Country ICT Data (Until 2018) – Gender ICT 
Statistics (Excel).” Accessed October 2, 2019. https://www.
itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx .
Jack, W. and T. Suri. 2011. “Mobile Money: The Economics of 
M-PESA.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working 
Paper Series 2011(16721). doi: 10.3386/w16721.
Jaffee, S., S. Henson, L. Unnevehr, D. Grace, and E. Cassou. 2019. 
The Safe Food Imperative: Accelerating Progress in Low- and 
Middle-Income Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Jordan Investment Commission. 2017. Sector Profile - Agriculture. 
Amman: Jordan Investment Commission. Available at: 
https://www.jic.gov.jo/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Sector-
Profile-Agriculture-Final-Mar-2018-JIC-HAS-020418-1.pdf . 
Jouanjean, M.-A. 2019. “Digital Opportunities for Trade in the 
Agriculture and Food Sectors.” OECD Food, Agriculture, and 
Fisheries Paper 122. Paris: OECD. 
Kärner, E. 2017. “The Future of Agriculture Is Digital: Showcasing 
e-Estonia.” Frontiers in Veterinary Science  4: 151. doi: https://
doi.org/10.3389/fvets.2017.00151 .
Katta, M., M. Byrne, and A. Al-Arabiat. 2018. Decent Work and 
the Agriculture Sector in Jordan: Evidence from Workers’ 
and Employers’ Surveys, Jordan, 2018.  Beirut: International 
Labour Organization (ILO). Retrieved from https://reliefweb.
int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/66265.pdf . 
Kerlink. 2017. Kerlink Partners with Libatel to Deploy Lebanon’s 
First Internet of Things Network for Smart Agriculture.  
Accessed December 9, 2019. https://www.kerlink.com/
blog/2017/11/28/kerlink-partners-with-libatel-to-deploy-
lebanons-first-internet-of-things-network-for-smart-
agriculture/ .
Kirui, O. K., J. J. Okello, R. A. Nyikal, and G. W. Njiraini. 2013. 
Impact of Mobile Phone-Based Money Transfer Services 
in Agriculture: Evidence from Kenya. Quarterly Journal of 
International Agriculture  52(2): 141-162. doi: 10.22004/
ag.econ.173644.Kittipanya-ngam, P ., and K. H. Tan. 2019. “A Framework for 
Food Supply Chain Digitalization: Lessons from Thailand.” 
Production Planning & Control: The Management of Operations 
31(2-3): 158-172. doi:10.1080/09537287.2019.1631462. 
Klaasse, A., and E. Haas. 2017. Satellite Derived Information 
to Assess the Consequences of Armed Conflict on the 
Agriculture Sector.  Presentation at Earth Observation 
for Sustainable Development: Agriculture and Rural 
Development Conference, Beirut, Lebanon and Wageningen, 
Netherlands (WEBEX-enabled conference).
Kutter, T., S. Tiemann, R. Siebert, and S. Fountas. 2011. “The 
Role of Communication and Co-operation in the Adoption 
of Precision Farming.” Precision Agriculture  12: 2–17. 
doi:10.1007/s11119-009-9150-0. 
Lampietti, J. A., S. Michaels, N. Magnan, A. F. McCalla, M. Saade, 
and N. Khouri. (2011). “A Strategic Framework for Improving 
Food Security in Arab Countries.” Food Security 3(1): 7-22. 
doi:10.1007/s12571-010-0102-3. 
Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture. 2012. Report on Global Results 
of Agriculture Census 2010 . Beirut: Ministry of Agriculture. 
Available at http://www.agriculture.gov.lb/html/RESUL TATS_
RECENCEMENT_AGRICUL TURE_2010/RAPPORT_
RESUL TATS_GLOBAUX_DU_RECENCEMENT_2010.pdf . 
Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture. 2014. Ministry of Agriculture 
Strategy 2015–2019.  Beirut: Ministry of Agriculture. Retrieved 
from http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/leb149670.pdf . 
Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture. 2016. Agriculture Production 
Survey.  Beirut: Ministry of Agriculture. 
Lewis, P ., M. A. Monem, and A. Impiglia. 2018.  Impacts of Climate 
Change on Farming Systems and Livelihoods in the Near East 
and North Africa - With a Special Focus on Small-Scale Family 
Farming.  Cairo: FAO. Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/
CA1439EN/ca1439en.pdf . 
Libelium. 2017. The First Smart Vineyard in Lebanon Chooses 
Libelium’s Technology to Face the Climate Change. Accessed 
December 9, 2019. http://www.libelium.com/the-first-smart-
vineyard-in-lebanon-chooses-libeliums-technology-to-face-
the-climate-change/#!prettyPhoto .
Lowder, S. K., J. Skoet, and T. Raney. 2016. “The Number, Size, and 
Distribution of Farms, Smallholder Farms, and Family Farms 
Worldwide.”  World Development  87: 16–29.
Lowder, S. K., M. V. Sánchez, and R. Bertini. 2019. “Farms, Family 
Farms, Farmland Distribution and Farm Labour: What Do 
We Know Today?” FAO Agricultural Development Economics 
Working Paper 19-08, Rome, FAO.
Lucani, P . 2012. “Iraq: Agriculture Sector Note.” FAO Investment 
Centre: Country Highlights. Rome: FAO. Available at: http://
www.fao.org/3/i2877e/i2877e.pdf . 
Majdalawi, Y. K., T. Almarabeh, H. Mohammad, and W. Quteshate. 
2015. “E-Government Strategy and Plans in Jordan.” Journal 
of Software Engineering and Applications  8: 211–223. doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/jsea.2015.84022 . 
Making Cents International. 2019. Digital Identities for Refugees 
2018–2020. Accessed December 16, 2019. https://www.
makingcents.com/digitalidentitiesforrefugees . 
McBratney, A., B. Whelan, T. Ancev, and J. Bouma. 2005. “Future 
Directions of Precision Agriculture.” Precision Agriculture  6 
(1): 7–23. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-005-0681-8 . 
McKinsey. 2018. Lebanon Economic Vision (Slide deck).  Retrieved 
from https://www.economy.gov.lb/media/11893/20181022-
1228full-report-en.pdf . 
McKinsey. 2019. Blockchain’s Occam Problem.  Available at https://
www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-
insights/blockchains-occam-problem  Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon64McKinsey. 2020. Unlocking the Online Retail Opportunity with 
European Farmers.  Available at: https://www.mckinsey.
com/industries/agriculture/our-insights/unlocking-the-
online-retail-opportunity-with-european-farmers?cid=other-
eml-alt-mip-mck&hlkid=acf4ec3541c744809c9f4d213
ac2f7fa&hctky=9175640&hdpid=87d6c4d5-1599-48da-
b9c7-f61192179263 .
Mellor, J. W., and S. J. Malik. 2017. “The Impact of Growth in Small 
Commercial Farm Productivity on Rural Poverty Reduction.” 
World Development  91: 1–10. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
worlddev.2016.09.004 . 
Mhawej, M., A. Caiserman, A. Nasrallah, A. Dawi, R. Bachour, and 
G. Faour. 2020. “Automated Evapotranspiration Retrieval 
Model with Missing Soil-Related Datasets: The Proposal of 
SEBALI.” Agricultural Water Management  229 (28): 105938. 
doi:10.1016/j.agwat.2019.105938.
Ministry of Environment of Jordan, International Union for 
Conservation of Nature, and Global Environment Facility. 
2015. The Aligned National Action Plan to Combat 
Desertification in Jordan, 2015–2020.  Amman: Ministry 
of Environment. Retrieved from https://knowledge.
unccd.int/sites/default/files/naps/Jordan%2520-
%2520eng%25202015-2020.pdf . 
Ministry of Labour, Syrian Refugee Unit. 2020. Syrian Refugee 
Unit Work Permit Progress Report December 2019. 
Retrieved from https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/
resources/73629.pdf .
Ministry of Planning, Republic of Iraq. n.d.. National Development 
Plan 2018–2022: Summary. Ministry of Planning. 
Retrieved from http://www.iraq-jccme.jp/pdf/archives/
nationaldevelopmentplan2018_2022.pdf . 
Ministry of Water and Irrigation or Jordan. 2016. Structural 
Benchmark Action Plan to Reduce Water Sector Losses, 2nd 
Revision.  Amman: Ministry of Water and Irrigation. Retrieved 
from https://usjkamp.s3.amazonaws.com/prod_uploads/
system/resources/attachments/000/003/906/original/
Structural_Benchmark_Action_plan_2nd_Revision_2016-
final-120217.pdf?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-
SHA256&X-Amz-Credential=AKIAJNKAKIDZBGBBOKQA%2
F20190903%2Fus-east-1%2Fs3%2Faws4_request&X-Amz-
Date=20190903T130226Z&X-Amz-Expires=10&X-Amz-
SignedHeaders=host&X-Amz-Signature=1e3db13f621d2d8f
6b70e6e5061a8a53d859e65857b8fc9aa2a26c3c88b31218 . 
Myers, J. 2012. AgBEE Snapshot: Snapshot of the Business 
Enabling Environment for Agriculture – Jordan. Fintrac, Inc. 
Retrieved from https://www.agrilinks.org/sites/default/
files/resource/files/USAID-EAT%20AgBEE%20Snapshot%20
Jordan.pdf . 
Nakasone, E., M. Torero, and B. Minten. 2014. “The Power of 
Information: The ICT Revolution in Agricultural Development.” 
Annual Review of Resource Eocnomics  2014(6): 533-550. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-resource-100913-012714. 
Nasrallah, A., N. Baghdadi, M. Mhawej, G. Faour, T. Darwish, H. 
Belhouchette, and S. Darwich. 2018. “A Novel Approach for 
Mapping Wheat Areas Using High Resolution Sentinel-2 
Images.” Sensors 18 (7): 2089. doi:10.3390/s18072089.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. 
Science Breakthroughs to Advance Food and Agricultural 
Research by 2030.  Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17226/25059 . 
Netherlands Enterprise Agency. 2016. Export Value Chain Analysis 
- Fruit and Vegetables Jordan.  Retrieved from http://proverde.
nl/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Export-Value-Chain-
Horticulture-Jordan-August-2016-Public.pdf?x15400 . OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development). 2019. Digital Opportunities for Better 
Agricultural Policies.  Paris: OECD Publishing. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1787/571a0812-en . 
Official Gazette of Iraq. n.d. Iraq Budget Law.
Oqeili, M. 2019. Ghroorcom Farmers’ Empowerment: An Intelligent 
Marketplace for Fresh Food.  Presentation at UN-ESCWA 
Regional Meeting on Promoting Food and Water Security in 
the Arab Region, Amman, Jordan, November 27–28, 2019.
Osman, Y., M. Abdellatif, N. Al-Ansari, S. Knutsson, and S. Jawad. 
2017. “Climate Change and Future Precipitation in an Arid 
Environment of the Middle East: Case Study of Iraq.” Journal 
of Environmental Hydrology  25 (3). ISSN 1058-3912.
Oxford Business Group. 2018. Strategies to Transform Jordan 
into a Digital Economy and Leading ICT Regional Centre. 
Retrieved from https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/overview/
major-contributor-strategies-target-transformation-digital-
economy-and-leading-regional-centre .
Perry, C. 2011. “Accounting for Water Use: Terminology and 
Implications for Saving Water and Increasing Production.” 
Agricultural Water Management 98: 1840–1846. 
doi:10.1016/j.agwat.2010.10.002.
Pew Research Center. 2019. Mobile Connectivity in Emerging 
Economies.  Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. 
Accessed June 12, 2019. https://www.pewinternet.org/wp-
content/uploads/sites/9/2019/03/PI_2019.03.07_Mobile-
Connectivity_FINAL.pdf .
Pierpaoli, E., G. Carli, E. Pignatti, and M. Canavari. 2013. “Drivers 
of Precision Agriculture Technologies Adoption: A Literature 
Review.” Procedia Technology  8: 61–69.
Price, R. A. 2018. “Environmental Risks in Iraq.” K4D Helpdesk 
Report.  Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies. 
Retrieved from https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/
handle/123456789/13838 . 
Rahal, M. 2013. “E-Commerce in Lebanon: An Overview.” Wamda. 
Retrieved from https://www.wamda.com/2013/02/overview-
of-the-e-commerce-scene-in-lebanon . 
Reardon, T., R. Echeverria, J. Berdegué, B. Minten, S. Liverpool-
Tasie, D. Tschirley, and D. Zilberman. 2019. “Rapid 
Transformation of Food Systems in Developing Regions: 
Highlighting the Role of Agricultural Research & Innovations.” 
Agricultural Systems 172: 47–59. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.01.022 . 
RICCAR (Regional Initiative for the Assessment of Climate 
Change Impacts on Water Resources and Socio-Economic 
Vulnerability in the Arab Region). 2017. Arab Climate Change 
Assessment Report - Main Report.  Beirut: ESCWA. 
Salman, R. 2013. “Iraq Five-Year Plan Will Attempt to Diversify 
Economy.” Reuters.  Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/
article/iraq-economy-plan/iraq-five-year-plan-will-attempt-to-
diversify-economy-idUSL5N0HF0CE20130919 . 
Say, S. M., M. Keskin, M. Sehri, and Y. E. Sekerli. 2018. “Adoption 
of Precision Agriculture Technologies in Developed and 
Developing Countries.” The Online Journal of Science and 
Technology  8 (1): 7–15.
Schnepf, R. 2004. “Iraq Agriculture and Food Supply: Background 
and Issues.” In CRS Report for Congress, Order Code 
RL32093.  Washington: Congressional Research 
Service, The Library of Congress. Retrieved from http://
nationalaglawcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/assets/crs/
RL32093.pdf . 
Schwab, K. 2016. “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means, 
How to Respond.” World Economic Forum.  Retrieved from 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-
industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond/ . 65Small, B. 2017. “Digital Technology and Agriculture: Foresight for 
Rural Enterprises and Rural Lives in New Zealand.” Journal 
of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences 6 (2): 54–77. 
doi:10.15640/jaes.v6n2a7. 
Sonka, S. 2015. “Big Data: From Hype to Agricultural Tool.” Farm 
Policy Journal 12 (1): 1–9. 
Strusani, D., and G. V. Houngbonon. 2019. “The Role of 
Artificial Intelligence in Supporting Development in 
Emerging Markets.” EM Compass,  Note 69. Washington, 
DC: IFC. http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/
en/539371567673606214/pdf/The-Role-of-Artificial-
Intelligence-in-Supporting-Development-in-Emerging-
Markets.pdf . 
Sylvester, G. 2019. “Agriculture: Opportunities for Blockchain 
Technology.” In E-Agriculture in Action: Blockchain for 
Agriculture,  edited by G. Sylvester. 7-10. Bangkok, Thailand: 
FAO and ITU. 
Taimeh, A., F. Chenini, and M. Achouri. 2012. Country Study on 
Status of Land Tenure, Planning and Management in Oriental 
Near East Countries: Case of Jordan.  Food and Agriculture 
Organization, Regional Office for the Near East, Oriental Near 
East Sub-Region. FAO: Egypt. Retrieved from http://www.fao.
org/3/a-as712e.pdf . 
Temsah, M., K. Tarhini, A. Fadel, and K. Slim. 2016. “Effect of 
Irrigation with Lake Water Containing Cylindrospermopsin 
Toxin on Seed Germination and Seedlings Growth of 
Cucumis Sativus and Lycopersicon Esculatum.” International 
Journal of Sciences: Basic and Applied Research 27 (3): 
108–122.
Tey, Y. S., and M. Brindal. 2012. “Factors Influencing the Adoption 
of Precision Agricultural Technologies: A Review for 
Policy Implications.” Precision Agriculture 13: 713–730. 
doi:10.1007/s11119-012-9273-6. 
The Jordan Times. 2019. “Workshop Held on Agricultural 
Microfinance in Jordan.” [Newspaper]. Retrieved from 
https://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/workshop-held-
agricultural-microfinance-jordan . 
The Seam. 2018. “Agriculture and the Digital Supply Chain.” [Blog]. 
Retrieved from https://agritechtalk.com/2018/09/21/
agriculture-and-the-digital-supply-chain/ . 
The Seam. 2019 (March, 8). “Blockchain and Food Safety.” [Blog]. 
Retrieved from https://agritechtalk.com/2019/03/08/
blockchain-and-food-safety/#more-1202 https://agritechtalk.
com/2018/09/21/agriculture-and-the-digital-supply-chain/ . 
Trendov, N. M., S. Varas, and M. Zeng. 2019. Digital Technologies 
in Agriculture and Rural Areas - Status Report.  Rome: Food 
and Agriculture Organization. Retrieved from http://www.fao.
org/3/ca4985en/ca4985en.pdf . License: cc by-nc-sa 3.0 igo.
Tripoli, M. and J. Schmidhuber. 2018. Emerging Opportunities for the 
Application of Blockchain in the Agri-food Industry. Rome and 
Geneva: FAO and ICTSD. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/
ca1335en/CA1335EN.pdf . License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. 
Tsan, M., S. Totapally, M. Hailu, and B. K. Addom. 2019.  The 
Digitalisation of African Agriculture Report 2018–2019. 
Wageningen: CTA. Retrieved from https://cgspace.cgiar.org/
bitstream/handle/10568/101498/CTA-Digitalisation-report.pdf . 
Tulsian, M., and N. Saini. 2014. “Market-Driven Innovations in 
Rural Marketing in India.” International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research  5(5): 1439-1445. 
Turland, M., and P . Slade. 2019. “Farmers’ Willingness to Participate 
in a Big Data Platform.” Agribusiness . doi: https://doi.
org/10.1002/agr.21627 . Retrieved from https://www.ijser.
org/researchpaper/Market-Driven-Innovations-in-Rural-
Marketing-in-India.pdf .UN (United Nations). 2019a. UN E-Government Knowledgebase: 
E-Government Development Index (EGDI).  Accessed October 
4, 2019. https://publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en-us/
About/Overview/-E-Government-Development-Index .
UN. 2019b. UN E-Government Knowledgebase: E-Participation 
Index (EPI). Accessed October 4, 2019. https://
publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/en-us/About/Overview/
E-Participation-Index .
UN. 2019c. UN E-Government Knowledgebase: Country Data. 
Accessed October 4, 2019. https://publicadministration.
un.org/egovkb/Data-Center .
UN Women and REACH Initiative. 2018. Women’s Participation 
in the Agricultural Sector, Rural Institutions and Community 
Life. Amman: UN Women Jordan. Retrieved from https://
www2.unwomen.org/-/media/field%20office%20
jordan/attachments/publications/2018/womens%20
participation%20in%20the%20agricultural%20sector%20
rural%20institutions%20and%20community%20life.
pdf?la=en&vs=5756 . 
UN-ESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission 
for Western Asia). 2017. Arab Horizon 2030: Prospects for 
Enhancing Food Security in the Arab Region.  Beirut: UN-
ESCWA. 
UN-ESCWA. 2019. Assessing the Impacts of Changing Water 
Availability on Agricultural Production in Selected Arab 
Countries: National Assessment Report - Iraq (Arabic).  Beirut: 
UN-ESCWA. Retrieved from https://www.unescwa.org/sites/
www.unescwa.org/files/uploads/national-assessment-
report-iraq-arabic.pdf . 
UN-ESCWA and CNRS-L. 2017. National Technology Development 
and Transfer System in Lebanon. Beirut: UN-ESCWA. 
Retrieved from https://www.unescwa.org/sites/www.
unescwa.org/files/page_attachments/lebanon_ntto_book.
pdf. 
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2017. 
UNHCR Statistical Yearbook 2017. Geneva: UNHCR. Retrieved 
from https://www.unhcr.org/statistics/country/5a8ee0387/
unhcr-statistical-yearbook-2016-16th-edition.html . 
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 
2018. Jordan Vulnerability Assessment Framework: 2017 
Population Survey Report, Sector Vulnerability Review. 
UNHCR, UNICEF, and WFP . 2019. VASyR 2019: Vulnerability 
Assessment of Syrian Refugees in Lebanon. Beirut: UNHCR. 
Retrieved from https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/
download/73118 . 
Walmart Corporation. 2018. Global Responsibility Report, 2018. 
Accessed December 4, 2018. https://corporate.walmart.
com/2018grr/performance-highlights . 
WARD (Welfare Association for Research and Development). 2018. 
Functional Review of the Education and Extension Services 
(EES) of MoA. Study prepared by WARD for Lebanese 
Ministry of Agriculture, in framework of joint project with ILO 
and UNICEF.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2019. Innovation with a Purpose: 
Improving Traceability in Food Value Chains through 
Technology Innovations. Geneva: WEF. Retrieved from http://
www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Traceability_in_food_value_
chains_Digital.pdf . 
WFP (World Food Programme). 2020. “VAM Update on Food Price 
and Market Trends: December 2020.” Retrieved from https://
reliefweb.int/report/lebanon/lebanon-vam-update-food-
price-and-market-trends-december-2020 . Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon66WHO (World Health Organization). 2019.  Digitalization, Food Safety 
and Trade. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO. Retrieved from https://
www.who.int/docs/default-source/resources/digitalization-
food-safety-and-trade-en.pdf?sfvrsn=a11a03b8_2 .
Wikipedia. 2019. “List of Countries by Smartphone Penetration.” 
Accessed June 12, 2019. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
List_of_countries_by_smartphone_penetration .
Willett, W., J. Rockström, B. Loken, M. Springmann, T. Lang, S. 
Vermeulen, et al.  2019. “Food in the Anthropocene: The EAT-
Lancet Commission on Healthy Diets from Sustainable Food 
Systems.” The Lancet  393 (10170): 447–492. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31788-4 . 
Woetzel, J., J. Remes, B. Boland, K. Lv, S. Sinha, G. Strube, J. 
Means, J. Law, A. Cadena, and V. von der Tann. 2018.  Smart 
Cities: Digital Solutions for a More Livable Future. McKinsey 
Global Institute. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.
com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/capital%20projects%20
and%20infrastructure/our%20insights/smart%20cities%20
digital%20solutions%20for%20a%20more%20livable%20
future/mgi-smart-cities-full-report.ashx . 
Wolfert, S., L. Ge, C. Verdouw, and M. J. Bogaardt. 2017. “Big Data 
in Smart Farming - A Review.” Agricultural Systems  153: 
69–80. doi:10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.023. 
World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital 
Dividends.  Washington, DC: The World Bank Group. Retrieved 
from https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016 . 
World Bank. 2018a. The Role of Food and Agriculture for 
Job Creation and Poverty Reduction in Jordan and 
Lebanon (English).  Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/325551536597194695/pdf/Agricultural-Sector-Note-
Jordan-and-Lebanon.pdf .
World Bank. 2018b. Mashreq 2.0: Digital Transformation for 
Inclusive Growth and Jobs (Vol 2.) (English).  Washington, 
DC: World Bank Group. Retrieved from http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/246561561495359944/Mashreq-
2-0-Digital-Transformation-for-Inclusive-Growth-and-Jobs . 
World Bank. 2018c. Iraq Economic Monitor: From War to 
Reconstruction and Economic Recovery - With a Special 
Focus on Energy Subsidy Reform. Washington, DC: World 
Bank Group. Retrieved from http://documents.worldbank.
org/curated/en/771451524124058858/pdf/125406-WP-
PUBLIC-P163016-Iraq-Economic-Monitor-text-Spring-2018-
4-18-18web.pdf . 
World Bank. 2019a. Digital Adoption Index: Download. Washington, 
DC: World Bank Group. Accessed October 1, 2019. https://
www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016/Digital-
Adoption-Index .
World Bank. 2019b. Future of Food: Harnessing Digital 
Technologies to Improve Food System Outcomes. 
Washington, DC: World Bank Group. Retrieved from https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/31565 . 
License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
World Bank. 2019c. “Promoting Digital Agriculture: Case of 
E-voucher Program Implementation in Three West 
African Countries.” World Bank Memo, World Bank Group, 
Washington, DC. 
World Bank. 2019d. Enabling the Business of Agriculture: Country 
Scores. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. Retrieved from 
https://eba.worldbank.org/en/data/exploretopics/all-topics . World Bank. 2019e. Enabling the Business of Agriculture 2019. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:978-1-4648-1387-0. 
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO.
World Bank. 2019f. Iraq - Digital Economy Performance 2019. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank. 2019g. Jordan - Digital Economy Performance 2019.  
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank. 2019h. Lebanon - Digital Economy Performance 2019. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank. 2019i. “Iraq Economic Monitor, Fall 2019 : Turning the 
Corner - Sustaining Growth and Creating Opportunities for 
Iraq’s Youth.” World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32590 . 
License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
World Bank. 2019j. Executive Summary: Scaling Up Disruptive 
Agricultural Technologies in Africa. Washington, DC: World 
Bank Group. Retrieved from https://olc.worldbank.org/system/
files/59440_ASA%20Exec%20Summ_bleeds-crops.pdf .
World Bank. 2019k. Digital Technologies Changing Agriculture in 
Tunisia. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
World Bank. 2020a. “Breaking Out of Fragility: A Country 
Economic Memorandum for Diversification and 
Growth in Iraq.” World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Retrieved from https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/bitstream/handle/10986/34416/9781464816376.
pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y .
World Bank. 2020b. Global Financial Inclusion (Global Findex) 
Database.  Washington, DC: World Bank Group. Accessed 
January 15, 2020. http://databank.worldbank.org/data/
reports.aspx?source=1228 .
World Bank. 2020c. World Development Indicators. Washington, 
DC: World Bank Group. Accessed January 22, 2020. https://
databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-
indicators .
World Bank. 2020d. “Ability to Work from Home during COVID-19.” 
MENA Welfare Observatory Series N  4: 5.
World Bank. 2020e. State of the Mashreq Women Flagship 
1. Women’s Economic Participation in Iraq, Jordan and 
Lebanon. Executive Summary.  http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/
en/868581592904029814/State-of-the-Mashreq-Women.pdf .
World Bank. 2021. Digital Acceleration of Agricultural 
Transformation. Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
Yeboah, F. K., and T. S. Jayne. 2018. “Africa’s Evolving Employment 
Trends.” The Journal of Development Studies  54 (5): 
803–832. doi:10.1080/00220388.2018.1430767. 
Zhang, A., E. Jakku, R. Llewellyn, and E. I. Baker. 2018. “Surveying 
the Needs and Drivers for Digital Agriculture in Australia.” 
Farm Policy Journal 15 (1): 25–39.
67 ÎAppendix 1. Key Sector Indicators and Trends 
in Jordan, Lebanon, and Iraq.
Indicator Unit Jordan Iraq Lebanon
Surface ha, millions 8.9 43.5 1.0
Population Millions 10.4 38.4 6.8
Human Development Index 0.73 0.6 0.75
GDP US$, billions 40.0 225.9 56.6
GDP per Capita US$ 4,129.7 5,878.0 8,269.8
Share of Agriculture in GDP % 5.6 2.0 2.9
Share of Agriculture in 
Employment% 3.7 18.6 11.9
Government Expenditure  
for Agriculture% of total expenditure 0.75 n.a. 0.5
Agricultural Land ha, millions / % of total area 1.0 / 12.0 9.2 / 21.3 0.7 / 64.3
Arable Land ha, millions / % of total area 0.2 / 2.6 5.0 /11.5 0.1 / 12.9
Pastureland ha, millions / % of total area 0.7 / 0.8 4.0 / 0.9 0.4 /3.83
Forest Area ha, millions / % of total area 0.0 / 1.0 0.8 / 1.9 0.1 / 13.4
Area Equipped for Irrigation % of agricultural area 9.9 38.0 20.2
Share of Water Withdrawals 
for Agriculture% 60 n/a 59.5
Share of CO2-equivalent of 
Agriculturetons, millions 1.1 6.8 0.79
Trade Balance, All Sectors US$, millions −7,708.5 35,054.7 −13,708.7
Agro-food Trade - Export US$, millions 1,214.1 86.4 732.2
Agro-food Trade - Import US$, millions 3,711.6 10,590.8 3,206.3
Stunting % 7.8 22.1 16.5
Wasting (Children  
 under 5 years)% 0.7 2.8 2.9
Undernourished Population % 1.2 11.1 11.0
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon68 ÎAppendix 2. Digital Economy Performance in 
Mashreq
Components and Indicators Iraq Lebanon JordanMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
AverageMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
Average 
minus GCCData Source
Pillar 1: Digital Infrastructure 3.83 4.55 5.85 5.01 4.17
Access Mobile broadband 
capable market 
penetration19% 57% 49% 45% 34% GSMA
Fixed broadband 
household penetration 17% 58% 25% 44% 37% TeleGeography
Fiber to the Premises 
broadband penetration2% 0% 5% 15% 1% TeleGeography
Total used international 
bandwidth per internet 
user - Kbps 30.9 63.6 32.1 146.3 70.6 Analysis based on 
TeleGeography/
World Bank
% of population covered 
by 3G networks 93% 99% 99% 93% 89% GSMA Intelligence
% of population covered 
by 4G networks 25% 95% 99% 82% 70% GSMA Intelligence
Quality Mobile broadband 
download speed (Mbit/s) 7 38.1 15.2 24.9 17.5 Ookla
Afforda-
bilityFixed broadband 
download speed (Mbit/s) 15 6.6 29.6 17.4 8.9 Ookla
Mobile broadband price 
- price of 1 GB % GNI per 
capita 3.00% 2.70% 1.60% 3% 4% World Bank 
Research
Entry level Fixed 
broadband basket price 
% of GDP per capita 8.40% 2.30% 11.00% 8% 12% World Bank 
Research
Market 
CompetitionMobile market 
concentration index (HHI 
(Herfindahl-Hirschman 
Index)3,222 5,007 3,570 4,491 4,632 GSMA
Government 
OwnershipFixed broadband 
concentration index (HHI) — 8,907 4,768 6,804 7,424 TeleGeography
% of government 
ownership in the mobile 
market and fixed markets 0% 100% 23% 46% 49% Digital development 
team
% of government 
ownership in the Fixed 
market — 94% 17% 59% 67% Digital development 
team
Legal 
Frame-
worksDoes the country have 
a legal framework for 
data protection / privacy 
online?Draft Draft Draft Draft Draft UNCTAD Cyberlaw 
Tracker
Does the country have 
a legal framework for 
cybercrime prevention?Draft No Yes Yes Yes UNCTAD Cyberlaw 
Tracker
69Components and Indicators Iraq Lebanon JordanMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
AverageMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
Average 
minus GCCData Source
Pillar 2: Digital Platforms 4.08 6.01 5.02 5.44 4.81
Government 
PlatformsUnder-5 birth registration 
rate99% 100% 90% 93% 92% ID4D Indicators
National ID coverage (age 
18 +)— 97% — 97% 97% ID4D Indicators
ID database digitized Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes ID4D Indicators
Digital authentication 
enabled— Yes Yes Yes Yes ID4D Indicators
e-government Index 0.34 0.55 0.56 0.54 0.44 UN e-government 
database
Online Services Index 0.32 0.47 0.49 0.55 0.41 UN e-government 
database
e-Participation Index 0.48 0.12 0.69 0.53 0.54 UN e-government 
database
Share of population 
(age 15+) who cite 
lack of necessary 
documentation as a 
reason for not having a 
financial account (2017)23% 0% 9% 8% 9% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Logistics Percent of Population 
Having Mail Delivered at 
Home65% 100% 1% 51% 59% UPU
Percent of Income Linked 
to Parcels and Logistics 
Services62% 11% 6% 24% 22% UPU
Postal Reliability Index 15.9 79.4 59 58.7 53.9 UPU
Percent of the Population 
Without Postal Services0% 0% 61% 14% 19% UPU
LPI International 
shipments score2.3 2.8 3.2 2.9 2.6 Logistics 
Performance Index, 
World Bank
LPI Logistics 
competence score2 2.5 2.9 2.8 2.5 Logistics 
Performance Index, 
World Bank
LPI Tracing & tracking 
score2 2.8 3 2.8 2.5 Logistics 
Performance Index, 
World Bank
LPI Timeliness score 2.7 2.9 3.3 3.2 3 Logistics 
Performance Index, 
World Bank
Burden of customs 
procedures— 3.1 4.5 4.1 3.6 3.60
Private 
Sector 
PlatformsCountry value in 
the UNCTAD B2C 
E-commerce Index 14.3 57.4 41.3 49.2 39.2 UNCTAD
B2C Internet Use, 1–7 
(best)— 3.5 4.7 4.2 3.8 The Networked 
Readiness Index 
Historical Dataset © 
2012–2016 World 
Economic ForumFarmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon70Components and Indicators Iraq Lebanon JordanMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
AverageMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
Average 
minus GCCData Source
Pillar 3: Digital Financial Service 3.47 4.49 3.98 5.34 4.39
Payments Debit card (% age 15+) 4% 33% 19% 34% 19% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Debit card used in the 
past year (% age 15+) 1% 20% 6% 24% 12% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Credit card (% age 15+) 2% 11% 2% 12% 4% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Credit card used in the 
past year (% age 15+)1% 9% 2% 9% 4% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Cashless retail 
transactions per capita0.07 — 5.82 17.3 4.6 Global Findex, World 
Bank
Percentage of Adults 
having an Account at a 
financial institution (% 
age 15+)20% 45% 42% 49% 36% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Mobile money account 
(% age 15+) 4% — 1% 8% 6% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Made digital payments in 
the past year (% age 15+) 19% 33% 33% 34% 27% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Paid utility bills: using an 
account (% age 15+)6% 4% 4% 10% 7% Global Findex, World 
Bank
Legal  
Frame-
worksDoes the country have 
a legal framework for 
electronic transactions/e-
signature? Yes Draft Yes Yes Yes UNCTAD Cyberlaw 
Tracker
Does the country have 
a legal framework for 
consumer protection 
when purchasing online?No Draft No Draft Draft UNCTAD Cyberlaw 
Tracker
Pillar 4: Digital Entrepreneurship 2.95 5.1 5.59 4.18 3.55
Access to 
FinanceNumber of deals 0 41 33 24 18 https://magnitt.com
Number of deals by 
industry/sector— 14 11 21 14 https://magnitt.com
Value of disclosed 
funding by industry/
sector— 6 11 27 8.7 https://magnitt.com
Total disclosed funding 
(US$, millions)0 80 27 47.8 15 https://magnitt.com
Entrepre-
neurshipNumber of Startups — 85 88 47 42 Pitchbook
Number of VC Investors — 13 7 15 7 Pitchbook
Technology 
AbsorptionFirm-level technology 
absorption— 4 5 4.7 4.2 The Networked 
Readiness Index 
Historical Dataset © 
2012–2016 World 
Economic Forum71Components and Indicators Iraq Lebanon JordanMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
AverageMiddle 
East and 
North Africa 
Average 
minus GCCData Source
 Pillar 5: Digital Skills 2.83 5.45 5.13 4.68 3.94
Internet  
UseInternet users (per 100 
people) 17.2 74 53.4 53 38 ITU Database
Social  
MediaActive mobile social 
media penetration37% 52% 61% 46% 36% Statista 2017: US 
Census Bureau, 
Facebook
Active Social media users 
as % of population48% 66% 58% 59% 47% Datareportal: 
press releases and 
investor earning 
announcements, 
MENA 
Mobile social media 
users as % of population45% 59% 54% 53% 44% Datareportal: 
press releases and 
investor earning 
announcements, 
MENA 
Use of social networks 
Value— 5.7 5.7 5.6 5.3 The Networked 
Readiness Index 
Historical Dataset 
© 2012-2016 World 
Economic Forum
Digital  
skillsDigital talent as a 
share of total Full-time 
employees— — — 1.7 1.9 McKinsey 
Digitization  
Index
Skills Percentage of 
graduates from Science, 
Technology, Engineering 
and Mathematics 
programmes in tertiary 
education, both sexes (%)— 23% 26% 27% 28% UNESCO Institute 
for Statistics
Percentage of female 
graduates from Science, 
Technology, Engineering 
and Mathematics 
programmes in tertiary 
education, female (%)— 18% — 21% 21% UNESCO Institute 
for Statistics
Gross enrollment ratio, 
tertiary, both sexes (%)- 38% 32% 39% 38% UNESCO Institute 
for Statistics
Source: World Bank’s MNA Tech Initiative, World Bank. 2019f,g,h.
Note: ITU = International Telecommunication Union; UNCTAD = United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development; UNESCO = United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; UPU = Universal Postal 
Union.72
Farmers of the Future: Digital Revitalization of the Agrifood Sector in Mashreq - Focus on Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon
73
Chapter 1 The State of Agri-food Systems - Opportunities and Challenges
Contact information  
The World Bank Group
