Policy Research Working Paper 9199
Digital T rade in MENA
Regulatory Readiness Assessment 
Lillyana Daza Jaller 
Martín Molinuevo 
Middle East and North Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
   &
Macroeconomics, T rade and Investment Global Practice
March 2020
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedProduced by the Research Support TeamAbstract
The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development 
issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the 
names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those 
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and 
its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.Policy Research Working Paper 9199
A strong regulatory framework can provide essential tools 
for remote transactions and improve trust in digital trade. 
Yet, regulations can also introduce restrictions that hamper 
the conditions for digital markets. Based on a database of 
20 Middle East and North Africa countries and 20 compar -
ator countries around the world, this paper shows that the 
Middle East and North Africa region is falling behind in 
establishing a modern governance framework for the digital 
economy. The analysis focuses on a set of regulatory areas, 
including electronic documentation and signature, online 
consumer protection, data governance, cybersecurity, and 
intermediary liability regulations. It assesses each country’s domestic regulatory framework in light of recent interna -
tional trends and regulatory models. The study shows that 
regulation of digital markets in countries in the region is 
still in its infancy, being mostly governed by general laws 
that were not originally intended for the digital era. Some 
countries have tried to support an export-oriented infor -
mation technology sector by keeping an updated regulatory 
framework. However, regulation in most countries in the 
region, regardless of their level of development, still features 
some major loopholes that can limit consumer trust in dig -
ital markets or reduce certainty—and increase costs—for 
digital businesses. 
This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Middle East and North Africa Region and the Macroeconomics, 
T rade and Investment Global Practice. . It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research 
and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also 
posted on the Web at http://www.worldbank.org/prwp. The authors may be contacted at mmolinuevo@worldbank.org.     Digital Trade  in MENA  
Regulatory Rea diness Asses sment 
Lillyana Daza Jaller 
Martín Molinuevo 
JEL Codes: F13, K24, L86, O38 
Keywords: e-commerce, digital markets, regulatory framework, data policy This note was prepared by Lillyana Daza Jaller (Consultant), and Martín Molinuevo (Senior Counsel , 
ETIRI ), as a background paper for a World Bank study on “New Economy  Agenda for MENA ”, under the 
guidance of Antonio Nucifora (Manager) . The authors are grateful to Daniel Lederman, Martha Licetti, 
Ana Paula Cusolito, Christina Wood, Francois De Soyres, Jerome Bezzi na, and the participants to the 
author’s workshop  of July 2019 for valuable comments and suggestions.   
This note was  partially funded by the Umbrella Facility for Trade Trust Fund (UFT) , established with 
contributions from DFID, Sida, SECO, the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs , and the Norwegian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs .Digital Trade in MENA  
Regulatory Readiness Assessment  
I.Introduction
Regulation plays a central role in building the foundations of digital markets.  It can provide the 
legal tools necessary for remote contracts, clarify the rights and obligations of the multiple actors 
involved in digital transactions, and establish a framework that promotes consumer trust in 
digital ma rkets, even when the consumer does not know the merchant or when the merchant is in 
a different country.  
The regulation of digital markets is a patchwork of regulatory solutions from different policy 
areas. Broadly speaking, the regulation of e -trade entai ls elements of contract law, particular ly 
with regar ds to  electronic documents and signatures, as well as laws related to  consumer 
protection, intellectual property, cybersecurity, personal privacy, and data protection. A 
conducive regulatory framework in each of these policy areas is necessary for vibrant digital 
markets.  However, specific restrictive measures within these areas may undermine e -trade, for 
example by  unnecessarily  curbing the types of goods that can be traded remotely or  by limiting 
the cr oss-border flows of data that underpin e -trade transactions.  
Laws and regulations can 
hence either foster or hinder 
digital trade (Figure 1). 
Regulation can play three 
different roles for digital 
markets. First, it can provide 
essential regulatory tools for 
remote transactions, such as 
electronic documents and 
signature s; Second, it can 
improve the conditions for 
trust in digital markets, by 
ensuring that consumers are 
protecte d, and that their 
information is safe and 
remains private, hence 
increasing reliance and 
bringing new actors to 
digital transactions . A strong 
regulatory framework on these aspects can be associated with the expansion of digital trade –
represented o n the upward part of the slope in Figure 1. Yet, third, regulations can also introduce 
restrictions that hamper the conditions for digital markets, by restricting the types of goods and 
services that can bought online; by limiting or increasing costs for t he transfer of data —which is 
necessary for the transactions —or creating burdensome conditions for online marketplaces, 
platforms, and services providers, which ultimately limits the offer of goods and services in 
digital markets.  Figure 1: Domestic regulation can either foster or hinder e -trade  
   
 
2 
 Regulation of digital mark ets in Middle East and North Africa ( MENA ) countries is 
underdeveloped, being mostly covered by general laws not originally intended for the digital era.   
Regulations on long -standing digital policies, such as e -document s and e -signature s, are found 
throug hout the region, but even those frameworks are largely outdated  and incomplete.  Only a 
handful of countries  have advanced in most key regulations for digital markets, but  
comprehensive and up -to-date regulatory solutions are only found in a few countries in the 
region, notably Qatar , Bahrain , and Morocco,  while other s, like Lebanon and Tunisia,  also 
provide comprehensive regulations, albeit with small gaps . Digital regulation is virtually 
inexistent in a few countries like  Iraq, Jordan , UAE , and Kuwait , whose framework s are severely 
outdated (in areas like electronic transactions) or stemming from broader frameworks not 
designed for current digital markets  (on data  governance  and intermediary liability) .  For a quick 
attemp t to catch up on digital regulations, these countries could adopt the approach of Lebanon, 
which recently introduced a law on e -commerce tackling multiple regulatory policies at on ce, 
from e -signature to intermediary liability.  Most countries  in the region , including Lebanon,  as 
well as Oman, Jordan, the Islamic Republic of Iran, and UAE  would benefit from detailed, 
specific regulations  to expand the broad frameworks already in place, as well as new frameworks 
to address current gaps . 
A. Approach and met hodology  
In what follows, this study reviews the main policy areas th at build the regulatory framework for 
digital markets for countries in the MENA  region . The study considers a set of regulatory areas 
of central importance to digital markets and assess es the domestic  regulatory framework s in light 
of recent international trends and regulatory models. In particular, the study addresses electronic 
documentation and signature; online consumer protection; data governance ; cybersecurity; and 
intermediary liabi lity regulations.  
To guide the analysis, the study draws on a pilot database for regulation on digital trade in 40 
countries.1 The data are based on the review of laws and regulations relating to electronic 
documentation and signature; online consumer pr otection; data governance; cybersecurity; and 
intermediary liability regulations in MENA countries as well as over 20 comparator countries.  
This provides information on the regulatory stances of the different countries on a selected set of 
key provisions r elevant to trade policy. At the same time, the codification of the regulatory 
frameworks allows to translate that regulatory information into dummy variables or into a Digital 
Trade Regulatory Readiness Index to be used in economic analysis.  
The study offe rs an overall assessment of how comprehensive and up to date the regulatory 
framework for digital trade  is. The different regulatory areas  under review have in common that, 
taken together, they offer a set of basic rules that create tools for remote transactions (e -
document and e -signature) or clarify conditions of digital transaction s that enhance consumers ’ 
(online consumer protection; data governance and cybersecurity)  and business’ (intermediary 
liability) trust. Importantl y, however, there are a number of additional policies relevant to digital 
trade that are not covered in the current study : regulations related to competition policy, taxation, 
e-payments , as well as the conditions for business licenses , which can also make  or break a  
conducive framework for digital businesses.   
 
1 See Annex 1 for details .    
 
3 
 In assessing these regulatory fields, the analysis focuses on selected regulatory options within 
each of these fields , so as to assess the regulations in the region in a comprehensive manner .  For 
example, when asses sing e-signature  regulation , the study discusses the scope of the signature 
and legal validity given to the e-signature . While an in -depth assessment of the regulation of e-
signature in a specific country would require discussing  several  other aspects that are referenced 
only in passing in this analysis (e.g. the nature of the certifying provider ), the assessment of these 
key regulatory options provides a picture of the level of sophistication of the regulation and its 
timeliness in keepin g with the policy challenges introduced by digital transactions.   
The different sections of the study are focused on the different regulatory fields under 
consideration, and a concluding section summarizes the main findings and offers policy 
recommendation s. Each section  first presents the key features of the regulation and highlights  
international regulatory practices and  models and then describes the regulatory practices by 
MEN A countries in that particular area , assess es strengths  and weaknesses  of the regulations , 
and provides recommendations .  
II. Regulation on e lectronic transactions  
The legal recognition of electronic documents and signatures as adequate tools for remote 
businesses is a key step in building a thriving digital marke t.  As communication technologies 
connect people and businesses around the world with increasing ease and convenience, 
businesses engaged in digital trade also expand their network of clients and suppliers across 
borders. A conducive regulatory framework f or digital tra de should hence guarantee that 
contracts concluded remotely  through electronic channels  are valid and legally enforceable just 
as those concluded in person . Ensuring that electronic documents and signatures are fully 
recognized and can be enf orced is therefore an essential regulatory step to allow for remote 
electronic contracts and transactions.   
Being a key enabler for cross -border businesses, the regulation of electronic transactions is one 
of the few areas of digital regulation with dedic ated international guidance and substantive 
regulatory experience around the world. In fact, regulation on electronic information and 
signatures can be traced back to the use of the telegraph in the 19 th century.   
All countries in MENA have advanced on regulating electronic transactions , typically following 
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ( UNCITRAL ) guidelines for e -
documents and  e-signature s. Nonetheless, most regulatory frameworks remain i ncomplete or 
outdate d, providing partial solutions (e -documents) or unnecessarily burde nsome requirements 
that limit the use of electronic transactions (e -signatures) . In the case of e -signature s, it also 
remains unclear whether MENA countries have establi shed the institutional setting necessary to 
support e -signature regulation, which undermine s the regulation itself . 
A. Electr onic documentation  
A strong and reliable framework for e -documents is particularly important for business -to-
business (B2B) transactio ns. Transactions by final consumers, such as those on e -commerce 
platforms like Souq.com and app -based services like Airbnb, do not typically entail major 
documentation exchanges and can be concluded even without a specific regulatory framework 
for electro nic transactions. However, for business relations that require a degree of customization 
of the products and services and that are provided over time, such as those that allow suppliers to    
 
4 
 connect to global value chains and/or services that require peripat etic delivery over extended 
contract periods, the ability to conclude a contract or amend its terms remotely in a secure and 
reliable manner is a key step towards engaging in business -to-business digital trade.  
International guidelines  and practice  
UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce (MLEC) of 1996 is the international standard 
on regulation  of electronic documents. The main objective of the MLEC is to facilitate remote 
transactions by establishing rules to allow the electronic eq uivalent of paper -based documents to 
be legally recogni zed, thereby removing obstacles to remote transactions . The MLEC promotes 
the principles of non -discrimination, technological neutrality , and functional equivalence in the 
treatment of electronic documentation . The principle of non -discrimination is the cornerstone of 
the regulation, as it ensures that a document would not be denied legal effect, validity , or 
enforceability solely on the grounds that it is in electronic form.  
Regulation can recognize the validity of electronic documents in general  terms or provide 
specific provisions on key regulatory issues . All regulations inspired in the MLEC at very least 
ensure the legal validity of documents can be recognized and enforced, even when found in 
electronic form . Specific regulations on electronic documents further elaborate and provide 
answers on specific uses of e -documents, such as evidential weight and technological neutrality.  
Specific rules on electronic documents that tackle issues like evidential w eight an d technological 
neutrality, and most often both such 
elements, are clearly the preferred type 
of regulation in the selected 
comparator countries (Table 1) . While 
most of these countries have 
technologically neutral provisions in 
their e -document regulation , several –
mainly those located in Central and 
South Asia —lack provisions 
recognizing the evidential weight of e -
documents.  
Specific rules on e -documents address 
the issue of the evidential weight of 
electronic documents when presented 
as evidence in lega l proceedings. The 
MLEC provides that e -documents 
should not be denied admissibility as 
evidence in legal proceedings solely 
based on their electronic nature. The 
probative value of an e -document 
should be assessed based on several 
factors, including the r eliability of the 
methods used for creation, storage, and 
transmission.  
Technologically neutral regulation grants parties to an online transaction the freedom to choose 
the adequate technology based on their needs. Additionally , certain laws include requi rements 
regarding the way e -documents are stored, such as requiring encryption, which can be unduly Table 1. A doption of domestic regulation on e -documents  
  E-Docs regulation  
 None  General  Specific  
 Evidential 
weight  Technological 
neutrality  
Albania    ●  
Armenia     ● 
Bangladesh     ● 
Burkina Faso   
 ● ● 
Canada    ● ● 
Colombia   
 ● ● 
France    ● ● 
Honduras    ● ● 
Indonesia    ● ● 
Kazakhstan   
●  
 
Kenya     ● 
Korea , Rep.   
  
● 
Kyrgyzstan   
●  
 
Malaysia     ● 
Mexico    
 ● ● 
Moldova   
 ● ● 
Pakistan   
  
● 
Senegal    ● ● 
Tanzania    ● ● 
Vietnam   
 ● ● 
    
 
5 
 restrictive.  In that sense, it is worth recalling that any type of electronic communication, 
including through casual means like text messages, emails, or e lectronic chat, can be considered 
an electronic document with probative value, even when such communications are not encrypted 
or are relative weak in cybersecurity terms. According to the MLEC, a requirement to store an e -
document unaltered is inappropria te, as data messages tend to be decoded, compressed, or 
converted in the storage process. The MLEC provides the following conditions for the storage of 
e-documents:  
• The information must be accessible for subsequent reference;  
• The information must be stored in the manner in which it was created or transmitted, or 
in a manner which can be demonstrated to accurately represent it; and  
• Any existing information that enable s the identification of the origin and destination of 
the data message and the data and time of transmission must be stored . 
MENA  
All MENA countries, except for Djibouti 
and the Republic of Yemen , have adopted 
regulations that recognize electronic 
documents as equivalent to paper -based 
documents  (Table 2) . Israel  has done so 
by including provisions recognizing the 
general principal of non -discrimination of 
e-documentation in its legislation on 
electronic signature. The rest of the  
countries  in the region  have instead 
adopted a more developed framework on 
e-documents, reflecting in greater detail 
the principles of the UNCITRAL MLEC.  
While a more detailed regulation offers 
advantages in terms of clarity of the 
regulation, both approaches do give legal 
recognition to electronic documents.  
Lebanon was the last MENA country to 
recognize electronic documents , with a 
broad e -transaction law entering into force 
in October 2018.  While it is recognized 
that new law comes to fill an important 
vacuum, the law has received substantial 
criticism. 2 With regard to electronic 
documents, the new legislation follows the standard of giving full legal effect to e lectronic 
documents , but it does so  “ provided that […] they are organized and stored in a way that 
preserves their safety ”  and clarifies that “ [a]ny electronic writing tha t does not meet the criteria 
above shall be considered as introduction of written evidence ” (Article 4).  While this condition , 
applied by many  other countries in the region,  appear s to promot e cybersecurity measures, it 
 
2 See (Dentons 2019)  Table 2. Adoption of regulation on e -documents in MENA  
  E-Docs regulation  
 None  General  Specific  
  Evidential 
weight  Technological 
neutrality  
Algeria    ● ● 
Bahrain    ● ● 
Djibouti  ●    
Egypt , Arab 
Rep.    ●  
Iran, Islamic 
Rep.    ●  
Iraq    ● 
Israel   ●   
Jordan    ● ● 
Kuwait    ●  
Lebanon    ●  
Morocco    ● ● 
Oman    ● ● 
Qatar    ● ● 
Saudi Arabia    ● ● 
Tunisia    ● ● 
United Arab 
Emirates    ● ● 
Yemen , Rep.  ●    
    
 
6 
 unnecessarily limit s the scope of t he electronic documents. Under a strict reading, it would  seem 
to suggest that documents such as email or non-encrypted documents may not be fully 
recognized as electronic documents  equivalent to paper documents .  
B. Electronic signature  
The ability to conclude legally binding contracts remotely, without the face -to-face interaction of 
the parties , is a central feature of global business. Digital technologies reduce distances by 
facilitating interaction and collaboration across borders; electronic signat ure complement s that 
digital pro ximity by providing a mechanism which grants full legal recognition to any agreement 
that may be concluded, even at a distance.  
Digital activity involves engaging in remote —often international —contracts on a routine basis, 
to the point where users are not often aware of its international nature. For instance, accepting 
the terms of use of a website or a mobile app (often without even reading the content) by clicking 
a box entails, in legal terms, the acceptance of a contract through an electronic signature.  For the 
developer of the app or  the supplier of the online service, it is hence essential that the legal 
framework provide that such signature is indeed a recognized form of signature –in other terms, 
of accepting the term s of the contract.    
Electronic signatures are particularly important to transactions between firms, especially in the 
context of a global or regional value chain. While e -commerce transactions by final consumers 
are typically individual purchases of disc rete goods or services that can be satisfied with a simple 
click on a box, cross -border  deals between firms often involve a business relati onship  that 
extends in time and entails the production and delivery of customized goods or service s, whose 
terms and specifications need to be clearly agreed  to in advance. This type of B2B interaction 
must be reflected on a distinct, specific, contract between the client and supplier, sanctioned with 
the signature of the parties to accept that those are the agreed terms .  For these engagements, the 
parties may wish t o back those digital documents with an electronic signature that provides 
certain guarantees against tampering or prying by third parties.  
International guidelines  and practice  
At a minimum, a regulatory framework should recognize  that electronic signature s are a legally 
valid form of accepting an obligation or terms of a document.  Further, the framework should also 
ensure that, when an electronic signature meets certain requirements, it has full  recognition of 
validity and enforceability , just like a handwritten signature. 3 
The UN Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts  
provides that  e-signatures should satisfy a legal requirement for a signature  so long as t he e-
signature meets certain requirements . The method used to identify the party’s intention in respect 
of the information attached must be either as reliable as appropriate for the purpose of the 
electronic communication or proven to have fulfilled the re quirements. The Convention’s scope 
is limited to contracts between parties whose places of business are in different countries, and it 
 
3 Handwritten signatures, in addition to being legally valid, are also enforceable as they create the presumption that 
they were indeed inserted by the designated person (a rebuttable  presumption, that allows the interested person to 
show proof, for instanc e, that the signature had been forged). E lectronic signature s can be recognized as legally 
valid but may or may not be given full enforceability depending on the technology and procedures in use. Typically, 
only “digital signatures” that use some type of e ncryption technology are given full enforceability –see Box 1 for 
further details. An electronic signature that is not fully enforceable would require that the person claiming its 
validity also provide evidence that such electronic signature was indeed ins erted by the designated person.     
 
7 
 excludes certain transactions, including contracts for family or household purposes and 
transactions on a regulated excha nge.  
UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Signatures (MLES) of 2001 provides the standards 
required for an e -signature to be considered legally equivalent to handwritten signatures. It also 
lays out basic rules of conduct regarding the responsibilities and li abilities of the parties, 
including the signatory, the certification service provider (CSP), and the relying party. Any 
method of creating an electronic signature satisf ies a legal requirement for a signature.  
When certain conditions are met , regulation m ay extend to electronic or, more often, digital 
signature , the same treatment that it affords to handwritten signatures: that the signature is not 
only legally valid, but also that it belongs to the signatory (authenticity) , and that the signature 
itself a nd the information to which is relate has not been altered (integrity).  If deemed 
sufficiently reliable, foreign certificates and electronic signatures are recognized regardless of the 
place of issuance of the certificate, creation or use of the signature , or place of business of the 
issuer or signatory.  
Box 1: Electronic Signatures vs. Digital Signatures  vs Enhanced Digital Signature s 
Although the terms electronic signature and digital signature are sometimes used interchangeably, a digital 
signature is actually a type of electronic signature. An electronic signature is defined by Oxford Dictionar y as 
“symbols or other data in digital form attached to an electronically transmitted document as verification of the 
sender’s intent to sign the do cument”.  In practice, an electronic signature is an electronic representation that 
the person has agreed to the content of the document, be that in the form of a typed name (“ John Lennon ”), an 
image of the person’s handwritten signature ( ), or any other  form electronic representation, 
such as an image ( ) or icon ( )  or simply the clicking of a box with a ✓.  
Digital signature is defined as “a type of electronic signature that encrypts documents with digital codes that are 
particularly difficult to duplicate”. Whereas an electronic signature can be created by simply clicking a mouse 
or tracing a handwritten signature with a finger, digital signatures  involve the use of a code or algorithm to sign 
and validate the authenticity of a docume nt. Unlike electronic signatures, digital signatures come under specific 
standards and a stringent verification process. A digital signature ensures the integrity of a message. This is 
achieved through a series of steps. First, the receiver’s public key is  used to encrypt a random key. This is 
combined with the encrypted message as well as the digital signature and the authenticated message is 
transmitted through an unsecured network. Upon receipt, the message is separated from the digital signature 
and the  receiver’s private key is used to decrypt it. A temporary digital fingerprint, hashed from the random 
key, validates the received fingerprint. If the message has not been corrupted during transmission, it is 
authenticated.  
Digital signatures are most 
commonly created through a 
technology known as “Public Key 
Infrastructure” (PKI), which 
provides a cryptographic key pair 
that can be shared  through a trusted 
authority. The use of the keys not 
only encrypts the message so that 
only the intended recipient can  
access it, but it also guarantees that 
the content of the message has not been violated or altered.   
The mere use of PKI, however, cannot guarantee that the person who sent the message is indeed the person 
who he/she claim s to be.  Indeed, one person cou ld be sending secured messages using an alias.  To prevent 
this, an “enhanced digital signature” (or “secure digital signature” in some countries) is a digital signature that 
belongs to a person whose identi ty has been verified by a relevant authority.  An enhance d digital signature 
   
 
8 
 With the growth of e -commerce around the world, governments have enacted legal instruments 
to give recognition and legal validity to electronic and digital signatures . While the objective of 
all these regulations is recognizing some kind of electronic  representation as a legally valid 
signature , three different regulatory models are currently in place  ( (Frederick Fischer 2001) ; 
(Blythe 2011) ).  
• On one end of the spectrum, the prescriptive approach  only recognizes one type of e -
signature as legally valid  –typically, digital signatures that have adopted specific 
encryption mechanism and have been issue d following prescr ibed procedures. While 
secure digital signatures have the advantage of offering the maximum degree of security , 
the prescribed technology and procedures is unnecessarily costly and burdensome for 
most activit ies, as the parties may be  forced to resort to certification authorities  and pay a 
fee thereto .  This approach was pioneered in the state of Utah, and later replicated in 
other states in the U nited States  and countries around the world, including Bangladesh, 
Brazil , and Peru  ( (Blythe 2011) ; (Adobe 2019) ). 
•  A “minimalist ” or “permissive”  approach , on the contrary, allows parties to choose the 
technology they prefer , giving any selected technology equal legal valid ity. The United 
States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand have adopted this approached (AssureSign 
2019) . This approach affords the greatest liberty to the parties in adopting any type of 
technologies, thus reducing costs . However , the approach fails to acknowledge that 
certain technologies are indeed more secure than other s and the greater security may be 
warranted in certain  conditions.  
• A hybrid or “two -tiered”  approach  is a mix between these two, recognizing all 
technologies as legally valid while giving certain presumptions  (authenticity,  integrity, 
etc.) only to digital signatures . Like the prescriptive approach, it describes the 
requirements of a digital signature, and include s rules of conduct regarding the rights and 
respons ibilities of the parties, including the signatory, the certification service provider 
(CSP), and the relying party .  A few countries have further developed this approach to 
offer greater liberty to private parties in adopting digital signatures through tec hnologies 
of their own preference  or allowing certification by non -accredited CSPs . 
Singapore has further elaborated the two -tiered model creating a third category of signature. 
With a view to increasing security while reducing costs of adoption, Singapore’s Electronic 
Transactions Act  allow s private parties to adopt any commercially reasonable security  available 
that, to the extent that it could provide equivalent security as the  prescribed mechanism for 
digital signature s, they would also be granted the same treatment as handwritten signatures. This 
model essentially extends flexibility to the parties in selecting a technology and a certification 
provider of their choosing.  Othe r countries , like Mexico and Colombia , have followed this 
model in their more recent regulations.  The EU Electronic Identification and Authentication 
Services Regulation (eIDAS) of 2016 also opened the door for EU Members to recognize an typically involves, in addition the use of a PKI : i) a certificate service provider (CSP)—typically a n IT firm 
who offers electronic signature technologies, such as DocuSign or Adobe, and has been vetted to issue such 
certificate — who generates, stores, issues, renews, revokes, and verifies the digital certificates, and ii) a 
registration authority who verifies the identity of entities before their digital certificates are stored at the C SP, 
which could be  a public  entity or a private one, depending on the regulation.  
    
 
9 
 “advanced digital  signature” that has greater flexibility in the type of encryption technology and 
selection of CSP.   
The hybrid approach has become the preferred method of regulating electronic signatures around 
the world.  In 1998, Singapore introduced the first law of t his type, later amending it in 2010 to 
bring it in line with the UN Convention , and it has become the trend in modern electronic 
signature regulation, having been adopted by the E uropean Union ; China ; Hong Kong  SAR , 
China;  Japan ; and the Republic of  Korea,  among many others (Blythe 2011) . This approach is 
preferable as it sets out the use of a specific technology (PKI) and procedures (certification 
services providers ) to ensure that secure digital signatures can indeed guarantee the identity of 
the signatory and integrity of the content. Th ese specific procedures are required, for instance, 
for submitting documents to the government.  
Most countries in the 
sample have adopted 
the hybrid approach, 
recognizing all e -
signatures as legally 
valid while giving 
greater evidential 
weight  to digital 
signatures (Table 3). 
While some of these 
regulations grant 
specific legal 
presumptions to secure 
digital signatures, such 
as integrity or intent, 
others are broader, 
granting the m the  
presumption of 
reliability . Some 
countries followed 
Singapore’s example, 
extend ing the legal 
presumptions to all 
digital  signatures 
meeting certain criteria, 
regardless of the 
certification  service  
provider or technology 
used. Countries in 
Central Asia  –such as  
Armenia, Kazakhstan, 
and Moldova — 
maintain the 
prescriptive model, 
which is unduly Table 3: Regulations  on electronic signature aroun d the world  
 Model 
adopted  Flexibility 
in CSP or 
technology 
used  Certification authorities  
Albania  Two -tiered  Yes National Authority for Electronic 
Certification  
Armenia  Prescriptive  Yes “Authorized Body”  
Bangladesh  Prescriptive  Yes Controller of Certifying Authority  
Burkina 
Faso  Two -tiered  No Regulatory Authority of Electronic 
Communications  
Canada  Permissive  Yes Treasury Board  
Colombia  Two -tiered  Yes Superintendence of Industry and 
Commerce  
France  Two -tiered  No National Agency for Information 
Systems Security  
Honduras  Two -tiered  Yes Directorate General of Intellectual 
Property  
Indonesia  Prescriptive  Yes Minister of Communications and 
Informatics  
Kazakhstan  Two -tiered  No National Certification Authority  
Kenya  Prescriptive  Yes Communications Commission  
Korea , Rep.  Two -tiered  No Korea Information Certificate 
Authority  
Kyrgyzstan  Two -tiered  No State Committee of Information 
Technologies and Communications  
Malaysia  Two -tiered  No Controller of Certification 
Authorities  
Mexico   Two -tiered  Yes Secretariat of Economy  
Moldova  Two -tiered  No Information and Security Service  
Pakistan  Two -tiered  Yes Electronic Certification 
Accreditation Council  
Senegal  Two -tiered  Yes State Information Technology 
Agency  
Tanzania  Two -tiered  No Communications Regulatory 
Authority  
Vietnam  Two -tiered  No Root Certification Authority  
    
 
10 
 restrictive as it requires the use of specific technologies , such as encryption , to recognize the 
validity of the e -signature. All countries in the review allow commercial firms to provide legally 
recognized certifications , and some , such as Armenia and Kyrgyzstan,  allow for certification by 
non-authorized CSPs . Providing th ese option s reduces the costs of adoption as parties to a 
transaction have alternatives to choose from when seeking certification.  
MENA  
Most of the countries in the 
MENA region have adopted 
regulation that recognize s 
electronic signature s as 
legally valid , adopting a two -
tiered model  (Table 4). In the 
majority of the countries, 
parties to a contract may 
choose any method of 
signing that th ey deem 
appropriate given the 
circumstances. However, in 
most cases, the use of a 
digital signature with a 
certificate issued by a 
certification service provider 
licensed by the authority is 
given evidentiary 
presumptions,  includ ing the 
presumption of vali dity and 
authenticity. Other countries 
in the region have  
implemented the prescriptive 
approach, only viewing 
digital signatures as legally 
valid, regardless of the 
circumstances. This can be 
restrictive, as it does not 
allow the parties to a contract 
to select the technology that 
best suits their needs.  
Some MENA countries still 
feature burdensome models, 
and implementation is 
uncertain across the region.  The Arab Republic of Egypt  and Tunisia  maintain prescriptive 
model s that unnecessarily limit the options of private parties  to cho ose a type of e -signature 
appropriate for their circumstances.    
While other countries have adopted seemingly m ore liberal regulation, implementation remains 
uncertain across the region. For instance, Bahrain has to date ac credited no certification ser vices Table 4: Regulations  on electronic signature in MENA  
 Model 
adopted  Flexibility 
in CSP or 
technology 
used  Certification authorities  
Algeria  Two -tiered  
 No Economic Authority of 
Electronic Certification  
Bahrain  Two -tiered  No No accredited CSPs to date 
Djibouti  None  N/A N/A 
Egypt , 
Arab Rep.  Prescriptive  N/A ITIDA operates the Egyptian 
Root Certificate Authority and 
issues licenses for CSPs.  
Iran, 
Islamic 
Rep.  Two -tiered  Yes N/A 
Iraq Two -tiered  No N/A 
Israel  Two -tiered  Yes Registrar of Certification 
Authorities  
Jordan  Two -tiered  Yes N/A 
Kuwait  Two -tiered  No N/A 
Lebanon  Two -tiered  No Lebanese Accreditation Council 
(COLIBAC).  
Morocco  Two -tiered  No Direct orate  General  of 
Information Systems Security  
Oman  Two -tiered  Yes Information Technology 
Authority  
Qatar  Two -tiered  No National Center for 
Information Security  
Saudi 
Arabia  Two -tiered  Yes National Center for Digital 
Certification  
Tunisia  Prescriptive  N/A National Agency for Digital 
Certification  
United 
Arab 
Emirates  Two -tiered  Yes Controller  
Yemen , 
Rep.  None  N/A N/A 
    
 
11 
 providers. 4  This means that no firm or individual can adopt a secure digital signature , thus 
severely crippling the framework for e -signatures.  Information regarding the certification 
authorities of other countries in the region , including Jordan  and Kuwait , is also not available 
online, reducing the effectiveness of the system in the best-case scenario.  All other countries 
have appointed public entities as certification authorities , which often lead s to poor 
implement ation  when the agencies are not adequately trained and equipped . However, all MENA  
countries allow for certification by private  certification providers , which  can help  mainstream the 
use of digital signatures.  
III. Trust -building  regulation  
Regulation plays an essential role in bolstering digital markets by promoting trust. As digital 
markets are still in their infancy, t he top reason for not engaging in online purchases , at least in 
developed markets, remains the lack of trust in remote elec tronic transactions (Figure  2). 
Consumers typically have no face -to-face contact with vendors, which leads to few “visual 
cues”, such as location, facilities , and personalized interaction, which helps consumer s gauge the 
retailer or suppliers’ professional ism.  In this environment, consumers are asked to disclose 
sensitive information and personal data either to a retailer, online intermediary , or digital 
platform. As a result, one important limiting factor in both developed and developing economies 
is the perception that cross ‑border online transactions and delivery are less secure, and remedies 
do not exist for when something goes wrong  (World Economic Forum 2019) . 
Three sets of regulations are particularly relevant to promot ing consumers’ trust in digital 
markets:  
• An effective framework for online consumer protection  helps consumers be better 
informed about the characteristics of the good or services at hand  as well as the terms of 
the transaction, promoting a greater underst anding of the conditions of the transaction;  
• As consumers are required to provide sensitive personal and financial  details, a strong 
data governance  regime is essential to give individuals control over their own 
information;  
• Similarly, a cybersecurity  framework further improves trust by ensuring that firms meet 
certain minimum tech nical  standards in the protection of their digital information and that 
illegal access to such data is duly prosecute d and, if needed, penalized . 
Figure 2. Lack of trust  is the top reason for not purchasing goods and services online  
 
4 (International Trade Administration 2019)     
 
12 
  
Source: (CIGI -Ipsos 2017)  
 
Trust -building  regulation  for digital markets is underdeveloped in MENA countries.  Most 
countries in the region have not adopted frameworks specific to online consumer protection, data 
governance , and cybersecur ity, by rather rely ing on general frameworks that we re not designed 
for digital  transactions .  Even those who advanced on speci fic provisions for online transactions , 
such as Algeria, Qatar , and Tunisia , are missing important elements of the regulation.   
A. Online consumer protection  
Online consumer protection is essential to support a global market for digital good s and services.  
Distance shopping presents challenges, such as the inability to assess products in person before 
confirming a transaction. Online consumer protection laws aim to ensure “a level of protection 
not less than that afforded in offline commerce”  (UNCTAD, Consumer Protection in Electronic 
Commerce: A Note by the UNCTAD Secretariat 2017)  (Bartley Johns, et al. 2017) .  To that end, 
online  consumer protection builds on the principles and mecha nisms of traditional consumer 
protection regimes, extending and adapting those protections to digital markets, in order to 
reduce some of the challenges of buying and selling online, such as the rights and obligations 
involving an electronic transaction , or the way to rescind it if necessary  (OECD, Guidelines for 
Consumer Protection in the Context of Electronic Commerce 2000) .  
A detailed framework for online consumer protection should include digital -specific protections 
at all stages of the transaction. Consumer concerns include the conditions for the sale (pre -
purchase) , whether the goods purchased online will meet their expectations when they arrive  
(purchase) , and whether they are entitled to any remedies i f any problems arise during or after 
the transaction  (post -purchase) . These can be addressed through regulations addressing 
information disclosure requirements, the right to withdraw from a transaction, dispute resolution, 
and redress (Figure 3). 
Figure 3. Stages of consumer protection regulations  
 
 
International guidelines  and practice  
According to UNCTAD’s Global Cyberlaw Tracker, only about 50 percent of countries around 
the world have some degree of protection for online consumer s. Traditional consumer protection 
   
 
13 
 laws have existed long before the emergence of the internet,  and the protections can also exten d, 
at least partially, to online transactions. However, shopping on the internet brings new legal 
challenges , and w hile some have introduced new legislation or updated consumer codes to 
include specific provisions for electronic transactions, most countries still lack a comprehensive 
regime for online consumer protection.  
One particular consideration is whether to establish specific  regimes tailored to transactions 
through e -commerce platforms. Solutions on this area differ widely. For instance, China places 
extensive responsibilities on e ‑commerce platforms to the extent that platforms will be held 
liable if they fail to provide inf ormation on offending vendors, whereas the U nited States  and the 
European Union  place more responsibility on users (World Economic Forum 2019) . 
The key principles for online consumer protection are recognized in two main international soft -
law instruments. In 2016 , the Organization for Economic Co -operation and Development 
(OECD)  revised its Recommendation on Consumer Protection for E -commerce of 1998, 
modernizing its approach to fair business practices, information disclo sures, payment 
protections, unsafe products, dispute resolution, enforcement and education. Similarly, the 
UNCTAD Guidelines on Consumer Protection of 1985 (revised in 1999) were updated in 2015 
to include recommendation s directed to protecti ng online cons umers and improv ing transparency 
in online transactions. The Guidelines also recommend cooperation among countries, including 
in terms of information exchange and enforcement activities.  
Box 2: General Principles for Consumer Protection for E -commerce fro m OECD Recommendation  
Pre - Purchase  
1. Transparent and effective protection: consumers who participate in e -commerce should be afforded 
transparent and effective consumer protection that is not less than the level of protection afforded in 
other forms of c ommerce . 
2. Fair business, advertising and marketing practices: businesses engaged in e -commerce should pay due 
regard to the interests of consumers and act in accordance with fair business, advertising and marketing 
practices as well as the general principle of good faith . 
3. Online disclosures: online disclosures should be clear, accurate, easily accessible and conspicuous so that 
consumers have sufficient information to make an informed decision regarding a transaction. Online 
disclosures comprise the  following areas of recommendations:  
a. Information about the business: businesses engaged in e -commerce with consumers should 
make readily available information about themselves that is sufficient to allow, at a 
minimum: i) identification of the business; i i) prompt, easy and effective consumer 
communication with the business; iii) appropriate and effective resolution of any disputes 
that may arise; iv) service of legal process in domestic and cross -border disputes; and v) 
location of the business . 
b. Informati on about the goods and services: businesses engaged in e -commerce with 
consumers should provide information describing the goods or services offered that is 
sufficient to enable consumers to make informed decisions regarding a transaction . 
c. Information abou t transaction: businesses engaged in e -commerce should provide 
information about the terms, conditions , and costs associated with a transaction that is 
sufficient to enable consumers to make an informed decision regarding a transaction. 
Consumers should be  able to easily access this information at any stage of the transaction . 
Purchase     
 
14 
  4. Confirmation process: businesses should ensure that the point at which consumers are asked to confirm a 
transaction, after which time payment is due or they are otherwise con tractually bound, is clear and 
unambiguous, as should the steps needed to complete the transaction, especially for new payment 
mechanism s. 
Post - Purchase  
5. Dispute resolution and redress: consumers should be provided with meaningful access to fair, easy -to-
use, transparent and effective mechanisms to resolve domestic and cross -border e -commerce disputes in 
a timely manner and obtain redress, as appropriate, without incurring unnecessary cost or burden. These 
should include out of court mechanisms, su ch as internal complaints handling and alternative dispute 
resolution. Subject to applicable law s, the use of such out -of-court mechanisms should not prevent 
consumers from pursuing other forms of dispute resolution and redress. (See below sub -section on o nline 
dispute resolution and redress .) 
6. Privacy and security: businesses should protect consumer privacy by ensuring that their practices relating 
to the collection and use of consumer data are lawful, transparent and fair, enable consumer 
participation and  choice, and provide reasonable security safeguards (see section on data privacy) . 
Other  
7. Education, awareness , and digital competence: governments and stakeholders should work together to 
educate consumers, government officials , and businesses about e -comm erce to foster informed decision 
making. They should work towards increasing business and consumer awareness of the consumer 
protection framework that applies to their online activities, including their respective rights and 
obligations, at domestic and cr oss-border levels . 
Source:  (OECD, Guidelines for Consumer Protection in the Context of Electronic Commerce 2000)  
 
Table 5. Regulation on online consumer 
protection  around the world   
 Online consumer protection 
regulation  
 None  General  Specific  
Albania   ●  
Armenia  ●   
Bangladesh  ●   
Burkina Faso    ● 
Canada*    ● 
Colombia   ●  
France    ● 
Honduras   ●  
Indonesia   ●  
Kazakhstan   ●  
Kenya   ●  
Korea, Rep.    ● 
Kyrgyzstan   ●  
Malaysia    ● 
Mexico    ●  
Moldova    ● 
Pakistan*   ●  
Senegal    ● 
Tanzania    ●    
 
15 
 Of the domestic regulations analyzed, most have 
introduced online consumer protection 
provisions. Some of these protections can be 
found in e -commerce specific laws or in 
provisions under a general consumer prote ction 
law (Table 5).  Laws specific to e -commerce 
offer the opportunity to fine tune the regulation to online transactions, and hence provide for a 
more comprehensive and tailored regulation that is not guaranteed by the mere enacting of a 
consumer protect ion law.   
All the countries found to have online consumer protection regulations require that online sellers 
disclose certain information before the terms of the contract are accepted (Table 6). Some 
countries, such as Honduras and Kazakhstan, take this a step furth er, requiring the online 
disclosures be provided in the country’s official language. While Kenya requires the disclosure 
of “prescribed information”, the government has not specified what this information is.  
Most of these countries follow OECD recommendation  to provid e online consumers a period of 
time to cancel a contract after purchasing a product or service online. The EU Directive on 
Consumer Rights grants online consumers the right to withdraw from distance contracts within 
fourteen  days (A rticle 9). Consumer s may withdraw from  a contract if they do not like the 
product or they changed their mind. The consumer bears the direct cost of returning the goods, 
unless the trader agreed to bear it or failed to inform the consumer of the responsibil ity (Article 
14, para. 1). On the other hand, Kenya’s Consumer Protection Act gives online consumers seven 
days to cancel a contract, provided that (1) the seller did not provide certain online disclosures, 
or (2) the seller did not  allow the consumer to a ccept or decline the contract or to correct 
mistakes prior to concluding the transaction (Article 33) . Canada’s Internet Sales Contract 
Harmonization Template has similar conditions for the cancellation of an online transaction.  
France and Mexico stand ou t with regard to dispute resolution, providing online mechanisms to  
resolve disputes for e-commerce transactions. The European Commission’s Online Dispute 
Resolution platform  allows  online consumers to lodge complaints  in any EU language, in 
addition to Icelandic, and Norwegian. Consumers may use the platform to communicate directly 
with the seller regarding their claim, or they may choose to go through a mediator on the 
platform. The E uropean  Commission posts an online  list of approved mediators  for the 
consumers’ convenience. Mexico has followed a similar approach, providing an option to resolve 
disputes online. According to Mexico’s Consumer Protection Law, dispute resolution may be 
carried out via telephone or any ap propriate means. The Office for the Federal Prosecutor for the 
Consumer allows online consumers to submit complaints via Concilianet, an online dispute 
resolution platform. Following the online conciliation hearing, users are able to  may review the 
service  provided by the platform.  On the other hand, while their regulatory frameworks do  not 
provide for online dispute resolution, Canada, Colombia, Korea , and Vietnam are members of e -
consumer.gov ,5 a partnership of 36 consumer protection agencies worldwide t hat provides, 
among other services, an international platform to address cases of cross -border claims.   
 
5e-consumer.gov  is a web -based service developed by the International Consumer Protection and Enforcement 
Network (ICPEN). ICPEN is a network of governm ental organizations in the enforcement of fair -trade practice laws 
and other consumer protection activities.  E -consumer.gov is one of the first examples of an international ODR 
 Vietnam    ● 
(*) Template approved by federal, provincial and 
territorial ministers responsible for consumer affairs  
(**) Consumer protection is a provincial subject, 
regulated in Karachi through the Sindh Consumer 
Protection Act  
    
 
16 
 Table 6. Domestic r egulations on online consumer protection  
 
 Pre-Purchase   Post -Purchase  
 Information disclosure 
requirements (*)   Withdrawal  Dispute 
Resolution  Options for redress  
 a. b. c. d. 
 Existence 
of right  Absence 
of Reason  Online 
mechanism  Refund  Other 
options  
Albania  ● ● ● ● ● ●  ● ● 
Armenia           
Bangladesh           
Burkina Faso  ● ● ● ● ● ●  ●  
Canada  ● ● ●     ●  
Colombia  ● ● ● ● ● ●  ● ● 
France  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Honduras  ● ● ●  ● ●  ● ● 
Indonesia  ● ● ●     ● ● 
Kazakhstan  ●  ●  ● ●  ● ● 
Kenya      ●   ●  
Korea , Rep.  ● ● ● ● ●   ●  
Kyrgyzstan  ● ● ●  ● ●  ● ● 
Malaysia  ● ● ●     ● ● 
Mexico  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Moldova  ● ● ●  ●   ● ● 
Pakistan  ●  ●     ● ● 
Senegal  ● ● ● ● ● ●  ● ● 
Tanzania  ● ● ●  ● ●    
Vietnam  ● ● ● ●    ● ● 
(*) Information on a. merchant’s address; b. payment process and/or delivery conditions; c. product specifications; d. 
complaint handling  
 
Most regulations  allow online consumers to obtain redress for harm suffered as a consequence of 
goods or services that are defective or do not meet advertised quality criteria. This usually takes 
the form of a monetary remedy (e.g. refund or price reduction) or a conduct remedy with a 
restorative element (e.g. exchange or repair). While Burkina Faso, Canada, Kenya, and Korea 
only offer refund as an option for redress, the rest of the countries provide alternatives to refunds.    
MENA  
 
platform, meant to help consumers and agencies to combat international scams. It allows consumers to make cross -
border fraud complaints in several languages (English, French, German, Korean Japanese, Polish, Spanish, and 
Turkish) and across many industries (e -commerce, banking, tourism, lottery, etc.). It is also a secured platform 
hosted by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission for law enforcement to share and access consumer complaints . Table 7. Adoption of regulation on onlin e 
consumer protection  in MENA  
 Online consumer 
protection regulation  
 None  General  Specific  
Algeria     ● 
Bahrain    ●  
Djibouti  ●   
Egypt , Arab 
Rep.   ●  
Iran, Islamic 
Rep.    ●    
 
17 
 Online consumer protections are scarce in the MENA 
region. Only about a handful of MENA countries have 
introduced legislation to address consumer protection 
for online transactions , most of these found in 
regulations specific to e -commerce  (Table 7).6 In the 
case of the regulation s enacted in Bahrain, Qatar , and 
Saudi Arabia , while they are a step in recognizing the 
specific features of digital transactions, they fall short 
from offering a comprehensive regime and leave much 
room for further development.  
Regulations on pre -purchase information are the most 
common in MENA onl ine consumer protection 
regimes. All MENA countries  with online consumer protection regulation  require the essential 
information disclosures on produc t specific and transaction conditions.  Regulations on post -
purchase , even for countries that have enacted  specific laws for e -commerce, remain limited. Of 
the countries  that provide for the right of withdrawal , none  require s a reason to exercise this 
right,  and they allow a cooling -off period of between three and ten days. Options for consumer 
redress in the case of defective or inadequate products purchased online vary throughout the 
region, with refund being the most common tool provided to online consumers ( Table 8).  
Lebanon stands out in the region, addressing pre -purchase as well as post -purchase issues in its 
consumer protection law, which covers electronic transactions. Lebanon is the only country in 
the region that has set out a procedure for dispute settlement  for e-commerce , providing that 
disputes up to 3 million Lebanese pounds  (about US$2,000) for online transactions are subject to 
mediation.   
Table 8. Regulations on online consumer protection in MENA  
 
 Pre-Purchase  Post -Purchase  
 Information disclosure 
requirements (*)  Withdrawal  Dispute 
Resolution  Options for redress  
 a. b. c. d. 
 Existence 
of right  Absence 
of Reason  Online 
mechanism  Refund  Other 
options  
Algeria  ● ● ● ●    ● ● 
Bahrain  ●  ●     ● ● 
Egypt , Arab Rep.  ● ● ●  ● ●  ● ● 
Iran, Islamic Rep.  ● ● ●  ● ●  ●  
Lebanon  ● ● ● ● ● ●  ● ● 
Morocco  ● ● ●  ● ●  ● ● 
Qatar  ● ● ●     ● ● 
Saudi Arabia  ● ● ●  ● ●    
Tunisia  ● ● ●  ● ●  ●  
(*) Information on a. merchant’s address; b. payment process and/or delivery conditions; c. product specifications; d. 
complaint handling  
 
Although none of the MENA regulations provide s for an online dispute resolution mechanism, 
Egypt, Israel, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE are  e-consumer.gov  members .  This solution, 
 
6 Secondary sources refer to online consumer provisions present in Israel’s consumer protection regulations, but 
these regulations have not been found online  Iraq ●   
Israel  ●   
Jordan  ●   
Kuwait  ●   
Lebanon    ●  
Morocco    ●  
Oman  ●   
Qatar     ● 
Saudi Arabia     ● 
Tunisia     ● 
United Arab 
Emirates  ●   
Yemen , Rep.  ●   
    
 
18 
 together with a consumer protection law s present in Egypt, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia that 
explicitly appl y to digital transac tions and expand consumers rights, creates some of the stronger 
frameworks for online consumer protections in the region.  
B. Data governance  
Consumers are increasingly aware of the value of their personal data.  Lack of trust in the way 
personal data is manag ed drives consumers away from electronic transaction s, limiting the 
growth of digital markets. At the same time, burdensome regulations on the use and transfer of 
individual data can build substantial costs for businesses, especially small and medium 
enter prises.  The goal is hence to allow data transfers in a manner that support s the expansion of 
digital markets, while increasing consumer trust that their private information  remains secure and 
under their control.  
Data governance legal frameworks consist of  entitling rights for all or certain types of 
individuals (also called data subject s) regarding the collection, usage, storage, and disposal of 
their personal data. They also create obligations for controllers and processors while enacting 
derogations in c ertain circumstances (state security, public safety, etc.). Security processes for 
data controllers (either public or private) ensure the appropriate processing of personal data.  
International guidelines  and practice  
Countries have unequally embraced data  governance legal frameworks. The 1970s and 1980s 
saw a surge in personal data protection regulation, with several European countries enacting laws 
and several international organizations, such as the OECD, enacting instruments addressing the 
issue. But at the time, regulation arose for large government -owned data  sets. Since the 1990s, 
digital communications led to the collection of massive data from private companies, which led 
to a new generation of legal frameworks to strengthen personal data protecti on and consumers’ 
trust. However, while some countries have strived to modernize the ir privacy frameworks to 
reflect the challenges of the new digital technologies, many countries lag and still rely on broad 
privacy principles set out in the constitution o r elaborated in older privacy laws . 
Europe has been at the forefront of the most comprehensive (and costly) legislation on data 
protection. It had a significant impact on other countries’ legislation (see below). The United 
States developed a less stringen t and comprehensive framework which mostly relies on industry -
related best practices. Canada and Latin American countries developed privacy frameworks in 
the 1990s and 2000s partly in the form of habeas data. Asia and Oceania have seen their most 
developed  countries adopting data governance laws (Australia ; New Zealand ; Hong Kong  SAR, 
China;  Korea) while others remain lagging.  The Middle East and Africa have the least 
developed data governance legal frameworks.  
Several international instruments have been f ocused on setting out the key principles of data 
governance regulation. Most recently, the Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA) 
between Singapore, Chile, and New Zealand recognized the need for international collaboration 
on matters relating to the  digital economy, including data governance. The Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation (APEC) Privacy Framework of 2015 promotes a flexible approach to 
privacy protection, with a focus on avoiding the creation of unnecessary barriers to information 
flows. The Convention “108+” by the Council of Europe is an international human rights treaty 
focused on data protection, setting out principles that are compatible with the requirements of the 
European regulation.  In 2013 , OECD members updated their Guidelines on t he Protection of    
 
19 
 Privacy adopted in 1980 to account for the new reality of digital data flows.  The OECD 
Guidelines  declare digital risk an economic risk and they aim to protect privacy and individual 
liberties with respect to personal data process in the p ublic or private sector. They include eight 
basic principles for data protection : 
• Collection limitation principle : limits the collection of personal data and suggests 
lawful and fair means for collection, as well as consent of the data subject where 
approp riate 
• Data quality principle : calls for relevancy of the personal data to the purposes for which 
they are to be used. Additionally, it calls for data accuracy, completion, and maintenance  
• Purpose specification principle : data controllers should specify the  purpose for which 
the data are collected no later than at the time of data collection. Subsequent use of the 
data should be limited to those purposes and the data subject should be notified of any 
change of purpose  
• Use limitation principle : limits the use  of the data for purposes other than those 
specified, with the consent of the data subject or by the authority of law  
• Security safeguards principle : calls for reasonable protection of the data from risks such 
as loss or unauthorized access, destruction, us e, modification, or disclosure of the data  
• Openness principle : suggests a general policy of openness regarding developments, 
practices, and policies with respect to personal data  
• Individual participation principle : the data subject should have the right to request data 
from a data controller or a confirmation of whether the data controller has personal data 
relating to the individual. If the data controller has such data, it should be provided to the 
data subject within a reasonable time, in a reaso nable manner and in a form that is readily 
intelligible to the data subject  
• Accountability principle : the data controller should be held accountable for abiding with 
principles of the Guidelines . 
 
Most countries in the sample have introduced a substantial regulatory framework for data 
governance (Table 9). Some of the governments that do not currently have a regulatory 
framework in place are discussing draft regulations to address this. 7 On the other hand, Honduras 
has implemented an interim pr otection, inserting a provision in its e -commerce law that subjects 
data messages to constitutional and legal provisions which guarantee the right to communication 
privacy and access to personal information.  
Misuse or breach of sensitive data usually lead s to greater consequences for the data subject. 
Sensitive data may include special categories of information, such as a person’s political views, 
sexual orientation, or medical history. Most countries studied address this, providing special 
rules for the t reatment of sensitive personal data during processing  (Table 1 0). Canada, 
Indonesia, Kazakhstan, and Vietnam stand out in that they feature a general framework on data 
governance, but do not provide special rules for the treatment of sensitive data.  
 
7 See Kenya —The Data Protection Bill, 2018.     
 
20 
 Common principles for 
processing of personal data 
include the need to have a 
legitimate reason for any 
processing activity, usually 
obtained through consent of the 
data subject.  Alternatives to 
consent  address contractual or 
legal obligations the  firm may be 
subject to as well as the interests 
of the data subject or the public.  
The majority of the regulations 
analyzed feature elaborate 
frameworks  in this regard.  An 
array of legal bases for data 
collection and processing giv es 
processors more freedom under 
certain circumstances. 
Additionally, all the regulations 
reviewed required that personal 
data be stored in a manner that 
allows for the data subject’s 
exercise of the right to access the 
information and to request its 
correction or deletion if 
necessary. Wh ile most of these 
requirements are included in the general frameworks for data governance, Honduras and Kenya 
grant these rights through the Constitution, and the Access to Information Act, respectively.  
Providing clear rules on cross -border data transfers increases transparency and the ease of 
compliance. Here too, Vietnam’s legislation stands out as the only one failing to provide such 
rules. Additionally, where  data is required to be stored domestically , such requirement should not 
prevent processors from transferring a copy of the data abroad. This grants governments greater 
ease of accessing the data of their citizens during legal disputes, while ensuring global data 
flows. Although  data localization r equirements may be present in other regulations, such as those 
addressing financial or health matters, none of the general data governance frameworks analyzed 
feature this type of restriction.  
 
Table 10:  Domestic regulation on data governance  around the world  
 Sensitive 
data  Legal bases for data collection and processing  Data 
subject’s 
rights  Cross -border data 
transfers  
 Special 
treatment  Consent  Performance 
of a contract  Legal  
obligation  Legitimate 
interests  Access / 
deletion  Rules on 
transfers  No data 
localization  
Albania  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Armenia  ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● 
Burkina Faso  ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● 
Canada   ● ● ● ● ● ● ● Table 9. Adoption of domestic r egulation on data governance  
 None  Partial  Full*  Comments  
Albania    ●  
Armenia    ●  
Bangladesh  ●    
Burkina Faso    ●  
Canada    ●  
Colombia    ●  
France    ●  
Honduras   ●  The Constitution grants right to 
access and deletion  
Indonesia    ●  
Kazakhstan    ●  
Kenya   ●  Access to Information Act grants 
right to access and deletion  
Korea , Rep.    ●  
Kyrgyzstan    ●  
Malaysia    ●  
Mexico    ●  
Moldova    ●  
Pakistan  ●    
Senegal    ●  
Tanzania  ●    
Vietnam    ●  
(*) Refers to a general framework on privacy and data protection.  Despite the 
lack of a general framework, specific rules may be often found in sectoral 
regulations, in particular on financial, telecommunications and health sectors  
    
 
21 
 Colombia  ● ●  ●  ● ● ● 
France  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Honduras       ●   
Indonesia   ●  ●  ● ● ● 
Kazakhstan   ●  ●  ● ● ● 
Kenya          
Korea , Rep.  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Kyrgyzstan  ● ●   ● ● ● ● 
Malaysia  ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● 
Mexico  ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● 
Moldova  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Senegal  ● ● ● ●  ● ● ● 
Vietnam   ● ● ●  ●  ● 
         
MENA  
Few countries in the MENA region 
have introduced  a comprehensive  
legislation to protect data privacy 
(Table 1 1). Algeria, Bahrain, and 
Morocco, appear to have establ ished 
the strongest frameworks for data 
protection, taking elements from the 
EU Data Protection Directive of 
1995 and, in the case of Bahrain’s 
new law, from EU GDPR. Israel’s 
main legislation on privacy 
protection dates back to 1981, but it 
has been compl emented with 
additional regulations, resulting in a 
modern and strong framework. In 
2003 Israel become the first and the 
only country to date in the region to 
have been officially recognized by 
the European Union as providing an 
“adequate level of protecti on” for 
personal data (CipherCloud 2017) . 
 
 
While some countries have set out 
strong regulatory frameworks, most 
regulations remain patchy, weak, or 
outdated. Some countries have 
included basic principles of data 
privacy in th e context of broader 
regulations on e -commerce, such as 
Lebanon and Oman, providing hence an embryonic framework for data governance .  Saudi 
Arabia features specific provision s on data privacy in its e-commerce law of 2019 . These partial Table 11. Adoption of  regulation on data governance in MENA  
 None  Partial  Full*  Comments  
Algeria     ●  
Bahrain     ●  
Djibouti  ●    
Egypt , 
Arab 
Rep.  ●    
Iran, 
Islamic 
Rep.    ●  
Iraq ●    
Israel     ●  
Jordan  ●    
Kuwait   ●  Basic rules on privacy in 
Electronic Transactions Law  
Lebanon   ●  Basic rules on privacy in 
Electronic Transactions Law  
Morocco    ●  
Oman   ●  Basic rules on privacy in 
Electronic Transactions Law  
Qatar     ●  
Saudi 
Arabia   ●  Basic privacy rules in e -
commerce law  
Tunisia     ●  
United 
Arab 
Emirates   ●  Data protection regime 
applies to Dubai  
Yemen , 
Rep.  ●    
(*) Refers to a general framework on privacy and data protection.  
Despite the lack of a general framework, specific rules may be often 
found in sectoral regulations, in particular on financial, 
telecommunications and health sectors  
    
 
22 
 regimes typically only focus on the legal basis for data collection and some rights of data 
subjects but fail to offer a comprehensive framework that differentiates personal from non -
personal data, provides rules on transfer of data, or set s out conditions for conservation or 
destruction of personal data.  UAE does not have a framework for privacy protection, but Dubai 
has adopted a ful l-fletched framework under the context of the Dubai International Financial 
Centre (DIFC) Authority that appl ies to business conducted in the special economic zone -thus 
having a geographical limitation to the scope of the regulation.  Despite not having  a 
comprehensive framework on data governance , provision s on personal privacy can be found in 
other countries i n the region dispersed in sectoral or other specific regulations. For instance, in 
Egypt, the criminal code imposes a punishment for the unlawful collection of images or 
recordings of individuals in private places, and the Banking Law requires confidential ity for 
information regarding clients and accounts (CipherCloud 2017) .  These discrete provisions can 
be essential in their own context but should ideally be integrated in a broader framework that 
balances the d ifferent priori ties of data privacy protection.  
Table 12:  Regulation on data governance in MENA  
 Sensitive 
data  Legal bases for data collection and processing  Data 
subject’s 
rights  Cross -border data 
transfers  
 Special 
treatment  Consent  Performance 
of a contract  Legal 
obligation  Legitimate 
interests  Access/ 
deletion  Rules on 
transfers  No data 
localization  
Algeria  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Bahrain  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Iran, Islamic 
Rep.  ● ●    ●  ● 
Israel  ● ●    ● ● ● 
Kuwait   ●    ●  ● 
Lebanon  ●     ●  ● 
Morocco  ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Oman   ●  ●  ● ● ● 
Qatar  ● ●  ● ● ●  ● 
Saudi Arabia   ●  ●    ● 
Tunisia  ● ● ●   ● ● ● 
United Arab 
Emirates   ●     ● ● 
 
All the existing comprehensive regulatory frameworks for data governance in MENA feature 
most of the crucial provisions, including special treatment of sensitive data and data subjects’ 
rights with regard to their personal data  (Table 1 2). The Islamic Republic of Iran and Israel failed 
to introduce alternatives to consent as legal bases for data collection and processing. All these 
regulations, except for those introduced by the Islamic Republic of Iran and Qatar, feature clear 
rules on cross -border data transfers.  As seen in the other countries studied, none of these 
regulations include data localization requirements  but this does not mean that such requirements 
are absent from  sector -specific regulations .  
C. Cybersecurity  
While less visible to the individual consume rs, cybersecurity regulation is an essential 
component for promoting trust in digital markets. Cybersecurity refers to the measures that can 
be implemented to protect personal data from unauthorized access and corruption. Major data 
breaches, like that which Yahoo witnessed in 2013 —affect ing 3 billion  user accounts — not only    
 
23 
 compromise people’s privacy but can have a chilling effect for digital markets as consumers 
realize how vulnerable their information is.   
In 2015, the OECD declared digital risk an eco nomic risk (OECD, Recommendation of the 
Council on Digital Security Risk Management for Economic and Social Prosperity 2015). If 
personal data is not securely processed it is more prone to breaches. Data breaches can occur in 
different ways, including unin tended disclosure, hacking, and malware  (Privacy Rights 
Clearinghouse n.d.) .  
Adequate cybersecurity regulations render data controllers and data processors liable for data 
processing. A data controller makes decisions over the purposes and means of the data 
processing, while a data processor processes data on behalf of controllers.  For example, if an e -
commerce platform hires a firm to track  consumer activity  on the platform, the e -commerce 
platform is the controller  with regard to the information collected, while the firm is the 
processor.  
International guidelines  and practice  
Secu rity requirements consist of organizational and technical measures as well human resources. 
These may include mandatory encryption of personal data, implementation of rigorous internal 
policies, or the appointment of a data manager. Assessment of the risk to a data subject’s privacy 
helps determine the adequate safeguards that need to be implemented (OECD, Privacy 
Guidelines 2013). Countries without adequate data protection regulations risk being avoided by 
companies due to the lack of certainty about compliance and data handling (Trade 2015). 
Additionally, these countries are missing out on the benefits of the Internet, such as innovation 
and economic growth (Forum 2016).   
Following two significant U.S. government hacks that affected over 22 million pe ople 
(Washington Post n.d.) , the Executive Office of the President’s Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) issued new cybersecurity requirements for federal agencies  (OMB 2017) . These 
include : 
• Breach r esponse team designation  
• Risk assessment, risk mitigation,  and breach notification  
• Periodic internal data protection policy review  
• Annual reporting of satisfaction of cybersecurity requirements; data breaches reported; 
breach response plan; identification of breach response team; and confirmation of breach 
response team’s preparation exercises.  
The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which went into effect in 2018, also 
introduce d updated provisions to protect the personal data and privacy of EU c itizens, including 
cybersecurity requirements  (Table 1 3).  
Table 13: EU GDPR cybersecurity requirements   
Security of 
processing   Controllers  and processors must ensure a level of security appropriate to the risk 
through measures such as data pseudonymization and encryption    
Breach notification   In case of a personal data breach, controllers must notify the supervisory authority 
within 72 hours of becoming aware of the breach.   In cases where  the breach is likely 
to result in a high risk to the individual rights, the controller must notify the data 
subject of the breach without undue delay      
 
24 
 Impact assessment   Where data processing is likely to result in high risk to individual rights, the controller 
must conduct an impact assessment prior to  processing, including the foreseen 
measures to address the risks   
Designation of data 
protection officer   Controllers and processors must designate a data protection officer under certain 
circumstances, including if the bulk of the processing activities require regular and 
systematic monitoring of data subjects on a large scale, or if it consists of processing of 
sensitive data on a large scale   
 
A key aspect of data protection is who monitors and enforces the implementation of the 
regulation.  The establishment of a capable and effective implementing agency is central to 
ensuring adequate implementation of the regulation and to providing individua ls with a policing 
entity to which resort in case of violations.  When it comes to the enforcement of cybersecurity 
measures, a single central regulator tends to be the most adequate solution, providing oversight 
and complaints management  (UNCTAD 2016) . They can inform data subjects about their rights , 
supervise and assist data controllers with regard to compliance , and ensure the enforcement of 
data regulations. Data protection requirements also include registration with th e authority and 
notification of data processing activities  (UNCTAD 2016) . Depending on the ease, cost, and 
recurrence of these requirements, they may impose a burden for businesses trying to enter a 
foreign market  (UNCTAD 2016) . The OECD revised its privacy guidelines in  2013, highlighting 
the importance  of establishing privacy enforcement authorities  (OECD 2013) .  
Most countries that have adopted a comprehens ive framework on data protection have buttressed 
it with a data protection agency (DPA). Certain countries, such as France, have  had a DPA since 
the 1970s, when large state -owned datasets were the main concern of the public. While most 
DPAs are independent  agencies, some countries have embodied them with ministries or policy -
making bodies (Makulilo 2016) . 
Table 14: Cybersecurity measures  around the word   
 Encryption  Internal 
policy  Data  manager  Risk 
assessment  Breach 
notifications  Supervisory 
authority  
Albania   ●    ● 
Armenia  ● ●   ● ● 
Bangladesh        
Burkina Faso   ●    ● 
Canada   ● ●  ● ● 
Colombia   ●  ● ● ● 
France  ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Honduras        
Indonesia  ● ●   ●  
Kazakhstan   ●    ● 
Kenya   ●     
Korea , Rep.  ●  ● ● ● ● 
Kyrgyzstan   ● ●  ● ● 
Malaysia   ●    ● 
Mexico   ●  ● ● ● 
Moldova   ●    ● 
Pakistan        
Senegal   ●    ● 
Tanzania        
Vietnam   ●  ● ● ● 
    
 
25 
 All of the countries found to have a comprehensive framework for data governance have 
included  cybersecurity requirements  in these regulations  (Table 1 4). These include  
administrative and technical controls to protect against accidental loss or destruction or 
unauthorized access of the data. While most countries only require the  adoption of an internal 
policy or  the performance of internal controls, some countries have additional 
requirements.  France and Korea feature the most inclusive requirements, calling  for data 
encryption  under certain circumstances  to prevent unauthorized access to the data ; appointment 
of a data manager ; procedures  to assess the threats and risks to personal information;  and 
notif ication of  the data subject and/or the authorities in c ase of a data breach .  
Also, m ost countries that regulate data privacy governance have a supervisory authority that 
monitors data processing activities.  Although Kyrgyzstan’s Law on Personal Data makes 
reference to the “authorized body”, such body is not c urrently identified. About half of the 
countries that have a supervisory body require certain administrative procedures to lawfully 
process personal data. Data processors in Colombia and Kyrgyzstan must register with the 
supervisory authority. In Moldova, Senegal, and Tunisia, controllers must notify the authority of 
their intent to process personal data. In Armenia, notification requirements only apply 
to sensitive  data or by request of the authorized body.    
MENA  
The framework for cybersecurity in the region follows the same pattern of limited development 
as data governance (Table 15).  Even for those countries that have adopted broader privacy 
regulations, provisions on cybersecurity tend to be vague, requiring da ta processors to implement 
measures to protect the data from unauthorized access or damage , without any  clear 
specific ations on the nature of the measures. Israel and Qatar are the only countries featur ing a 
comprehensive framework on cybersecurity , imposi ng obligations on data processors to adopt 
internal data protection policies , conduct risks assessments ,, notify data subjects and/or 
authorities of any data  breaches, maintain sensitive data protected encrypted (Israel) , and appoint 
a Data Manager respons ible for data security in the firm (Qatar)  (Table 1 4).  
Table 15: Cybersecurity measures  in MENA   
 Encryption  Internal 
policy  Data  
manager  Risk 
assessment  Breach 
notifications  Supervisory 
authority  
Algeria   ●    ● 
Bahrain   ● ●   ● 
Iran, Islamic 
Rep.        
Israel  ● ●  ● ● ● 
Kuwait   ●     
Lebanon   ●     
Morocco   ●    ● 
Oman        
Qatar   ● ● ● ● ● 
Saudi Arabia        
Tunisia   ●    ● 
United Arab 
Emirates        
 
Of the MENA countries found to have general data governance framework, the Islamic Republic 
of Iran stands out as the only one with no cybersecurity requirements and no supervisory    
 
26 
 authority in charge of enforcing data protection policies . MENA c ountries should consider 
adopting a framework for cybersecurity (ideally, in parallel to, and complementary of, a data 
governance framework) including specific regulations , such as data encryption requirements and 
risk assessment  procedures.   
D. Intermediary liability  
The internet’s unparalleled ability to connect billions of individuals worldwide has boosted 
business models based on intermediation between vendors and consumers. E -commerce 
platforms like Alibaba, eBay, and Mercado Libre are based on offering consumers p roducts from 
thousands of different providers rather than their own stock.  “Gig economy” apps offer services 
such as rides, lodging, or delivery of food or groceries from firms and individuals.  Other 
services rely on content such as video (YouTube, Vimeo ), opinions and reviews of products or 
services (Yelp, Google), or information (blogs) developed by thousands of users, most of whom 
remain relatively unknown to the final consumer.  The relationship between the intermediary 
(websites and apps) and the fir ms or individuals offering their own products or services is hence 
essential to the functioning of those digital transactions.  
Intermediary liability rules are the set of provisions that distribute the liability between 
intermediaries (website and apps) an d actual vendors or content developers when things go 
wrong.  In other terms, intermediary  liability is the responsibility that falls upon online 
intermediaries, such as search engines, application platforms, social networks, and broadband 
companies, for third-party content featured i n, or products and services offered through, their 
website or apps .  Just like intermediation is not a novel business model, intermediary liability 
rules are not new  a legal concept –most such rules can be traced back to Roman law. 
Intermediary liability rules can in fact be broader rules that apply to online intermediaries  
(Gasser and Schulz 2015) .  However, specific rules of digital intermediaries are more likely to 
adapt to the particular conditio ns of digital markets.  
Rules on intermediary liability need to strike a balance between protecting consumer rights and 
supporting the expansion of digital markets, including through intermediary platforms. While the 
good, service, or content may be offered  or developed by third parties, intermediary platforms 
benefit from it by building their businesses around it.  Digital intermediar ies manage the 
relationship with the costumer, and they are often the largest, more sophisticated actor involved 
in the trans action.  As such, regulations can impos e on intermediaries (jointly with the third 
party) liability for fake or faulty products or services, or for offensive or illegal content, 
transacted  through  or featured in their services.  On the other hand, intermed iaries often do  not 
have full knowledge of everything that is being offered  by producers and content developers , 
who have  greater control over it.    
For digital intermediaries, responsibility may arise mainly from two types of conduct: the 
offering for sale of counterfeited products or the publication of unlawful content, such as images 
or text, by their users. The offering of fake products would norma lly entail a violation of 
intellectual property rules (typically trademark protection). Unlawful content can instead run 
against intellectual property rules when the content is unduly featuring other people’s work (a 
violation of copyright protection) by f or instance reproducing music or video without the 
authors’ permission, or  it may violate criminal law provisions such as rules against  libel, hate 
speech,  or child pornography, the protection of individual privacy or classified information, or 
amount to l èse-majesté crimes.     
 
27 
 Rules on intermediary liability in MENA are generally at odds with a conducive framework for 
digital markets. Most countries in the region lack a specific framework for online  intermediary 
liabilit y, which results in overly stringent re quirements that add risks and costs for digital 
platforms .  Those who do provide for such a framework usually do not cover infringements 
related to intellectual property –a key aspect for providers for content platforms  (YouTube ) or 
social media  (Facebook ) or smaller local social platforms,  who depend on content uploaded by 
third parties  and may find themselves  liable for violations incurred by their users.  Intermediary 
liability rules appear as the most underdeveloped segment of digital regulations in MENA , 
possibly  adding high risks and costs for online platforms for e -commerce and content.  
International guidelines  and practice  
Typically, rules on online intermediary liability  have  two components: one attributing 
responsibility to the intermediary  and another reduc ing its liability by removing the violation 
(“safe harbor”). For example, an intermediary  would be held liable if it had knowledge that the 
product being offered was fake but could be exonerated from responsibility if it took steps to 
remove the product from its listings  upon obt aining knowledge of the violation .  Rules on 
responsibility pivot between no responsibility, actual knowledge of the infringement (the 
intermediary  knew the content was unlawful), duty of knowledge (the intermediary  should have 
known that the content was unlawful), or absolute responsibility (the intermediary  is responsible 
in all conditions). Safe harbor provisions typically involve notice and take down procedures, 
which require that upon receipt of a notice regarding infringing content, the intermediary  search 
and remove all copies of the infringing content . 
Rules on liability for digital intermediaries are nascent and still evolving, and a global t rend on 
the topic remains elusive. Even within countries, v iews on the extent of liability that should be 
imposed on intermediaries varies greatly between the content industry and the internet industry. 
Much of this tension is see n in the Unites States, ho me to some of the largest internet  firms  as 
well as content developers , which has traditionally resulted in strong protections  of digital 
intermediaries, as well as far -reaching disciplines on intellectual property (Holland, et al. 2014) . 
Content industry representatives claim that the lack of intermediary responsibility leads to an 
increase in online piracy and decreased revenue for content industries, which has led the 
American Association of Publishers (AAP)  to advocate for sanctions imp osed on intermediaries 
for failing to ensure the protection of copyrighted material  (USITC 2017) . On the other hand, 
internet industry representatives argue that an increase in intermediary liability is likely to 
increase costs  and limit intermediaries’ ability to combat piracy (USITC 2017) . The U.S. Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) creates a safe harbor for intermediaries under certain 
circumstances, including if they unknowingly display, tra nsmit, or store infringing content. 
Section 230(c) of the Communications Decency Act shields intermediaries from liability for 
most third -party content. However, when it comes to copyright infringement, they must meet 
certain conditions, including a notice  and takedown requirement.  
The notice and take down model has been replicated around the world.  In June 2017, Germany 
passed a law imposing fines of up to €50 million upon online intermediaries who do not remove 
illegal content within twenty -four hours of notice. The Russia n Federation ’s Federal Law No. 
187 provides intermediaries with safe harbor protections based on a legal test which determines 
whether they knew or should have known about infringing content. Content owners are not 
required to notify inte rmediaries about infringing content, and instead may go directly to the 
courts to request an injunction to block the content. Taking it a st ep further, t he notice and stay     
 
28 
 down model featured in  the EU Directive on Copyright  of 2019  compels intermediarie s to 
prevent any future transmission of the infringing content .  Notice and stay -down requirements 
seek to ensure that infringing content will not be posted again.  
Seeking to protect online freedom of expr ession, an international coalition released the Manil a 
Principles for Intermediary Liability (Box 3). The Principles provide governments with standards 
for censorship and takedown laws which  respect the users’ rights while promoting innovation.  
Box 3. Intermediary liability guidelines  
The Manila Principles for Intermediary Liability were developed to protect online freedom of expression and to 
provide governments with standards for censorship and takedown laws that respect the users’ rights.  The 
effort involved civil society groups fro m around the world, led by the Electronic Frontier  Foundation  (EFF,  USA),  
the Centre for Internet and Society (CIS, India), Article 19 (UK),  KICTANET (Kenya), Derechos Digitales (Chile), 
Asociación por los Derechos Civiles (ADC, Argentina) and Open Net ( Republic of Korea).  
The proposed principles are:  
1. Intermediaries should not be liable for third party content: intermediaries should be exempt from liability 
for third party content where they did not modify the content; they must not be required to routinel y 
monitor content on their network or platform;  
2. An order by a judicial authority must be required for content restriction: an order from an independent and 
impartial judicial authority must be required for content restriction;  
3. Requests for restrictions of content must be clear, be unambiguous, and follow due process: where an 
intermediary receives a restriction request before a court order is issued, they need not evaluate the 
legality of the content; the request must include its legal basis ; sanctions should be imposed for bad faith 
restriction requests;  
4. Laws and content restrictions orders and practices must comply with necessity and proportionality tests: 
restrictions should be specific to the content at issue, if applicable, limited in ge ographical scope; and not 
extend beyond its duration;  
5. Laws and content restriction policies and practices must respect due process: parties must be provided the 
right to be heard and to appeal against restriction orders;  
6. Transparency and accountability mus t be built into laws and content restriction policies and practices: 
applicable rules and transparency reports must be published online in a timely manner.  
Source: (EFF 2015)  
 
At the international level, some principles on intermediary liability were included in recent trade 
agreement s. The recent Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans -Pacific Partnership 
(CPT PP) and the United States, Mexico, and Canada Agreement  (USMCA) set limits to 
intermediary l iability  in their intellectual property  and digital trade  chapter s, respectively . 
Inter mediaries a re not liable for copyright infringements “that they do not control, initiate, direct, 
and that take place through systems or networks controlled or operated by them or on their 
behalf”. However, they must remove or disable access to copyright infringing c ontent on their 
networks upon obtaining knowledge of its existence.  
Intermediary liability rules relating to criminal or civil infringement laws are being modernized 
for the digital environment. The proliferation of  fake news in recent years has led countr ies to 
seek to reduce the amount of misinformation that citizens can find online.  However, this raises  
concerns about content filtering, freedom of speech, and media ma nipulation. Singapore , who 
has been often criti cized for its heavy control of the media  (Leung 2019) , recently introduced the 
Protection from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation to hold social media sites liable for third -
party  content  published on their platforms . Noncompliant platforms are subject to fines and 
imprisonment if they do not remove the “misinformation” or publish “corrections” next to it. 
Industry groups fear that this new type of  law allows government s to decide what is true or false,    
 
29 
 endangering the freedom of expression and speech. Following a terr orist attack in a mosque in 
New Zealand, which was streamed live on Facebook, Australia passed a bill requir ing social 
media platforms to promptly remove abhorrent violent user content shared on their sites. The 
acts covered by the new law include murder, torture, rape , and kidnapping. Other countries 
around the world , including France and Germany,  are also tackling these issues through 
legislation.  
Table 16: Regulation on intermediary liability around the world   
 Liability 
Status  Safe harbor provisions  IPR infringements 
covered  Notice and take down 
requirements  
Albania  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal   ● 
Armenia  N/A    
Bangladesh  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal    
Burkina Faso  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal   ● 
Canada  Partial  Lack of knowledge  ●  
Colombia  N/A    
France  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal  ● ● 
Honduras  N/A    
Indonesia  N/A    
Kazakhstan  N/A    
Kenya  Partial  Lack of knowledge    
Korea , Rep.  Partial  Content removal  ● ● 
Kyrgyzstan  N/A    
Malaysia  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal  ● ● 
Mexico  N/A    
Moldova  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal   ● 
Pakistan  Partial  Lack of knowledge    
Senegal  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal   ● 
Tanzania  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal  ● ● 
Vietnam  Strict    ● 
 
Most of the countries studied address intermediary liability and provide online platforms with 
safe harbor provisions where infringing content is posted by third parties  (Table 1 6). The most 
common conditions to avoid liability are lack  of knowledge of the infringing content and 
removing or disabling access to the infringing content expeditiously upon obtaining knowledge 
or bec oming aware of a likelihood of liability. Intermediarie s are usually deemed to become 
aware upon being notified of the infringement.  No countries  studied in  Latin America have 
introduced legislation on the issue.  
Notice of infringement can take different forms depending on the domestic regulation. In some 
countries , anyone may request the removal of infringing content. Tanzania’s Cybercrimes Act 
allows anyone to notify the intermediary  of content infringing their rights as well as the rights of 
others (Art icle 45). Other countries only give this right to copyright holders. In Korea, copyright 
holders may request the removal of infringing content after providing evidence of the 
infringement. (Copyright Act Article 103). I ntermediarie s are required to remove the content 
immediately and to notify the third party as well as the copyright holder. If the third party proves 
that the content is posted based on legitimate rights, the intermediary  must notify the copyright 
holder of the request and of the scheduled da te of resumption. The intermediary  is required to 
designate an agent responsible for processing removal requests. Malaysia intermediarie s must 
remove infringing content within forty -eight hours of obtaining notice from copyright holders    
 
30 
 (Copyright Act Arti cle 43H). Upon receipt of a counter notification from the third party, the 
intermediary  must provide the copyright holder with a copy of the counternotification and with 
notice that access to the content will be restored in ten business days. The copyright  holder may 
seek a court order to restrain the third party from engaging in any infringing activity relating to 
the content on the intermediarie s’ platform. Finally, Canada has implemented a “notice and 
notice” regime . There, if a copyright holder notif ies the intermediary of infringement , the 
intermediary must forward the notice to the third party.  
In other cases, the removal of infringing content may be enforced through a judicial order or 
notification by relevant entities. While A lbania ’s Law on e -commerce  explicitly excludes IPR 
infringements from its scope (Article 2),  it provides that the court or competent authorities may 
compel the removal of unlawful activity by intermediarie s (Article 19) . In France , an 
administrative authority may notify the intermediary  of content infringing laws against terrorism 
and child pornography,  giving  the intermediary  twenty -four hours to remove the content. 
Senegal’s law on electronic transactions also took steps to prevent infringement  related to 
terrori sm or child pornography : platforms must  provide a method for anyone to notify them of 
infringing content, and the platforms must inform the relevant authority of this content (Ar ticle 
3).   
MENA  
Legislation throughout the MENA region focuses on content pos ted online, holding 
intermediaries liable for third -party content.  Some countries have introduced safe harbor 
provisions, shielding intermediaries from liability if they lack knowledge of the infringing 
content or act expeditiously to remove it upon becomi ng aware of it  (Table 1 7). All those 
regulations include notice and take down requirements, ensuring that the infringing content is not 
posted again.  
Table 17: Regulation on intermediary liability in MENA   
 Liability 
Status  Safe harbor provisions  IPR infringements 
covered  Notice and take down 
requirements  
Algeria  N/A    
Bahrain  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal  ● ● 
Djibouti  N/A    
Egypt , Arab 
Rep.  Strict  N/A  ● 
Iran, Islamic 
Rep.  Strict  N/A   
Iraq N/A    
Israel  N/A    
Jordan  N/A    
Kuwait  N/A    
Lebanon  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal   ● 
Morocco  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal  ● ● 
Oman  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal   ● 
Qatar  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal  ● ● 
Saudi Arabia  Partial  Lack of knowledge; content removal  ● ● 
Tunisia  Strict  N/A ● ● 
United Arab 
Emirates  Strict  N/A   
Yemen , Rep.  N/A       
 
31 
  
Most of the existing MENA regulations on intermediary liability appear aimed to govern 
situations involving criminal or civil sanctions, such as content that violates individual privacy, 
religious values, public morals, or national security. Intermediary l iability rules in MENA do not 
seem to be directly linked to violations of intellectual property. Only Bahrain, Morocco, Qatar, 
and Saudi Arabia’s regulations cover infringements of intellectual property rules. While IP 
infringements also fall under the sco pe of Tunisia’s Decree fixing the conditions and procedures 
for granting authorization for the activity of supplying internet services , intermediaries don’t 
enjoy safe harbor provisions, and they may be subject to an order suspending their activities in 
case of infringement.  
These rules allow for heavy government intervention and control, raising costs and potential 
risks for digital intermediaries. Bahrain’s Copyright Law provide s safe harbor provisions for 
network intermediaries and  provide that they are not required to monitor third -party content 
posted on their platform. However, civil society organizations report that political content is 
often blocked from online platforms, and  currently,  entire websites , including live streaming 
services , are blocked.  Authorities enforce the law via arrests, prosecution, and torture, forcing 
online forum moderators to close their platforms. (FreedomHouse 2018) . Egypt’s Anti -
Cybercrime Law, passed in 2019, grants the government the power to block websites with 
content that threatens national security or the national economy. Exposing or failing to report 
infringing content may result in travel bans, imprisonment, and fines. In Iran, intermediarie s 
must report any illegal content  to the Commit tee for Determining Instances of Criminal Web 
Content, otherwise subject to fines or liquidation. Under UAE’s Cybercrime Law of 2012, 
websites can be held liable for defamatory or false statements posted by third parties.  In several 
countries, the list of restricted content is not easily accessible, making it more difficult to avoid 
liability.  
 
IV.  Conclusion  
Figure 4. Digital trade regulatory readiness in MENA and comparators  
A. All countries  
 
B. High Income Countries  
   
 
32 
 Regulation of digital trade in 
MENA countries is still in its 
infancy, being mostly governed by 
general laws not originally 
intended for the digital era. A 
broad review of key regulations for 
digital markets in MENA suggests 
that the region is falling behi nd in 
establishing a modern governance 
framework for the digital 
economy. Based on a database of 
40 countries, Figure 4 depicts the 
average progress in the regulation 
of digital trade in MENA, as 
compared to the 20 comparator  
countrie s from the rest of the 
world, and a subset of the three 
high-income countries in that 
sample.  In general, regulation on 
electronic transacti ons (e-
documents and e -signature s) in 
MENA countries appears broadly 
in line with global practices , 
although room for improvements 
remains . So do rules on 
intermediary liability –although 
mainly because the issue remains 
globally poorly regulated. 
MENA’s m ain gap appear s on the 
regulation of online consumer 
protection, data governance , and cybersecurity. The regulatory gap is particularly stark  for 
MENA’s high -income economies . Figure 4.B shows how advanced economies have attempted to 
keep up with the regul ation of key areas of digital trade , while MENA high -income economies 
are lagging far behind.  This gap exists also in the case of MENA’s middle -income countries, 
although not nearly as wide as for richer economies.  
Lack of an adequate regulatory framework  can lead to missed opportunities for digital 
businesses, especially those oriented to foreign markets or relying on foreign investments. For 
instance, apart from Israel,  MENA -based firms that involve the storage or processing of personal 
data can find add itional difficulties in doing business with European firms, as the E uropean 
Union  requires a level of data protection regulation that MENA currently lacks.  While this 
requirement may not be unsurmountable –MENA companies could use EU -based servers - it doe s 
add costs and reduces the linkages of such businesses with their countries’ economies. Similarly, 
digital platforms for e -commerce and especially content, face important risks and costs in some 
MENA countries for content generated and uploaded by third p arties, even if the platforms have 
strong policies to identify and remove infringing content.   
C. Middle Income Countries  
 
 
   
 
33 
 Intuitively, digital policies that have a longer history have had a greater adoption in MENA than 
newer digital policies. Table 18 summarizes the development  status of digital markets 
regulations in the region. As could be expected, regulations on digital transactions, such as e -
documents and e -signatures, that have more than two decades of development and have been the 
subject of agreed international guidelines, are the policies more frequently adopted in MENA. 
Except for Djibouti and the Republic of Yemen, a ll MENA countries  reviewed  have at least a 
comprehensive regulation for e -documents and e -signatures –although improvement and updates 
would be advisable for most countries.  On the other side of the spectrum, regulation on online 
intermediary liability, which is a newer regulatory matter linked to the boom of digital platforms 
in recent years, has received virtually no attention from regulators and remains gov erned by 
outdated regimes inadequate to the development of digital markets.  Modern data governance 
and cybersecurity regimes are missing in the region, with only a handful of countries having 
adopted modern regimes. Israel, wh ich boasts a strong IT sector  with global reach, and Qatar , 
seeking to become a hub in the region for IT and digital development, are the countries with the 
most comprehensive and up -to-date regulatory framework for data governance and 
cybersecurity.  
Table 18: Digita l trade regulatory readiness in MENA  
MENA  (*) E-document  E-signature  Consumer 
Protection  Data 
governance  Cybersecurity  Intermediary 
Liability  
Algeria        
Bahrain        
Djibouti        
Egypt , Arab 
Rep.        
Iran, Islamic 
Rep.        
Iraq       
Israel        
Jordan        
Kuwait        
Lebanon        
Morocco        
Oman        
Qatar        
Saudi Arabia        
Tunisia        
UAE     (**)   
Yemen        
 = no substantial regulation;   
   
 
34 
  = barebones framework or dispersed individual regulations;   
  = comprehensive regulatory framework, but major additions or amendments needed;   
  = comprehensive regulation in place, but small additions or updates recommended;  
 = comprehensive and modern regulation in place;  
(*) No available data for Libya, Pal estine, and Syria. (**) Dubai provides a comprehensive data governance framework for 
companies under the DIFC regime.  
 
Only a  few countries have made strong efforts to keep abreast  with digital regulations. Bahrain, 
Qatar, and Morocco  feature the most comprehensive regulatory frameworks for digital markets 
in the region,  but updates and further developments remain necessary, particularly on consumer 
protection and cybersecurity . On the other hand, Iraq, Jordan, and UAE  have made little or no 
progress on digital regulation, with most regulatory solutions being severely outdated or 
stemmin g from broader frameworks not designed for current digital markets.    
Some countries , like Lebanon , have recently introduced broad “e -commerc e” regulations which 
address multiple aspects of digital markets regulations  at once , from e -signature to intermediary 
liability matters.  Th is kind of solution is a welcome attempt to catch up on digital regulation, 
which can be followed by other countrie s in the region  with under developed regulatory  
frameworks.  These broad efforts , however, must be viewed as a first step which needs to be later 
complemented with individual fine-tuned regulations, ideally developed by specialized agencies 
in each of these fields.  
MENA countries have a long way ahead in providing for a strong and comprehensive regulatory 
framework for digital trade.  Some countries, like Qatar , Israel, and Morocco, have tried to 
support an e xport -oriented IT sector by keeping an updated regulatory framework, especially in 
key areas like data governance and cybersecurity. Other countries, like Lebanon, have recently 
jump -started a framework for digital trade by covering a range of different is sues under one 
single legislation.  Yet , regulation in most countries in the region, regardless  of their level of 
development, still features some major loopholes that can limit consumer trust in digital markets 
or reduce certainty -and increase costs - for digital businesses.  
The greater challenge for MENA countries remain s recognizing the potential for economic 
growth and social development that digital trade can bring  and integrating it in its economic and 
trade policy . From this starting point, MENA cou ntries would benefit from introducing a 
standing policy for a comprehensive regulatory framework for  digital trade, and a monitoring 
mechanism to consult with stakeholders  as technologies evolve and new regulatory solutions 
may be needed .  
 
  
   
 
35 
 Bibliography   
Adobe. (2019, June). Global Guide to Electronic Signature Law.  Récupéré sur 
https://acrobat.adobe.com/content/dam/doc -cloud/en/pdfs/document -cloud -global -guide -
electronic -signature -law-ue.pdf  
AssureSign. (2019, June). E-Sign Laws Across Borders.  Récupéré sur AssureSign: 
https://www.assuresign.com/e -sign-laws-across -borders/  
Bartley Johns, M., Hoppe, M., Molinuevo, M., Nghardsaysone, K., & Daza Jaller, L. (2017). 
Taking Advantage of E -Commerce: Legal, Regulatory and Trade Facilitation Priorities 
for Lao PDR.  Washington, DC: World Bank Group.  
Blythe, S. (2011). E-Commer ce Law Around the World - Volume 1.  USA: Xlibris Corp.  
CIGI -Ipsos. (2017). Global Survey on Internet Security and Trust.  Centre for International 
Governance Innovation & IPSOS.  
CipherCloud. (2017). Global Guide to Data Protection Laws.  San Jose: CipherClou d. 
Dentons. (2019, January 21). New Lebanese law on e -transactions and data protection . Récupéré 
sur https://www.dentons.com/en/insights/alerts/2019/january/21/new -lebanese -law-on-
etransactions -and-data-protection  
EFF. (2015, March 24). Manila Principles o n Intermediary Liability: Best Practices Guidelines 
for Limiting Intermediary Liability for Content to Promote Freedom of Expression and 
Innovation.  Récupéré sur https://www.manilaprinciples.org/  
Frederick Fischer, S. (2001). Saving Rosencrantz and Guilden stern in a Virtual World? A 
Comparative Look at Recent Global Electronic Signature Legislation. 7 B.U.J.SCI & 
TECH. L. , 229.  
FreedomHouse. (2018, May 31). Freedom House . Consulté le March 25, 2019, sur 
https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom -net/2018/bahra in 
Gasser, U., & Schulz, W. (2015). Governance of Online Intermediaries: Observations from a 
Series of National Case Studies. Berkman Center Research Publication No. 2015 -5. 
Holland, A., Bavitz, C., Hermes, J., Sellars, A., Budish, R., Lambert, M., & Decoster, N. (2014). 
Intermediary Liability in the United States . Retrieved from Global Network of Internet 
and Society Research Centers (NoC): https://publixphere.net/i/noc/insta nce/noc.html  
International Trade Administration. (2019, February 12). Export.gov.  Récupéré sur Bahrain 
Commercial Guide: www.export.gov  
Leung, H. (2019, April 2). Time.  Consulté le April 2, 2019, sur Singapore is the latest country to 
propose tough legisla tion against fake news: http://time.com/5562501/singapore -fake-
news -law-freedom -speech/  
Makulilo, A. B. (2016). African Data Privacy Laws. Dans Issues in Privacy and Data Protection.  
Springer.  
OECD. (2000). Guidelines for Consumer Protection in the Context  of Electronic Commerce.  
Paris: OECD.     
 
36 
 OECD. (2013). Privacy Framework.  Paris: OECD.  
OMB. (2017, January 3). Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally Identifiable 
Information, Memorandum for Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies.  Récupér é 
sur Executive Office of the President's Office of Management and Budget: 
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2017/m -17-
12_0.pdf  
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. (s.d.). Chronology of Data Breaches: Security Breaches 2005 - 
Present . Récupéré sur www.privacyrights.org/data -breach  
UNCTAD. (2016). Data protection regulations and international data flows: implications for 
trade and development.  New York and Geneva: United Nations.  
UNCTAD. (2017). Consumer Protection in Electronic Commerce: A Note by the UNCTAD 
Secretariat.  Geneva: United Nations.  
USITC. (2017). Global Digital Trade I: Market Opportunities and Key foreign Trade 
Restrictions.  The U.S. International Trade Commission.  
Washington Post. (s.d.). Hacks of OPM da tabases compromised 22.1 million people, federal 
authorities say . Récupéré sur https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/federal -
eye/wp/2015/07/09/hack -of-security -clearance -system -affected -21-5-million -people -
federal -authorities -say/ 
World Economic Forum. (2019 , March). The Global Governance of Online Consumer 
Protection and E -Commmerce.  Récupéré sur World Economic Forum: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_consumer_protection.pdf  
 
     
 
   
 Annex  1: Digital Trade Regulatory Database Methodology  
The Digital Trade Regulatory Readiness Assessment  evaluates whether a  domestic legal and 
regulatory framework provides answers to specific challenges brought about by digital trade . The 
assessment focuses on th e existence of a comprehensive and modern framework that offers 
solutions in key matters related to digital trade, including the regulation of electronic transactions  
and trust-building  regulation.  The ground assumption  of the assessment  is that providing 
effective and transparent regulatory solutions helps foster digital trade by enhancing trust in 
digital markets and reducing costs related to uncertainty and ambiguity in the legal framework.     
This study collects and analyzes available  information on digital trade regulation assembled in a 
comparable manner across 40 countries, including 20 Middle East and North Africa ( MENA ) 
countries, in order to provide an analysis of the patterns of policy across countries and sectors. 
The five poli cy areas covered are electronic documentation and signature; online consumer 
protection; data governance; cybersecurity; and intermediary liability.  
The paper seeks to facilitate the analysis of digital trade regulation, inform policymakers on 
recent tren ds and areas for reform, and provoke dialogue among stakeholders. The database, 
containing the index, legislative sources, and country scores, can be obtained from the authors . 
About the data  
The Digital Trade Regulatory Readiness database contains information on regulations that 
impact  digital trade. There is no globally agreed definition of “digital trade”.  We refer to digital 
trade as the buying and selling of goods and services using the I nternet. This includes cross -
border transactions of traditional services (e.g. books) and digital services. (e.g. cloud 
computing).  
The Assessment  focuses on domestic policies that affect the supplier of the good or service as 
well as the consumer. It does not  take into account  the implementation or enforcement of the 
existing legislation. The purpose of this  study is not to  evaluate  policy decisions or to cover 
controversial topics, but rather to assess whether governments have introduced legislation 
that addresses  digital trade.   
Countries covered in the database  
The database currently includes information from a total of  40 countries, of which  20 are 
countries from the  MENA  region, and 20 are countries that represent  different regions and 
income groups a round the world  (see Table A1). 
Regulations  covered in the database  
The main focus of the database is on regulations that provide essential regulatory tools for 
remote transactions and promot e trust among  the parties to the transaction. The Regulatory 
Readiness  Index is divided into two major  topics , namely regulation on e lectronic transactions 
and trust-building  regulation,  with each topic further disaggregated into subtopics  (electronic 
documentation; electronic signature; online consumer protection; data governance; 
cybersecurity; and intermediary liability) containing t he specific variables .   
38 
 Data collection process  
Regulatory information for the countries covered was obtained from publicly available sources. 
The Assessment is based on  an analysis of the texts of relevant laws and regulations  available 
online.  The data a re current as of October 2019, and do not reflect any changes to the legislation 
after that date.  For some  countries,  no information could be  gathered, in which case this is noted 
in the text.   
Quantification of  digital trade regulat ions 
The assessment measures the sophistication of the country’s regulatory framework for digital 
trade. The scoring methodology uses weighted scores, reflecting the experts’ assessment of  the 
relative  importance  of the variables, subtopics, and topics  in terms  of their  contribution to 
facilitating electronic transactions  and increasing trust  (see Table A2).  
• Thirty -seven independent variables, ranging between 0.25 and 1 point each, add up to 
incremental scores per subtopic and per topic.   
• The total  country  scores range in values between zero and 20, with zero representing 
an inexistent  regulatory framework and 20 a comprehensive regulatory framework for 
digital trade.   
The trust-building  regulation topic was given the most weight, as the presence of legislation 
addressing the  variables  covered under this topic is deemed to show that a country has an 
advanced regulatory framework  with regard to  digital trade. Within that topic, data privacy 
carries the most weight, being considered as an area of great importance f or the evolution of 
digital markets.  On the other hand, the topic of regulation on electronic transactions, considered 
very basic, was given less weight.  
Data presentation  
While a score can give a quick idea of how a country’s regulations stand with regard  to 
fomenting digital trade, we believe that the information behind the number can provide better 
insight into the strengths and weaknesses of each regulatory framework. For this reason, the 
database provides details on the information gathered.  
The “data ” tab displays  the information  in a binary form, with “1” representing the presence of 
regulation for the specific variable and “0” the lack thereof. The “scoring” tab takes the assigned 
weight into account, providing the country scores for each variable a s well as the total score for 
each countr y. The “sources” tab provides the legislative source for each variable, where 
applicable. Finally, the “index” tab provides all of the variables evaluated, the score granted to 
each, and the reasoning behind each va riable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table A2. Digital Trade Regulatory Index   
Variable  Score  
Regulation on electronic transactions   4   
Electronic documentation   2  
1   Electronic documents are legally valid   1  
2   Specific  provision  provides detail on admissibility  of e-documents  as evidence   0.5  
3   The law is technology  neutral  regarding the storage of  e-documents   0.5   
Electronic signature   2  
4   Electronic signatures are  legally valid   0.5  
5   Certificates issued by a qualified certification authority (CA) or using specific technology are  recognized same legal status as 
handwritten signature   0.5  
6   Digital signatures with a valid certificate are  afforded a rebuttable presumption, regardless of certification provider or technology 
used   0.5  
7   Certification authorities may be private parties, in addition to public entities.   0.5  Table A1. Countries covered in the database  
MENA countries  Income level  Comparator countries  Region  Income level  
Algeria  Upper -middle  Albania  ECA Upper -middle  
Bahrain  High  Armenia  ECA Upper -middle  
Djibouti  Lower -middle  Bangladesh  SA Lower -middle  
Egypt , Arab Rep.  Lower -middle  Burkina Faso  SSA Low 
Iran, Islamic Rep.  Upper -middle  Canada  NA High  
Iraq Upper -middle  Colombia  LAC Upper -middle  
Israel  High  France  ECA High  
Jordan  Upper -middle  Honduras  LAC Lower -middle  
Kuwait  High  Indonesia  EAP Lower -middle  
Lebanon  Upper -middle  Kazakhstan  ECA Upper -middle  
Libya  Upper -middle  Kenya  SSA Lower -middle  
Morocco  Lower -middle  Korea, Rep.  EAP High  
Oman  High  Kyrgyzstan  ECA Lower -middle  
Palestine  Lower -middle  Malaysia  EAP Upper -middle  
Qatar  High  Mexico  LAC Upper -middle  
Saudi Arabia  High  Moldova  ECA Lower -middle  
Syria n Arab Republic  Low Pakistan  SA Lower -middle  
Tunisia  Lower -middle  Senegal  SSA Lower -middle  
United Arab Emirates  High  Tanzania  SSA Low 
Yemen , Rep.  Low Vietnam  EAP Lower -middle  
  
40 
 Trust -building  regulation  12   
Online consumer protection   4  
8  Framework explicitly addresses online consumer protection   0.5   
  Online information disclosure requirements:          
9   Full business address of merchant   0.25   
1   Full description of the product or service   0.25   
11   Information about  delivery and/or payment   0.25   
12   Information about complaint handling   0.25   
13   Existence of the right of withdrawal    0.5  
14   No need to provide a reason for withdrawal   0.5  
15   Availability of an online dispute resolution mechanism   0.5  
16
17   Refund available as an option for redress   0.5  
Additional alternatives for redress, such as repair, replacement, or partial refund   0.5   
Data  privacy   5  
18   Framework explicitly addresses online personal data privacy protection   1  
19   Special rules for the treatment of sensitive personal data during processing   0.5   
  Legal basis for data collection and processing:     
20   Consent  by data subject   0.25   
21
22 
23   Performance of a contract to which the customer is party   0.25  
Compliance with a legal obligation to which the controller is subject   0.25  
Legitimate interests pursued by the controller or by a third party   0.25  
24   Data subject’s right to  electronic  data access and data deletion   1  
25   Explicit rules on cross -border data transfers   0.5  
26   Where data is required to be stored domestically,  such requirement does not prevent from transferring  a copy of it abroad (subject to 
other conditions if necessary)   1  
 
Cybersecurity    3  
27   Data encryption required   0.5  
28   Internal data protection policy required   0.5  
29   Appointment of a data manager required   0.5  
30   Risk assessment procedures required   0.5  
31   Data breach notification requirements   0.5  
32   Supervisory authority in charge of enforcement   0.5  
Platform Regulation  4   
Intermediary liability    4  
33   Framework explicitly addresses online intermediary liability   0.5   
41 
 34   Safe harbor provisions exist to shield online intermediaries from liability   1  
35   Infringements related to intellectual property are covered   1  
36   Notice and stay -down procedures required   1  
37   An order from a judicial authority is required for content restriction   0.5  
  Scoring  TOTAL  20 
 