Cornelius, Kalenzi; Kwon, Youngsun
Conference Paper
Digital Finance Revolution in E. Africa: Retail Bank's
Adaption to a changing Marketplace
22nd Biennial Conference of the International Telecommunications Society (ITS): "Beyond
the Boundaries: Challenges for Business, Policy and Society", Seoul, Korea, 24th-27th
June, 2018
Provided in Cooperation with:
International Telecommunications Society (ITS)
Suggested Citation: Cornelius, Kalenzi; Kwon, Youngsun (2018) : Digital Finance Revolution
in E. Africa: Retail Bank's Adaption to a changing Marketplace, 22nd Biennial Conference
of the International Telecommunications Society (ITS): "Beyond the Boundaries: Challenges
for Business, Policy and Society", Seoul, Korea, 24th-27th June, 2018, International
Telecommunications Society (ITS), Calgary
This Version is available at:
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/190340
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:
Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.
Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.
Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.Terms of use:
Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your
personal and scholarly purposes.
You are not to copy documents for public or commercial
purposes, to exhibit the documents publicly, to make them
publicly available on the internet, or to distribute or otherwise
use the documents in public.
If the documents have been made available under an Open
Content Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you
may exercise further usage rights as specified in the indicated
licence.Digital Finance Revolution in E. Africa: Retail Bank ’s Adaption to 
a changing Marketplace  
Kalenzi Corneliusa , Youngsun  Kwonb 1 
aDoctoral Candidate, Department of Business and Technology Management, Korea Advanced Institute of Science 
and Technology, Repub lic of Korea.  
b Professor, Department of Business and Technology Management, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Republic of Korea.  
 
Abstract  
The question of how retail banks adapt to a changing market place that is driven by disruptive F intech 
firms is increasingly becoming important . This is  especially critical  in East Africa where banks have 
traditionally had limited presence. This paper examines the impact of digital technologies such as mobile 
money and mobile banking on retail banks  ‘channel  strategy. We introduce a technology and innovation 
adap tation model for retail banks;  consisting of digital channel adoption,  changing consumer prefe rence 
and how these factors  influence banks ’ adap tation strategies  and distribution channel s.  A S EM analysis 
based on a survey of over 100 bank managers from  mainly cross border  retail banks in East  Africa  was 
carried out. The study results  suggests that digitization and consumer preference s have statistically 
significant impact on retail banks ’ adapt ion strategy. Our findings show that, for retail banks to remain 
competitive and relevant in the new digital marketplace, they must think beyo nd traditional distribution  
strategies such as branch banking and  embrace new possibilities  provided by digitizati on like digital 
banking services. While some banks that offer a mixture of traditional and multi -channel models are 
attractive to the consumers, o thers that partner with new players such MNOs to o ffer digital banking stand 
at a higher competitive edge . The key implication is that digitization is tied to success of retail banks in 
the new market place.  
Keywords: Retail Banking, Digital Finance, Mobile Banking , Financial Policy,  E. Africa  
 
1. Introduction  
     The financial system in East Africa has for a deca des been dominated by traditional banks, 
despite this market dominance, the banking system in region has been described as shallow and 
less inclusive. A recent study showed that out of 100 adults, only 15 had accounts in financial 
systems and there is only  3.1 branches per 100, 000 adults( Beck and cull, 2013).  However, 
                                                           
1* Email  address: yokwon@kaist.a c.kr 
E-mail address: kalenzi.c@kaist.ac.kr   
 
 C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
recent advancement and wide acceptance of mobile communication and internet has ushered in 
an era of digital  finance inclusion and Fintech. These  two forces are changing the whole financial  
access equation in the region by introducing new player’s  namely Mobile network operators and 
Fintech firms to the banking industry (Mckinsey 2017). The on -going changes are further 
exuberated by innovative regulatory changes which allow for experimenting  with digital finance 
technologies  as well as changing consumer behavior leading to a fierce competition and battle 
for consumers between banks and the new players.  
         But what is Digital finance ?, in this article we adopt the definition by CCAP, (20 15) which 
defines it as technologies which  enables previously excluded customers to digitally access and 
use formal financial services provided by financial institutions and agents, through transactional 
platforms u sing mobile devices.  Similarly, Fintech which is a short term for financial technology 
generally refers to  software and other technologies used to facilitate banking  and financial  
services.  Recent studies suggests that  the wide acceptance of digital financial innovati ons such 
as M -PESA  and Fin tech services such WorldRe mit in East Africa  is likely to have a  disruptive  
effect on the regions banking industry. This is especially  due to fact that retail  banks stand  to lose 
out some financial  services such as money transfer, payments, savings and s mall loans as the  
new players “cream them off” retail banking  value chain (McKinsey, 2016). Currently, retail  
banks offer branch banking, internet based - mobile banking services through apps and agent 
banking to their customers, while MNOs and Fintech firm s provide similar services through 
SMS based - Mobile Money services and apps respectively.   
       Considering the disruptive effect that digitization has on banks, it is expected that many 
banks will have to reconsider their business strategies and model s. This is so because innovation 
has traditionally pushed incumbent firms to change strategy, while some retail banks may 
actively adopt innovation, others may not due to inertia. Recent developments in the regions 
banking industry suggest that some retail  banks are changing their strategies. For instance  big 
regional banks such as stanbic bank , commercial bank of Africa and Kenya commercial banks 
have formed strategic partnerships with  the largest MNOs due to wide popularity of the latter’s 
digital fina nce platforms. How this unlikely  marriage between “competitor - turns - partner -turns - 
competitor “will play out in the future is presently unclear and needs explorations, however what 
is clear is that small banks which are unable to form partnerships with “almighty” MNOs  are 
likely not to survive in the banking finance market place of they don’t innovate (Mckinsey, 
2017).  More so because,  recently, MNOs  are leve raging their partnerships with big banks to 
boldly enter the banking space such as loan service s such as MShwari in Kenya provided by 
KCB bank in partnership with Safaricom, MOKash and MPawa which are provided by big bank -
MNO partnerships in Uganda and Tanzania respectively.  
       Another emerging trend in East Africa which calls for further resea rch on impact of 
digitization on bank strategy is that many retail banks are trying  figure out how to  strategically 
respond to changing market dynamics.  For instance some banks such as Stanbic bank, B ank of 
Africa  are altering  their dis tributional network s by closing branches and refocusing their efforts 
to digital services and branchless banking (BBC. 2017, daily monitor, 2017).   Others such as 
equity bank are experimenting with new business model such as Mobile virtual network operator C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
(MVNO) Bank, a mo del that allows them to directly compete with MNOs in provision of 
financial services and gain competitive hedge in the regions banking industry. Still many 
majority of the banks in the region are laggards and haven’t figured out how to innovate and stay 
competitive.  
    While retail banks  are contending with MNOs over who controls the banking service market, 
Fintech firms such as WorldRemit, Remit, and Terrapay have joined the financial innovation 
frenzy  to further  undercut banks in some financial service  markets such as in th e international 
remittance.  This changing  market place as described above raises a lot of issues and questions. 
First, how banks innovation – and its response to innovative ideas change in face of “disruptive 
innovation/ innovation s hock?, Second, what is the future of traditional banking distribution 
channels in East Africa in new innovative market space, Third, what are the strategic competition 
dynamics between traditional banks, MNOs and Fintech firms in the mobile banking market 
space? And lastly, which banking channel models are like to emerge and dominate the industry 
and why? These questions are extremely important to the players involved and should be 
answered through a thorough study of strategic competitio n in the changing m arketplace.  
     In this paper we  seek to explore and understand  the impact of digital financial inno vations on 
the retail banks strategy .   While there some existing literature on impact of internet on banking 
distribution channel Mol et al., (1999) , we argue that most of these studies where for specific 
markets such as European  and America ‘s market s and thus their context is  different from that 
of East African Market. Secondly, most of these studies where researched in a period where 
bank innovation strategy meant that banks adopted innovation as tool to get competitve 
advantage over other banks , which we define as competition from within. It is therefor not 
clear if their findings and implications apply to the new digital era which has ashered in non-
banking firms in banking industry , an era we have define as competition from out.   Our focus 
in this study is not to compare different market contexts but rather to take stock of trend in East 
Africa s banking industry and our aim is to uncover how digit al innovations are i mpacting retail 
banks strategy. A gap which is not filled by literature and as resulted in  scanty research on 
competition strategy and lack of proper understanding of contemporary  issues  in East Africa’s 
banking industry , a gap which th is study attempts to fill.  
   The remaining structure of the article is as follows. In section 2 we describe the characteristics 
of East Africa’s banking industry in order to elucidate on the rise of digital banking. In section 3, 
we present the literatur e review and the theoretical framework with corresponding hypothesis 
development. Section 4 describes the data and methodology used in the study. In section 5 we 
present the results and in last section we conclude the paper with implications of the study.  
2. Characteristics of East Africa’s Banking Industry  
       The E. Africa’s region banking environment shares some characteristics that have defined 
and shaped how banking is done in the region the past few decades. The industry is as previously 
mentioned  is shallow  and the players in the market only offer simple banking services to an 
exclusive urban market. This shallowness is due to some regional market characteristics which C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
makes it difficult for the banking industry to grow ( Beck & Cull, 2013).  To begin  with, the size 
of East African economy although growing at impressive rates is small, which means that 
players in the banking industry cannot enjoy the benefits which accrue from scale economies. 
Similarly, the overall per capita income in the region is s mall, for instance the in the 3 sample 
countries of our study,  Uganda is a paltry 615 US dollars , Tanzania is 879.19 US dollars and 
Kenya is 1455 dollars, the small per capita income has two main implications, first, it implies 
that overall the region ha s limited viable customers. Second, it implies that there is low demand 
for formal banking products (savings, loans etc.).  
    This is compounded by widely scattered population across the region which makes it costly to 
provide banking infrastructure and services, for example according to World Bank, in 2016 , 
Kenya had only 5.4 branches, Uganda had 2.8 while Tanzania had 2.5 for serving 100,000 adults 
in the region. It is there no surprise that account ownership in MNO networks has easily 
overtaken accoun ts in traditional banks in East Africa, and in some countries like Uganda, 
accounts in financial institutions are actually in the decline  see figure 4 below.  
  
 
 
Figure 1. Access to Banking in East Africa  
C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
    Regarding banking infrastructure, as of 2016, Kenya has only 9.2 ATMs, Tanzania has 5.99 
and Uganda 4.3 ATMs serving 100,000 Adults. The absence of banking infrastructure has 
resulted in the increased usage of mobile and digital platforms for financial transactions in t he 
East African region. Figure 1 above shows  that there is a consistent upward growth in Uganda, 
Kenya and Tanzania from 2009 to 2012 for the available data.  Emerging reports indicate that this 
digital platforms have overtaken traditional banks in their transa ction volumes across the region  
 
 
Figure 2. Emerging Branchless Banking Model  
        Secondly, in East Africa, the biggest percentage of population do their business informally 
and are outside the formal business channels. This informality means that they lack access to 
formal records (IDs, land titles, registered companies,) used in main stream banking industry.  As 
a result, there is a small number of customer s who borrow from banks in East Africa, for 
example, as Kenya which i s the highest had about 160 borrowers per 1000 people, Uganda and 
Tanzania has about 25 borrowers per 1000 and the data shows a downward trend the later 
countries as shown in Figure 3. This may be an indication that the region is not attractive for 
formal banking services such as loans and as a result, it is an expensive and risky venture for 
banks to provide services to larger parts of E. Africa’s population.   
   The high cost of lending  has alienated banks from big part of the market which  means that 
there is gap in the market that  could be filled by low cost loan schemes that has been filled by 
C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
micro lending through micro finance institutions , and recently  MNOs have entered the lending 
market space by offering small loans services as mentioned in the intr oduction section above.  
The success of MNO micro lending schemes such as Mpesa loans2 in Kenya, MoKash3 in 
Uganda and M -Pawa in Tanzania 4 proves that the market is available, but only for institutions 
that have successfully designed services that are sui table for market and that products that banks 
have offered the last two decades could only serve a limited number of users which further 
limited their potential for growth and competitiveness.   
The new market place therefor demands that  retail banks drop the legacy thinking and way of 
doing banking in order for them to remain competitive in the new market place.   
 
Figure 3. Number of Borrowers/1000 and Number of Deposit Accounts  
                                                           
2  KCB group issued  Shs. 8 billion  in Mobile loans through Mpesa Platform  
3  MTN launched MoKash saving and loan service in Uganda in 2016  
4  Vodacom Tanzania l aunched Mobile saving and lending service in collaboration with Commercial Bank of Africa in 2014  
C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
  
                      
    The third point   as St uart , (2017) showed is that  the region’s economies are volatile and are 
susceptible to price changes and large exchange rate movements, which is a result of multiple factors 
including heavy dependence on commodity exports, political instability, social i nstability among others 
which makes banking and investing in the industry complex .  
 
  
 
Figure 4. Selected Commodity Prices  
       Finally political instability across the region especially in Kenya and Uganda is an ongoing 
threat  to economic players including the banking industry and its ability to fully deliver services 
to its customers by limiting investments in the banking sectors.   
 
 
 
C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
3. Literature Review  
       Digital finance in simple terms represents the “electronization” - i.e. turning transactions and 
financial services electronic or digital (Gomber et al, 2017). This encompasses every form of 
bank service or product which is delivered by electronic means, examples of digital finance may 
include but not imitated to the follo wing automated teller machines, internet banking, mobile 
banking, and mobile money.  
         The latest form of digitizing of finance is  Fintech, which is a term derived from 
combination of terms finance and technology, it can be defined as internet base d innovations  
that relies on advanced communication tools and information processing to facilitate financial 
transactions. Fintech typically involves innovators in form of start -up s that develop business 
models which unbundle the traditional banking sect or by offering dynamic, secure and better 
tools for financial service provision (Lee 2015a).  
     The retail banking industry has traditionally utilized the branch network in the provision of 
banking services (James, 1995). However recent advances in tech nology and information 
processing as already mentioned means that service provision is changing into fully digitization 
and providing the thrusts that change consumer behavior. The introduction of technology is not 
new, indeed, at one point, it was believe d that the introduction of ATMs would replace branches 
but time proved those studies wrong as ATMs become complementary rather than substitutes.  
       Historically technology has been introduced in banking from time to time starting in the 
introduction of  tabulator to automation of bank statements in 1916s during the early 
mechanization, technology then evolved in the 1960s to early 1980s to introduction of ATMs, 
automation of branch accounting, Teleprocessing among others, this period marked the 
beginning  of real time bank service provisioning according to Batiz -lazo and wood, (2002).The 
adoption rates of technology were still low due to still developing communication technology at 
the time.  
        The period of 1983 -2015 marked the era wide spread adopt ion and diffusion of technology 
in banking sector, (Batiz -Lazo and Wardley, 2007; Batiz -lazo, 2017) it was in this era that 
witnessed the introduction of e -Finance, E –wallets, digital finance, mobile banking, mobile 
payments, digital currencies and financ ial inclusion. The thrusts to the phenomenal growth in 
diffusion of technology in the banking sector came from lowering of communication technology 
costs, wide spread use of internet technology, high level of adoptions on mobile communications 
on the suppl y side, while on the demand side, the impetus to adopt these services come from 
convenience, ease of use, reduced costs among others.   
       The level of use of technology and banking development vary from region to region and 
country to country, advance d countries tend to have well established banking sectors with well -
established technology infrastructure that enables banks to provide multi -channel distribution 
networks to their customers, developing countries on the other hand with less technology 
infrastructure, some with wide population disperse ration has resulted in concentration of fewer 
banking services to specific areas usually capital and main cities.  C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
       These difference have shaped how technology shapes banking in the respective markets as  
above, for example according to beck& cull, (2015), the wide spread adoption of mobile banking 
through new players such as MNOs  in developing countries of Africa can be attributed to low 
penetration of banks and bank branches. Conversely, according to kw on and Lee, mobile 
banking in Korea, a country with well -established technology infrastructure, efforts by MNOs to 
enter the banking industry of Korea didn’t succeed even if they could control the gateway to 
wireless communication, because banks were well established and the emergence of smart phone 
apps meant that they didn’t have to rely on MNOs.  
        The introduction of technology in banking sector inform of mobile banking, Fintech 
technology and digitization of banking value chain is triggered wide spread interest in both the 
industry and academia for the past two decades. It appears that the development of technology 
has grown hand in hand with academic research. In the academia, the interests range from 
covering the demand side of banking service d istribution to supply side distribution of banking 
services to customers, while a limited number of empirical studies have focused on strategic 
competition issues in the banking industry that arises from technology innovations.  
        A number of theories  have been used to by different researches to study and illuminate on 
the subject, on the demand side, the most widely used theory is technology acceptance 
model(Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003), innovation diffusion theories,(Rogers, 1995) 
and the ories of planned behavior and extended variations to understand why user adopt 
digitization in banking through mobile banking and other channels in developing countries 
(Shaikh & Karjaluoto, 2014; Ngugi, Pelowski, & Ogembo, 2010; Irura & Munjiru, 2013)  
       Other studies for example Mbiti and Weil (2011) tried to explore impact of digitization on 
traditional banking channel, in their ground breaking study of the impact of MPESA in Kenya, 
they found that increased use of digital tools such as M -Pesa reduce d peoples use of informal 
channels and opened possibilities for these previously unbanked to get “banked”, they also found 
that use of these digital services lowered to cost of banking services. While their study provided 
important findings, it could not c apture strategic responses of traditional banks to the entry of 
digital platforms in the banking industry.  
       The supply side studies have been concerned with understanding drivers that influence 
banks and banking service provider choice of service del ivery, there is extensive literature on 
banking distribution channel. For example, according to James F Devlin (1995) in his study of 
banking innovation in the UK, he qualitatively captured the developments in banking distribution 
channels, and suggested t hat on the supply side, factors such as deregulation, technology and 
resultant market structure determines the channel which banks will select in the delivery of 
banking services.  
       This study although very useful didn’t provide empirical basis for t he study and its 
conclusions, moreover, it is not always the case that some factors like regulation deregulation 
will impact since it can also be argued that regulation or deregulation measures sometimes come 
after innovations have already effected changes  in the market, furthermore, this study does not 
explain how traditional banks respond to digital innovations. Similarly Neil et al (1999) studied C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
the distribution channels strategies of Danish retail banking using distributional channel theory, 
in this st udy, the authors developed the adaptation process in the distribution channels, they 
validated by surveying bank employees in Danish banks, despite its introduction of conceptual 
model for understanding, the study according to the authors fell short of exp laining how 
digitization impacts channel choice and strategy by incumbent players.  
        There is generally limited papers focusing on strategic competition perspectives of the 
traditional banking players in face of competition brought about by digitiza tion, in one of the 
earliest attempts to address this important question, Kwon and Lee (2010) explored to hegemonic 
struggle between MNOs and retail banks which gave a thorough review how the struggle has 
evolved qualitatively, and they found that in the e nd banks prevailed over the digital finance 
market of Korea because they were well established and the emergency of smart phones and 
smart phone apps reduced the need for relying on MNOs. This was useful finding, however, it is 
hard to be generalized to ot her countries case, moreover, it was at best premature to make the 
conclusion as Technology has evolved and now MNOs have entered the banking industry 
including in the Korean market.    
   Finally most papers are written for the already established markets  with solid technology 
infrastructure, their findings may have limited implications in market contexts where banks have 
limited footprint and technology infrastructure is limited. This  study therefor seeks to address 
these missing gaps by exploring how inc umbent banks and their response to innovative ideas 
change in face of disruptive innovations  Secondly by addressing the strategic competition 
dynamics between banks and MNOs in the digital finance market space?  Lastly which banking 
model gets hegemony over  the market and why? In the next section we discuss theoretical 
framework of the study and methodology used.  
 
 
4. Research framework  
      The proposed research framework inspired by work on banking distribution channel such as 
(Mols, Nikolaj D. Bukh, & Floh r Nielsen, 1999) , is formulated based on thorough review of 
theories on banking from both a supply side and demand side. On the demand side, the 
framework is rooted in theories of technology acceptance and consumer behavior ( Kolodinsky, 
Hogarth, & Hilgert,  2004) studies while the demand side is rooted in distributional channel 
literature (Li, 2002) Figure 11 below.  
 C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
   Figure 5. Proposed Technology and Innovation adaption Model for retail banks, adapted From 
Mols et al, (1999)  
 
4.1. Digital Channel adoption and Retail banks Strategy (H3)  
      Technology has throughout history played a core role in the functioning of bank and has 
influenced banking distribution channels. Literature is a washed with a lively debate on whether 
techno logy will finally replace the core functioning of banks and in particular the role of branch 
in baking system. Earlier research for instance predicted that Automated teller machines would 
replace banks,  however other researchers (Consoli, 2008) in a longit udinal study proved that it 
was possible for dual evolution in  banking innovation system where communication 
technologies while core to banking becomes  complementary to existing systems. Ot her studies 
(Bulgărea, 2011) have also supported the idea that branches has main means of banking 
distribution channel are here to stay showing increasing reliance on branches in Europe.  
       These studies represent a school of thought which argues agai nst another ideas suggested by 
likes of Bill gates, who suggest that unless banks evolve using technology, they will become 
extinct like dinosaurs. Other literature for example by Heffernan, (2005) strikes  middle ground 
in this debate by arguing that whil e technology for example digital finance will not replace 
banks, the adoption of digital products will change the way intermediary services are delivered.  
      Regardless of the side of the debate, most of these studies represents a period in which 
techn ology adaption in the banking industry was motivated by internal forces and competition 
within the industry, and didn’t anticipate a time when banks could face competition from players 
who use latest communication tools to take part of banking value chain,  which represented a 
period intensified competition from out. In the competition from within,  banks adapted to 
technology innovations to gain competitive advantages in the industry (Chang, 2003) , as means 
of cost saving , tools for improving performance ,  (Xue, Hitt, & Harker, 2007), customer 
relationship management (Durkin & Howcroft, 2003) among other functions within the industry.  
C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
      According to kwon, and lee, (2010) this limited perspective of impact of digital technologies 
such as mobile banking o n incumbent banks could  be  because these technologies where viewed 
as an additional channel to bank services, besides, the digital technologies were in the nascent 
stages and thus limited data to for empirical studies. At the time of their study , competit ion from 
out was just beginning to emerge as reflected by entry of MNOs in Korea’ banking industry 
which eventually failed.  
   However as  Marinč, (2015) noted, there are on -going fundamental changes in  the banking   
industry due to IT innovations and entr y of new players especially Fintech firms and MNOs in 
the banking industry.  This research proposes that the adoption and usage of digital channels to 
deliver banking services by new players such as MNOs and Fintech firms is the game changes 
and will influ ence incumbent banks strategic choices in terms of delivery channels especially in 
markets where banks have limited presence such as East Africa.  
    First, digital channels for delivering financial services like mobile banking and mobile money 
have brough t with them their own “branch” network, which is cheaper to deploy compared to 
establishing actual branch by incumbent banks. As result new entrants have scaled their branch 
network ( Ndungu & Njeru Lecturer, 2014), across East Africa faster than incumbent banks 
(Mwando, 2013) in banking. The result is that these channels enabled the new players, chiefly 
MNOs to solve the financial distributional issues that have dodged retail banks for decades as 
well as allowing proximity to customer (Alexandre & Gates, 20 11), the current market situation 
in East Africa points to the fact that these channels are substituting for retail bank branches as 
evidenced by some banks closing branches across the region, the key question however is how 
banks will strategically react to the ongoing transformation. This research therefor propose that 
retail banks channel strategies will be influenced by digital channel adoption and usage, this is 
based on th e fact as above that the successful adoption of digital channels  in E.Africa , their wide 
reach to customers through mobile  will compel banks to rethink their distributional channel 
strategies. More so because,  for retail banks to survive and compete in the new “digital age”, 
they will have to evolve and develop delivery models which a re scalable to retain existing 
customers as wel l reach out to wider consumer in  cost effective way compared to traditional 
branches, or other channels such as internet banking that are presently used.  
 
4.2. Technology adoption  and consumer behavior (H1)  
        Second ly, digital  channels such as mobile money and their corresponding network of 
“human” ATMs have an influence on changing consumer’s behavior in terms o f preferred 
methods for banking.  According to Maurer, Nelms, & Rea, (2013), these channels co py the 
functionality of typical retail bank branch or ATM. This means customers who are “unbanked” - 
that is consumers who cannot access formal banking,  can still access financial services such as 
transfer, deposits, savings and loans through their mobile phones without ever stepping in a 
bank. All this is made possible because the new service by MNOs relies on extensive human 
agents who facilitates the cash -in and cash out - a process that involves digitizing value and 
loading it into MNO banking system and  converting it back to cash (Eijkman, Kendall, & Mas, C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
2010).  Beyond this main functionality digital banking, agents usually act as branch tellers who 
provide services such as tutoring customers on system usage, registering customers and are 
usually link b etween MNOs and customers. To consumers the digital channels offers 
compatibility,  convenience, cost effective, faster, accessible services, all which are in limited 
supply i n the  East Africa’s  traditional branch model.  In this research, we propose that  d igital 
channel agents is sifting consumer preference away from retail banking to new players based not 
only on premise above but also on that fact digital channels are closer to consumers and therefore 
more convenient to use.  Hence banks have to rethink th eir strategies.  
 
4.3. Consumer preference and Retail b ank’s Distributional Channel  strategy (H2)  
         Research on effect of consumer preference of retail banking distribution channel is well 
established, for stance Literature on distribution channel th eory points out that what customer 
wants is critical in determining how services will be delivered to them. This could be as result of 
factors such as willingness to pay, switching costs among others.  According t o Laukkanen, 
(2007). T here is diversity in banking channel preference, as those who use digital channels such 
as internet banking have different preference to those who use mobile banking channel.  In the 
case of East African consumers, digital channel such as Mpesa have become the face of their 
banking and financial services (Stenitzer, 2015). This introduces the aspect of promotion and 
branding where customers who are consistently exposure may influence preference. Moreover, 
the wide spread adoption of digital finance channels as reported by ( mon ey&survey.,2011;Etim, 
2014;Muya, 2016) may be creating a network externality effect (Choi, 1994) , which may 
influence even those with customers with bank accounts may switch to use digital channels by 
new players since many other customers are already usi ng it. Others studies for example (Calisir 
& Gumussoy, (2008) ; Karjaluoto , Mattila, & Pento, 2002) point to consumers demographic traits 
such as education, age and they suggest that this may influence consumer preference of banking 
distribution channel. Si milarly, in case East Africa with world’s youngest population and who 
are known to prefer digital channels may suggest future directio n of banking channel strategies. 
This research proposes therefor that cons umer preference has positive  influence retail ba nks 
distributional channel strategies in the new digital finance environment of East Africa.  
 
4.4. Retail  bank ’s adaptation strategy  
      Proper understanding of new technologies and threats of new arrival are historically 
recognized for bringing competit ive advantages to firms that adopt them or adapt to them 
(Porter, 2008). However there is divergence of views on how incumbent firms adapt to new 
environments and technology stimuli’s that may come for new entrant. According to Leonard -
Barton, (1988), tech nology adaption is a process of continuous alignment  of cycles of miss -
aligned involving the user environment and  technology until such as point when technology, the 
delivery system and performance criteria fits. The current research argues that the proces s above 
is more adaptable to cases where firms are adapting to technology innovations and co mpetition C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
within the industry.  For instance when a retail bank introduces internet banking to gain 
competitive edge over other retail banks in similar industry, th is process will be important 
because internet banking may not be the aligned to user environment.  For example in an 
environment such as Africa where there are more mobile users compared to internet uses, retail 
banks may correct the misalignment by adding  additional mobile banking channel or eliminating 
internet banking from their delivery channel and they will repeat the cycle until they have perfect 
product or services fits that market.  
      However it’s  not to  clear how this process plays out in cases of where a firm’s strategic 
choices are influenced by wide acceptance of new competitors innovation, we suggest in this 
research similar to (de Lange, Armanios, Delgado -Ceballos, & Sandhu, 2016),   that a firms 
strategic response may involves collaboration  with competitors, cannibalization of their existing 
technologies and delivery systems, mergers am ong other strategic responses.   In the case of 
retail banks in East Africa digital finance system, one emerging trend is that of big bankers are 
partnering w ith big MNOs to tap into new markets as wel l as retain existing customers. H owever 
there is are limitations to this  model such as leaving out majority of ‘smaller’  banks who are not 
in partnerships with MNOs, and thus these banks will have to explore other  strategic choices in 
their adaption process. Moreover, partnership between MNOs and Banks as an adaptive strategy 
may not work out given the wide variations their objectives and existing structures (organization 
and operations), (Gupta, 2016). This means that still, other banks may have to explore other 
strategies within the digital finance framework. This article  therefor proposes that the existing 
retail banking distributional channel strategy will be aligned to new competitor’s digital 
innovation strate gy, this is based on the argument as above that, for retail banks to remain 
competitive, they will have to forge partnerships with MNOs, or implement similar technologies, 
and this may entail cannibalization of their existing systems to be able to compete in new market 
environment.   
         
4.5. Retail bank ’s  adaption to t echnology innovation, and New/Future  delivery channel  (H4)  
     As a result of changing dynamics as  described above , and digital finance innovation which as 
Li, (2002) as showed,  will have an impact on type of banking services and delivery models that 
will be developed in East Africa. F irst because the adaption process in the new banking 
environment will lead to new innovations , some  might be  hybrid versions that take into 
consideration  of retail banks and MNO systems, to deliver a new banking channel provided by 
joint partnerships between banks and MNOs.  Equity  bank M -Swahiri is such example, others 
may develop different system, as already mentioned elsewhere . Bottom  line here is that new 
systems will be developed to a lign to new market environment. The paper therefor proposes that 
the bank adaption process which a bank chooses  positively influences  new banking new 
innovations which are more aligned to the new market environment, these may me an replacing 
existing technologies or complementing existing technologies to deliver services to customers  
 C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
 
                         Figure 6. Possible Banking Scenario in E.A Banking, Modified from Mols et al 1999  
5. Research Met hodology  
        The study qualitatively explored how banks in East Africa are responding to digitization 
using a questionnaire, which was sent to mainly senior managers working in cross border 
financial institutions, some of which control the largest mark et share of formal banking in the 
region.  
     As a starting point, a pilot study involving experts in the field of digital finance, mobile 
banking as well as senior practioners in the banking industry was conducted to ascertain the 
viability of the survey . The experts where composed of researchers with PhDs in relevant fields, 
PhD and Graduate students at masters level majoring in Business with considerable 
understanding of business and innovations.  The study also involved preliminary pilot with 
senior pr actioners in the banking industry to assess the feasibility of obtaining quality data for 
empirical analysis. Following which a questionnaire was designed using their feedback, and a 
thorough study of relevant literature on digital finance.  
     The study used a questionnaire to obtain relevant data for the key variables covering the 
study. The main aim of these survey was to explore key themes of digitization in banking 
industry and how they are impacting retail banks strategy from bank perspective . The su rvey for 
this research, was conducted  in the months of February and March 2018, respondents from 
varying backgrounds and working in banking industry in East Africa were invited to participate 
C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
in the study. This way of conducting the study enabled a compreh ensive coverage from all angles 
and a wider perspective s (Bradley and Stewart, 2003).   
      The study question naire was sent to the banks through an experienced research firm called 
insight wells, based in Nairobi.  The research firm followed up and made sure that banks assigned 
respondents to answer the survey.  The retail banks such as KCB, equity bank, Standard 
Chartered, Barclay, Bank of Africa among others which were contacted were mainly  because 
they have strong presence in all the three E ast African  count ries under study, but also because 
cross border banks tend to apply same template when implementing strategies in the region.  
    Similar to (Gikandi & Bloor, 2010) the goal the questionnaire was capture emerging issues 
related to digitization of the  banking industry, while there study focused on understanding 
technologies changes  as  a key factor   in banking industry, this study zeroes in channel strategy 
and competition dynamics in the industry.    
Table 10. The Questionnaire items  
 Items capturing  retail banks Distributional Channel strategy 
in East Africa  
 Source  
Distribution  
Channel  
Bank 
adaption  
 
 The bank attaches decisive importance to expanding  
 digital channels to its customer than branches  Mols et al, ( 1999) 
The bank attaches decisive i mportance to  
offering customer friendly Mobile banking services  Severino, 
Tonderai, & 
Life,( 2015)  
The bank attaches decisive importance to offering  Mobile 
money service  
 in partnership with MNOs  Mckinsey & 
Company,  
(2017) 
 
Distributional  
Channel  The bank attaches decisive importance to offering  customer 
friendly  
 internet banking services  Li, (2002)  C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
     The st udy findings were further supplemented with case studies given the exploratory nature of the 
study (Donner, 2008), complimented with secondary data sources in  mobile banking surveys, banking 
industry trend studies. In addition latest reports and articles r elated to digitization, digital finance, mobile 
money and mobile banking trends in East Africa were examined.  
   The multi -dimension method above was a natural choice for the study because digitization of the 
financial industry is in the early stages and t here is not a lot of existing data to support an empirical study, The bank attaches decisive importance to offering to 
offering a customer friendly  
integrated banking services  Laukkanen, 
(2007)  
 Items measuring other Market mix elements   
 
Customer  
Preference &  
Segmentation  The bank attaches decisive importance to serving all 
customer segments   
Gupta, (2013)  
The bank attaches decisive importance to fast service to 
consu mers  
The bank attaches decisive importance to convenient 
services to customers  
 Retaining existing customers and reaching wider 
consumers is important  
   
 
Future 
Banking  
Channel  The bank attaches decisive importance to offering Mobile 
money service i n partnership with MNOs   
Mols et al, ( 1999) 
The bank attaches decisive importance to offering a 
customer friendly integrated banking services  
The bank attaches decisive importance to offering  customer 
friendly internet banking services  C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
as experienced by other similar studies (Kwon and Nam 2007), secondly obtaining industrial level data 
from banks is usually not easy given the bureaucracy and industrial secrets issues (Ochi eng and 
Marcharia, 2014).  
 
5.1. Data collection and Analysis  
    In the following table, a breakdown of respondent’s bank is presented, over 57 % of banks that 
were sampled are large banks with strong presence in the region.  The survey used a 5 -level 
Likert-type scale.  Majority of respondents close to 60 percent had a post graduate degree 
indicating an expert understanding of the industry. Overall a total of 109 responses were out  of 
which we obt ained 99 usable sample.  For data analysis, we used Structural  Equation Modeling 
(SEM) technique and R -Programing using the Lavaan package (Rosseel, 2012) which as one of 
most popular tool for SEM analysis in R -Programming  
Table 1 . Profile of Bank Respondents  
 
 
 
C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
Table 2.  Factor Loadings  
 
 
 
 
      The new digital b anking environment as articulated in the proposed retail banks adaption 
framework above suggests that incumbent banks are faced with a new banking era which 
demands different strategic choices for them to remain competitive and serve the market. Below 
we d iscuss  results are based on thorough literature review, survey questionnaire data from in 
East Africa’s banking industry ,  regarding the direction that banks will have to take in terms of 
delivery channels . 
 
 
 
 Factor  Item B SE Z P-value  Beta 
Digital Chann el Digital Banking  1.000  0.000  NA NA 0.670  
 Channel Coverage  1.135  0.183  6.215  0.000  0.749  
 All Customer  
Coverage  0.631  0.137  4.594  0.000  0.502  
Customer Preference  Fast service  1.000  0.000  NA NA 0.879  
 Convenient service  0.848  0.128  6.625  0.000  0.762  
 Retain Customer  0.566  0.114  4.947  0.000  0.516  
Bank Adaption strategy  Expand Digital  1.000  0.000  NA NA 0.753  
 Reduce Branch  0.832  0.168  4.967  0.000  0.541  
 Smart App Banking  0.798  0.137  5.804  0.000  0.631  
 Offer Mobile Money  0.813  0.286  2.842  0.000  0.515  
Future Channel  Agency Banking  1.000  0.000  NA NA 0.352  
 Internet Banking  2.443  1.194  2.046  0.041  0.892  
 Multi -Channel  1.633  0.786  2.076  0.038  0.773  C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
5.2.   Measurement Model  
 
   We conducted a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) to check the constru ct validity using 
Lavaan package in R. then we carried out a reliability convergent validity and discriminant 
validity, see tables 13 and 15.  Results indicate that most factors loaded above the recommended 
0.7, which confirms the reliability of items that  are measured in the study. In addition AVE and 
square roots of AVE obtained indicate that most of the items were greater than the recommended 
threshold of 0.5 and 0.85 respectively (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). All the other indicators such as 
the CFI, TLI, RMSEA and P -values of RMSEA (see results table 14), were above the 
recommended threshold indicating a good model fit.  
Table 3 . Correlation Table  
  
 Digt.B  Reach  Servll  Fast Covnnt  Rtn.Ex  DgExpn  RdcBrn  OffrMM  OfferIB  OffrInB  
Digt.B  0.642            
Reach  0.326 0.655           
Servll  0.180  0.171  0.458          
Fast 0.295  0.370  0.204  0.524         
Covnnt  0.275  0.331  0.176  0.343  0.498        
Rtn.Ex  0.186  0.216  0.292  0.232  0.201  0.490       
DgExpn  0.276  0.306  0.169  0.136  0.115  0.078  0.656      
RdcBrn  0.211  0.215 0.136  0.107  0.076  0.063  0.359  0.875     
OffrMM  0.288  0.336  0.149  0.146  0.126  0.111  0.489  0.394  0.925    
OfferIB  0.216  0.251  0.138  0.109  0.094  0.064  0.366  0.294  0.604  0.863   
OffrInB  0.144  0.167  0.092  0.073  0.063  0.042  0.244  0.196  0.402  0.459  0.514  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
Table 4. Results of Hypotheses tests.  
 
                   Model Path  Estimate  Std.Err  z-value  P(>l z l )  Result  
H1                Digital Channel  adoption  ~ Consumer Preference  0.809  0.130  6.230  0.000  Accept  
H2                Consumer Preference ~ Ban k Adaption Strategy  5.456  7.685   0.710  0.478  Reject  
H3                Digital channel adoption  ~ Bank Adaption Strategy  0.160  0.084  1.903  0.057  Accept  
H4                Bank Adaption Strategy ~ Future Channel  0.446  0.211  2.111  0.035  Accept  
Model Fit ( Chi – square) = 0.000       
Comparative Fit Index (CFI) = 0.867       
Tucker –Lewis Index (TLI) = 0.817       
RMSEA = 0.126       
P-value RMSEA = 0.000       
SRMR = 0.091       
 
Table 5. Descriptive results  
 
Decisive Importance attached   
A  
Pa  
Ν  
Pd  
Ď 
 
(%)  
(%)  
(%)  
(%)  
(%) 
Expand Digital  24.2 54.5 18.2 1 2 
Reduce Branch  14.3 41.8 33.7 7.1 3.1 
Offer Mobile Banking  26.3 47.5 24.2 2 0 
Mobile Money(with MNO)  20.2 42.4 28.3 6.1 3 
Multi -Channel Strategy  22.2 52.5 24.2 1 0 
 
 
 Note: Ấ= (Highly agree),  Pa= (Partially agree), N = (Neutral), P ď= (Partially Disagree),  Ď= (highly Disagree)  
The percentages (%) represent descriptive findings of this qualitative study  C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
 
 
 
5.3. Digital Channel  adoption and Consumer preference  
     We found that digital channel adoption has a positive effect on what retail banks perceive as 
consumer preference that is the ability of banks to provide consumers with fast, convenient and 
compatible services. This r esult is not surprising since the ubiquity and availability of digital 
finance services provided by massive network of agents by MNOs and Fintech firm, as resulted 
in consumers to continuously rely on these services.  This is in line with on -going trends in  the 
region, for example a World Bank report suggests that close to 40 percent of customers leave 
their accounts dormant in banks as they switch to fast and convenient services provided by new 
players.  The implication of these finding suggest may have to re-consider what it means to do 
banking in East Africa. To majority of consumers, it may mean that retail banks may have 
develop and implement compatible and convenient platforms that enable majority of consumers 
to access banking services. It also may imp ly that focusing on digital strategy by banks is no -
longer an option but a must if these retail banks are to remain competitive and relevant to 
consumers.  
 
5.4.    Retail bank ’s branch strategy  (H3)  
         The branch strategy as always been the center o f retail banks operation in East Africa a just 
as elsewhere in the world, among its key roles involving being the meeting places between banks 
and customers, being the face of bank brand  and different researches have shown to be preferred 
channel. However  similar to findings Mols et al., (1999) in their study of Danish consumers, this 
study to found that banking channel has impact on retail  banks adaptation  strategy. We measured 
strategy by three strategic items namely strong willingness to expand digital  services,  reduce 
branch and willingness to offer compatible mobile banking services . The results suggest that 
retail banks in East Africa may are cutting back on their existing branch strategy. This is line 
with emerging trend among retail banks in Uganda and Kenya of closing branches.   
      We suggest that this new phenomena is due to disruptive effect of digital channels such as 
mobile money and their extensive reach to customers through their “human ATMs” that copies 
how retail banks branch works(Eijkm an et al., 2010). The extensive reach of new entrants whose 
services such as money transfer, savings, deposits, and loan resemble those of banks and are 
delivered to customers at a fraction of cost of bank branch are rendering operating branches 
especially  in sparsely populated cities unprofitable for retail banks hence the scaling back of their 
branches. One obvious challenge with scaling back of branches is that retail banks may forfeit 
their already limited presence in the banking market. The natural que stion that results then is, 
what can retail banks do to remain competitive through branch strategy, and to answer this 
puzzle, this research similar to (Leonard -Barton, 1988) suggests that retail banks in East Africa C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
particular in Uganda may have to alter branch to agency banking similar to Kenya cases 
(Mwando, 2013) in order to maintain growth and comp ete in the digital banking era.  
 
 5.5.  Retail bank adaption vs. Innovation and future banking (H4)  
    The ubiquity of mobile communication in East Africa h eralded the importance of mobile 
channel to deliver banking services to vast customers.(Etim, 2014) and started the movement of 
financial inclusion which highlights the potential of mobile in bringing the unbanked in formal 
banking channels(Munyegera & Mat sumoto, 2014), indeed millions of users have become 
financially included thanks to new channels and new entrants to financial service provisions such 
as MNOs, who have turned mobile phone banking into their leading cash cow. Similarly, retail 
banks noted t he power of mobile communications as additional channel to their financial 
delivery models and many banks deployed mobile banking apps in East Africa .  
    Its however important to note that in terms of functionality and service delivery, there is 
limited difference between mobile banking by retail banks and mobile money by MNOs 
although they tend to serve different customer segments, in particular those with smart phones 
and access to internet in cities and those with feature phones in cities and rural are as 
respectively. Retail banks across the region saw the mobile banking strategy as means of 
providing convenient services and some studies such as (Kithaka, 2014) suggest that they have 
increased banks financial performance.  
    The finding of this  study  indicate that incumbent banks adaption strategy which involves 
expanding digital  and offering compatible mobile banking  has impact on  future  banking 
innovation  which involves a mixture of hybrid banking channels such as Agency banking, . This 
may sugge st that retail banks are using a strategy of maintaining their mobile banking systems  
and adopting new mobile systems . Since these banks have their own mobile banking systems. 
This study suggests that retail banks may be using it as a core strategy for ret aining existing 
customers while co -opting mobile money services from their new rivals as strategy for new 
customer acquisitions. This finding may not be surprising since banks starting from Kenya 
already adopted mobile money services, however, it is import ant to point out that reliance on it 
has serious sustainability issues.  
    First, there will emerge channel conflict (Rosenberg & Stern, 1971) given the fact that both 
services share similar functionality, second, because of the wide acceptance and usage  of digital 
channel provided by MNOs have network externality effect, may result in incumbent customers 
switching to MNO channel at expense of mobile banking provided by retail banks, the two issues 
discussed above may lead to strategy of cannibalization  of mobile banking by retail banks.  
 
5.6. Consumer Preference and Retail bank’s adaption strategy (H2)  C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
   Incumbent retail banks have traditionally deployed internet banking strategy as one of the 
channels to bring convenience and fast services to their cust omers at less cost. According to 
Takieddine & Sun, (2015), there is a wide variation in use of internet banking in different 
countries. Much as some retail banks in East Africa adopted internet banking,  Jagero & 
Abeka,(2011), suggests that it is used for o nly corporate users mainly high end consumers and 
businessmen in East Africa cross country analysis.  
     This level of specific customer segmentation may be due to lower levels of internet adoption 
at individual levels across the region, even though the trend is changing of late ( Stork, Calandro, 
& Gillwald, 2013). Despite the growing rate of internet and mobile internet adoption, there is 
still a long way to go before it reaches critical mass that is needed for banks to scale internet and 
mobile banking to customers. Meanwhile, mobile money channel which is much simpler and 
doesn’t require internet enjoys wild popularity across East Af rica.  This research surprisingly 
found that consumer preference for fast, convenient and compatible services has no effec t on 
bank strategy . This may be motivated by need to maintain relationship with existing customer  in 
cities that rely on existing mobile and internet banking legacy systems,  and their brand valu e.    
This research suggests that it will be important for ret ail banks to main a strategy that alters 
internet banking to mobile banking for two main reasons, one is for future strategy since mobile 
internet is projected to grow 20 folds in Africa ( Smith, 2014), the battle for digital consumers 
who prefer fast and c ompatible banking  services will  shift internet enabled as opposed to mobile 
money that is disrupting banks now. Second and similarly is because banks may be able to win 
against MNOs in the fight for customers should mobile internet materialize as developme nts in 
countries like South Korea proved (kwon & Lee, 2010).     
  
5.7.  Retail bank ’s multi -channel strategy  (H4)  
     This research also found that retail banks in East Africa find multi -channel strategy as 
strategy to pursue. In the study we found posit ive relationship between bank adaption strategy 
and innovation solutions like multi -channel strategy. This is in line with descriptive findings 
which suggest that multi -channel as one of the most attractive option as shown by over 70 
percent of banks who a greed on this strategy. This is probably due to fact that it encompasses 
other strategies allowing them to maintain traditional banking services alongside innovating new 
digital services in line with new digital consumers. More over this result is not surp rising  
because as Gupta, (2013) suggested, different customer segment have different needs which 
means that retail banks and financial service providers will have to maintain a mixture of 
strategies to meet these needs. In this study we suggest that the mu lti-channel strategies will take 
the form of different variations as discussed above. This means that incumbents will enjoy its 
benefits as well as limitations such as cannibalization as already discussed above. In addition,  as 
Mols et al., (1999) found ou t for Danish consumer, this strategy may lead to customer 
dissatisfaction as different channel have different cost of services to customers.  
 C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
5.8.  Retail bank ’s-MNO Partnership strategy  (H4)  
    Finally, the study found that there is growing interest in h ybrid banking which typically 
involves provision of banking services by retail banks in partnership with MNOs, as indicated by 
over 60 percent of banks that responded strongly to pursue such strategy. This service we suggest 
is particularly of great intere st to larger incumbent banks and leading MNOs because both have 
mutual interest to leverage larger customer base and reach to gain competitive advantage in the 
market while delivering convenient banking services to customers. This finding similar  to 
findin gs by (Bilodeau, Hoffman, & Nikkelen, 2011) and projections of Mckinsey& Company, 
(2017 ) suggest  that the retail banks –MNO partnership strategy will take two forms, the first one 
is MNO - led partnership where  retail banks support MNOs to deliver financial  services,  and 
Bank -led partnership where banks ride on MNO infrastructure to roll out banking services 
similar to mobile money banking to reach wider consumers.   However unlike these studies, we 
zoomed in on strategic behaviors of East Africa banks since  strategic behavior varies from 
market to market, second unlike those reports we  analyses the on -going changes based on in -
depth survey by expats in banking industry,   and also different from them, we suggest that this 
strategic option is very limited to  specific few banks and MNOs.  Finally similar Gupta, (2013), 
we suggest that this strategic option may not be very attractive to many banks since banks tend to 
have different goals and organization structure from that  of MNOs and Fintech firms.      
 
 
6.  Conclusion and Future Research  
 
       The study highlights the critical importance of strategy upgrade in the retail banking industry 
in markets where bank presence is limited such as East Africa. The study also shows that banks 
in markets where digital in novations have been widely accepted have to innovate and come up 
with new models of delivering financial services to digitally oriented consumers.  
       Based on technology adaption theories and distributional channel literature, this study 
examined the i mpact of digitization on retail banks strategic behavior. The study findings show 
that digitization has an impact on retail strategic behavior and choices. Further still, the study 
found that digital channels have an impact on consumer preferences. From th e findings, the study 
draws theoretical and industry implications. First, on theoretical implications, the study extends 
literature on technology adaption in banking industry by extending line of inquiry on the market 
context, moreover, to the best of our knowledge, this is first study to shade light on the impact of 
digitization on retail banks strategies from perspective of incumbent banks.  
     On the industry implication, this study offers an empirical snapshot of the impact of 
disruptive innovation on  the banking industry in East Africa market and discuss several 
strategies that retail banks can implement to overcome the distributional problem in the current 
retail banks structure. The study further discusses the limitations such as channel conflicts, C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
cannibalization and co -opetition issues that retail banks face in new era of banking.  Future 
research could focus on understanding on the empirical relationship between digitization of 
financial industry and emerging issues discussed above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
References  
 
Alexandre, C., & Gates, M. (2011). What Can Branchless Banking Do to Advance the Field , and What 
Can It Not Do ? From Mobile Banking to Point of Service. Commissione d Workshop Paper, 14(17), 1 –
20. 
Beck, T., & Cull, R. (2013). Banking in Africa. CSAE Working Paper, 2013(16), 1 –44. 
http://doi.org/doi:10.1596/1813 -9450 -6684  
Bilodeau, J., Hoffman, W., & Nikk elen, S. (2011). Mobile Financial Services Development Report 2011. 
Development.  
Bulgărea, C. (2011). The Evolution and the Future Role of the Branch in Distribution of the Banking 
Products and Services. Of the University of Petroşani~ Economics~, 11(3), 1 5–22. Retrieved from 
http://ns2.upet.ro/annals/economics/pdf/annals -2011 -part3.pdf#page=15  
Calisir, F., & Gumussoy, C. A. (2008). Internet banking versus other banking channels: Young 
consumers’ view. International Journal of Information Management, 28(3),  215–221. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2008.02.009  
Chang, Y. T. (2003). Dynamics of banking technology adoption: an application to internet banking. 
Policy, 44(0), 1 –47. 
Choi, J. P. (1994). Network Externality, Compatibility Choice, and Planned Obsol escence. The Journal of 
Industrial Economics, 42(2), 167 –182. http://doi.org/10.2307/2950488  
Consoli, D. (2008). Systems of Innovation and Industry Evolution: The Case of Retail Banking in the 
UK. Industry & Innovation, 15(6), 579 –600. http://doi.org/10.10 80/13662710802550893  
Crowe, S., Cresswell, K., Robertson, A., Huby, G., Avery, A., & Sheikh, A. (2011). The case study 
approach. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 11. http://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2288 -11-100 
de Lange, D. E., Armanios, D., Delgado -Ceballos, J., & Sandhu, S. (2016). From Foe to Friend: Complex 
Mutual Adaptation of Multinational Corporations and Nongovernmental Organizations. Business and 
Society, 55(8), 1197 –1228. http://doi.org/10.1177/0007650314568537  
Devlin, J. F. (1995). Technology and inn ovation in retail banking distribution. International Journal of 
Bank Marketing, 13(4), 19 –25. http://doi.org/10.1108/02652329510082915  
Donner, J. (2008). Research Approaches to Mobile Use in the Developing World: A Review of the 
Literature. The Informatio n Society, 24(3), 140 –159. http://doi.org/10.1080/01972240802019970  
Durkin, M. G., & Howcroft, B. (2003). Relationship marketing in the banking sector: the impact of new 
technologies. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 21(1), 61 –71. 
http://doi.org/10.1108/ 02634500310458162  
Eijkman, F., Kendall, J., & Mas, I. (2010). Bridges to cash: The retail end of m -pesa. Savings and 
Development, 34(2), 219 –252. http://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004  
Etim, A. S. (2014). Mobile banking and mobile money adoption for f inancial inclusion. Research in 
Business and Economics Journal, 9, 1 –13. C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
Gikandi, J. W., & Bloor, C. (2010). Adoption and effectiveness of electronic banking in Kenya. 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(4), 277 –282. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.e lerap.2009.12.003  
Gupta, S. (2013). The Mobile Banking and Payment Revolution. European Financial Review, 3 –6. 
Retrieved from http://consortio -services.com/wp -content/uploads/2013/10/The -Mobile -Banking -and-
Payment -Revolution.pdf  
Irura, N. S., & Munjiru, M.  M. (2013). Technology Adoption and the Banking Agency in Rural Kenya. 
Journal of Sociological Research, 4(1). http://doi.org/10.5296/jsr.v4i1.3584  
Jagero, N., & Abeka, S. O. (2011). Corporate Customers Usage of Internet Banking in East Africa. 
Internation al Journal of Computer Science Issues, 8(5), 394 –402. 
Karjaluoto, H., Mattila, M., & Pento, T. (2002). Electronic Banking in Finland: Consumer Beliefs and 
Reactions to a New Delivery Channel. Journal of Financial Services Marketing, 6(4), 346 –361. 
http://d oi.org/10.1057/palgrave.fsm.4770064  
Kithaka, E. (2014). The Effect of Mobile Banking on Financial Performance of Commercial Banks in 
Kenya. International Journal of Business and Social Research, 2(1), 36 –40. http://doi.org/10.9790/487X -
1810063748  
Kolodinsk y, J. M., Hogarth, J. M., & Hilgert, M. A. (2004). The adoption of electronic banking 
technologies by US consumers. International Journal of Bank Marketing, 22(4), 238 –259. 
http://doi.org/10.1108/02652320410542536  
Laukkanen, T. (2007). Customer preferred c hannel attributes in multi ‐channel electronic banking. 
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 35(5), 393 –412. 
http://doi.org/10.1108/09590550710743744  
Leonard -Barton, D. (1988). Implementation as mutual adaptation of technology and orga nization. 
Research Policy, 17(5), 251 –267. http://doi.org/10.1016/0048 -7333(88)90006 -6 
Li, F. (2002). Internet banking: from new distribution channel to new business models. International 
Journal of Business Performance Management, 4(2/3/4), 136 –160. 
http://doi.org/10.1504/IJBPM.2002.000112  
Marinč, M. (2015). The Future of Banking : The Role of Information Technology. The Future of 
Banking : The Role of Information Technology, (SEPTEMBER 2015), 1 –15. Retrieved from 
http://poseidon01.ssrn.com/delivery.php?ID=17208608902900406912011609700907700 0059080034086
0590560720840690741180970740931080270600490490260191230511080061090651130050641110250
0701605108011401008209100812303208101210207000711702308411402909809801908508107  
Maurer, B., Nelms, T. C., & Rea, S. C. (2013). “Bridges to Cash”: Channeling A gency in Mobile Money. 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute \r, 19(1), 52 –74. http://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -9655.12003  
Mols, N. P. (1998). The Internet and the banks’ strategic distribution channel decisions. International 
Journal of Bank Marketing,  8(4), 331 –337. http://doi.org/10.1108/10662249810231087  C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
Mols, N. P., Nikolaj D. Bukh, P., & Flohr Nielsen, J. (1999). Distribution channel strategies in Danish 
retail banking. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 27(1), 37 –47. 
http:/ /doi.org/10.1108/09590559910252694  
Munyegera, G. K., & Matsumoto, T. (2014). Mobile Money, Rural Household Welfare and Remittances: 
Panel Evidence from Uganda. GRIPS Discussion Paper, 14 –22(February), 41.  
Muya, C. (2016). Mobile money in Africa. The Econom ist: Intelligence Unit, 1 –4. 
Mwando, S. (2013). Contribution Of Agency Banking On Financial Performance Of Commercial Banks 
In Kenya. Journal of Economics and Sustainable Development, 4(20), 26 –34. 
Ndungu, C. G., & Njeru Lecturer, A. (2014). Assessment of Factors Influencing Adoption of Agency 
Banking in Kenya: The Case of Kajiado North Sub County. International Journal of Business and 
Commerce, 3(38), 91 –111. Retrieved from www.ijbcnet.com  
Ngugi, B., Pelowski, M., & Ogembo, J. G. (2010). M -Pesa: A case stu dy of the critical early adopters’ 
role in the rapid adoption of mobile money banking in Kenya. The Electronic Journal of Information 
Systems in Developing Countries, 43(3), 1 –16. http://doi.org/.  
Porter, M. (2008). The Five Competitive Forces that Shape S trategy. Harvard Business Review, 
86(January), 78 –94. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.0955 -6419.2005.00347.x  
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations. Macmillian Publishing Co. http://doi.org/citeulike -article -
id:126680  
Rosenberg, L. J., & Stern, L. W. (1971). Conflict Measurement in the Distribution Channel. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 8(4), 437. http://doi.org/10.2307/3150233  
Shaikh, A. A., & Karjaluoto, H. (2014). Mobile banking adoption: A literature review. Telemat ics and 
Informatics. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2014.05.003  
Smith, D. (2014). Internet use on mobile phones in Africa predicted to increase 20 -fold. The Guardian. 
Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/05/internet -use-mobile -phones -africa-
predicted -increase -20-fold 
Stenitzer, G. (2015). Why Kenya leads the world in mobile money. Global Telecoms Business, (140), 22 –
23. Retrieved from 
http://search.ebscohost.com.ezproxy.liv.ac.uk/login.aspx?direct=true&db=bth&AN=103583576&site=eds
-live&sc ope=site  
Stork, C., Calandro, E., & Gillwald, A. (2013). Internet going mobile: internet access and use in 11 
African countries. Info, 15(5), 34 –51. http://doi.org/10.1108/info -05-2013 -0026  
Takieddine, S., & Sun, J. (2015). Internet banking diffusion: A co untry -level analysis. Electronic 
Commerce Research and Applications, 14(5), 361 –371. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2015.06.001  
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M., Davis, G., & Davis, F. (2003). TECHNOLOGY ACCEPTANCE MODEL - 
Research. MIS Quarterly, 425 –478. C.Kalenzi, Y.Kwon  
 
Xue, M., Hitt, L. M., & Harker, P. T. (2007). Customer Efficiency, Channel Usage, and Firm 
Performance in Retail Banking. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 9(4), 535 –558. 
http://doi.org/10.1287/msom.1060.0135  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 