Don’t let a crisis go to waste - reshaping
the economy through ‘no-regret’ policies
 C O V I D - 1 9  P O L I C Y  
 R E S P O N S E  N O T E  # 5
 
JUNE 2020
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedKey Messages
 
Vietnam has the unique opportunity to take advantage of the COVID-19 crisis. While the
future is hard to predict, most would agree that the world will look very different in the
post coronavirus era. There will be a notable reshaping of global value chains. Similarly,
the development of contact-free services, telemedicine, and e-commerce will accelerate
requiring fast adaptation of existing digital systems. Lastly, the importance and value of
human life will increase as more governments prioritize the inclusion of the wellbeing of
future generation in policy making. 
 
The ongoing transformation of the global economy provides the opportunity for Vietnam to
take important policy actions and move faster toward its goal of becoming a high-income
economy. We recommend five concrete pathways on which Vietnam can build on: 
 
1. Tapping into the new global trading system: Vietnam can consolidate its existing
footprint on the global economy by developing strategic alliances with other COVID-19
safe countries to boost its bilateral movements of goods and people. It can also target
industries that are considering diversifying their value chains away from neighboring
countries by refocusing its promotion efforts. 
2. Promoting digital payments for a new business model: COVID-19 has hastened the
transition from a cash-based toward an electronic payment system. Such move can be
accelerated by the entry of diverse providers into the digital financial services market.
Concurrently, new regulations are needed to govern account opening and provision of low
value transaction accounts as well as to secure a more evolved role for third party
payment service providers to interact with payment systems. 
3. Promoting telemedicine: With ongoing momentum and with support from the highest
level of leadership, telemedicine can be progressively mainstreamed in Vietnam’s health
service delivery system. Since telemedicine need not be ‘high-tech’, inexpensive and
simple technologies should also be prioritized in the short-term such as telephone
consultations which are a cost-effective way of connecting health professionals to
patients.
4. Enhanced information sharing for increased resilience: The COVID-19 crisis has
proved to be a game changer in the use of data and information-sharing in Vietnam. The
recent issuance of a broad regulation on digital data sharing and open data should be
followed by the rapid adjustments of sector-specific regulations and practices. The
objective should be here to generate more efficient and more responsible behaviors in
health, land, environment and natural resources, trade, as well as public finance. 
5. Aiming for a low-carbon economy: The disruption in the global energy demand and
supply presents a unique opportunity to implement climate-smart policies and investments
which are not only good for environment but also promote energy security and financial
viability. Implementing demand moderation, supply diversification, and promoting low-
carbon investments should be prioritized.
 
While these five opportunities are not exhaustive, they are worth pursuing as they will
bring substantial gains to Vietnam, regardless of how the global economic recovery
scenarios play-out. These policy actions should be pursued swiftly given that the window
of opportunity for Vietnam will be relatively short as other countries emerge from the
COVID-19 crisis in the coming months.
Don’t let a crisis go to waste - reshaping the
economy through ‘no-regret’ policiesCOVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTESReshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policies
1Global context: As of end-May, Vietnam
is moving out of the COVID-19 health
crisis with extraordinary results: the
number of infected people is just over
300, with nearly 80 percent of them
having recovered, and no registered
deaths. After focusing on immediate
health response, time has now come for
Vietnam to ease the restrictions and to
gradually reopen the economy. While
the trade-off between saving human
lives and economic costs is a cause of
much debate worldwide, the
Government’s decision seems justified
by its success in controlling the
pandemic while also dealing with the
harsh realities associated with the
lockdown of the economy. By easing
controls, the Government aims at
alleviating the financial burden on both
businesses and people by jump-starting
the recovery of economic activities.
While a rapid (or V-shaped) recovery is
possible, it is unlikely. The return to the
pre-COVID-19 growth trajectory might
take some time and efforts because the
‘new normal’ for people and businesses
will be different. The speed of the
recovery will also depend on what
happens with Vietnam’s main trading
partners. For all these reasons, the
Government should do all what it can
today, to stimulate the economy without
endangering the country’s fiscal and
debt sustainability in the longer-term. 
 
In line with the World Bank’s last policy
note which identified several actions to
accelerate the economic recovery, this
note aims at supporting the Government
in its efforts by sharing new ideas on
how Vietnam can leverage various
abcdes
 
 
 
 
COVID-19 has tipped the world economy
into its most severe crisis since the
Depression. While the full impact of the
pandemic would be hard to predict,
there is a consensus amongst experts
abc
1. Discussion on the double causality between the (re)allocation of labor and probability of infection: D. Krueger, H. Uhlig, and T.
Xie, Macroeconomic dynamics and Reallocation in Epidemic, NBER Working Paper, N. 27047, 04-2020.COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
emerging mega-trends from the global
economy. By being ahead of the curve in
the fight against the COVID-19, and
building on its natural as well as
comparative advantages, Vietnam has
the opportunity to consolidate its
recovery, as well as to mitigate the risks
associated with the emerging world
order. However, policymakers need to
move fast as the window of opportunity
would be relatively short. Several
concrete and implementable ‘no-regret’
policy actions are being recommended
to reshape the economy. These actions
are worth doing now regardless of how
the global economic recovery scenarios
play out. They will enhance development
outcomes by improving the
competitiveness and resilience of
Vietnam’s economy and help improve
the country’s resilience to possible
future waves of pandemics by
encouraging the reallocation of
resources toward sectors less prone to
human contacts. These actions focus on
areas such as: (i) repositioning Vietnam
in new global value chains, (ii)
supporting the boom in e-commerce by
digital payments, (iii) expanding the
delivery of contact-free health services,
(iv) sharing information for improved
resilience and for encouraging
responsible behavior, and (v) aiming for
a low-carbon development pathway.
 
This policy note presents description of
some of the mega-trends and then
explores how Vietnam can build on them
not only to generate the much-needed
economic gains during the recovery
phase, but also to help implement a
successful reform agenda in the longer
term.
 
 
 
 
that: (i) the world trade system will look
different in the years ahead, (ii) social
distancing will change the way we work
and do business, and (iii) the value of
life will become an explicit element of
abc
24
1
1. What mega-trends are emerging from the COVID-19
pandemic?Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesGovernment decisions. These factors
will influence how countries and
individuals manage risks and resilience
in the future. Below is a brief discussion
on these three mega-trends as they
expect to influence Vietnam in both the
short and longer terms. A word of
caution would be useful as the intent is
not to be exhaustive on complex and
evolving issues but to suggest new
directions to Vietnamese policymakers.
 
1.1. Revisiting globalization: The
COVID-19 pandemic is causing the
worst contraction in global trade in the
post-war era and, so, has strengthened
the hand of those who have long
opposed economic openness between
countries. On the face of it, all our
current vulnerabilities seem rooted in
globalization: disease transmission,
economic interdependence, and medical
procurement transcend boundaries.
Even before the pandemic, the balance
was tilting towards closed economies.
The reemergence of protectionism might
change the way multinationals and
governments do business in the years
ahead. The reshaping of global value
chains and trade is envisioned for those
who argue that the world have become
too interdependent (e.g. relying on a few
countries for medical equipment and
being left helpless when supply chains
break down). Workplace closures or
transportation difficulties have caused
interruptions to the delivery of
intermediate goods, severely affecting
production in manufacturing industries
that practice lean inventory
management. Many governments have
become concerned about shortages of
essential products from offshore
sources. Such trend against
globalization would reinforce the
existing forces against international
trade that have been linked to the
automation of manufacturing and the
growing environmental concerns
associated to the excessive carbon
footprint linked to international
abcdddetg
 
transport.
 
However, the impact of the pandemic on
globalization might not be as
straightforward as suggested above.
Technology will continue to shrink
physical distances and favor the
delocalization of production, in countries
that will be offering the best conditions
to international businesses.
Furthermore, ensuring a domestic
capacity to produce what is needed, can
be prohibitively expensive for many
firms and governments, at least in the
short term. There are also several
alternative to reshoring activities to
address security and strategic concerns
for essential goods. In this environment,
firms as well as countries have an
incentive to reduce the risk exposure of
supply chains over the medium-term by
increasing the geographical diversity of
their suppliers. Rather than producing a
full line of everything from food and fuel
to medical textiles to respirators at
home, the best bet for states is to group
together with trustworthy partner
countries, in the expectation that
whatever is produced in the larger bloc
will always be accessible to all
members. Sound government policies
with respect to infrastructure
investment, education, and public health
could therefore encourage the efficient
relocation of some production to a
variety of countries and help firms
manage the risks of transnational
production. These trends may offer a
unique opportunity for Vietnam.
 
1.2. The rise of a contact-free
economy: With the increasing adoption
of new technologies, it is becoming
possible to imagine a world of business,
from the factory floor to the individual
consumer, in which human contact is
minimized, but not eliminated. This
move toward a contact free society is
not new but has been accelerated by the
combination of social distancing policies
and the rapid development of digital
abcd
2. McKinsey Global Institute estimates that 60 percent of all jobs could see more than 30 percent of their key tasks automated,
affecting 400 million to 800 million jobs around the world by 2030.COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
32Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiestechnologies during the pandemic. In
three areas in particular, digital
commerce, the delivery of services and
home-based work, the pandemic could
prove to be a decisive turning point.
While e-commerce was already
meaningfully and visibly eating into the
sales of brick-and-mortar stores, what
the coronavirus has done is to
accelerate a change in shopping habits.
According to Salesforce Global
Shopping Index, between Q1 2019 and
Q1 2020, retailers experienced a spike
of 16 percent in digital traffic growth.
Additionally, the average amount spent
per visit grew by 4 percent. Social
distancing and school closures (globally,
over 1.2 billion children are out of the
classroom) have also encouraged the
move toward e-learning whereby
teaching is undertaken remotely and on
digital platforms.
 
The figures for telemedicine and virtual
health are just as striking. With a
vaccine or treatment at least months
away, patients and healthcare providers
both have reason to expand virtual
interactions. With this sudden shift away
from the classrooms and doctor’s offices
in many parts of the globe, some are
wondering whether the adoption of
online learning and telemedicine will
continue to persist post-pandemic, and
how such a shift would impact the
worldwide education and heath markets.
Research suggests that online learning
has been shown to increase retention of
information, and take less time, meaning
the changes coronavirus have caused
might be here to stay. There are,
however, challenges to overcome. Some
students or patients without reliable
internet access and/or technology
struggle to participate in digital learning
and to access telehealth services; this
gap is seen across countries and
between income brackets within
countries. The pandemic has forced
organizations into perhaps the most
significant social experiment of the
abcde
future of work in action, with work from
home and social distancing policies
radically changing the way we work and
interact. But the impact on work is far
more profound than just changing where
people work, it is also fundamentally
altering what work is performed and how
we perform it. Companies have relied on
automated services to allow workers to
operate, monitor, and control systems
remotely, thereby reducing the risk of
human exposure to the virus and
enabling operations to run smoothly
without service disruptions.
 
1.3. The value of life as a key element
of decision making: In times of high
uncertainty (war, natural catastrophes,
pandemics), the value of human life
(current and future generations)
increase, rebalancing priorities of
governments, people and businesses to
incorporate resilience in their decisions
processes. We are all learning valuable
lessons in resilience and human
adaptability. We are learning how
quickly humans can respond when faced
with a common enemy, be it a novel
virus or the well-established physics of
climate change. A good way to illustrate
how the pandemics has changed
policymaking is to explain how social
distancing policies have been justified
by using the concept of the statistical
value of life. This concept measures how
much an individual or a society is willing
to pay upfront to minimize the risk of
death. According to a recent study, the
statistical value of life is around
$400,000 in Vietnam. If we assume that
in case of non-interventions, the
coronavirus would have killed around
200,000 people, or a crude mortality rate
of 0.2 percent, the total losses would
have been equivalent to $70 billion or
almost 1/3 of current GDP. This simple
calculation provides some sense of how
much the Government has saved by
taking early actions and savings life. By
using this concept, economists have
been able to calculate that the costs of
abc COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
443
3. The Index captures the activity of more than 1 billion shoppers worldwide. https://public.tableau.com
4. Even before COVID-19, there was already high growth and adoption in education technology, with global investments reaching
US$18.66 billion in 2019 and the overall market for online education projected to reach $350 Billion by 2025.Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiestaking early social distancing measures
were generally much lower than the
long-term costs associated to a situation
with no government interventions . In
the US, the use of social distancing
measures has been justified as long as
abc
 
 
 
 
Vietnam can take advantage of the three
mega-trends (described above) by
undertaking swift and concrete policy
reforms. However, the window of
opportunity will be short as many other
countries would likely be planning on
engaging in these areas. The ongoing
crisis has caused a swing in the political
economy which can create favorable
conditions to undertake such reforms.
There can be much support generated
with a view of long-term benefits
associated with reforms will be greater
than the costs. However, this swing
might only be temporary. 
 
To identify ‘no-regret’ policy actions
which the Government could quickly and
opportunistically implement, the World
Bank is presenting a proposed
framework. This framework describes 
they don’t cost more than $6.1 trillion or 20
percent of GDP. Such approach was already
utilized by environmental agencies but is
now expected to become a more popular
tool in other areas such as health crisis
management and natural catastrophes.
 
 
 
 
 
how the three mega-trends could be
immersed within the Government’s main
priorities in shaping a strong policy
agenda. These priorities are: (i)
accelerating the country’s economic
structural transformation by upgrading its
production structure through
diversification, added-value and
innovation, and (ii) responding to the
evolving domestic demand from the
emerging middle-class and aging
population that will be looking for new and
sophisticated products and services such
as: healthcare, quality post-secondary
education, and better housing. Using this
framework, the World Bank team has
identified a set of opportunities (presented
below). These are opportunities on which
Vietnam can build on emerging mega-
trends to accelerate the priorities of its
policy agenda (Table 1).
5. The Macroeconomics of Epidemics by Martin S. Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, NBER Working Paper
26882.COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
55
2. How can Vietnam take advantage of these 
mega-trends?
Table 1. Summary of no-regret opportunities
Revisiting
globalizationReshaping global value chains
(local/global)
Developing strategic partnerships with low-
COVID risk countries  
Increasing exports of products in higher
demand (rice, health equipment)Promoting local production of imported
high value fruits and vegetables (e.g. $2
billion of fruits are imported per year)
Encouraging Inward FDI for domestic
market (services, consumer goods)
Encouraging formalization of small
businesses through ID4D programs
Developing digital payments (particularly
G2P) and e-commerce
Greening production (e.g. carbon tax,
domestic emission trading)
Greening investment in energy and
transportImproving access to education by e-
learning
Providing healthcare through the
development of telemedicine
Improving responsible behaviors by
information sharing through digital tools
Developing risk sharing instruments
(insurance) against shocksContact-free
economy
The value of
lifeStructural transformation Emerging new demandReshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesVietnam can exploit the emerging global
mega-trends to push ahead its domestic
agenda. Of course, this list is not
exhaustive and should be illustrative of
a wider range of possibilities. The
proposed framework emphasizes the
relationships between the mega trends
and the domestic agenda, but it fails to
account for potential synergies across
opportunities. For example, encouraging
the formalization of small businesses
can help the development of linkages
with larger enterprises and so their
integration in global value chains.
Similarly, improving e-learning, notably
as part of upskilling and reskilling
programs for the existing labor force,
would enhance the delivery of the skills
that are necessary to sustain the shift
toward the proposed greening of
production capacities. These synergies
would make the proposed opportunities
even more valuable. We believe that the
above selection of priorities is
straightforward as it is based on the
country’s existing advantages and the
recent changes induced by the COVID-
19 crisis. To be most useful, a higher
degree of granularity is necessary such
that the recommendations can be
implemented quickly. Within this vision,
further analysis and recommended
policy actions are presented for five
selected focus areas of these identified
opportunities. In each of these focus
areas,  the discussion is organized to
respond to  the following guiding
questions: (i) what  is the underlying
mega-trend, (ii) why would it matter to
Vietnam, (iii) why would it matter now,
(iv) what could be done about it, and (v)
what has been the international best
practice in these areas?
 
Area 1: Tapping into the new global
trading system
 
Global context: As explained earlier,
COVID-19 has heightened negative
attitudes towards globalization. In a joint
effort to reduce the propagation of the
abcd
pandemics, most countries have closed
their borders and prevent people
movements. The global demand for
many products has also declined,
leading to an unprecedented fall in the
prices of most commodities on
international markets. As a result, the
value of trade is predicted to plunge
between 13 and 32 percent in 2020. 
 The role of global value chains (GVCs)
has also been increasingly questioned in
view of their vulnerability to the
combination of factory closures, border
closures, and reduced demand. The high
reliance on China in several strategic
products (notably in food and medicine)
has also been a concern for many
governments. For these reasons, the
reshaping of global value chains,
notably away from China, offers a
unique opportunity for Vietnam.   
 
Why does it matter for Vietnam? Any
change, even marginal, in the structure
of world trade and investment is
expected to impact heavily on the
Vietnamese economy, which is one of
the most open in the world. Vietnam
does not only report a merchandise
trade to GDP ratio close to 200 percent,
but its economy is also highly dependent
on international tourists and FDI. The
country has also succeeded to position
itself in various GVCs, notably in
electronics and textile and clothing
where the import content of exports was
almost three times higher than the rates
reported in Indonesia and China.
Similarly, many industries in Vietnam
are sourcing inputs that are then used
by export companies located in other
countries. A large fraction of the
bilateral trade between Vietnam and
China is explained by these intra-
sectorial relationships.  
 
Why now? Vietnam can move fast
because it is further ahead of the
COVID-19 curve compared to many of
its competitors, including India and
Indonesia. Factories are opening up
abcd
6. Source: World Trade Organization, press release, April 8, 2020.COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
66Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesagain, and many workers are going
back to work, revamping supply
capacities in the tradable sectors and
minimizing supply chain disruptions.
Similarly, the successful containment
of community infections has made the
country relatively safe, opening the
possibility for the gradual return of
international visitors. The Government
can build on these recent positive
developments to launch a trade and
investment strategy, which will
complement the country’s traditional
advantages of cheap labor and
stability. International investors appear
to have already reacted positively to
Vietnam’s attraction as the value of
registered FDI surged by 20 percent in
April 2020 compared to a year ago.
Moving fast is also justified from a
business point of view as, many firms
will aim at increasing their own
resilience by increasing the
geographical diversity of their
suppliers. By its relative economic and
political stability and its proximity to
China, Vietnam offers a credible
investment destination for firms that
aim to rapidly substitute their
production. 
 
What to do? Vietnam can consider two
strategic moves to strengthen its
footprint on both trade and investments
global markets. First, it can develop
alliances with country partners that
also appear COVID safe and so boost
bilateral movements of goods and
people. As illustrated in Figure 1
below, several of Vietnam’s major
trade partners are also highly ranked
by the COVID safety index, including
China, South Korea and Japan. Others
(like Germany, Australia and New
Zeeland) are safe but not trading
extensively with Vietnam. The strategy
for Vietnam, while prioritizing safety
for Vietnamese citizens, should be to
gradually open borders with these two  
a 
groups of countries. To be effective,
this gradual opening should be mutual
between these countries, especially for
key sectors such as high value
agriculture exports, medical products
(including PPEs) and tourism (similar
to the tourism bubble that New Zealand
and Australia are considering).
Second, Vietnam can target industries
that are considering diversifying their
value chains (Vietnam is well placed
as it was ranked at the second rank in
terms of attractiveness for companies
that aim at relocating from China).
Beyond its traditional assets and its
geographical proximity with China, it
can also count on its successful
management of the COVID crisis as a
prime foreign investment promotion
tool. Vietnam’s privileged access to
various markets due to its bilateral,
regional and multilateral trading
arrangements (such with the US,
Korea, ASEAN, CP-TPP and the EV-
FTA) open up trade opportunities to
the largest markets in the world for
companies relocating in the country.
While a number of electronic
companies have already started to
move some production to Vietnam,
additional opportunities may emerge in
agro-processing and transformation
building on Vietnam’s massive
agricultural capacities. That said,
Vietnam’s absorptive capacity is
limited by its skilled labor force size
and its complex cross-borders
administrative procedures (ranked 104
out of 190 economies in trading across
borders, 2020 Doing Business report).
Improving these weaknesses will
require an acceleration of current
reforms on post-secondary education
(e.g. vocational education and
training), tackling current gender-
based skills and occupational
segregation, simplifying and
streamlining further administrative
procedures faced by businesses.
 COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
7Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesSource: WITS trade data and
DKG COVID-19 safety ranking 
Note: (i) The COVID-19 Safety
Ranking integrates four main
parameters; quarantine
efficiency, government
management efficiency,
emergency treatment readiness
and monitoring and detection;
(ii) the size of the bubble
captures the amount of
Vietnamese exports to the
particular country (in billions of
US dollars).
COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
8Figure 1. COVID safety rankings can be used to select trade partners
Table 2. Recommended actions to enhance trade and FDI
New
partnerships
Increase
Vietnam’s
footprint in global
tradePromote bilateral agreements with other safe countries.
Facilitate trade including (inbound and outbound) by
Customs Clearance Support Center. 
Use ASEAN and other FTA’s such as CP-TPP as a
platform for trade promotion. 
Promote digital technology to reduce transaction costs,
improve competitiveness, business continuity.
Promote contact-free business platforms: e-procedures,
logistics, warehouse, promote digitally enabled tourism
ecosystem businesses 
Promote quality and safety. This applies to tourism workers
and visitors. Also important for supplying safe and quality
food through development and enforcement of food safety
regulations; and improve coordination between
government authorities and exporters/producers for
compliance with Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS)
measures. Targeted information campaigns (including
online) will be necessary.South Korea: the customs
administration has implemented
several reforms to facilitate trade
including the implementation of
measures to facilitate the trade
of critical supplies for both
inbound and outbound cargoes.
Customs Clearance Support
Center facilitates the movement
of critical raw materials. This
includes critical supplies needed
to restart factories. KCS
temporarily implemented 24/7
support teams for emergency
clearance of raw materials at
several customs offices.
Target companies that are interested in diversifying supply
chains  
Launch a campaign with companies that have already
expressed interest in locating in Vietnam.
Establish a database for value chain mapping and regional
specialization and establish high frequency information
system to provide important policy making information.
Identify skills demanded by companies/industries targeted
for new investments and promote availability of in-demand
skills, especially through vocational training and improved
tertiary education that can also promote a gender diverse
labor force.
Promote greater use of services in the manufacturing
sector (e.g. for research and development, design and
embedded services, logistics that increasingly matter for
manufacturing competitiveness and account for much of
the value added in a product).Key considerations Examples Objectives
Singapore’s Economic
Development Board (EDB)
offers investors financial
advantages through long term
shareholding to companies in
high-growth technology sectors.
It also focuses towards
innovation-led industries such as
biomedical cluster, information
and technology, smart and
sustainable technology (Internet
of Things, AI, software
automation and robotics) and
selected industry clusters under
Strategic Investment Program.New investments
Attract new
sources of quality
FDIReshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesArea 2: Promoting digital payments
for a new business model
 
Global context: The closures and
social distancing triggered by the
COVID-19 crisis have highlighted the
potential of e-commerce and practical
use of digital payments to instantly link
sellers with buyers, lower transaction
costs, and create new markets tailored
to consumer demand, while minimizing
physical contact. The pandemic has
also highlighted how digital payments
facilitates the availability and smooth
provision of cash and non-cash
payment services used by the most
vulnerable individuals particularly for
Government to Person (G2P) payments
and remittances. Those trends have
proven advantageous in countries that
embraced digital financial services and
has reduced the full economic impact
of the pandemic on commerce and
access to financial services.
 
Why does it matter for Vietnam? The
Vietnamese economy continues to be
heavily cash-based, with only a
fraction of transactions conducted
using electronic payments. According
to the Global Findex survey, only 24
percent of adults in Vietnam had a
debit card in 2017, compared with 43
percent in East Asia and Pacific
countries overall. The disparity
between ownership of debit cards and
usage of those cards was also
substantial; only 5 percent of adults
that owned a debit card had used it to
make payments within the previous
year as of 2017. There is significant
scope for growth in digital banking
since Vietnam has a high rate of
smartphone penetration and cost-
effective internet and Wi-Fi access, but
a remaining gap in existing
regulations. Building an enabling
payments eco-system is essential to
help Vietnam promote digital payments
and reach greater levels of financial
inclusion by expanding coverage and
abc 
outreach and promoting the entry of
diverse providers into the digital
financial services market and
strengthening knowledge-sharing
surrounding financial inclusion
initiatives.
 
Why now? The COVID-19 pandemic
hastens the need to transition away
from a cash-based economy toward a
system that encourages the use of
electronic payment services, which are
vital to increase efficiency, reduce
costs, facilitate financial inclusion and
reduce poverty. The Government and
the SBV have been moving in that
direction, notably under the necessity
to deliver financial support to
vulnerable people and businesses that
do not owned a bank account or do not
use electronic payments. The recent
development of e-commerce (as a
substitute to traditional shopping) has
proved to be important for business
resilience, including SMEs. Yet, many
of them are restricted not by the lack
of access to Internet but by the
absence of secure cashless payment
systems.
 
What to do? Facilitating enabling
regulation related to branchless
banking initiatives will help Vietnam
achieve greater levels of financial
inclusion by promoting the entry of
diverse providers into the digital
financial services market and
strengthening knowledge-sharing
around financial inclusion initiatives.
This would however require
enhancements to regulations governing
account opening and provision of low
value transaction accounts as well as a
more evolved role for third party
payment service providers to interact
with payment systems and to allow for
a more effective use of innovative
technologies and the growth of the
retail access networks. These steps
will be essential to expand outreach to
the under- and un-served segments of
abc COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
9Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesthe population, including the majority
of micro-entrepreneurs who are
women, and to improve the usage and
reduce the cost of payment services,
including remittances. Most digital
payments require an e-wallet with a
bank that in turn requires a bank
account. Given the current
circumstances, it may be prudent to
revisit the potential of digital payments
acb
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Area 3: Promoting telemedicine 
 
Global context: As societies grow in
wealth and go digital, people want
better healthcare and expect it to go
abcd
and expedite the process of developing
the regulations to allow for non-bank
agents to operate in the Vietnamese
payments landscape. The growth in
digital payments is an important
component of the expanding digital
economy, but it is also one of the
enabling factors for growing other
aspects of the digital economy like e-
commerce.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
digital, too. With rising incomes,
people increasingly aspire to enjoy
long, healthy, and productive lives. As
in other countries, rising expectations
of a growing middle class in Vietnam
abcdCOVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 0Table 3. Recommended actions to promote digital payments
Developing
digital payments
ecosystemStrengthen digital ID to facilitate adoption of digital
payments, to improve privacy, and to reduce fraud
risks.  
Strengthen consumer protection to build trust in digital
payments.        
Adopt standards and guidelines to complement
innovations in disclosure and recourse.       
Promote interoperability  of services across service
providers and points of service.  
Expand the use and acceptance of e-payments; by
promoting electronic payments to and from government
and between businesses.  
Create a regulatory and institutional framework for
participation of third-party payment service providers in
new payments infrastructure.Interoperability with Mobile
Network Operators is common
and preva lent in many
countries. Increasingly QR
codes as a form of payment
are also gaining in popularity
particularly in Asia. Regulatory
authorities in Asia are pushing
for standard ization to support
interoperability of payments
systems across financial
service providers. QR codes
are two-dimensional machine-
readable barcodes, used to
facilitate mobile payments at
the point-of-sale.
Enable e-KY C and tiered-KYC requirements for low
risk accounts.  
Establish regulated third-party payment initiation
services through open architecture to new national
Automated Clearing House (ACH) payment schemes.  
Set up transparent and objective operational and
organizational criteria for all potential companies.  
Encourage small retailers and businesses to create an
on-line presence and accepting digital payments and
roll-out rural e-commerce demonstration programs.  
Strengthen collaboration among ministries on data
sharing with complementary cloud based digital
services including (i) point of sale and sales
management, (ii) accounting, (iii) ERP, and (iv) delivery
and logistics.
Develop Supply Chain Finance through digital
financing platforms that will help create a transparent
database on transactions among suppliers and buyers.Key considerations Examples Objectives
Singapore’s Economic
Development Board (EDB)
offers investors financial
advantages through long term
shareholding to companies in
high-growth technology
sectors. It also focuses
towards innovation-led
industries such as biomedical
cluster, information and
technology, smart and
sustainable technology
(Internet of Things, AI,
software automation and
robotics) and selected industry
clusters under Strategic
Investment Program.Facilitating  
e-commerce and
financial
inclusionReshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policieshave contributed to higher demand for
better quality and more technologically
sophisticated healthcare. Recent
advancements in information and
communication technology (ICT) have
been the biggest drivers of
telemedicine over the past decade.
The transition from analogue to digital
forms of communication, increased use
of the Internet, and advances in
computing power have created new
possibilities for health service delivery.
Common forms of telemedicine include
telemonitoring of patients, sharing of
information across providers, remote
consultations (provider-to-provider)
and virtual visits (patient-to-provider).
A rapid drop in the cost of ICT has
also led to increased availability and
utilization, expanding the potential for
telemedicine to be a game-changer in
healthcare.
 
Why does it matter for Vietnam?
Telemedicine presents an opportunity
to increase access to good quality
health care. Examples from developing
countries have shown improvements in
the quality and accessibility of medical
care by allowing providers to evaluate,
diagnose, treat, and provide follow-up
care to patients from a distance, and
enable remote access to tertiary care
advice in underserved areas. In East
Asia, for example, China extensively
uses ICT for remote consultations
between hospitals and primary care
facilities, which a delegation from
Vietnam viewed during a study tour in
2018. Telemedicine interventions
should take equity into consideration,
ensuring that it facilitates access to
care for people and not only wealthy
urbanites. Telemedicine also offers an
opportunity to address the systemic
challenge of lack of coordination and
integration of care in Vietnam’s
fragmented health service delivery
system. Healthcare providers currently
do not coordinate among one another
on patient transfers and discharge,
abcd
fragmented payment systems lead to
conflicting incentives, and there is no
information sharing across providers
for follow up care. Electronic sharing
of medical records facilitates
coordination of care across providers.
Telemedicine also allows patients to
seek care at home or at lower level
facilities with remote consultations with
specialists at secondary or tertiary
levels, which can improve quality of
care. There are also potential cost-
savings and economic benefits from
telemedicine. Direct cost savings have
been shown from teleradiology
(transmission of CT images),
avoidance of unnecessary patient
transfers to higher levels, and phone
consultations. Opportunity costs from
time spent seeking care can also be
reduced: studies suggest that a typical
doctor’s visit takes 121 minutes, of
which 37 are travel time, 84 at the
clinic, with just 20 minutes of face-to-
face physician time. Such cost-savings
will also likely affect the existing
gender time use gap, as females spend
more time on unpaid care than male
household members. As in other
countries, women are also at risk of
being victims of gender-based violence
(GBV).
 
Why now? The COVID-19 pandemic
has accelerated several trends that
justify the uptake of telemedicine,
including the growing use of digital
tools and the demand for more
sophisticated services by the aging
and emerging middle class. The
mainstreaming of telemedicine also
offers the opportunity to reach out to
isolated population in mountainous and
lagging regions. implementation in the
long term. In response to the COVID-
19 pandemic, many countries have
introduced or accelerated the use of
telemedicine. While robust
assessments of clinical-and cost-
effectiveness are not possible in real
time, promising use cases have
abcdeddCOVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 1Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support continued health service
delivery in this context where fewer
people are seeking care for essential
services (e.g. vaccination, antenatal
care) for fear of going to health
facilities. Telemedicine, coupled with
care teams operating in shifts and
designated spaces and protocols for
managing suspected COVID-19 cases,
could maximize the number of
abncsdferCOVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 2Table 4. Recommended actions to promote telemedicine
Technological
environment  
Including reliable
ICT infrastructure,
interoperable
systemsImprove coverage of ICT infrastructure
especially in hard-to-reach areas. 
Introduce standards for interoperability of
systems, consolidate existing data, and
encourage a culture of data sharing.Thailand: Telemedicine program and ICT
investments in rural hospitals.
Estonia: Consolidated online e-health record
per citizen, accessible by providers and
patients and interoperable with non-health
databases.
Euro region: Unique patient ID, shared
electronic health records.
India: Has established an e-health authority
and national IT portal.
Review and revise regulations and policies, in
particular on (i) data security, protection, and
sharing, (ii) reimbursement, and (iii)
responsibility for patients to ensure clear
medical liability and continuity of care. 
Consider new governance and management
structures for organizing health care
providers, including specifying new roles of
providers and health workers, and developing
tools for collaboration.
Encourage informal (and virtual) social
support networks for GBV survivors and
expand support to on-line counselingKey considerations Examples Objectives
Euro region, US: Legislation on data
protection and use
China medical alliances, Germany
Gesundes Kinzigtal, Singapore Regional
Health Systems: New governance
structures or contracts for care networks;
clearly defined roles for providers within
network, use of multidisciplinary teams and
integrated care pathways.
UK: Remote patient monitoring platforms
coordinate care across different providers.Regulations and
organizational
environment  
Establish clear
regulations and
policies;
reorganize health
service delivery
network
Financial and
economic
incentives
Establish strong
financial
incentives and
clear evidence on
clinical and
economic benefitsRevise payment policies to create conducive
financial arrangements for the adoption of
telemedicine, so that the reduction in face-to-
face service volume will not adversely affect
providers’ revenue and income.
Establish measurement and evaluation
methods to assess the effectiveness of the
different technologies, clinical interventions,
and improvements to patient outcomes from
long term, routine use of telemedicine.US (selected states): Payment parity
between telemedicine and face-to-face
services.
UK: Selected e-health apps free of charge
to patients, with negotiated reimbursement
rates to providers.
Systematic reviews of existing evidence
suggest significant scope for better
measurement and evaluation, especially in
developing countries.
Human element
Increase user
acceptance of and
level of comfort
with ICT; Improve
providers’
competence and
confidence in ICTUse simple technology (e.g. phone
consultations) to mitigate potential ‘digital
divide’ and offer services in relevant
languages to ensure access to ethnic
minorities and women, in particular. 
Train providers and run public awareness
and education campaigns to boost
acceptance and use.Vietnam’s hospitals conduct patient
satisfaction surveys via phone. Expand
scope to include follow-up consultations
and case management.
US: Telemedicine training components in
some undergraduate medical curriculum
Australia: Telemedicine Awareness Week 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emerged for both COVID and non-
COVID patients. “Forward triage” and
nurse hotlines have enabled effective
screening while protecting patients,
clinicians, and the community from
exposure; virtual visits using simple
technology (phone or video calls) have
enabled primary care physicians to
continue seeing their patients.
Telemedicine also has the potential to
abReshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesconsultations (remote and face-to-
face) and reduce instances of foregone
care. Vietnam, too, has rapidly
adopted telemedicine and online
counseling to GBV survivors during
COVID-19. Bluezone by Viettel covers
a range of uses and supports contact
tracing and alerts for COVID-19. The
Government of Vietnam aims to extend
the application across the country, to
bring high quality health services to
people regardless of their location, at
a low cost. This rapid adoption of
telemedicine comes after almost a
decade of attempts to develop and
standardize the use of ICT in
Vietnam’s health system. COVID-19
thus presents a rare opportunity – with
ongoing momentum and with support
from the highest level of leadership –
to roll out telemedicine more broadly
and mainstreamed in the health service
delivery system in the long term.  
 
What to do? Of course, not all
telemedicine needs to be “high-tech”:
Vietnam could use inexpensive and
simple technology, especially in the
short term. Phone consultations are a
cost-effective way of connecting health
professionals to patients. Hospitals in
Vietnam already conduct patient
satisfaction surveys via phone after
discharge. This can be expanded to
include questions on patients’ well-
being, simple follow-up medical advice,
and case management. There may be
inequities arising from a “digital divide”
based on age, education,
socioeconomic strata, and geography.
User acceptance of and level of
comfort with ICT may also limit the
adoption of telemedicine. Effort will be
needed to ensure that the elderly,
lower-income households, and those in
hard-to-reach areas can also benefit
from telemedicine. Offering
telemedicine in relevant languages
would also be important to making it
accessible to ethnic minorities. Global
experience shows that there are
abcdesg
several common factors for successful
implementation of telemedicine. These
include having the appropriate
technological environment (reliable ICT
infrastructure, interoperable systems);
clear regulations and policies and
organizational arrangements; a
conducive economic environment
(strong financial incentives and clear
evidence on clinical and economic
benefits); and the “human element” of
telemedicine: user acceptance,
competence, and confidence. In
addition, when it comes to case-
management and online service to GBV
survivors, confidentiality and
anonymity are important elements.
 
Area 4: Enhanced information
sharing for increased resilience 
 
Global context: Over 90 percent of
data that exists today has been
created over the last two years. This
data has become a source of
comparative advantage for firms
(seven out of the ten best-performing
companies in the world are data-
oriented) and for governments.
International experience demonstrates
that forward thinking governments are
those that have made innovation
possible by opening their own data and
make them easier to share through the
use of digital tools. These tools (data
collaboratives, big data and artificial
intelligence) have been increasingly
applied to solve today’s challenges,
from addressing climate change to
public health and to job creation.
 
Why does it matter for Vietnam?
International experience has shown
that more open, inclusive, and data-
sharing governments are not only more
efficient but also more resilient and
better able to adapt to shocks. Over
the years, the Government of Vietnam
has been quite effective in gathering
data from different sources
(government operations, households
abcCOVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 3Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proactively and boldly, including
through digitization that largely reduce
the transaction costs associated to this
effort.
 
Why now? The COVID 19 crisis can
serve as a catalyst for Vietnam to take
bolder actions to place the use of data
and information sharing in the heart of
its recovery strategy. The successful
containment of the Coronavirus
outbreak has demonstrated that data
sharing can be a powerful tool to
design, implement, monitor, and
evaluate the impact of policy actions
on individual and collective behaviors.
Vietnam has used a wide range of
digital support to inform and track
people during the crisis. Reliable and
transparent information from the
government on the outbreak not only
helped citizens to make concerted
actions to contain the virus, but also
enabled public authorities at different
levels to flatten the curve. The
hgsadfyy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and firms’ surveys). The collected data
also covers a broad range of areas
from health, labor markets, pollution,
public finance, public investments,
contracting, corporate governance, or
geospatial such as natural asset
management, flood and risk
information. While these data have
been used with success by the
authorities to design their policy
strategies, many are not shared with
the public. As a matter of fact, Vietnam
was ranked 106 out of 178 countries by
the most recent Open data Index.
Limiting the widespread sharing of the
data could be justified for security and
privacy motives, but it also contributes
to the deterioration of the quality of the
collected data and to weaker
accountability as results cannot be
properly monitored and evaluated over
time. The government can leave a
strong legacy for the future now by
publishing an increasing share of
government information more
ábdfuyherghCOVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 4Table 5. Recommended actions to enhance information sharing
Regulations  
Enhance
information
accessibility for
opening up dataIssue sector specific (for free) data sharing
regulations and guidelines of critical datasets
including in foundational registries (land,
citizens, businesses), tax, public finance, health
insurance, land, environment and natural
assets, and geospatial data.South Korea: national data warehouse
China : Environment, pollution control,
natural assets 
Brazil: greater transparency in timber
tracking is helping tackle illegal activities
found in 70 percent of the timber
operations.
Assign data custodians at the central, sector,
and agency levels 
Develop a whole of government common IT
platform
Develop standards for sector-specific data
collection and classification schemes with
agreed data exchanges standards and
exchange formats to enable updating, use
and reuse of data
Developing data exchange mechanisms -
establishing APIs and portals for seamless
data sharingKey considerations Examples Objectives
Canada: Standards, OpenMaps 
Denmark: Datafordeler 
Switzerland: SwissTopo, 
Indonesia: Geospatial Portal
United States: O*NETGovernment
Information
Develop
whole-of-
government data
governance
structure and data
integration and
inter-operability
Consumer rights
Improve privacy
and security
protectionIssue regulations on privacy protection
including anonymization
Issue security standards and layer for access
control and forgery prevention in digital
transactionsSingapore: SingPass Mobile App with sign-
in security features         
Thailand Personal Data Protection Act
Europe: General Data Protection
Regulations
7. Source: https://odin.opendatawatch.com/ReportCreator/ExportCountryReport/VNM/2018Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policies
7government can certainly build on
these gains by further opening
government data in order to help
strengthen management, improve
market perceptions of risk, and
increase accountability for service
delivery in its post-COVID 19 recovery.
Information disclosure in public and
natural assets management could also
enable the general public to
complement regulatory monitoring and
enforcement to improve performance of
the industries or service delivery units.
 
What to do? Collecting and sharing
data has proved to be a game changer
during the COVID-crisis. The recent
issuance of a broad regulation on
digital data sharing and open data,
amid the outbreak in early April, was a
step forward in the right direction. It
should be followed by the rapid
adjustments of sector-specific
regulations and practices, such as in
health, land, environment and natural
resources, trade, or public finance –
tax administration - that are limiting
the sharing of this invaluable
information even among public entities.
Ultimately, a whole-of-government data
governance structure needs to be
implemented to facilitate seamless
data sharing across government
agencies and with businesses and
citizens. Moving toward this objective
could be attained by (i) removing
barriers to information accessibility in
priority areas; (ii) developing
government data platforms or easy-to-
use portal with application
programming interfaces (APIs) to
automatically share data between
computer systems; and (iii) improving
privacy and security for users.
 
Area 5: Aiming for a low-carbon
economy 
 
Global Context: The COVID-19
pandemic and the ensuing lockdowns
have created an intense demand shock 
 
in the global energy markets. While
fluctuations in the market are common,
the magnitude of the current demand
reduction is the largest since the
second world war. By the end of the
year, demand for oil is expected to be
down by 9-10 percent, for coal by 8-9
percent, for gas by 2-4 percent, and for
electricity by 5-10 percent. Renewable
energy is one of the few sources
noticing an increase in demand of
around 1-2 percent which also points
to its economic and financial viability.
Due to the supply-demand imbalance,
the energy commodity prices have
plummeted in the past months, on
average, by 50 percent below pre-
COVID-19 levels. In some cases, for
instance, crude oil, the prices have
fallen below theoretical limits (to
negative) for the first time in modern
history. Given that over two-thirds of
the global energy system relies on
fossil-fuels, the reduced consumption
is having a dramatic impact on carbon-
dioxide (CO2) emissions. The rate of
decline of CO2 emissions has been the
fastest in over one-hundred years and
six-times larger than the previous
record reduction of 0.4 Gt in 2009
caused by the global financial crisis.
Countries across the world have noted
the highly positive impact of the
reduced pollution levels to human
health and natural environments. The
gains from reductions in rate of
increase of CO2 emissions and local
air pollution will be short-lived unless
they facilitate deeper and longer-term
behavioral, business, and institutional
changes. Furthermore, it is imperative
to avoid an emissions ‘snapback’
similar to what occurred during the
global financial crisis of 2008, when
CO2 emissions from fossil fuel
combustion and cement
production grew 5.9% in 2010 (more
than triple the decrease associated
with the recession).
 
Why does it matter for Vietnam? The
eaCOVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 5Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesenergy commodity price fluctuation is
experienced differently by fuel
exporting and importing nations. Fuel
exporting nations are facing
unprecedented current account deficits
and are reducing fiscal programs while
also having to respond to emergency
spending needs for the pandemic.
Vietnam, as a net energy importer (e.g.
oil, gas, coal), has thus far fared well
in this regard. Having managed the
COVID-19 crisis better than many
nations, Vietnam’s economy is on the
path to recovery. The transport sector
is slowly rebounding, industrial activity
is resuming, and the year-to-year
electricity consumption, which is fossil
fuel intensive, is up by 4 percent in the
first four months of 2020. Given the
reliance of energy system on fossil-
fuels, the instinct would be to expand
consumption (liquid fuel and coal
inventory at the end of March 2020
was 47 percent higher than the same
period last year). Since Vietnam has
largely eliminated fossil fuel
subsidization mechanisms, by default,
end consumers would benefit from
lower pass-through prices (with
allocation being made for the Fuel
Stabilization Fund). However, as
commodity prices rebound, this near-
term financial benefit can have severe
negative financial as well as economic
impacts in the long-term with regards
to human health, environment, and
natural resources. In recent past,
Vietnam has been the lower middle-
income country with the highest
average annual change (of about 3
percent) in losses from ambient
pollution between 1995 and 2015.
 
Why now? It is anticipated that energy
commodity supply will increasingly be
throttled to respond to the demand
shock and that the prices will rebound
strongly within a year. Nearly 70
percent of Vietnam’s energy for core
productive sectors, such as transport,
electricity, industry, is derived from
abcd
fossil fuels. At the current rate, energy
imports will account for at least a
quarter of all energy consumed in
Vietnam by 2030. The vulnerability of
Vietnam’s energy system to imported
fossil-fuels will leave it exposed to
financial risks (foreign exchange
payments for imports), energy security
risks (disruptions in imported supply),
and environmental risks (increased
GHG and air pollutant emissions)
unless it seizes the current window of
opportunity and undertakes urgent
course corrections. The timing of these
decisions is particularly relevant given
the policy framework transition
expected in the year 2020. Several
landmark actions are being considered
which could have a tremendous impact
on the energy sector. For instance: the
planned revision of the Vietnam’s
Nationally Determined Commitments
(NDCs) can increase ambition on CO2
emission reductions and put in place
no regret policies and measures that
can address air quality and climate
action together, Social-Economic
Development Plan (SEDP) which can
connect the climate commitments to
core economic policy, Power System
Development Plan (PSDP 8) which can
anchor renewable energy based
generation, Vietnam’s National Energy
Efficiency Plan (VNEEP) which can
accelerate implementation of energy
efficiency measures, as well as the
proposed revisions to the Law on
Environmental Protection, which would
set a strong legal basis for climate
action. As the energy demand for
economy continues to rise, it will be
imperative that investments in the
COVID-19 recovery period do not lock-
in Vietnam on a fossil-fuel intensive
pathway. This would help avoid
potential stranded asset risks in the
energy sector, given that long-term
investments with lifetimes spanning up
50 years or even longer may not be
economically viable much earlier than
that. Taking a low-carbon orientation in COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 6Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesinvestments (including stimulus
measures which should not ignore
environmental standards for fast-
tracked implementation) can enhance
competitiveness, more attractiveness
of foreign direct investment, improved
public health, and local quality of
life. Additionally, supporting the
development of a clean energy industry
will also bring about short-term job
creation benefits while also potentially
building an internationally competitive
manufacturing industry in Vietnam.
 
What to do? COVID-19 presents a
unique opportunity to prioritize
climate-smart investments. These
investments not only provide long-term
financial and environmental benefits,
but also bring short-term and low-risk
positive impacts on employment and
economic activity.  Three areas are
discussed below: (i) demand
moderation, (ii) supply diversification,
and (iii) facilitating low carbon
investments. 
 
Scaling-up production-side and
consumption-side energy efficiency
effort is a low-hanging fruit. Following
actions should be undertaken: (i)
pushing for a shift towards greater use
of public transport for passengers and
of railways, waterways, and coastal
shipping for freight; (ii) promoting e-
mobility by switching from fossil-fuel
driven vehicles to electric vehicles
(especially where public transit is not
feasible) must become a priority; (iii)
making efforts to reduce transport
demand through prudent use of
telecommuting, e-commerce, and
promotion of compact urban planning;
(iv) strengthening regulatory
frameworks to implement energy
efficiency targets at sub-national and
sector levels (e.g. power system loss
reduction, industrial retrofitting,
improved building codes, appliance
standards, etc.); and (v) providing
investment incentives (e.g. credit
faciliti
facilities, tax breaks) for firms and
individuals together with targeted
communication campaigns to support
behavior change towards efficiency.
 
Electricity continues to become the
primary fuel source of Vietnam’s
modern economy. As such, switching
from imported molecules to local
electrons through aggressive
utilization of abundant domestic
renewable energy resources (e.g. solar
and wind energy) can significantly
reduce, and eventually eliminate, the
reliance on fossil fuels. Given
continued trend of reduced costs of
renewable energy, rising
environmental costs of fossil fuels, and
the ongoing hurdles experiences in
implementing new projects, the
opportunity is now to reconsider plans
for large-scale coal-fired power plants.
Following actions should be
undertaken: (i) revised sector plans
(PSDP 8) should include ambitious
targets for renewable energy as part of
the generation mix, while also
including all relevant technical
requirements (e.g. for grid
strengthening, battery storage) for
enabling successful variable renewable
energy integration; (ii) while private
investment is essential and should be
promoted, public investment in
upgrading grid capacity to evacuate
renewable energy needs to be
prioritized; (iii) implementing
transparent commercial framework for
promoting private sector investment
(e.g. reverse auctions and
standardized agreements) can further
reduce costs build investor confidence;
(iv) distributed generation programs
(e.g. rooftop solar systems) can
reduce the pressure on the centralized
grid supply; and (v) regional power
trade with careful consideration of
energy security (e.g. import of surplus
hydropower from Laos and China) can
facilitate utilization of low cost, low
carbon energy.
 
 COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 7Reshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policiesSuccessful clean energy transition will
require upfront financial support for
long-term economic benefits. Following
actions should be undertaken: (i)
charging a carbon price on fossil fuels
(not passing on all benefits directly to
consumers) and using the proceeds for
low-carbon investments, including in
renewable energy and energy
efficiency. Given the historically low
prices as well as relatively low levels
of fossil fuel consumption, this would
be a timely opportunity. Adopting a
well-designed carbon pricing
instrument (e.g. carbon tax, cap and
trade system) would make climate-
smart investments more competitive
and lead to a shift towards low-carbon
abc 
forms of energy would be important.
Such market-based approaches will
provide an incentive for firms and
consumers to find areas where lower-
carbon technologies can substitute
most easily without disrupting the uses
where low-carbon alternatives are not
close to being cost competitive. It
would also incentivize innovation in
those areas where alternatives are
expensive; (ii) supporting private
sector led financing (which can be
enhanced with government guarantees
or equity support) and launching green
bonds can bolster investments; and
(iii) establishing cost-reflective tariffs
for electricity which enables long-term
financial viability.COVID-19 POLICY RESPONSE NOTES
1 8Table 6. Recommended actions to ‘flatten the carbon curve’:
Demand
moderation
Reduce the energy
intensity of the
economy as
Vietnam’s energy
elasticity to the GDP
is estimated to be
about 2, which is
one of the highest in
the region and calls
for significantly
increased ambitionPromote e-mobility, public transport, and
other fossil-fuel demand reduction measures.
Scale-up investment in improved energy
efficiency of supply as well as consumption of
electricity. 
Stricter energy efficiency standards for
industry, appliances, vehicles while phasing
down super climate pollutants (HCFCs and
HFCs) used for space cooling, refrigeration
and insulation.China’s public bus electrification program is
one of the largest in the world
USA’s energy efficiency stimulus resulted
in double the energy cost savings
Hebei’s Pollution Prevention and Control
Implementation Action Plan (China)
focusing on reducing emissions in
enterprises, household stoves and
transport 
Montreal Protocol support for HCFC phase-
out and HFC phase-down
Implement a carbon price on fossil-fuels and
use proceeds for low carbon investments.
Adopt a well-designed carbon pricing
instrument to provide incentives for low
carbon innovations. 
Continue electricity tariff reforms and support
development of market-based investment
approach.Key considerations Examples Objectives
India, China, UAE: energy from Solar PV
has reached grid-parity in many countries 
Korea plans to shut half its coal power
plants and nearly triple the share of
renewable energy in electricity generationSupply diversity 
Accelerate clean
energy transition
from imported
molecules to local
electrons through
aggressive utilization
of abundant
domestic renewable
energy resources
(e.g. solar and wind
energy)
Facilitating low-
carbon
investments
Support clean
energy industry and
innovation that will
require upfront
financial support for
long-term economic
benefitsImprove planning and provide
complementary public investment to ensure
growth of domestic renewable energy. 
Accelerate development of transparent and
competitive commercial frameworks to attract
private sector financing. 
Identify and promote training in the skilled
workforce needed to support this transition.
Canada has successful reduced emissions
using a carbon tax on fossil fuels
EU, Japan (Tokyo and Saitama), USA
(California) have used cap-and-trade
schemes to incentivize GHG emission
reductions targeting heavy emitting sectorsReshaping the economy
through ‘no-regret’ policies