  
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 87 - 
 
DOI 10.2478/sbe-2019-0007 
SBE no. 14(1) 2019 
 
 
ELECTRONIC COMMERC E TOWARD DIGITAL 
BANGLADESH: BUSINESS EXP ANSION MODEL BASED ON 
VALUE CHAIN IN THE NETWORK ECONOMY 
 
 
ISLAM Mohammad Saiful  
Leading University, Bangladesh 
 
EVA Sharmin Akter  
Voice of South Bangladesh, Bangladesh 
  
Abstract:   
The purpose of this research paper is to study the present status of e-commerce industry in 
Bangladesh and finding out comprehensive model based solution for the expansion of the sector spreading e-commerce all over the country. SWOT analysis has been conducted and business 
expansion model has been developed from the data generated from surveying to the reputed e-commerce business organizations and customers of e-commerce. Primary data has been collected 
from the top level management of e-commerce business organizations and e-commerce customers 
as interviewees while secondary data have been collected from Bangladesh Telecommunication 
Regulatory Commission reports, relevant literat ure etc. This study id entifies that e-commerce 
intermediation and channel conflict are the gr eat problems in case of e-commerce business 
expansion that increases the price level of the pr oducts and services but can not reach mass people 
outside the mega cities as Dhaka. That is why a value chain based business expansion model has been proposed to reach the mass people of Bangladesh for inclusive e-commerce through e-commerce agent.  The study  will provide insights to the policy makers to work with e-commerce 
business expansion in the process of digitization of Bangladesh.  
 
Key words: Debit card, Credit card, B2B, C2C, Agent banking   
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Electronic commerce refers to buying, selling or transmitting d ata of goods and 
services over electronic network. It has become popular over th e years due to getting the 
services from home or office wit h comfort to shop (Andam et al. , 2003; Nanehkaran, 2003). 
As Bangladesh is in the process o f digitization some selected s egments of the Bangladeshi      
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 88 -    business community has embraced technology with reasonable succ ess in spite of having 
a developing country (Hossain, et al., 2013; Hossain, 2000). Th ese positive indicators are 
favorable for the prospects of e-commerce in Bangladesh. 
E-commerce industry generates r evenue from products selling com mission,   
delivery charge, product selling profit, restaurant commission,  etc. (UNCTAD, 2015) Both 
supervisor as manpower and software are used as monitoring syst em. Generally, own 
vehicle, own manpower, third pa rty involvement etc. are require d to maintain delivery 
channel. Delivering goods all over Bangladesh has not been poss ible yet for most of the e-
commerce business organizations although e-commerce is an inter net based business. E-
commerce business organizations are mainly dependent on getting  feedback regarding 
customer satisfaction through website rating and facebook revie w. Popular marketing 
strategies for e-commerce indust ry in Bangladesh include facebo ok, campaign, fest 
participation, attractive offers, print media, offline campaign  etc.(Almeida, 2007). 
Although e-commerce industry in Bangladesh has huge potential b ut this industry is facing 
some core problems such as differences between real products an d displayed products at 
e-commerce site, delay on delivery to customers, lack of reliab ilities and relevance, 
inconvenient return pol icies, payment options are still limited , limited cash on delivery 
option etc.(Chavan, 2013).  
 
Figure 1: Internet subscribers a nd internet subscribers’ growth  rate  
 
According to monthly BTRC reports on internet subscribers in Ba ngladesh 
(February 2012-January 2016), internet subscribers were 30.48 m illion, 35.52 million, 
42.77 million and 56.17 million in 2013,2014,2015 and 2016 resp ectively. Internet 
subscription growth rates were 17%, 20% and 31% in 2014, 2015 a nd 2016 respectively. 
Besides, currently annualized volume of e-commerce is estimated  at USD 50 million with 
seasonality peaks during yearly religious festivals according t o IBIS World. Above 
mentioned statistics shows that e-commerce has huge potential i n Bangladesh if it can 
reach to the mass people with proper delivery channel.  
This research paper has identified that E-commerce channel conf lict asises when 
manufacturers sell products at lower price than wholesalers or retailers. In this regard, 
customers are purchaing products with higher price charged by r etailers and wholesalers. 
Manufacturers are not been able to sell products directly at re asonable price as they are 
dependent on wholesalers and retailers as delivery channel. Tha t is why, manufacturers 
have to be stronger enough to sell products directly to the cus tomers at reasonable price.    
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 89 - In this research paper, e-commerce agent has been proposed whic h will support the 
manufacturers to sell products all over the country at reasonab le price with direct 
involvement of manufacturers through e-commerce agent booth. Du e to minimum barriers 
to entry many individuals are just opening webpage and starting  e-commerce businesses 
that stimulate fradulent activit ies threatening trust and confi dence in e-commerce 
customers. E-commerce agents will be reliable business platform  that will build trust and 
confidence in e-commerce customer s with physical existance (Bha ttacherjee,2002). The 
revenue source of e-commerce agents will be the commission gene rated from selling 
products of multiple manufactu rers through a common e-commerce agent.     
Review of several relevant literatures show that most of the re search papers are 
based on probelms and prospects of e-commerce industry in Bangl adesh but these rarely 
show the proposed solution. Mohiuddin (2014) in his study did n ot generated adequate 
data or model due to the limit ation of unwillingness of e-comme rce websites to  provide 
information but this research paper has conducted SWOT analysis  through interviewing to 
the e-commerce websites. Besides, an unique model based solutio n has been proposed in 
this research paper. 
 
2. Rational of the Study 
 
Bangladesh is in the process of d igitization where it seems a b ig challange to 
include the mass people in this process who are staying outside  mega cities. E-commerce 
can play vital role in this regard through reaching to the mass  people in remote areas and 
districts far from capital Dhaka.  E-commerce seems concentrated  i n  s o m e  s p e c i f i c  
crawded districts which is not adequate for acceleration of dig itization of Bangladesh.  That 
is why it is highly required to expand the e-commerce in both t he urban and rural areas 
(Molla & Hecks, 2007). Besides, excessive dependence on faceboo k commerce seems 
vulnerable for e-commerce industry in long run. In this researc h paper, a business 
expansion model based on value chain has been developed so that  e-commerce can 
reach to mass people in the network economy.      
3. Objective of the Study 
 
 To identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threa ts of e-
commerce industry in Bangladesh. 
 To identify core problems of e-commerce industry in Bangladesh  
 To generate idea for ensuring availability of product at reaso nable price 
minimizing channel conflict 
 To develop a comprehensive business expansion model of e-comme rce to 
reach the mass people  
 To recommend some measures for the advancement of e-commerce t oward 
establishing a inclusive digital Bangladesh 
       
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 90 -    4. Research Methodology 
 
The research is empirical in nature where both theoretical and numerical analyses 
have been used. Primary data have been collected from top level  management of four e-
commerce businesses named kaymu.com, daraz.com, hungrynaki.com and iferi.com. 
Besides, 200 customers of e-commerce surrounded in Dhaka city a nd outside Dhaka city 
have been surveyed. Secondary dat a have been collected from BTR C reports, internet 
browsing, books, journals and relevant research papers. Purposi ve sampling has been 
used to conduct the survey to e-commerce customers with structu red questionnaire 
(Kothari, 2001). Data have been analyzed using Microsoft Excel and presented in logical 
and simple form (Saunders et al., 2009). 
 
5. Limitation of the Study  
 
As there are few popular e-commerce sites in Bangladesh, four e -commerce 
businesses have been visited to generate primary data. Besides,  Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry and related regulator y bodies are reluctant to pro vide sufficient data of e-
commerce. In this research paper, it was not possible to mentio n the amount of total 
revenue generated from e-commerc e industry due to lack of infor mation.    
 
6. Literature Review  
 
Ahammad et al. (2017) have identified that Bangladesh has to ta ke drastic 
measure promptly to take active part in adopting e-commerce tec hnology for the 
advancement of the nation. Bhowmik (2012) has concluded that B2 C e-commerce can 
never be deployed properly if Credit Card Gateway and Electroni c Fund Transfer Gateway 
have not been established to enhanc e the e-transactions and eli minate the security issues. 
Hossain et al. (2013) have proposed a solution that merchants r equire to ensure the 
platform for customer data retention and employing strong encry ption of payment 
processing to overcome the problems of electronic payment issue s and poor network 
connectivity. Mohiuddin (2014) h as identified that reforming th e country’s commercial and 
financial procedures and liberalizing the information technolog y and telecom sectors are 
the prerequisites of successful implementation of e-commerce in  Bangladesh. Khan (2016) 
has found that e-commerce will fl ourish easily making run out o f traditional business when 
internet cost will be low.  
7. Analysis and Findings 
As generating data of total e-commerce transactions in amount i s difficult in 
Bangladesh, only secondary data of e-commerce transactions thro ugh banking channel 
has been found from authentic sources (Al-Amin & Rahman, 2010).  Besides, to have a 
through idea regarding e-commerce industry in Bangladesh both t he e-commerce 
customers (200 respondents) and  e-commerce businesses (four maj or e-commerce 
websites) have been surveyed.    
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 91 -  
7.1 E-commerce Transactions through Banking Channel 
 
Figure 2: Local transaction of e-commerce through banking chann el 
 
Above mentioned figure (Figure 2) has been depicted from the lo cal transaction 
data of e-commerce generated fro m Bangladesh Bank Statistics. I t has been found that 
total amount of local transaction was Tk. 89.6 crore through de bit card and credit card in 
from January to march 2017.No transactions of e-commerce was co nducted through State 
Owned Commercial Bank and Specialized Bank. E-commerce transact ions amounting 
38.9 crore and 31.5 crore hav e been made through debit card and  credit card respectively 
under Private Commercial Banks. B esides, e-commerce transaction s amounting 3.2 crore 
and 16 crore have been made through debit card and credit card respectively under 
Foreign Commercial Banks.  
 
 
Figure 3: Abroad transaction of e-commerce through banking chan nel 
 
Figure 3 of above has been depicted from the abroad transaction  data of e-
commerce generated from Banglad esh Bank Statistics. It has been  found that total amount 
of abroad transaction was Tk. 91.7 crore through debit card and  credit card in from 
January to march 2017.No transactions of e-commerce was conduct ed through State 
Owned Commercial Bank and Specialized Bank. E-commerce transact ions amounting Tk. 
1.1 crore and Tk. 81.3 crore have been made through debit card and credit card 
respectively under Private Commercial Banks. Besides, e-commerc e transactions 
amounting Tk. 4 crore and Tk. 5.3 crore have been made through debit card and credit 
card respectively under For eign Commercial Banks.   
 
7.2 Perceptions of the E-commerce Customers  
 
Around 200 customers of e-commerce have been surveyed with stru ctured 
questionnaire. From the survey, it has been found that age limi t of frequent buyers through      
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 92 -    e-commerce is from 22 years to 30 years. Most of them are stude nts. Main problem faced 
during shopping through e-commerce is quality problem and dissi milarities with the picture 
in the website. Expectation as user friendly approach is mainly  cash on delivery.  
bikroy.com seems the most popular  e-commerce business in Bangla desh according to the 
respondents.  Generally, the users of e-commerce purchases prod ucts through e-
commerce once a month. 
  
 
Figure 4: Preferred types of products through e-commerce 
 
From the survey, it been found that  most preferred types of pro ducts through e-
commerce are Clothing (54.5%) and Electronics (36.4%) as majori ty of the respondents 
purchases these types of products through e-commerce. Least por tion of the respondent 
purchases tickets through e-commerce whoever e-ticketing in dra stically increasing in 
recent years.   
 
 
Figure 5: Factors Affecting Customer Convenience 
 
 
Customer inconvenience is mainly being generated from delivery issues (28%) 
and quality issues (24%). Besides, return policy and payment is sues are also significant to 
ensure customer convenience. Pri ce issue gets preference of 8 p ercent customers only 
because they can compromise price against quality product and p rompt product delivery.    
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 93 - 7.3 Perceptions of the E-commerce Business Organization 
 
From the feedback of the management generated from interview in  four popular e-
commerce business organizations named kaymu.com, daraz.com, hun grynaki.com and 
iferi.com following SWOT analysis can be conducted regarding e- commerce industry in 
Bangladesh: 
 
Table 1: SWOT Analysis 
Strength 
High quality products (iferi.com) Maintaining words (iferi.com) 100% indigenous capital (Hungrynaki.com) Recognition: ICT Award for e-commerce (Hungrynaki.com)  
Free return policy(daraz.com) User friendly approach: own  application (daraz.com) 
Global reputation (kaymu.com) Business model: Rocket Internet (kaymu.com) Weakness
Insufficient marketing ac tivities (iferi.com) 
Small customer size (Hungrynaki.com) Problem of maintaining huge management (daraz.com) Time management problem (kaymu.com) 
Opportunities Lots of areas to work yet for business development (iferi.com) Smaller domain of competitors(hungrynaki.com) Strong dominance in e-commerce industry to be the market leader (daraz.com) Potential for exploring new fi elds with diversification of 
products (kaymu.com) Threats
Bad image for e-commerce due to fraud Seller of similar products (iferi.com) Low Entry barrier (iferi.com) Sudden closing of restaurants (hungrynaki.com) Insufficient internet access (daraz.com) New international e-commerce site  entrance (kaymu.com) 
 
7.4. Proposed Vibrant E-commerce Development Model 
 
Following business expansion model has been developed consideri ng the 
impediments of e-commerce business expansion generated from int erviewing e-commerce 
business organizations and e-commerce customers.  
1. Middle man or e-commerce intermediary is a problem for both the manufacturer 
and e-commerce customers. It creates problem for both the parti es increasing 
price level outside mega cities (Ohidujjaman, 2013). But physic al existence of any 
booth can build trust and confidence in the mind of e-commerce customers 
(Ohidujjaman, 2013).  That is why proposed model suggests intro ducing E-
commerce Agents in stead of Middle man. Middle man will not be abolished in the 
model rather they will be encoura ged to be converted into e-com merce agents. 
2. Due to channel conflict in e-commerce retailers or wholesale rs will not sell the 
goods of the manufacturers if they can not make profit charging  higher price than 
manufacturer. In the proposed model price of product will remai n same whether it 
will be purchased fr om manufacturer or  e-commerce agent.       
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 94 -    3. If E-commerce agents have booth all over Bangladesh and manu facturers directly 
supply products according to orders through e-commerce agents i t will minimize 
the cost of establishing and maintaining showroom in remote pla ces in all the 
districts for both the branded a nd non branded goods where esta blishing and 
maintaining showrooms seems costly. 
4. If E-commerce agents are introduced than manufacturers will not require 
establishing costly showroom outside crowded districts like Dha ka. Rather they will 
be able to sell products through the agents directly according to the order received 
from secured webpage. In every booth there will be facility of viewing different 
products through big projectors and touch screens so that custo mers can review 
and select suitable products and services through physical visi t to make order. 
There may be three menus called story, technology and buzz for each products. 
From story menu customers will know about the background of the  product. From 
technology customers can be in formed about the technology that has been used to 
produce the product. Customers can view the comments of the use rs of the 
product from social networking with the option of buzz. There m ay have the option 
to e-mail several designs of products to friends and relatives to get more order and 
selection of products.  Besides, some popular sample products c an be displayed 
at the booth of e-commerce agent. Agents will collect the order ed products from 
the manufacturers and supply to the customers as soon as possib le. Besides, 
manufacturers will supply the ordered products and services gen erated from their 
own secured webpage through e-commerce agents to the remote are as or outside 
crowded mega districts where showrooms are not available but th ere is demand 
for the product or service. E-commerce agent will get some comm ission and solve 
the issues of courier, return pol icy, customer service etc. as per instruction and 
support of the manufactu rer (Almeida, 2007).   
  
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 95 - 5. In Bangladesh, e-commerce business does not require to pay t ax to the 
government. That is why; both t he manufacturer and the e-commer ce agent will 
sell goods at same price according to the proposed model. It wi ll be possible 
maintaining adequate profit because manufacturer will not requi re to pay tax to the 
government on sales to customers. Manufacturer will be able to give some 
commission against sales as it will be able to cut down the cos t of selling the 
product through their own showroom or intermediary as retailer or wholesaler. As 
commission of e-commerce agent will depend on the quantity sold  only it will 
minimize huge fixed cost of maintaining showroom by the manufac turer to cover 
whole country. 
6. As manufacturer will be directly related with e-commerce age nt to ensure 
customer satisfaction providing quality goods at reasonable pri ce it will build up 
trust of customers toward the manufacturers due to having physi cal existence in 
the locality. Besides, it will be possible to offer diversified  products to diversified 
people as the area coverage will be expanded from urban areas t o rural areas 
(Bhattacherjee, 2002). 
7. There will have no impact of t ax on price level of products as manufacturer will get 
tax advantage. This model will spread brand image to mass peopl e with vast 
opportunity of business expansion. Besides, cost of doing busin ess with e-
commerce transaction will signi ficantly reduce. It will not be feasible to abolish 
manual showroom or taking support from retailer or wholesaler t o reach mass 
people in densely populated urban areas as Dhaka. E-commerce ag ent based 
model will be supporting mechanism to expand the business besid es manual 
business mechanism that will require middle man and showroom at  different 
crowded districts. 
8. Under the proposed model, branded goods such as Catseye, Ric hman, Raymond 
etc. will also be sold through e-commerce agents. Besides, some  products will 
have guarantee and warranty where applicable. That is why consu mers will get 
trust and confidence of getting quality products. E-commerce ag ents will support to 
manage complaints of customers and they will collect the produc ts for the 
customers in remote areas or dis tricts where physical showrooms  are not available 
for the product to save the time  of the customer. Manufacturer can offer discount if 
average production cost and administrative cost becomes lower d ue to high 
demand and supply in that particular area. 
9. As agent banking has been started in Bangladesh, with other payment methods 
such as debit card, credit card, b-kash, rocket, Q-cash, COD, a dvance payment 
etc. it can also be introduced to  make payment for purchasing t hrough e-
commerce in remote areas (Sagar  & Chowdhury, 2014; Uddin & Akhi , 2014).  
10. Concerned regulators of e-com merce industry have to take pr ompt actions 
regarding advanced software development, ensuring market discip line, VAT and 
Tax issues and establishing and implementing proper e-commerce guideline as 
there are some lacking regarding structured legal issues of e-c ommerce in 
Bangladesh (Ministry of Commerce , 1997; Ministry of Commerce, 2 000). 
      
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 96 -    7.4.1 Unique Propositions of the Proposed Model:  
 
1. From the existing Surf –and Turf e-business model, it has been found that prices 
offered by the manufacturer or retailer or wholesaler vary sign ificantly due to the 
attitude of profiteering and lack of uniformity in prices. Besi des, customers do not 
have confidence on price against quality as there is no connect ion between the 
manufacturer or trader and customer. There is no authority as w ell to justify the 
price gap or spread. Hence, customers are the victims. Besides,  some e-
commerce sites are doing business at the urban areas only where  majority portion 
of the people are living in rural areas. E-commerce booths will  be established in 
that rural areas to reach the mass people and delivering goods and services at 
reasonable prices without any discrimination to rural people. I f there is any 
problem for making payment by rural people, e-commerce agent ca n physically 
help them to make financial transactions. Payments can be made to the 
manufacturer or trader through e-banking channels such as, debi t cards, credit 
cards, B-kash etc. Besides, agent banking booths can be used to  make account to 
account transfer or depositing cash in the account of manufactu rer or trader as 
convenient payment system against goods and services. Deposit s lips can be the 
proof of payment by the customer.      
2. Under the proposed model, there will be opportunity for applyin g tax rate in long 
run under a centralized platform of government as existing wave r of e-commerce 
from tax is good only in initial phase of its development. It h as to be taxed as e-
commerce has become an important part of the commerce in Bangla desh. If Value 
Added Tax of 15% is applied for e-commerce transactions governm ent may earn 
around Tk. 53.76 crore (Tk.89.6 crore x0.15x4) from only local transactions per 
year.   
3. E-commerce agents will get commission against sales. As manufac turers or 
traders need not to incur cost of maintaining showroom in remot e areas, it can be 
a cost cutting advantage for the manufacturer or trader that ca n be the source of 
revenue for e-commerce agents. A particular agent will get comm ission from 
several manufacturers or trade rs as it will sell different prod ucts offered by them 
from one centralized agent booth. Some newly arrived sample pro ducts can be 
shown physically in the agent boot h for the convenience of the customers. 
4. It has been observed from the experience of e-commerce that the re is huge price 
gap between the price offered by the manufacturer or trader and  price offered by 
the retailer or wholesaler or any  other delivery channel. Under  t h e  p r o p o s e d  
model, there will be a uniform price for purchasing from manufa cturers or traders 
and another uniform price for purchasing from e-commerce agents . Besides, both 
the prices will be shown in the e-commerce website of the manuf acturer or trader.  
Hence, there will be no option of  price manipulation through in termediation by 
multiple traders to be in volved in profiteering.    
5. To maintain discipline and proper tax collection in long run, c entral government 
based application has been proposed so that central government can exclude any 
e-commerce site if required.    
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 97 - 6. As there will be direct communication between manufacturer or t rader and agent 
without any further intermediary there will be no chance of dif ference between real 
products and displayed products in website. Timely delivery wil l be ensured as 
products will be send directly fr om manufacturer or trader to a gent only. Lack of 
reliability on e-commerce busine ss will be minimum due to havin g physical 
existence of agent booths near customers for complaint manageme nt and 
convenient return policy.    
7. According to the data of The Worl d Bank, as 66 percent people a re rural 
population in Bangladesh as of 2015, a huge portion of potentia l customers are 
beyond the reach of e-commerce in  existing e-commerce mechanism  (The World 
Bank). E-commerce agents will re ach to these potential customer s to develop 
inclusive e-commerce industry in Bangladesh. Quantity of sales will definitely 
increase taking support from e-commerce agents to make order or  learning the 
way of making own order own self.     
8. Conclusions and Recommendations  
 
It has been found that clothing items (54.5%)  are preferred pr oducts in case of e-
commerce where it is required to have branding with real produc t image in the respective 
e-commerce webpages. Around 36 percent customers prefer to purc hase electronic items 
through e-commerce where guarantee and warranty issues need to be settled promptly to 
build customers’ trust. Customer convenience of 28 percent e-co mmerce customers 
depends on delivery issues where 24 percent customers prefer qu ality issues in this 
regard. It is needed to develop trained manpower for management  and delivery purposes. 
Incentives can be introduced to compensate delay delivery issue s. Besides, making profit 
with high quality products at reasonable price is urgent need. To implement the proposed 
e-commerce business expansion model, a comprehensive regulatory  guideline has to be 
developed for ensuring market discipline where cyber security i ssues will get preference 
and the middlemen or intermediaries will be encouraged to be co nverted into e-commerce 
business. A central government based application or platform ca n be developed which will 
include almost all the e-commerce sites of Bangladesh with cate gory of products having 
almost all the payment options so that customers using only thi s one app can get all the 
information. A regulation committee from the government side co nnected to the central app 
to ensure the market discipline and customer complains can be i ntroduced. E-commerce 
websites need to be translated in to Bengali besides having Eng lish option to reach mass 
people and to be more user friendly. There should have the opti on of 24/7 customer care 
and option of real time feedback from customers regarding produ cts to implementing them. 
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to acknowledge the support of Mr. Md. Ashfaq Uddin , Mr. Zawad 
Abedin, Mr. Nasir Ahmed Siddiquie, Ms. Musrat Jahan and Ms. Sab iba Khaled for 
conducting excellent survey and interview with me. Besides, I a lso thank Mr. Sukanoto 
Halder for his support in e-commerce model development. I speci ally thank Mohammad 
Ziaul Islam for his contribution in the research paper as Resea rch Assistant.       
 
 
Studies in Business and Economics no. 14(1)/2019 
- 98 -    9. References 
 
Ahammad , S.M., Satter, F., Saifullah, M. (2017). Prospects of E-Commerce in Bangladesh, J. Sci. 
technol. (Dinajpur) Vol. 5: 74- 80 (2007), ISSN 1994-0386,pp-74- 80. 
Al-Amin, S. and Rahman, SK.S. ( 2010). “Application of Electroni c Banking in Bangladesh: An 
Overview”, Vol-4, pp. 172-182. 
Almeida, G. A. A. (2007). Promoting E-Commerce in Developing Co untries. www.diplomacy.edu, 
2007. 
Andam, Zorayda and Ruth (2003) , E-commerce and e-business. E-A SEAN Task Force and Asia-
Pacific. 
Bhattacherjee, A., (2002). “Individual Trust in Online Firms: S cale Development and Initial Test.”, 
Journal of Management Inform ation Systems19, no.1. 
Bhowmik, R.,(2012), “The Present E-Commerce Situation In Bangla desh For B2c E-Commerce”. 
International Journal of Econo mic Research, Vol. 3(5), pp.77-91 ,2012.  
Chavan, J. ,(2013), “Internet B anking- Benefits and Challenges in an Emerging Economy”. 
International Journal of Resea rch in Business Management, Vol. 1(1), pp. 19-26. 
Hossain, M.A., Ali , M.A., Kibr ia, M.G. and Bhuiyan, M.N., (201 3), A Survey of E-Commerce of 
Bangladesh, International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR ), India Online ISSN: 
2319-7064 , Volume 2, I ssue 2,pp 15 0-158. 
Khan, A.G.,(2016). Electronic Commerc e: A Study on Benefits and  Challenges in an Emerging 
Economy, Global Journal of Management and Business Research: B Economics and 
Commerce, Volume 16, Issue 1, Version 1.0 , pp-19-22.  
Kothari, C.R., (2001). “Research Methodology: Methods and Techn iques”, New Age International 
Publishers, New Dilhi. 
Molla, A., and Heeks, R. ,(2007). “Exploring E-commerce benefit s for businesses in a developing 
country”. The Information Society. 
Mohiuddin, M., (2014).“ Overview the E-Commerce in Bangladesh”,  IOSR Journal of Business and 
Management, Volume 16, Issue 7 . Ver. II (July. 2014), PP 01-06.  
Ministry of Commerce, Governmen t of Bangladesh, ( 2000). Trade p olicy Review, April 2000, Dhaka. 
Ministry of Commerce, Government  of Bangladesh, (1997). Report on Export of Computer Software 
from Bangladesh: Problems and Prospects, Dhaka. 
Hossain N, (2000). E-commerce in  Bangladesh: Status, Potential and Constraints, December 2000. 
Nanehkaran, Y. A., (2013). “An Introduction to Electronic Comme rce”. International Journal of 
Scientific & Technology Research, Vol. 2(4), pp.190-193. 
Ohidujjaman,(2013). “E-commerce Challenges, Solutions and Effec tiveness Perspective 
Bangladesh”. International Journa l of Computer Applications, Vo l. 70(9). pp. 9-17. 
Sagar, A.H. and Chowdhury, M.M., (2014). “Cost Comparison betwe en Electronic Money Transfer 
Channel and Traditional Money Transfer Channel: A Study on Comm ercial Bank in 
Bangladesh”, Vol-4, pp. 40-46. 
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., and Thrnhill, A., (2009). “Research Me thods for Business Students”, 5the 
ed. Dorling Kindersley, India. 
UNCTAD , (2015). Information economy report 2005: Unlocking the  Potentials of e-commerce for 
developing countries. United Nations Publication. 
Uddin, M.S., Akhi, A.Y, (2014). “E- wallet System for Banglades h an Electronic Payment System”, 
Vol-4, pp. 216-219.  
 