 DISCUSSION NOTE
Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce 
Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Early assessment of the impact of COVID-19 on e-commerce and  
the provision of digital financial services for micro, small,  
and medium enterprises and low-income consumers
DECEMBER  2020
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized© 2020 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank 
1818 H Street NW  
Washington DC 20433  
Telephone: 202-473-1000  
Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, 
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of 
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, 
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part 
of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such 
boundaries.
RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages dissemination of its 
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full 
attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of  
the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422;  
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.Finance, Competitiveness & Innovation Global PracticeCONTENTS
Acknowledgments iii
List of Acronyms IV
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND KEY LEARNINGS 1
EMERGING GOOD PRACTICES AND REGULATORY IMPLICATIONS 2
1. INTRODUCTION  5
1.1 Study Objectives 5
1.2  Definition and Categorization of e-Commerce Platforms 6
1.2 Study Scope and Limitations 7
2.  GROWTH OF E-COMMERCE DURING COVID-19 9
2.1  Context: Growth of e-Commerce before COVID-19  9
2.2  Short-Term Impact of Lockdowns on  9 
e-Commerce Platforms in 2020 
2.3  Policies Adopted by e-Commerce Platforms to Incentivize Usage 13
3.  TOWARD INCLUSIVE DIGITAL ECONOMIES? ASSESSING PARTICIPATION OF  
UNDERSERVED SEGMENTS IN E-COMMERCE  16
3.1 Participation of Low-Income Consumers  16
3.2 Participation of MSMEs  17
3.3  “Second-Generation” e-Commerce Platforms for Underserved Segments 17
4.  THE ROLE OF DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES IN E-COMMERCE 21
4.1  Overview of Payments and Credit Products via e-Commerce Platforms 21
4.2  Regulatory Enablers for Financial Services via e-Commerce Platforms 22
4.3  Financial Services in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic 26
5.  CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 28
6.  WORKS CITED 29
  i
  iiiACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This discussion note is a product of the Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection Team in the 
World Bank Group’s Finance, Competitiveness & Innovation Global Practice. The note was drafted 
by Edoardo Totolo (Operations Officer, IFC), Hemant Baijal (Consultant, World Bank), and Delia 
Dean (Consultant, World Bank). Margaret Miller (Lead Financial Sector Economist, World Bank) 
provided overall guidance, and Ahmed Faragallah (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, World Bank) 
provided substantial inputs to the note.
The team is grateful for valuable peer-review inputs received from Harish Natarajan (Lead Finan-
cial Sector Specialist, World Bank), Juni Tingting Zhu (Private Sector Specialist, World Bank), and 
Maria Fernandez Vidal (Senior Financial Sector Specialist, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor). 
The team also gratefully acknowledges the support provided by Peter Knaack (Consultant, World 
Bank), Renuka Pai (Consultant, World Bank), and Meriem Ait Ali Slimane (Senior Private Sector Spe-
cialist) at different stages of the project.
ivLIST OF ACRONYMS 
AML/CFT anti-money laundering and counterfinancing of terrorism
FATF Financial Action Task Force
KYC Know Your Customer
MFI Microfinance Institution
MSME Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise
PSP Payment Service Provider
 
All dollar amounts are US dollars unless otherwise indicated.   11. e-Commerce played an essential role during the 
COVID-19 crisis: At a time when retail commerce was 
severely hampered by lockdowns and mobility restric-
tions, e-commerce took on greater importance in 
helping consumers purchase basic goods and services 
primarily through digital payments methods, counter -
balancing the negative effects of low economic activity 
in the brick-and-mortar retail sector. e-Commerce plat-
forms in countries where the lockdown effects were 
not very severe performed better than in countries 
where restrictions were harsher. 
2. The impact of COVID-19 on e-commerce platforms 
varied greatly depending on the government poli-
cies adopted during the crisis. Some countries, such 
as India, experienced short-term disruptions in both 
physical stores and e-commerce platforms. The short-
term impact was generally negative, as vendors in the 
platforms could not operate their businesses and sup-
ply chains were disrupted. The lack of policy differenti-
ation during the lockdown between physical stores and 
online marketplaces exacerbated the negative effects 
on the economy. In these countries, the platforms were 
prevented from delivering products other than essen-
tial items. Sellers were not able to access their physical 
inventories and get products shipped to customers.
3. Digital transformation and adoption accelerated 
due the pandemic: Unique digital shoppers increased 
in most countries, with a few exceptions where the lock-
down policies restricted all types of economic activities 
including e-commerce. The data available is fragmen-
tary but shows fast growth rates in most regions, from 
the United States to Africa and the Middle East, reshap-
ing consumer behavior and enterprise operations. On 
the selling side, online sales are no longer an option, 
but a necessity for brick-and-mortar businesses. On the 
consumer side, the COVID-19 crisis has caused a struc-tural shift of demand toward digital commerce that is 
likely to continue in the years to come. MercadoLibre, 
for example, registered a 100 percent year-on-year 
increase for essential goods and pharmacy products. In 
Africa, Jumia registered a fourfold increase in the sale 
of grocery items. Amazon’s first-quarter sales in 2020 
rose by 26 percent year over year.
4. The crisis might open opportunities for second-gen-
eration “niche” platforms that specialize in specific 
market segments. In addition to causing disruptions 
to large e-commerce platforms, the COVID-19 crisis 
also opened opportunities for new and niche platforms 
employing innovative business models and catering 
to segments traditionally excluded from large e-com-
merce platforms. Several new platforms gained rele-
vance in emerging markets of Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America, adopting new business models and helping 
the overall landscape to become more competitive. 
Platforms such as FarmCrowdy in Nigeria, Twiga in 
Kenya, and Dunzo in India have been operational for 
several years. However, they have gained importance 
and expanded their business models during the crisis, 
as traditional supply chains are disrupted. Other plat-
forms, such as SafeBoda in Uganda and Helloomarket 
in Ethiopia, were able to open opportunities for micro 
and small businesses that are too small and informal to 
operate in large e-commerce platforms. 
5. The digital payments infrastructure, including the 
mobile and bank agent networks, are critical for the 
expansion of e-commerce toward underserved seg-
ments. Most platforms saw the usage of digital pay-
ments, notably digital wallet usage, increase. In Africa, 
Jumia enforced the usage of digital payments in coun-
tries such as Kenya, as it temporarily discontinued cash 
on delivery. Mercado Pago saw a strong increase both 
in terms of penetration of digital payments and vol-
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND KEY LEARNINGSume of transactions. On the other hand, countries with 
low mobile-money penetration and/or not well-estab-
lished agent networks had to rely on cash payments. 
For example, in Nigeria, FarmCrowdy had to discon-
tinue mobile payments because disruptions to the 
agent network made it difficult for sellers to cash out 
their payments. In Ethiopia, low penetration of mobile 
money forced Helloomarket to enable cash on delivery 
for deliveries in Addis Ababa and different forms of 
cash deposits in banks, post offices, or mobile-money 
agents outside of the capital. 
6. e-Commerce lending to micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) declined during the crisis due 
to worsening market conditions, but platforms pro-
vided relief to existing borrowers. New loan orig-
inations to MSME sellers on e-commerce platforms 
declined in the weeks immediately after the COVID-
19 outbreak, as many platforms wanted to limit their 
exposure to the risk of nonperforming loans. How-
ever, existing sellers who already had an established 
relationship with the platforms were given discounted 
loan terms to cover losses and economic hardship for 
short-term loans (between three months to one year) 
in most markets. In some instances, such as China and 
Brazil, governments also used the e-commerce plat-
forms as the channel to provide discounted financing 
to MSME sellers. 
7. Uncertainty about regulatory frameworks for the 
provision of financial services is a key risk for e-com-
merce platforms and needs to be prioritized by 
regulators in the short term. The uncertainty around 
the regulatory framework for the provision of e-money 
wallets and credit to MSMEs is an important risk for 
the operation of platforms in emerging markets and 
developing economies. Changing requirements linked 
to payments and credit licenses and know-your-cus-
tomer requirements for sellers and customers need to 
be addressed for platforms to expand.EMERGING GOOD PRACTICES AND 
REGULATORY IMPLICATIONS
The surge in usage of e-commerce during the COVID-
19 pandemic has accelerated the need for deeper 
understanding of the risks and opportunities posed by 
the growing interaction of digital commerce and digital 
finance. This discussion note identifies several emerging 
good practices and recommendations based on the coun-
try and platform case studies analyzed:1 
a) Digital financial services are critical for participation in 
the digital economy. e-Commerce platforms need to 
integrate seamlessly with the national payment system 
and offer different payment methods to target differ -
ent segments of the population. 
b) Governments should coordinate with banks and 
mobile-money providers to ensure that agent net-
works remain operational in areas where their services 
are most needed. This may require incentives and/
or subsidies to ensure agents’ liquidity and financial 
viability in periods of slow economic activity. Clear 
policies should also be designed to regulate agents 
who operate both essential financial services and retail 
businesses deemed nonessential.
c) e-Commerce platforms can play a key role in facilitat-
ing access to credit for small businesses, either directly 
or in partnership with banks or other licensed lenders. 
Governments need to develop adequate and propor -
tional regulatory frameworks to encourage innovation 
and the sound development of this market, including 
participation in the credit-reporting system, financial 
consumer protection, and data protection. This would 
encourage competition and reduce the risk that ven-
dors will “lock in” to the largest platforms in the market. 
d) As e-commerce business models have evolved, the 
role of intermediaries has expanded rapidly to pro-
vide financial services that would be typically handled 
by regulated payment service providers (PSPs). These 
service providers or intermediaries include non-bank 
financial institutions and businesses that previously 
did not issue any financial products (for example, 
e-money digital wallets) or handle transactions on 
behalf of the regulated PSPs (for example, e-com-
merce aggregators). 2  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
1.  These are considered as “emerging,” rather than “established,” good practices, as the COVID-19 crisis was still unfolding and data contin-
ued to be fragmentary at the time of writing. Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  3
e) Regulators need to be aware of emerging risks within 
the e-commerce ecosystem due to unregulated inter -
mediaries issuing financial products and/or providing 
services or moving funds on behalf of merchants or 
regulated PSPs. While no regulatory framework for 
global e-commerce is commonly agreed upon, aware-
ness of emerging non-bank players within the e-com-
merce ecosystem and the potential risks posed by 
them is a good starting point for developing a nation-
al-level regulatory framework. The potential risks to 
the financial ecosystem include the following:
• Credit and liquidity risks may arise if the interme-
diary responsible for collecting funds on behalf of 
the merchant fails to transfer funds to the merchant 
account. 
• Operational and reputational risks may also arise 
due to operational and security disruptions result-
ing in reputation risk for merchants. • Cyber risks in the form of data breaches may result 
in loss of funds or the stealing of sensitive consumer 
information. 
• Consumer-protection risks due to loss of con-
sumer funds and the lack of recourse mechanism 
for chargebacks and refunds. Consumers also face 
privacy and data-protection risks.
f) Regulators and e-commerce platforms should con-
sider introducing simplified onboarding processes and 
proportional due-diligence processes to facilitate the 
enrollment of new merchants while ensuring compli-
ance with rules on anti-money laundering and counter -
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT).   51. INTRODUCTION 
This study provides an early assessment of the impact 
of COVID-19 on e-commerce platforms and digital 
financial services, identifying the opportunities, good 
practices, and key challenges that have emerged in 
different regions. The study is based on interviews with 
some of the largest e-commerce platforms conducted 
early after the onset of the COVID-19 crisis and an exten-
sive analysis of their corporate media channels, quarterly 
and annual financial reports, and general media reports. 
The project team also engaged with new and emerg-
ing platforms that leverage digital channels and digital 
finance to promote participation of MSMEs in the econ-
omy in emerging markets, Africa in particular. The study 
also benefitted from interviews and discussion with indus-
try experts, entrepreneurs’ associations, and other players 
in the field.
1.1 Study Objectives
The focus of the study is to evaluate the impact of 
COVID-19 on the use of e-commerce platforms across 
different regions and the role that digital financial 
services have played in the process. The emphasis is 
on digital and financial inclusion of consumers and small 
businesses and their impact on job creation and eco-
nomic growth. 
The following questions are analyzed:
1) Did e-commerce platforms function efficiently and 
increase sales during the crisis? The study looks 
at the immediate impact of the COVID-19 crisis on 
e-commerce platforms. Using sales volume data 
wherever available, it looks at the effects of lockdown policies adopted by different governments on the 
participation rates of businesses and consumers on 
these platforms. 
2) Have underserved segments, such as small busi-
nesses and low-income households, increased 
participation rates in e-commerce platforms as a 
response to the crisis? The study also looks at the 
effects of growing e-commerce volumes on under -
served segments, especially small businesses and 
low-income buyers, and whether opportunities for 
these segments to buy and sell on these platforms 
increased.
3) Have e-commerce platforms accelerated the adop-
tion of digital financial services, especially digital 
credit and digital payments? The study analyzes 
the role played by the platforms in providing access 
to digital financial services, such as digital payments 
and working-capital loans, and other support services 
to MSME sellers. The study also analyzes the regula-
tory environment enabling the provision of financial 
services through e-commerce platforms and the key 
challenges therein. 
4) What are the main demand-side, supply-side, and 
regulatory challenges affecting the growth of 
e-commerce platforms and participation by dis-
advantaged segments? A cross-cutting question 
analyzed in each section of the paper focuses on key 
barriers constraining the growth of e-commerce plat-
forms and participation of disadvantaged segments 
such as small businesses and low-income households. 
The research focuses on regulatory frameworks, gov-
ernment policies, and digital skills. 
1.2  Definition and Categorization of e-Commerce 
Platforms
In its most basic definition, e-commerce is defined as the 
buying and selling of goods and services over digital and 
electronic networks (Reserve Bank of India 2019). e-Com-
merce could require the integration of diverse technolo-
gies and business systems that include but are not limited 
to Internet-based and mobile-based platforms, cloud 
computing, electronic data interchange, digital payments, 
escrowing services, and supply-chain and inventory man-
agement, among others. Virtually all e-commerce transac-
tions require access to the Internet in at least one point of 
the transaction.
e-Commerce can be classified several ways based on its 
structure and the type of linkages between sellers and 
buyers. This paper categorizes e-commerce platforms 
based on three criteria: (i) sales models, (ii) the suite of 
services provided, and (iii) the type of sellers and buyers 
involved in the platforms. 
1. SALES MODELS:2 The first categorization is based on 
whether platforms use an inventory or marketplace 
model of e-commerce: 
a)  In an inventory-based model, the inventory of 
goods and services is owned by an e-commerce 
entity and sold to the consumers directly.
b)  The marketplace model i nvolves providing an IT 
platform or digital or electronic network to act as 
a facilitator between the buyer and seller. The mar -
ketplace model can itself be divided into several 
types depending on whether the platform performs 
the transaction or only manages components of it. 
Large platforms such as Amazon, eBay, Jumia, and 
MercadoLibre fall under this category.
2. CORE SUITE OF SERVICES:  The second categorization 
is based on the types of services provided to buyers 
or sellers. The ecosystem is complex and evolving 
rapidly, and platforms are quickly adopting new strate-
gies. Important services include but are not limited to 
the following: 
• Within-platform payments: Most e-commerce 
platforms allow customers to make within-plat-
form payments through different channels. Ama-
zon, for example, allows diverse payment methods 
depending on the country of operation, including 
debit and credit cards, prepaid cards, and Pay-
Code, among others.3 Jumia allows customers to pay via mobile money, cash on delivery, and cards. 
Facebook Marketplace recently introduced check-
out in the United States, which allows buyers to pay 
within the app through PayPal or credit card. The 
majority of Facebook Marketplace pages, how-
ever, especially those in emerging markets, require 
buyers and sellers to settle the payment outside 
the platform. Online classifieds platforms such as 
Craigslist or Jiji work in a similar way. 
• Fulfillment processes:  e-Commerce platforms use 
widely different strategies for fulfillment services 
such as warehousing, inventory management, and 
shipping. In Latin America, for example, Mercado-
Libre provides Mercado Envíos, in which the plat-
forms manage orders from customers, store sellers’ 
products in their warehouses, and manage deliv-
eries. Jumia Express (fulfillment by Jumia) in Africa 
and Amazon’s FBA (fulfilled by Amazon) work in 
similar ways. On the other hand, other platforms, 
such as eBay and Facebook Marketplace, have tra-
ditionally not provided fulfillment services,4 while 
other platforms, such as Etsy and Shopify, allow 
third-party fulfillment services to integrate with 
their platforms. 
• Customer and seller guarantees: Another import-
ant service provided by e-commerce platforms 
relates to product returns and money-back guaran-
tees. These services are guaranteed by some plat-
forms. Amazon, for example, provides an “A-to-Z 
Guarantee” to customers who purchase from third-
party sellers. EBay developed a Money Back Guar -
antee policy for their customers, whereas platforms 
like Etsy allow each seller to decide its own return 
policies. Other platforms, such as Facebook Mar -
ketplace or Craigslist, do not provide such guaran-
tees directly to buyers or sellers.
• Other services: e-Commerce platforms may pro-
vide a variety of other services, such as financial 
services (for example, loans, insurance, and so on), 
data services (for example, scoring, sales dash-
boards, and the like), webpage design, and train-
ing, among others. 
3. TYPES OF SELLERS AND BUYERS:  A third criterion com-
monly used to categorize e-commerce marketplaces 
refers to the types of users in the platform. This pri-
marily differentiates between business and individual 
customers and sellers:
2.  The definition developed in this paper expands on the 2019 definition developed by the Reserve Bank of India (Reserve Bank of India 2019).
3.  Amazon PayCode is a cash payment method available in some countries. This is briefly described in section 3.
4.  Note that eBay introduced an end-to-end fulfillment service in 2019.6  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemica)  Business to business: Platforms such as Alibaba in 
China and Twiga in Kenya target primarily business 
supply chains, where enterprises are both the main 
sellers and buyers in the platform.
b)  Business to consumer: The most widely known 
type of e-commerce, this is where businesses sell 
products to individual consumers. Amazon, Jumia, 
and MercadoLibre all belong in this category.
c)  Customer to customer: This type of platform, 
often described as s-commerce (social commerce), 
is becoming increasingly common, especially 
through social media. Platforms such as WeChat 
and Facebook Marketplace belong in this category.
d)  Other: Customer-to-business, government-to-busi-
ness, and other types of platforms exist but usually 
adopt different business models. They are beyond 
the scope of this paper.
1.2 Study Scope and Limitations
The previous section showed the complexity and het-
erogeneity of e-commerce platforms. This study is not 
a comprehensive diagnostic of all e-commerce business models and regulatory frameworks globally, but an anal-
ysis of selected platforms and country case studies focus-
ing on the role of digital financial services and the impact 
of COVID-19. As such, it is important to note that the 
research is limited in scope. First, the study is based on 
a series of interviews with selected platforms conducted 
between April and May 2020; hence, the study is not 
representative of all platforms and regions. Categories 
such as the business-to-business e-commerce platforms 
described above are not analyzed in this paper, while cus-
tomer-to-customer platforms are analyzed only partially. 
Second, the research makes an early assessment of the 
short-term impact of COVID-19 on the market. However, 
the limited availability of data, combined with the fact 
that the pandemic is recent and still unfolding, makes the 
analysis subject to potential errors and biases. It will be 
important to validate the findings as data becomes avail-
able and to conduct further research on areas linked to 
e-commerce not covered in this note. Finally, the study 
does not focus, or has limited focus, on such important 
issues as market competition, consumer protection, data 
privacy, and gender, among others. These should be pri-
oritized in the future studies.  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  7
TABLE 1:  Suite of Services Provided by Different e-Commerce Platforms
(Examples of platforms)END-TO-END  
FULFILLMENT WITHIN-PLATFORM 
PAYMENTSCUSTOMER GUARANTEES 
(for example, returns, money-back 
guarantees, others)
Amazon ✓ ✓ ✓
MercadoLibre ✓ ✓ ✓
Jumia ✓ ✓ ✓
Alibaba ✓ ✓ ✓
eBay ✕ ✓ ✓
Etsy ✕ ✓ ✕
Shopify ✕ ✓ ✕
WeChat ✕ ✓ ✕
Facebook Marketplace ✕ ✕ ✕
Jiji ✕ ✕ ✕
Craigslist ✕ ✕ ✕8  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Customers use different payment methods for 
their e-commerce purchases. These include pay-
ment cards (credit, debit, and prepaid cards); bank 
accounts; e-wallets using a prefunded account (for 
example, PayPal); e-wallets linked to payment cards 
(for example, pay wallets—Apple Pay, Samsung Pay, 
and others); digital wallets provided by e-commerce 
platforms (for example, Alipay, AmazonPay, and the 
like); and mobile wallets provided by mobile opera-
tors, often in association with banks and other PSPs. 
To facilitate e-commerce payment transactions, 
the following types of intermediaries play a role to 
complete the payment process and provide data 
analytics, fraud protection, and security solutions to 
ensure a smooth customer experience:
• e-Commerce marketplaces do not store or ware-
house their own goods but collect, or aggregate, 
information about goods and services provided 
by third-party suppliers and furnish this informa-
tion through their website or mobile app, allowing 
consumers to compare prices and features. Ama-
zon, Alibaba, and MercadoLibre are essentially 
e-commerce aggregators. 
• A payment or merchant aggregator is a service 
provider that signs up merchants directly under 
its own merchant identification number to pro-
cess transactions through a single master account. 
One merchant account is used to represent many 
merchants; in the traditional model, a merchant 
account is disbursed to each merchant. In this 
respect, e-commerce platforms such as Amazon 
and Alibaba are payment aggregators for inde-
pendent vendors participating in the platform as 
sub-merchants. It is important to note that aggre-
gators exist for physical merchants in addition to 
e-commerce.
• A payment gateway helps initiate e-commerce 
transactions or in-app payments. It helps mer -
chants transmits the online payment data securely BOX 1
Overview of the Payments Value Chain in e-Commerce Platforms
to the payment processor, continuing the life cycle 
of the transaction. The gateway is not directly 
involved in the money flow, but it is a web server 
to which a platform’s website is connected. A pay-
ment gateway often connects several acquiring 
banks and payment methods under one system 
• A payment processor executes the transaction by 
transmitting data between the payer, merchant, 
payer’s bank (issuing bank), and merchant’s bank 
(acquiring bank). A payment processor facilitates 
the transaction, while a payment gateway is a tool 
that communicates the approval or decline of 
transactions between you and your customers.
• A PSP is a third-party merchant service provider 
that typically combines the functions of both a 
payment gateway and a payment processor. It 
facilitates and helps merchants in accepting online 
payments. In online shopping, the PSP will pro-
vide various methods of payment, including direct 
debit, bank transfer, real-time bank transfers using 
online banking, and credit cards. All these inter -
mediaries use the national retail payment systems 
at the back end for the clearing and settlement of 
transactions. In most countries, they are not regu-
lated directly by the financial regulator; however, 
as they play an increasing role in providing pay-
ment services and handling financial transactions 
and customer data, more regulators are coming 
up with specific regulations concerning interme-
diaries that facilitate the e-commerce payments 
value chain.
Two recent examples of regulatory focus include Euro-
pean Union Payment Systems Directive 2 (EU PSD 2), 
which imposes greater standards on how merchants 
enforce the security measures needed to safeguard 
consumer data from misuse, and the Reserve Bank of 
India’s exploration of options for regulating the activ-
ities of payment gateways and payment aggregators 
in managing online transactions. 2.  GROWTH OF E-COMMERCE 
DURING COVID-19
2.1  Context: Growth of e-Commerce before 
COVID-19 
Global e-commerce has grown rapidly in recent years. 
While retail commerce grew by 4.5 percent to $25 trillion 
in 2019, e-commerce sales increased by approximately 18 
percent during the same period to $3.5 trillion.5 At the start 
of 2020, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, e-commerce 
was expected to nearly double by 2023 to more than $6.5 
trillion. e-Commerce is growing much faster than retail 
commerce, but its share of total retail commerce is still 
relatively small, representing 14 percent of global retail 
sales. Much of the e-commerce growth is attributable to 
the emergence of large global and regional e-commerce 
platforms such as Amazon, Alibaba, MercadoLibre, Jumia, 
Walmart, and others.
e-Commerce has been growing fastest in the emerging 
economies of Asia Pacific, Latin America, and the Mid-
dle East and Africa. Figure 1 shows the growth rates for 
these regions. Mexico (35 percent), India (32 percent), the 
Philippines (31 percent), China (27 percent), and Malaysia 
(22 percent) recorded the highest growth rates in 2019. 
But growth rates tell only part of the story. China is the 
global leader in business-to-consumer e-commerce, with 
an estimated $1.062 trillion in e-commerce sales in 2017. 
Online sales are higher in China than in the United States, where they are estimated to be $753 billion (UNCTAD 
2019). According to emarketer, in 2019 China’s share of 
the global e-commerce sales was 54.7 percent, or nearly 
twice that of the next five countries combined (Lipsman 
2019). Apart from China and some other developed mar -
kets, where the e-commerce platforms have matured their 
end-to-end processes, the state of e-commerce in many 
developing countries is still nascent due in large part to 
an evolving infrastructure to support payments and cus-
tomer service, including consumer protection, logistics, 
and delivery. For e-commerce platforms to expand, con-
sumers also need to build trust in how platforms work, 
including their return policies and capacity to manage 
complaints and frauds. This usually requires a combina-
tion of adequate market discipline, competition, regula-
tion, and supervision.
2.2  Short-Term Impact of Lockdowns on  
e-Commerce Platforms in 2020
The short-term impact of lockdowns had two distinct 
phases: The first phase, in mid- to late March, saw the 
immediate impact of the crisis, when most governments 
were hurriedly imposing restrictions on mobility and 
commerce.6 The second phase started in late March 
and lasted until late April or early May, when lockdown 
restrictions were still on in most markets, but consum-
ers and e-commerce platforms had adjusted to the new 
normal and e-commerce transactions for groceries and 
other essential categories surged.  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  9
5. eMarketer, https://www.emarketer.com.
6. Except China, where lockdowns began much earlier. The corresponding period was late January to mid-February.FIGURE 1. 2019 Retail e-Commerce Sales Growth (Percentage Change over Previous Year)
Source: emarketer.com25%21.30%21.30%19.40%14.50%10.20%20.70%
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30%Worldwide
Western Europe
North America
Central & Eastern Europe
Middle East & Africa
Latin America
Asia Pacific10  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
2.2.1 Phase 1: The Immediate Impact
The immediate impact of the COVID-19 crisis on 
sales volumes of e-commerce platforms in different 
regions depended primarily on the policies adopted 
by governments. Like the rest of the economy, e-com-
merce platforms suffered most from the immediate con-
sequences of the pandemic; disruption of logistics and 
supply-chain networks negatively affected platforms. 
While customer orders surged, especially for groceries 
and essential everyday goods, e-commerce platforms’ 
ability to keep up with the consumer demand was 
affected by limitations in supply, logistics, and health and 
safety concerns among workers.
In Africa, Jumia’s supply chain was disrupted by the 
national lockdowns and the manufacturing shutdown 
in China. The latter affected imports on its Jumia Global 
marketplace and prevented local sellers from tapping into 
their international supply chains. Country lockdowns had a 
severe effect on cargo operations, affecting the platform’s 
cross-border logistics. At the local level, government pol-
icies restricted sellers from accessing their inventories, 
resulting in capacity limitations and restricting their abil-
ity to fulfill consumer demand. In countries such as Kenya 
and Uganda, many restaurants shut down after the impo-
sition of evening and nighttime curfews that affected the 
food-delivery business. Confinement measures led to a 
closure of a Jumia’s main warehouse in Lagos, Nigeria, 
and in South Africa, deliveries of fashion items operated 
by Jumia’s partner platform Zando were suspended until 
the government lifts the confinement (Jumia 2020). 
In India, e-commerce platforms like Flipkart and Ama-
zon suspended their entire operations temporarily 
when the government first announced the lockdown 
in late March. Upon resumption a few days later, their 
efforts were focused entirely on the delivery of essential 
medical supplies and groceries. Their activities were also 
curtailed to top-tier cities like Mumbai, Delhi, and Benga-
luru, as mobility restrictions and limited delivery capacity 
prevented operations in tier 2 and tier 3 cities. 
In Latin America, after suffering a sharp drop in 
demand in Brazil and Argentina during the first few 
weeks of the lockdown, leading platforms like Mer -
cadoLibre saw sales rebound in April. The platform 
registered an increase in number of consumers adjust-
ing to shopping online while social-distancing measures 
were still in place. In such markets as Mexico, Colombia, 
Chile, and Uruguay, where government policies were 
not overly restrictive, after the imposition of lockdown 
there was a 100 percent year-on-year increase in sales of essential goods and pharmacy products. In Mexico 
alone, sales of pharmacy and home- and laundry-related 
products increased 114 percent and 403 percent, respec-
tively. According to the Brazilian e-commerce associa-
tion ABComm, Brazil’s online sales increased 30 percent 
between April and May 2020 and counted over one mil-
lion new customers in the country.
In China, where the lockdowns began earlier than in 
other countries, e-commerce platforms were initially 
disrupted. Platforms such as Alibaba and JD.com strug-
gled to keep up with consumer demand for groceries and 
essential supplies due to limited delivery capacity. Several 
products sold out on these platforms and could not be 
replenished in time, and other products experienced ship-
ment delays and were undeliverable to many locations. 
Alibaba even warned during its earnings call in February 
that some of its businesses that rely on the sale of phys-
ical goods would likely see a significant decline in reve-
nues in the current quarter. Retail and restaurant ordering 
reduced significantly through the middle of February, as 
many people experienced delays getting back to work 
after the Chinese New Year. Travel bookings were also 
down. On the other hand, grocery shopping and delivery 
went up sharply, as did digital communication tools and 
video-chat services (Rossolillo 2020). 
In the United States, consumer orders at Amazon 
have spiked since mid-March. Unable to keep up with 
the demand due to worker health and safety concerns, 
labor force shortages and bottlenecks with cross-border 
shipments (many Amazon vendors are in China and other 
countries), the company enforced several policies, includ-
ing the prioritization of essential supplies and limitations 
on online grocery deliveries. Non-priority items would 
take more than two or three weeks even for Amazon 
Prime members who under normal circumstances would 
get them within two days.
2.2.2  Phase II: Stabilization Phase and Shift in Demand 
Patterns
While the pandemic initially introduced short-term 
challenges to e-commerce platforms, it also began a 
structural shift in the demand for basic and essential 
products that may continue in the long term. In many 
countries, the pandemic caused a surge in demand for 
online commerce and the contactless delivery of groceries 
and essential products. Some product categories, such as 
health products and fast-moving consumer goods, grew 
particularly fast. Table 2 shows the trend for product cat-
egories with high, moderate, and low demand observed 
across most e-commerce platforms. 7. The table was compiled from multiple sources, but mainly from the earnings reports of platforms covered in the study. 
8.  Numbers on the Y axis are not absolute values but represent a search interest (worldwide) relative to the highest point on the chart. A value 
of 100 is the peak popularity for the term. A value of 50 means that the term is half as popular. Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  11
Interest in e-commerce grew worldwide, as evidenced 
by the frequency of Google searches for some of the 
largest e-commerce platforms. While search trends 
for the largest e-commerce platforms were stable until 
the beginning of March 2020, after mid-March Google 
searches for all platforms were largely positive, reaching 
a peak around the middle or end of May 2020. Figure 2 
shows some initial drops for platforms such as Flipkart and 
MercadoLibre, probably due to the strict lockdown mea-
sures adopted in the initial stages of the crisis in India and 
some Latin American countries. One of the impacts of the 
crisis is that the big players could not meet the demand; 
this led to significant growth among lesser-known e-com-
merce players, and companies without e-commerce 
presences rushed to create it. Some of these trends are 
analyzed in section 3.3.In Africa, as confinement measures were put in place 
in a number of countries, Jumia experienced a surge 
in orders for everyday essential goods. Notably, the 
demand for groceries increased fourfold in terms of items 
sold over the same period in the previous year. On the 
other hand, Jumia food sales were harmed by restaurant 
shutdowns. This validates their new strategy, initiated in 
2019, of refocusing their business on everyday-product 
categories. On a geographic basis, volumes surged in 
markets such as Morocco and Tunisia, while lockdowns 
and confinement measures constricted supply in markets 
such as Nigeria and South Africa, limiting their ability to 
meet consumer demand. 
In the Middle East, the uptake of e-commerce grew rap-
idly in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. In Saudi 
TABLE 2: Shifting Consumer Demand on e-Commerce Platforms
PRODUCT CATEGORIES WITH HIGH 
DEMANDPRODUCT CATEGORIES WITH  
MODERATE DEMANDPRODUCT CATEGORIES WITH 
BELOW-AVERAGE DEMAND
Groceries and everyday essentials Toys and games Travel-related products and services
Essential hygiene, health products,  
household cleaningHome furnishings and household 
goodsFashion and apparel
School, office supplies, and work-  
from-home essentialsCosmetics, beauty, and care Sporting goods, outdoor equipment
Digital content and entertainment Insurance and financial services Jewelry and luxury items
Baby products Consumer electronics Automotive or tools
Source: Authors elaborations7
FIGURE 2: Google Trends for Some of the Largest e-Commerce Platforms between March and May 2020
Source: Google Trends30405060708090100
1-Feb-20 21-Feb-20 12-Mar-20 1-Apr-20 21-Apr-20 11-May-20
Jumia MercadoLibre Amazon.com Flipkart12  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Arabia, the percentage of the population using e-com-
merce platforms to buy groceries grew from 6 percent in 
2019 to 55 percent in April 2020 (Choueiri Group 2020). 
The grocery products that registered the highest growth 
rates were basic items such as dairy products (69 percent), 
fruits and vegetables (67 percent), and bread (62 percent). 
Other demand-side research in the Middle East suggests 
partially different estimations but confirms the overall 
trend of rapid growth. According to Ipsos, countries such 
as Morocco and Lebanon registered an increase in online 
sales, reaching approximately 40 percent in April 2020. 
(See figure 3.)
In Latin America, changes in demand trends led to a 
shift in sales, as consumers prioritized essential items. 
Categories such as health, consumer packaged goods, 
and toys and games showed strong volume growth, 
exceeding 100 percent year on year in some markets. 
Conversely, growth rates in higher-ticket nonessential 
categories such as auto parts and consumer electron-
ics declined markedly. MercadoLibre experienced an 
increase of 1.7 million active customers a few weeks after 
the crisis. The e-commerce platform has hired 200 direct 
employees and 2,500 third-party contractors since the 
second half of March to strengthen its logistics team and 
cope with a higher volume of deliveries.Across China, the growth in aggregate e-commerce 
sales was lifted by a significant increase in grocery 
sales. China’s largest e-commerce platforms, such as Pin-
duoduo, Alibaba, and JD.com, registered record sales 
during the first quarter of 2020, growing by 44 percent, 
22 percent, and 21 percent, respectively. Alibaba reached 
record annual sales of $1 trillion for the year up to March 
2020, with 726 million active users in the platform. Sales 
for JD.com increased to $300 billion, with a 25 percent 
increase in active customers. Pinduoduo’s annual sales 
increased to $163 billion, with 628 million active custom-
ers. According to McKinsey, growth in online sales was 
driven by essential items such as home cleaning products, 
groceries, and personal care items (Ho et al. 2020).
In the United States, daily downloads of online gro-
cery apps in March and Aprilat Instacart, Walmart Gro-
cery, and Shipt surged 218 percent, 160 percent, and 
124 percent, respectively, compared to mid-February.  
Walmart overhauled the online shopping experience for 
customers, merging its popular grocery app with the 
company’s main app, so shoppers could buy all items (for 
example, food, toys, and tools) in a single app. In April, 
Amazon put new online grocery customers in Amazon 
Fresh and Whole Foods on a waitlist to help workers fulfill 
more online orders, as it was unable to cope with increas-
ing demand despite an increase in capacity by 60 percent. 
Amazon’s waitlist on its online channels ended in mid-May. 
FIGURE 3: Percentage of Adults Using e-Commerce to Purchase Products They Would Normally  
Buy in a Store in Middle Eastern Countries (March–April 2020)
 48%52%58%63%
42% 42%51%
49%
46%
33%36% 36%41%
35%
35%38%
23-Mar 30-Mar 6-Apr 13-Apr
Saudi Arabia UAE Jordan Lebanon Morocco
Source: Ipsos 20209
9.  See full report https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2020-04/COVID-19_mena_consumer_sentiment_tracker_
wave_4_regional_report.pdf Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  13
In India, transactions in payment gateways serving 
e-commerce platforms declined by 30 percent to 40 
percent (Bhalla 2020). e-Commerce platforms like Flip-
kart and Amazon saw reduced sales volumes since the 
national lockdown began, despite a rise in purchases for 
essential everyday items and groceries that were limited 
to large tier 1 cities. This was due to the strict lockdown 
imposed at the national level in India, according to which 
e-commerce platforms and businesses could operate only 
in large cities. The rise in volumes in large cities did not 
offset the loss of sales in tier 2 and tier 3 cities. In gen-
eral, online transactions at e-commerce gateways serving 
smaller online merchants also declined 25–30 percent, 
primarily due to the lockdown and limitations on inter -
state movements of goods. For most consumers outside 
large cities, the purchase of these items shifted to local 
cash-based sources.2.3  Policies Adopted by e-Commerce Platforms to 
Incentivize Usage
To drive participation and usage, e-commerce plat-
forms offered incentives to consumers, workers, and 
entrepreneurs. To ensure business continuity and service 
quality during the crisis, e-commerce platforms adopted 
the following policies to incentivize participation in the 
platforms:
• Waiving fees on essential items
• Using platforms as gateways for the distribution of 
government support
• Organizing contactless deliveries
• Incremental benefits to support workers
• Specialized trainings for sellers12 
10.  For Alibaba, the first quarter of 2020 is the fourth quarter of the fiscal year, which runs from April 1 to March 31. 
11.  Walmart International does business in nine markets: India, China, Japan, Mexico, Chile, Brazil, Argentina, the United Kingdom, and Can-
ada. Flipkart revenues are not reported separately but as part of Walmart International’s business.
12.  Platforms took on a variety of other initiatives during the COVID-19 crisis, including remote working options for staff, sanitization of war -
houses, daily temperature scanning for workers and riders, and several others. These initiatives are not covered in the analysis.TABLE 3:  Growth in Alibaba’s Annual Active Customers (2019–20)
MARCH 
2019DECEMBER 
2019MARCH 
2020NET ADDS
YOY QOQ
Annual active consumers (in millions) 654 711 726 72 15
Source: Alibaba 2020b
TABLE 4: Growth in e-Commerce Sales or Staff
PLATFORM GROWTH IN E-COMMERCE SALES 
Amazon, United States 
(Amazon 2020)• Net sales increased 26 percent to $75.5 billion in the first quarter, compared with $59.7 billion 
in the first quarter of 2019
• Hired an additional 175,000 people in March and April to enhance fulfillment and delivery 
network
Alibaba, China • e-Commerce sales reached a historic landmark of $1 trillion for the fiscal year,10 one-sixth of all 
retail sales in China
Jumia, Africa • Annual active consumers reached 6.4 million, an increase of 51 percent year over year
• Orders reached 6.4 million, an increase of 28 percent year over year
• JumiaPay total payment volume was € 35.5 million, an increase of 71 percent year over year, 
and on-platform total payment volume penetration rose to 19 percent in the first quarter of 
2020, compared with 10 percent in the first quarter of 2019
• JumiaPay transactions reached 2.3 million, an increase of 77 percent year over year, represent-
ing 35 percent on-platform penetration in terms of orders
MercadoLibre, Latin 
America• In the first quarter, net revenues at MercadoLibre reached $652.1 million, up 70.5 percent year 
over year
• The company’s total payment volume reached $8.1 billion, up 82.2 percent year over year,  
and its number of consumers increased 1.7 million in March 2020
• Sales of health products increased 1,100 percent in March 2020
• Hired 200 direct employees and 2,500 third-party contractors since late March
Flipkart, India • Limited Flipkart operations in India hampered growth of e-commerce revenue for Walmart 
international business11 a)  Commission waivers on essential items: Many e-  
commerce platforms supported customers and sell-
ers by reducing commissions and providing fee waiv-
ers on essential items such as face masks and hand 
sanitizers. Jumia, for example, waived commissions 
on essential products as part of their Stay Safe Cam-
paign. In partnership with Reckitt Benckiser, Jumia 
waived its commissions to ensure that essential health 
and hygiene products could be offered without exces-
sive markups. It also encouraged Proctor and Gamble 
and other brands on its platform to extend discounts 
and provide free shipping on essential items to make 
their products more affordable to low-income house-
holds. Jumia also partnered with big brands to sell dis-
counted goods or even to make donations of certain 
critical health products through its platforms. These 
include partnerships covering multiple countries with 
such high-profile fast-moving consumer goods brands 
as Unilever, Proctor and Gamble, Nestle, Beiersdorf, 
and Coca-Cola. In Latin America, MercadoLibre cut 
commissions for essential products and protected con-
sumers from speculative price increases. Commissions 
were eliminated on roughly 1,000 essential products 
for 100,000 merchants, with an understanding that 
purchases of these items would be essential for their 
buyers over the next few months. 
b)  Distribution of government digital vouchers: In 
China, the government played an active role to sup-
port the sector. To stimulate depressed retail sales and 
e-commerce volumes, about 30 local governments 
provided digital coupons through Alipay and WeChat 
Pay to incentivize consumers to make purchases. As 
examples, the city of Hangzhou issued $237 million of 
such coupons. The city of Beijing handed out vouch-
ers worth ¥12.2 billion ($1.73 billion) in June 2020 (Wu 
2020). Alibaba also launched an online shopping fes-
tival with ¥1 billion ($144 million) in spending subsi-
dies to offset the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic 
(Li 2020). As of June 2020, 190 cities in China distrib-
uted to their citizens vouchers that could be used in 
e-commerce platforms. In Brazil, Mercado Pago has 
engaged in discussions with the Brazilian government 
to be able to pay the government’s emergency aid 
of R$600 a month to vulnerable informal workers. As 
the pandemic and ensuing lockdowns has increased 
participation in the digital economy, regulators and 
e-commerce platforms should consider introducing measures such as rapid account opening, simplified 
onboarding processes, and proportional due-dili-
gence processes to facilitate the enrollment of new 
merchants and consumers while ensuring compliance 
with rules on AML/CFT (CGAP 2020).
c)  Increased pay for workers: Numerous platforms 
adopted policies to support workers during the crisis, 
including higher wages, increased overtime pay, and 
heightened health standards. Amazon, for example, 
increased hourly pay for warehouse workers and dou-
bled overtime pay in April and May 2020. In China, 
platforms such as JD.com and Alibaba opened over 
20,000 positions to temporarily hire workers who were 
laid off in other sectors (for example, retail, restaurants, 
hotels, and so forth). In India, no direct discounts were 
provided to consumers in the initial stages as platforms 
were disrupted, but platforms like Flipkart partnered 
with Uber to deliver essential supplies to customers in 
large cities during the crisis. Uber passed on the rev-
enues earned through these rides to their drivers to 
compensate for a decrease in demand for general rid-
ership. Similar initiatives are also being carried out by 
BigBasket and Spencer’s Retail for the last-mile deliv-
ery service in India.
d)  Specialized training for sellers in the platforms: 
e-Commerce platforms supported small businesses 
during the COVID-19 crisis with specialized training 
programs. These programs were targeted primarily at 
existing sellers in the platforms, to help them ensure 
health and safety standards and increase understand-
ing of evolving COVID-related policies linked to 
contactless deliveries, digital payments, and so on. 
For example, in Nigeria, Jumia developed a dedi-
cated COVID-19 page and FAQ on its vendors hub 
addressing questions linked to health and safety, the 
availability of packaging material, and emerging risks, 
such as delays in supply chains and at drop-off cen-
ters, among others.13 The Alibaba Group launched 
the 2020 Spring Thunder Initiative to help MSMEs 
navigate the crisis, including specialized training pro-
grams for export-focused MSMEs and selected man-
ufacturing clusters, and the development of 1,000 
Alibaba digitized agricultural centers across China 
(Zhang 2020). Box 2 provides an overview of regu-
lar training programs provided by e-commerce plat-
forms to entrepreneurs. 
13. “COVID-19 FAQ,” Jumia Seller Hub (accessed April 2, 2020), https://vendorhub.jumia.com.ng/covid-19-faq.14  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 PandemicMore research is needed to assess the availability 
and quality of training programs aiming to pro-
mote digital skills in marginalized segments of 
the economy. Most training programs encountered 
in the research aimed at helping entrepreneurs cope 
with increased health risks and challenges caused by 
supply-chains disruptions. However, these programs 
were aimed at entrepreneurs who were already 
part the platform and needed support to cope with 
emerging issues. There seem to be few initiatives, 
either government-led or platform-led, that aimed 
to improve digital skills and promote participation of 
marginalized entrepreneurs in e-commerce platforms, 
particularly youth, women, and rural entrepreneurs. 
Reaching more marginal segments is likely to require 
increased efforts and joint initiatives that have a pri-
mary goal of expanding economic inclusion. 
Some of the largest e-commerce platforms invested 
in training sellers as part of their growth strategy. 
In order to help sellers optimize their participation 
and knowledge of how e-commerce platforms work, 
some of the largest platforms have developed train-
ing materials and initiatives, using different channels 
to help sellers understand how e-commerce works, 
build online marketing strategies and communication 
skills, and ultimately increase sales and customer sat-
isfaction. All of these training programs are platform 
specific; hence, they have the key goal of increasing 
seller retention and service quality. Some, however, 
have more of a developmental focus. Below is a brief 
description of training programs encountered in the 
research:BOX 2
Improving Digital Skills to Expand Participation of Small Businesses in  
e-Commerce Platforms
• Alibaba’s TaoBao Villages/TaoBao University: 
Over the past few years, Alibaba’s Rural Taobao 
Program has promoted e-commerce in rural areas, 
encouraging rural returnees to engage in e-com-
merce activities and establishing “incubators” at 
the village level. According to Alibaba, by 2018 it 
had established tens of thousands of village-level 
service stations. The program provides training in 
e-commerce through 11 training centers through-
out the country and provides online e-commerce 
training courses for self-learning by entrepreneurs. 
It also supports rural financial services, such as 
online payment, digital credit loans, insurance, 
and other financial services. Furthermore, Taobao 
University built 11 e-commerce training bases 
across China and produced a series of online 
e-commerce training courses for self-learning 
(World Bank 2019).  
• Jumia University:14 Jumia offers training mod-
ules, both online and offline, to support sellers in 
the platform. In Nigeria, these trainings are pro-
vided on a weekly basis and cover a wide range of 
e-commerce topics, such as marketing, sales, and 
communication, and include specific modules on 
Jumia’s operations, such as how to list products, 
managing shipping, and understanding account 
statements.
• Universidad MercadoLibre (MercadoLibre 2016): 
MercadoLibre conducts training initiatives that 
focus on attracting and expanding the digital skills 
of sellers. The platform organizes such events as 
“MercadoLibre Universities” and seller meetings 
in a variety of countries, giving full-day sessions to 
advanced users who want to improve their selling 
skills on the platform.  
14.  “Jumia University,” Jumia Seller Hub (accessed June 19, 2017), https://vendorhub.jumia.com.ng/university. Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  1515. Data collected in an interview in April 2020.
16. “Amazon PayCode Frequently Asked Questions,” https://www.amazon.com/b?ie=UTF8&node=19449282011.
17. “What Is Fawry Pay?” (accessed August 14, 2020), https://fawry.com/fawrypaymerchant.
18. MercadoLibre first-quarter 2020 earnings report.3.  TOWARD INCLUSIVE DIGITAL 
ECONOMIES? ASSESSING  
PARTICIPATION OF UNDER-
SERVED SEGMENTS IN  
E-COMMERCE 
3.1 Participation of Low-Income Consumers 
Several e-commerce platforms registered an increase 
in first-time users, indicating an expansion of the cus-
tomer base making online purchases. However, low-in-
come households still seem to be out of reach. Many 
of the largest e-commerce platforms, such as Amazon, 
Jumia, MercadoLibre, and Alibaba, confirmed that par -
ticipation by first-time consumers has increased distinctly 
since the onset of the pandemic, indicating an expansion 
among segments that were not using e-commerce previ-
ously. However, data on the customer profiles is limited, 
and discussions with industry experts suggest that this 
increased penetration is limited primarily to high- and 
middle-income segments and mostly excludes the low-
est-income segments and rural households. This is due to 
a combination of factors, including wealthier segments’ 
higher familiarity with digital platforms, higher disposable 
income to face additional costs, such as transport costs, 
access to Internet data and smartphones, and digital liter -
acy, among others. It is important to monitor the expan-
sion of e-commerce in the near future, as the rapid market 
developments may draw new lines of inclusion and exclu-
sion to the digital economy and digital financial services. 
One of the strategies implemented by platforms is to 
seek increased geographical coverage and expand the 
product mix, with increased focus on essential and low-
cost items. In Africa, for example, Jumia has expanded its 
focus on day-to-day essentials and on second-tier cities. 
Jumia has traditionally aimed to offer a range of prod-
ucts to all income segments, including low-income and 
lower middle-income segments, by offering small-ticket-
size items to drive volumes and repeat purchases. Since 
the end of 2019, Jumia also built a new strategy to focus 
on fast-moving consumer goods and everyday essential 
items. Jumia does not have data on the income profile 
of its customers, but it observed that sales of items typi-
cally sold to low-income segments, such as phone credit, 
did not dip during the recent crisis. Jumia’s focus on small 
towns and rural areas is considerable; 25 percent of pack-
ages are delivered in second-tier cities and rural areas.15 Jumia has also taken special measures to protect low-in-
come consumers from price gouging by monitoring the 
prices of about 1,000 essential products in each country 
and taking down offending product listings. 
Similarly, platforms in China invested outside of the main 
urban centers. Alibaba has invested heavily to increase 
penetration in lower-tier cities, where e-commerce use 
is currently only about 40 percent of the volume in 
larger cities. The e-commerce platform Pinduoduo, with 
its “social shopping” model, and JD.com’s Jingxi app 
already cater to lower-income segments by allowing 
them to team up with cheaper bulk orders and obtain 
shipping and price discounts. However, these platforms 
reported issues with sales to these segments due to 
delivery and sourcing hurdles.
To reach new customers, platforms also improved the 
online shopping experience by developing dedicated 
apps and offering simplified payment solutions. In the 
United States, the number of first-time users increased 
by 25 percent. Many of these consumers are low-income 
households that normally prefer brick-and-mortar shop-
ping experiences. Walmart has invested in improving 
services for this segment, developing an omnichannel 
e-commerce shopping experience at competitive prices 
that helps fend off competition from other e-commerce 
platforms and retain its market share for this segment 
(Greene and Bhattarai 2019). Amazon has its PayCode 
product for low-income segments that were previously not 
e-commerce users. This payment option allows cash-ori-
ented consumers to shop first and get a QR code PayCode 
at checkout, which they use at a Western Union agent to 
pay with cash.16 In Egypt, Fawry provides an e-payment 
solution through its network of over 100,000 service points 
(for example, automated-teller machines, mobile wallets, 
retail shops, and so forth) in over 300 cities.17 
Similarly, in Latin America and India, first-time users of 
e-commerce platforms increased. In Latin America, quar-
antines and shelter-at-home orders have forced many 
people to try the platform out of necessity. Unique active 
users on MercadoLibre grew 30.9 percent in the first quar -
ter of 2020, reaching 43.2 million.18 Most of the growth 
came during the first few weeks of the lockdowns, when 
consumers had to adjust their shopping habits. In India, 
platforms increased penetration in lower-income seg-
ments. Prior to the national lockdowns starting in March 
2020, both Amazon and Flipkart saw 50–80 percent 16  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  17
growth in new lower-income segments, as more consum-
ers in smaller cities gained access to faster Internet and 
there was wider penetration of smartphones (Sen 2018). 
Efforts to improve penetration included investments in 
infrastructure, financing, and the launch of a local-lan-
guage version of the app. Amazon Easy stores in small 
towns also helped improve the shopping experience for 
customers not familiar with e-commerce. Like the situation 
in the rest of India, sales to this segment were impeded by 
lockdown restrictions.
3.2 Participation of MSMEs 
The participation of MSMEs in platforms increased 
during the pandemic. Available data on the number of 
new registrations of MSMEs in e-commerce platforms is 
limited. Many platforms reportedly registered an accel-
eration in participation of MSMEs selling essential items, 
both with new registrations and with increased participa-
tion of MSME who already had an existing account, as 
traditional brick-and-mortar businesses with limited or no 
e-commerce presence are moving quickly to embrace 
digital commerce. Nevertheless, rigid lockdown policies 
in countries such as India restricted online commerce and 
had a negative short-term effect on the participation of 
MSMEs in e-commerce. After the prolonged lockdown, 
it is still unclear whether small businesses will have the 
capacity and resources to fully integrate online sales as 
part of their growth strategy.
In China, participation of small businesses in e-com-
merce platforms grew in rural and poverty-stricken 
counties. According to the government, in the first quar -
ter of 2020, online commerce in poverty-stricken counties 
grew faster than the national average for rural areas. Chi-
na’s has over 800 poverty-stricken counties. According to 
data from the Ministry of Commerce, poor counties regis-
tered online sales of ¥56.6 billion (about $8.02 billion) in 
the first quarter, up 5 percent year on year. The pace is 1.9 
percentage points higher than the average growth of Chi-
na’s rural areas. Sales of agricultural products from these 
poor counties through e-commerce platforms surged 49.7 
percent to ¥8.32 billion in the three-month period (Xinhua 
2020). This was made possible by improvements to the 
logistics value chain that allowed agricultural products to 
move from remote areas to markets faster.
Alibaba’s group experienced a 719 percent increase in 
first-time users in their Taobao Live channel. The chan-
nel allows stores to engage with customers in live-stream-
ing sessions. As physical stores shut down, live streaming 
allowed businesses to maintain customer relationships 
through alternative marketing channels. In early February, 
Taobao Live removed barriers for new merchants to join the service, waiving all service fees. This encouraged mer -
chants and traditional brick-and-mortar stores to use Tao-
bao live-streaming technology to engage with customers 
and make up for losses incurred during the COVID-19 cri-
sis. As a result, the number of merchants utilizing Taobao 
Live for the first time surged 719 percent in February com-
pared to January (Alibaba 2020a), and the level of engage-
ment continued in the following months (Robbins 2020).
In Latin America, e-commerce platforms registered 
increased participation of MSMEs. To facilitate the tran-
sition from offline to omnichannel, MercadoLibre reduced 
listing fees for new sellers. This also helped stimulate the 
depth of assortments on its marketplaces. According to 
the Brazilian Electronic Commerce Association, more than 
80,000 retailers shifted to online sales between March and 
April 2020 through several platforms (Abcomm 2020).
In India, the extended national lockdown had negative 
effects on the economy and prevented small businesses 
from participating in e-commerce platforms. Even 
before the pandemic struck, both Flipkart and Amazon 
were actively recruiting MSME sellers on their platform. 
Amazon intended to invest a billion dollars in India to 
promote the participation of MSMEs in the e-commerce 
platform and expand the digital economy. Nevertheless, 
Amazon’s entry in the Indian market faced unprecedented 
protests from the small business community and received 
a generally cold reception from the political class (Govin-
darajan, Srivastava, and Enache 2020). The government 
introduced a set of regulations in December 2018 that 
prohibit e-commerce platforms from marketing products 
from sellers in which they have an equity stake. In Feb-
ruary 2019, the government introduced data localization 
laws that disadvantage international players in the Indian 
market (Kass n.d.). After the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, 
the government’s national lockdown restricted e-com-
merce deliveries to essential products and shut down ser -
vice deliveries, malls, and market complexes. At the time 
of writing, the lockdown is still in effect, but the removal of 
all restrictions on online retail is planned as part of India’s 
Lockdown 4.0 from May 31, 2020.
3.3  “Second-Generation” e-Commerce Platforms 
for Underserved Segments
In addition to causing disruptions to large e-commerce 
platforms, the COVID-19 crisis also opened opportuni-
ties for new and niche platforms employing innovative 
business models and catering to segments tradition-
ally excluded from large e-commerce platforms. While 
some platforms emerged directly as a response to the 
COVID-19 crisis to support local businesses affected by 
the lockdown, other digital platforms were established 18  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
before the crisis and recently expanded their business 
models to include the sale of grocery and essential items. 
This segment is largely heterogenous and fast evolving; 
hence, this study does not aim to provide a comprehen-
sive analysis or taxonomy. Rather, the objective is to look 
at case studies and to discuss how different players are 
leveraging digital channels to target segments that are 
traditionally underserved. 
We observed the following three trends:
First, new platforms are gaining traction in sectors 
where large-scale platforms have failed to achieve 
widespread coverage, including agricultural value 
chains. In particular, in Sub-Saharan Africa, digital plat-
forms such as Twiga Foods in Kenya and FarmCrowdy 
in Nigeria have supported agricultural supply chains to 
leverage digital platform to access markets. 
• In Kenya, Twiga Foods is a mobile-based busi-
ness-to-business marketplace connecting over 17,000 
farmers to over 8,000 small- and medium-size vendors 
in agricultural value chains. Since the onset of the 
COVID-19 crisis, Twiga Foods expanded its focus from 
business to business to business to consumer, partner -
ing with Jumia Kenya to sell baskets of assorted fruits 
and vegetables directly to consumers. Twiga leverages 
M-Pesa to enable mobile payments, and it also piloted 
a blockchain-based digital credit product in partner -
ship with IBM Research. 
• In Nigeria, FarmCrowdy is an agritech platform oper -
ating a network of over 800 aggregation centers and 
sourcing produce from over 25,000 small-scale farmers 
since it started in 2016. The platform does not deal 
with farmers on an individual basis; rather, it selects 
crops and locations to invest in and then engages with 
farmers associations or community leaders to enter 
into commercial agreements. Once farmers and crops 
are identified, FarmCrowdy provides inputs such as 
seeds and fertilizers as well as technical support to indi-
vidual farmers. FarmCrowdy registered a 20 percent 
increase in the first quarter of 2020 compared to the 
same period in 2019 due to the increased interest of 
consumers in online commerce solutions. FarmCrowdy 
also provides a link to a sister crowdfunding platform 
called CrowdInvest, in which individual investors can 
fund FarmCrowdy initiatives. The platform’s ultimate 
buyers can be large-scale firms, including both those 
in Nigeria and international importers, as well as indi-
vidual consumers in the local market. The target seg-
ment among local consumers are skilled members of the working class and the lower middle class, espe-
cially those who are tech savvy and relatively better 
educated. 
Second, new business models are emerging due to the 
convergence of ride-hailing apps, e-commerce provid-
ers, mobile-money platforms, and social media. (See 
Box 3.) The research shows that convergence between 
different business models is growing; platforms that ini-
tially focused on transports, logistics, or mobile payments 
are expanding operations and providing e-commerce 
functionalities.
• In Uganda, SafeBoda operated since 2014 as a 
ride-hailing platform for motorbike taxis. In April 2020, 
Safeboda announced a partnership with the United 
Nations Capital Development Fund to provide an 
e-commerce platform to connect over 800 small-scale 
market vendors and 300 merchants to consumers 
using the fleet of motorbike taxis available on the plat-
form. Safeboda in 2017 introduced a prepaid digital 
wallet that can be topped up via mobile money and 
enables access to discounts, among other benefits. 
In partnership with Finca Uganda, Safeboda provides 
a dedicated savings-and-loan account for drivers to 
purchase the motorbikes, but the platform has yet to 
develop a lending product for e-commerce vendors. 
The loan product uses Safeboda’s know-your-customer 
(KYC) and transaction data to enable identification and 
credit scoring of prospective borrowers. 
• In Kenya the platform Sendy expanded its business 
proposition from providing transportation services, 
such as cargo and lorries, to delivering basic items such 
as groceries, produce, drinks, and gas from outlets that 
have signed up with the service. So far, Sendy Go has 
signed up one of Kenya’s large supermarkets, Naivas, 
and a fruits and vegetables market (Ngara Market). 
The service enables small-scale vendors to sell their 
basic fresh products via the app. For payments, the 
app leverages the M-Pesa mobile-money platform.
• In Ethiopia, the Belcash group in 2019 established 
a new platform called Helloomarket that embeds 
its mobile-money solution HelloCash. Helloomar -
ket is in its early stages, and as of May 2020 it had 
signed up approximately 1,000 vendors, 300 of 
which approached the platform after the onset of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Women reportedly represent 
approximately 70 percent of sellers and 45 percent 
of consumers in the platform; most of them are 25 to 
35 years of age. The platform facilitates deliveries at 
the national level, using local transportation such as  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  19
motorbikes and taxis in Addis Ababa, and the post 
system for deliveries outside the capital. According to 
the platform, over 50 percent of its deliveries so far 
have been conducted outside the capital. 
• In India, Dunzo works on a similar business model: cus-
tomers can create a list of whatever tasks they need to 
get done, including picking up and dropping off, send-
ing packages, and ordering food, groceries, medicines, 
or bike taxis. Delivery is available 24 hours a day, seven 
days a week in most of the urban areas it operates in, 
and orders are delivered within 60 minutes.
Third, evidence is growing of partnerships between 
fintech platforms and local markets to promote micro-
enterprises to expand online sales during the times of 
crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic triggered initiatives to 
help local stores and producers leverage digital channels 
to survive the pandemic. Most of these initiatives are in 
their initial stages, and it is unclear whether they will con-
solidate into viable and financially sustainable platforms in the years to come. Nevertheless, they show the increased 
interest of MSMEs to participate in the digital economy19 
• In Brazil, for example, the fintech platform Stone, in 
partnership with the digital platform Collact, devel-
oped an initiative called Compre Local that allows 
customers to locate and buy items from the small 
businesses in their neighborhoods.20 The platform 
introduced a simplified payment solution, whereby 
entrepreneurs can produce a payment link and send 
it via SMS or WhatsApp to customers, who can then 
complete the payment from their phone. 
• In Nigeria and Kenya, the PSP Flutterwave has set up 
an e-commerce portal called Flutterwave Store to help 
brick-and-mortar businesses respond to the COVID-
19 crisis. The platform allows businesses to set up 
online shops with relatively simple steps, and it pro-
vides access to a digital payments solution. Businesses 
can also access delivery services from partners such as 
Sendbox in Nigeria and Sendy in Kenya.21 
TABLE 5:  Examples of New and Niche Platforms That Employ Innovative Business Models and Focus on Traditionally  
Underserved Segments
COUNTRY PLATFORM MAIN FOCUS PAYMENT METHODS CREDIT COVID-19 RESPONSE
Kenya Twiga Foods Agriculture (business 
to business)Mobile money Digital credit (piloted 
with IBM Research)Launched business-to-consumer 
solution in partnership with 
Jumia
Kenya Sendy Transport, deliveries, 
logistics (business to 
business)Mobile money - Launched grocery deliveries 
in partnership with stores and 
supermarkets
Nigeria FarmCrowdy Agriculture Cash on delivery, mobile 
money Linked to crowd-
funding platform 
CrowdInvestIncreased demand to partic-
ipate in the platform. Had to 
discontinue mobile payments 
due to disruption in agency 
network
Kenya/
NigeriaFlutterwave Payments Online payments - Launched Flutterwave Market 
to help MSMEs digitize their 
business
Uganda SafeBoda Motorbike taxis Prepaid e-wallet, cash on 
deliveryLoan for motorbike 
purchases in part-
nership with Finca 
UgandaLaunched grocery and restau-
rant deliveries via motorbike 
taxi fleet
Ethiopia Helloomarket General merchandise Mobile money, cash on 
delivery, deposits at agents 
or bank branchesPlans to partner 
with banks for credit 
productIncreased interest from vendors 
and sale of essential items
Brazil Compre Local Local grocery stores 
and restaurantsPayment link via SMS and 
WhatsApp- Started to support local 
businesses affected by the 
lockdown
19.  Another newly emerging platform in India called bharatemarket.in, focused on kirana stores, was launched by the Confederation of All India 
Traders during the pandemic. The platform has signed up 6,300 retailers in 90 cities and will levy no commission on sellers and no delivery 
charges on consumers once it begins taking orders. The platform has been announced in 2020 but has not yet launched.
20.  See https://cuidedopequenonegocio.com.br (in Portuguese).
21.  The Flutterwave Store has a pan-African focus and is available in all African countries. In Kenya and Nigeria, it has also partnered with the 
delivery firms Sendbox and Sendy (Salaudeen 2020).20  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 crisis has accelerated innovation 
around integration of e-commerce and social media 
platforms. Although an in-depth analysis is beyond 
the scope of this paper, it is important to acknowledge 
key trends and opportunities for further research. 
Social media platforms developing payment 
functionalities
WeChat, a leading Chinese social media platform 
and the fifth most-used platform globally, developed 
WeChat Pay, which is used to pay for goods and ser -
vices at merchant stores, within merchant apps, and 
on the web. Additionally, merchants can offer loyalty 
cards and coupons to their customers through the 
WeChat app. WeChat Pay has an average of 800 mil-
lion active users monthly and processes an average of 
one billion transactions monthly. Forced to close down 
all of its stores in Wuhan, cosmetics company Lin Qin-
gxuan shifted to WeChat and realized a 200 percent 
increase in sales (Williams 2020). During the pandemic, 
local governments in China leveraged WeChat Pay to 
distribute stimulus relief vouchers to encourage imme-
diate spending, thereby jumpstarting the economy. In 
the first quarter of 2020, it is estimated that WeChat 
Pay accounted for 39 percent of China’s mobile pay-
ment market of $7.7 trillion (Hong 2020). 
As of February 2020, WhatsApp had over two 
billion users globally. In 2018 WhatsApp launched 
WhatsApp Business to connect small businesses with 
subscribers. WhatsApp Pay, developed to enable 
financial transactions on the social media platform, 
was piloted in India in February. The National Pay-
ments Corporation of India has now granted a 
phased access to the Indian market. The first phase 
targets 10 million users. It is believed that Facebook’s 
partnership with Reliance Jio’s e-commerce platform 
JioMart would tap into the wide subscriber base held 
by Facebook (about 270 million subscribers) and 
WhatsApp in India. 
Partnerships, mergers, and acquisitions of 
e-commerce and social media platforms
Brick-and-mortar and e-commerce merchants have 
utilized social media platforms primarily as advertising 
channels. Typically, interested consumers would place BOX 3
The Growing Role of Social Media Platforms in e-Commerce
orders for products on a social media platform, and 
they would then pay for the orders in cash on deliv-
ery, or they would be redirected to the merchant’s 
website to complete payment. Following the expo-
nential growth of e-commerce as a result of the pan-
demic, social media platforms have shown increasing 
interest in venturing into e-commerce. In May 2020 
Facebook partnered with Shopify, BigCommerce, 
WooCommerce, and several other e-commerce plat-
forms to give small businesses the opportunity to 
expand their online presence through a new function-
ality called “Facebook Shops.” The service aims to 
allow businesses to create online stores on Facebook 
and Instagram for free and to connect with customers 
through WhatsApp, Messenger, or Instagram Direct 
(Facebook for Business 2020). Customers can place 
an order and make a payment either through the 
newly introduced “Checkout” option without leav-
ing the app (only in the United States), or they are 
redirected to the website of the business (Facebook 
2020). In India, PayU, a digital payment tech com-
pany, has made it possible for merchants to leverage 
Facebook, Twitter, and WhatsApp to reach customers 
and complete transactions through a PayU-enabled 
payments link in real time. In Italy, Nexi, a leading 
paytech company, started offering its merchants free 
use of its pay-by-link service, which enables consum-
ers to make hassle-free payments via social networks, 
e-mail, and text. 
Regulatory challenges and consumer concerns
The growing presence of social media in the e-com-
merce ecosystem has raised concerns and challenges 
from regulators. For example, Brazilian regulators sus-
pended WhatsApp payments a week after its launch 
citing anticompetitive concerns arising from Face-
book’s partnership with card processor Cielo (Mon-
dato 2020). In India, it took two years for WhatsApp 
to receive regulatory approval by the National Pay-
ments Corporation of India for a phased rollout of 
their payment product (PYMNTS 2020). The delay 
was due to compliance issues with India’s data-pro-
cessing and data-localization rules (Kalra 2019). More 
research is required to understand the risks posed by 
social media platforms playing a role in digital pay-
ments and e-commerce. Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  21
4.  THE ROLE OF DIGITAL FINANCIAL 
SERVICES IN E-COMMERCE
4.1  Overview of Payments and Credit Products 
via e-Commerce Platforms
Financial services such as payments and credit are 
increasingly being embedded in e-commerce platforms 
through a variety of business models. All of the largest 
e-commerce platforms introduced payment and credit 
solutions for sellers and buyers. The product proposition 
is diverse, and the level of penetration is closely linked 
to the quality of the regulatory frameworks and financial 
infrastructure. Many impediments to the use of e-pay-
ments are linked to the lack of efficiency and interop-
erability of the national payment systems, poor agent 
network infrastructure, or outdated and poorly structured 
regulatory frameworks. Some of these obstacles are 
linked to restrictions on the establishment of non-bank 
payment providers, disproportional KYC requirements, or 
other barriers to entry. 
In the United States, Amazon developed both payment 
and credit solutions for customers and sellers in the 
platform. On the credit side, Amazon Lending22 provides 
short-term business loans to sellers in the platform; loan 
amounts vary from $1,000 to $750,000, and annual inter -
est rates range from 6 percent to 16 percent (Megaw , 
2019). Amazon prequalifies sellers depending on their 
transaction history and track record on the platform, and 
it may require additional documentation as part of its cus-
tomer due diligence. Amazon does not use traditional 
financial information such as credit scores to determine the 
seller’s eligibility for their loan products. As such, it can be 
an attractive option for sellers who have a low credit rating 
and don’t qualify for other small business loans (McIntyre 
2020). However, it also means that positive repayment his-
tories are not shared outside of the platform, affecting sell-
ers’ ability to improve their credit ratings and access loans 
from other institutions. After the fast growth of the pro-
gram in 2015 and 2016, the total volume of lending seems 
to have stalled. According to the 2017 and 2018 annual 
reports, the program’s outstanding credit was estimated 
at $692 million in 2017 and $710 million in 2018 (Amazon 
2018), but the most recent annual report (2019) does not 
provide updates on the volume of lending.23 On the payment side, Amazon provides its payment solu-
tion Amazon Pay in 18 countries in Europe and the United 
States. Amazon has also recently piloted a new type of 
credit card for low-income consumers trying to establish 
or rebuild their credit called Amazon Credit Builder. To 
obtain it, consumers deposit funds, and the amount they 
deposit becomes their credit limit. The downside is that 
its 28.2 percent interest rate is much higher than 25 per -
cent, the median rate for retail cards (Greene and Bhatta-
rai 2019).
In China, Ant Financial was established in 2014 as a 
spinoff of the Alibaba Group and within five years 
became the world’s biggest fintech, reaching over a 
billion users. Ant Financial’s operations started in 2014, 
when the Alibaba Group rebranded its flagship payment 
product Alipay as “Ant Financial,” focusing on expand-
ing the product proposition to Chinese consumers and 
MSMEs. As of 2020, Ant Financial provides an extraordi-
nary variety of financial products to its customers. In addi-
tion to its core mobile payment platform Alipay (mobile 
wallet and payment app), Ant Financial provides Huabei 
(a virtual credit card), Jeibei (consumer loan services), 
MYbank (a cloud-based private bank), Ant Insurance 
(mobile-based insurance products), ZOLOZ (a biometric 
identity-verification platform), Ant Fortune (a wealth-man-
agement app), and Zhima Credit (credit-scoring services, 
among others). As of 2020, Ant Financial had over a billion 
customers, more than 10 times as many customers as the 
largest US banks—with less than 10 percent the number 
of employees (Iansiti and Lakhani 2020). 
In Africa, Jumia introduced both lending and payment 
solutions to its customers and MSMEs. Jumia Lending 
offers loans to sellers on the Jumia Platform in Nigeria, 
Kenya, Ivory Coast, and Egypt. In almost all countries, 
Jumia lends in partnership with licensed financial insti-
tutions such as Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) or banks. 
Jumia acts as a facilitator that originates the loan appli-
cation on behalf of the seller and provides data related 
to the creditworthiness of the seller based on their trans-
action history on the platform. Kenya is the only country 
where contract law allows the platform to lend directly 
to sellers. In the future, Jumia plans to provide scoring 
data in anonymized form to potential lenders and display 
the pre-approved offers directly on the Jumia seller plat-
form. Jumia also offers the payment solution Jumia Pay,24 
which offers consumers an option to link a digital wallet 
22.  There is limited official information on Amazon’s credit product. The study uses primarily media reports and information that sellers shared 
in online platforms such as https://sellercentral.amazon.com/ and on the product page https://sell.amazon.com/programs/amazon-lending.
html.
23.  According to media reports, Amazon Lending entered into a partnership with Bank of America for its lending program (Kim 2018). 
24.  As of March 31, 2020, JumiaPay was live in 7 of the 11 markets in which Jumia operates: Nigeria, Egypt, Morocco, Ivory Coast, Ghana, 
Kenya, and Tunisia.22  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
with credit cards or bank accounts either directly or via 
third-party aggregators for countries with large volumes 
of payments. Jumia currently does not offer full e-wallet 
functionalities in any of its markets. For example, in Nige-
ria and Egypt, e-wallets are provided through agreements 
with licensed banks, providing cashback and top-up 
options similar to vouchers whose primary purpose is to 
encourage consumer loyalty. Funds cannot be withdrawn 
or transferred from JumiaPay except for customer refunds, 
but they can be used for future purchases on the plat-
form.25 In Nigeria and Egypt, 54 percent of orders placed 
on the platform in the fourth quarter of 2018 were com-
pleted using JumiaPay. The payment solution complies 
with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard 
(PCI DSS). 
Similarly, in Latin America, MercadoLibre offers pay-
ment and credit solutions in most countries of oper -
ation. Mercado Pago is a stand-alone digital payment 
platform used by consumers and businesses in Latin 
America to send, receive, and finance payments online. It 
was originally created as an online payments solution inte-
grated into MercadoLibre but has since expanded its ser -
vices to include other e-commerce merchants. Mercado 
Crédito offers credit to sellers on MercadoLibre and to 
customers using Mercado Pago in Brazil, Argentina, and 
Mexico. MercadoLibre has provided more than $610 mil-
lion in working-capital credit lines to more than 270,000 
companies in Latin America and offered around $200 mil-
lion in consumer loans. A brief summary of the main payments and credit prod-
ucts is provided in table 7.
4.2  Regulatory Enablers for Financial Services via 
e-Commerce Platforms
As e-commerce business models have evolved, the 
role of intermediaries has expanded rapidly to provide 
financial services that would typically be handled by 
regulated PSPs. These service providers or intermediar -
ies include non-bank financial institutions and businesses 
that previously did not issue any financial products (for 
example, e-money digital wallets) or handle transactions 
on behalf of the regulated PSPs (for example, e-com-
merce aggregators). Regulators need to be aware of 
emerging risks within the e-commerce ecosystem due 
to unregulated intermediaries issuing financial products 
and/or providing services or moving funds on behalf of 
merchants or regulated PSPs. 
New types of non-bank financial institutions are intro-
ducing new types of risks in the e-commerce ecosys-
tem. While no global e-commerce regulatory framework 
has been commonly agreed upon, awareness of emerg-
ing non-bank players within the e-commerce ecosystem 
and potential risks posed by them is a good starting 
point for developing a national-level regulatory frame-
work. The potential risks to the financial ecosystem 
include the following:
• Credit and liquidity risks may arise if the intermediary 
responsible for collecting funds on behalf of the mer -
chant fails to transfer funds to the merchant account. 
• Operational and reputation risks may also arise due to 
operational and security disruptions, resulting in repu-
tation risk for merchants. 
• Cyber risks in the form of data breaches may result 
in loss of funds or the stealing of sensitive consumer 
information. 
• Consumer-protection risks due to loss of consumer 
funds and the lack of recourse mechanisms for charge-
backs and refunds. Consumers also face privacy and 
data-protection risks.
e-Commerce platforms must comply with country-level 
regulatory frameworks for the provision of payments 
and e-wallets services and credit products. Payment 
and credit products provided by different platforms must 
25.  Form F-1 (accessed June 11, 2020), https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1756708/000119312519071692/d650749df1.htm. 
26.  “Key Figures on Mercado Crédito in Latin America as of December 2019,” Statista (accessed June 11, 2020), https://www.statista.com/
statistics/1114939/latin-america-mercado-credito.TABLE 6: Mercado Credito Volumes and  
Value of Lending since 2016
Countries of operation 3
Number of borrowers (thousands) 270
Working capital to sellers (US$, 
millions)610
Consumer loans (US$, millions) 200
Source: Statista26 Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  23
TABLE 7: Credit and Payment Products Provided by e-Commerce Platforms
CREDIT PAYMENT
Amazon 
(United States)Amazon Lending offers short-term credit to qualified sellers in 
the platform so that they can finance additional inventory to 
sell through the Amazon marketplace. The Amazon Lending 
platform does not check credit ratings, and loans are provided 
on an invitation-only basis to sellers who have reached a certain 
milestone. Amounts range from $1,000 to $750,000. Amazon Pay is an online payment method that uses the payment 
methods stored in a customer’s Amazon account to pay for 
goods and services on Amazon or other websites accepting 
Amazon Pay. 
Alibaba (China) Alibaba’s affiliate company Ant Financial provides a variety of 
loan products to MSMEs, including virtual credit cards, con -
sumer loan services, and full cloud-based banking solutions (that 
is, MYbank). In the United States, as part of a program called 
Pay Later, it provides loans to MSMEs up to $150,000 with 
Kabbage, using big data and machine learning.Alipay is a digital wallet that allows users to pay using a mobile 
app, online (Alibaba and other websites), and at POS terminals. 
Jumia (Africa) Jumia Lending offers loans to sellers on the Jumia platform. 
These are provided by MFIs or banks, and Jumia acts as a facil -
itator that originates the loan application on behalf of the seller 
and provides data related to the creditworthiness of the seller 
based on their transaction history on the platform. The lender 
may do additional due diligence. Financial services are currently 
available to sellers in Nigeria, Kenya, Ivory Coast, and Egypt. 
There are plans to provide the scoring data in an anonymized 
form to potential lenders and display the pre-approved offers 
directly on the Jumia seller platform in the future.Jumia Pay27 offers consumers an option to link a digital wallet 
with credit cards or bank accounts via third-party aggregators. 
Jumia currently does not offer full e-wallet functionalities in any of 
its markets. In Nigeria and Egypt, e-wallets are provided through 
agreements with licensed banks, providing cashback and top-up 
options similar to vouchers whose primary purpose is to encour -
age consumer loyalty. Funds cannot be withdrawn or transferred 
from JumiaPay except for customer refunds, but they can be used 
for future purchases on the platform.28 In Nigeria and Egypt, 54 
percent of orders placed on the platform in the fourth quarter of 
2018 were completed using JumiaPay.
MercadoLibre 
(Latin America)Mercado Crédito offers credit to sellers on MercadoLibre and 
to customers using Mercado Pago in Brazil, Argentina, and 
Mexico. It has provided more than $610 million in working-capi -
tal credit lines to more than 270,000 companies in Latin America 
and offered around $200 million in consumer loans.Mercado Pago is a stand-alone digital payment platform used by 
consumers and businesses in Latin America to send, receive, and 
finance payments online. It was originally created as an online 
payment solution integrated into MercadoLibre but has since 
expanded its services to include other e-commerce merchants. 
Flipkart (India) The Flipkart MSME loan program is called Loan  
Capital; MSME sellers can obtain loans up to $400,000 at an 
interest rate of 9.5 percent for a period up to 12 months. About 
100,000 sellers are eligible for this through loans from 10 banks 
and non-bank financial institutions. Flipkart is currently in the 
process of applying for a non-bank financial company license.Flipkart’s digital wallet PhonePe is a bank account–backed digital 
wallet integrated with India’s Unified Payment Interface, allowing 
users to transact directly from their bank account and not store 
funds in their mobile wallet. Customers get cash back when 
using this wallet for shopping.
Twiga Foods 
(Kenya)Twiga is currently piloting its own short-term credit solution for 
vendors and engaging with financial institutions to partner on a 
credit product.Uses Safaricom’s M-Pesa platform.
FarmCrowdy 
(Nigeria)Linked to crowdfunding platform FarmInvest. The separation 
of the crowdfunding and e-commerce platforms is due to an 
ongoing initiative to regulate crowdfunding in Nigeria.Uses mobile payments and cash. Mobile payments were discon -
tinued during the COVID-19 pandemic due to the disruption of 
the agent network infrastructure.
27.  As of March 31, 2020, JumiaPay was live in 7 of the 1 1 markets in which Jumia operates: Nigeria, Egypt, Morocco, Ivory Coast, Ghana, 
Kenya, and Tunisia.
28.  Form F-1 (accessed June 11, 2020), https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1756708/000119312519071692/d650749df1.htm.
29.  Form F-1 (accessed June 11, 2020), https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1756708/000119312519071692/d650749df1.htm.comply with diverse regulatory frameworks in different 
countries and evolving licensing requirements. Uncer -
tainty around regulatory requirements is perceived to be a 
key risk for platforms in emerging markets and developing 
economies. Simplified KYC requirements for onboarding 
of MSME sellers and streamlined requirements for pro-
viding credit and payment services are needed for these 
platforms to expand. 4.2.1  Licensing Requirements for e-Wallets, Payments, 
and Credit
According to Jumia’s investor’s prospectus, inconsis-
tency in the country-level financial regulations is a key 
risk for the platform and a reason for consumers’ lack 
of trust in digital financial services.29 Among the key risk 
factors, Jumia lists a variety linked to financial-sector reg-
ulation and infrastructure, such as (i) failure in the national 
payments system; (ii) deterioration in the performance of 24  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
third-party payment aggregators; (iii) changes to payment 
card networks or bank fees, rules, or practices; (iv) credit 
card or payments-related frauds; (v) allegations and law-
suits concerning AML/CFT; (vi) change in requirements or 
arbitrary revocations of licenses, permits, or approvals to 
operate financial services; and (vii) risks related to emerg-
ing data-protection laws.
In order to comply with diverse (and evolving) coun-
try-level regulations, Jumia has structured its payment 
and lending solutions differently in each country. For 
example, Kenya is the only country where Jumia acts as a 
direct lender, as contract law allows them to operate with-
out any specialized licenses.30 Jumia has a license to lend 
in the city of Lagos, but in Nigeria, it provides its lending 
service in partnership with financial institutions. In Nigeria 
and Egypt, e-wallets are provided through agreements 
with a licensed bank, providing cashback and top-up 
options similar to vouchers, and the primary purpose is to 
encourage consumer loyalty. Funds cannot be withdrawn 
or transferred from JumiaPay except for customer refunds, 
but they can be used for future purchases on the platform. 
In Nigeria and Egypt, 54 percent of orders placed on the 
platform in the fourth quarter of 2018 were completed 
using JumiaPay.
In Latin America, MercadoLibre lists regulatory require-
ments as important risk factors for the use of its payment 
solution Mercado Pago (MercadoLibre 2020). According 
to the SEC prospectus, Mercado Pago is already compliant 
with national regulation in Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Chile, 
and Uruguay and will be subject to new regulations in 
Colombia. The platform claims not to have license require-
ments under the existing statutes in Argentina, Peru, and 
Colombia. Changing licensing requirements and regu-
lations could cause the platform to shut down Mercado 
Pago or to suspend the business temporarily. Due to the 
national regulation, Mercado Credito lending products are 
provided through corresponding banking agreements in 
Brazil, while it is in the process of obtaining a license in 
Mexico linked to its recent Fintech Law. 
4.2.2 Know-Your-Customer Regulation
Evolving anti-money laundering and KYC regulatory 
frameworks are perceived as risk factors by several 
platforms globally. The Financial Action Task Force’s 
(FATF) 2017 recommendations on “anti-money laun-
dering and terrorist financing measures and financial 
inclusion” require countries to conduct comprehensive 
risk assessments to assess the money-laundering and terrorist-financing risks associated with particular cus-
tomer groups, delivery channels, and specific national 
contexts. Unlike physical stores, e-commerce platforms 
do not implement face-to-face onboarding or interac-
tion with their customers; hence, it is more difficult to 
verify their identities. According to the FATF guidance, 
the identification of lower-risk situations should be con-
sistent with the country’s assessment of its overall risks 
of money laundering and the financing of terrorists. This 
assessment should take into account the impact of finan-
cial exclusion on the economy, the existence of unreg-
ulated services, the attractiveness of illicit transactions, 
and the vulnerability of excluded people to financial 
crime and exploitation. Where such risks are present, 
FATF recommends the use of proportional KYC require-
ments, including the use of alternative means of identifi-
cation and tiered and simplified customer due diligence, 
among others (FATF 2017).
KYC and AML/CFT regulation varies greatly from coun-
try to country. In Africa, Jumia implemented internal 
group-wide KYC policies and procedures, and it complies 
with all applicable country-level AML/CFT regulation. So 
far, the platform has not been subject to fines or penal-
ties. However, the group considers both the risk of not 
detecting fraudulent customers and the risk of tightening 
government regulations important, as they could affect its 
reputation, costs, and capacity to serve customers. Reg-
ulation is diverse and evolving. For example, in Egypt, 
Jumia is subject to regulation developed by the govern-
ment and enforced by the Egyptian Information Technol-
ogy Industry Development Authority in the context of 
online transactions and KYC. In Ghana, the Bank of Ghana 
has lobbied for new rules that would require e-money 
issuers to join a central registry and enforce anti-money 
laundering and data-protection standards. 
In Latin America, Mercado Pago is subject to diverse 
anti-money laundering laws and regulations in different 
countries. In Argentina, for example, MercadoLibre has 
been registered at the Argentine anti-money laundering 
authority (Unidad de Información Financiera) since 2016, 
and it is therefore subject to AML/CFT reporting obliga-
tions linked to the issuance of prepaid cards and card-ag-
gregator activities. The diversity and evolving regulations 
linked to KYC is considered a risk for Mercado Pago, as 
it could impose costs on the platform and increase the 
difficulty to reach customers. In particular, new regulation 
may require e-commerce platforms to conduct further 
identification and verification of their customers as they 
30.  Note that the proposed Financial Markets Conduct Bill 2018 seeks to regulate consumer lending by requiring the licensing of all credit 
providers regardless of whether they take deposits from the public. The bill was published to receive comments from the public but is yet to 
be introduced to Parliament. Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  25
TABLE 8: Regulatory Frameworks for Payments and Credit Products Provided by e-Commerce Platforms
PLATFORM REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR PAYMENTS REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR LENDING
MercadoLibre 
(Mercado  
Libre 2020)Mercado Pago Mercado Credito
Brazil Authorized payment institution by the Central Bank of Brazil since 2018. Currently, loans are provided through corresponding banking 
agreements with partner financial institutions, as Mercado 
Credito is not licensed as a financial institution in Brazil. In 
2018, Mercado Credito filed an application with the Central 
Bank for authorization to incorporate a financial institution in 
the modality of a savings-and-loan association.
Colombia Required by regulators to comply with requirements enacted in 2014–15 
and then in 2018 to regulate account opening, cash management, and 
risk policies, among others.Credit product unavailable in Colombia.
Uruguay Mercado Pago’s subsidiary obtained a registration at the Central Bank of 
Uruguay in 2016 to provide payments and collections services.Credit product unavailable in Uruguay.
Chile Submitted applications to obtain licenses to act as a prepaid card issuer 
and payment card operator in June and December 2019. Credit product unavailable in Chile.
Mexico In March 2018, Mexico enacted a new law that regulates both crowd-
funders and providers of wallets and money-transmittal services (the “Fin-
tech Law”). Under the Fintech Law, institutions that provide money-transfer 
services, digital credit, and crowdfunding services are required to obtain a 
license. Mercado Pago applied for such a license in September 2019 and is 
currently under review at the Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores.Applied for a license in September 2019 under the Fintech 
Law. (See the previous column for details.) The application is 
under review at the Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores.
Argentina A January 2020 law requires PSPs to register by April 2020 and comply 
with a variety of requirements linked to the provision of users’ information 
and use of customer funds, among others. Mercado Pago is registered 
with the anti-money laundering authority.Intends to apply for a license for its peer-to-peer lending 
business as required by regulation.
Jumia31JumiaPay Jumia Lending
Nigeria Introduced in 2016. No direct PSP license, but an agreement with an 
existing licensed bank. Has applied for a PSP license in 2019.Has a license to operate as a direct lender in the city of Lagos 
but currently does not offer any direct lending. Partners with 
several licensed institutions, such as QuickCheck Credit.
Kenya Introduced in 2018. No direct PSP license, but a partnership with  
Safaricom M-Pesa.Kenya is the only country where Jumia acts as a direct lender, 
as contract law has traditionally allowed them to operate 
without any specialized licenses.
Egypt Introduced in 2018. No direct PSP license, but an agreement with an exist-
ing licensed bank. No intention of applying for a license because Egypt 
permits PSP activity only in connection with a licensed sponsoring bank.Jumia provides loans through agreements with licensed third-
party lenders.
Ghana No direct PSP license, but an agreement with an existing licensed bank. 
The Bank of Ghana issued regulatory revisions for electronic money 
issuers in 2019 that require e-money issuers to join a central registry and 
may enforce additional regulation for AML and data protection for over 
150,000 active mobile-money agents.Jumia provides loans through agreements with licensed third-
party lenders.
Ivory Coast No direct PSP license, but an agreement with an existing licensed bank. 
A PSP license would require a minimum capital requirement of € 450,000.Jumia provides loans through agreements with licensed third-
party lenders.
Flipkart  
(Sen 2019)PhonePe Loan Capital
India Obtained a license in 2014 (prior to being acquired by Flipkart in 2016) 
from the Reserve Bank of India for the issuance and operation of a semi-
closed prepaid payment system.32Currently providing loans through agreements with banks 
and non-bank financial companies. Flipkart is in the process 
of applying for a non-bank financial company license to offer 
credit products such as buy-now-pay-later features, checkout 
finance, and working-capital loans to sellers.
Alibaba Alipay Alibaba Lending (various)
China Obtained license by the People’s Bank of China in 2011 as a third-party 
payments provider. Alibaba’s finance subsidiary Zhejiang Ant Small and Micro 
Financial Services obtained a banking license in 2014 from the 
China Banking Regulatory Commission through its 30 percent 
stake in Zhejiang Internet Commerce Bank (Tong 2014).
31.  Form F-1 (accessed June 11, 2020), https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1756708/000119312519071692/d650749df1.htm.
32.  Publications, Reserve Bank of India (accessed June 11, 2020), https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/publicationsview.aspx?id=12043.26  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
open accounts, which would increase costs and compli-
ance risks to the platform. 
In India, the Reserve Bank of India in 2019 developed 
“Guidelines for Payment Gateways and Payment 
Aggregators,” a discussion paper that could affect 
e-commerce platforms that operate payment-aggrega-
tion services. The guidelines would require e-commerce 
marketplaces acting as payment gateways and payment 
aggregators to other merchants stop the activity within 
three months. If they desire to pursue this activity, they 
must create a separate entity complying with all the rel-
evant regulations. According to the draft guidelines, 
payment gateways and payment aggregators will have 
to undertake KYC checks. They will also be required to 
undertake background and antecedent checks on mer -
chants, ensuring that they do not have a history of fraud, 
fake sales, or sales of prohibited items (Reserve Bank of 
India 2019).
4.3  Financial Services in e-Commerce Platforms 
during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Despite uncertainty regarding regulatory frameworks, 
the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the use of 
digital payments on most e-commerce platforms, espe-
cially in countries with efficient payments and agents’ 
infrastructure. As a result of both the increased number 
of first-time users on e-commerce platforms and the reluc-
tance of e-commerce platforms to accept cash on delivery 
to avoid physical contact with buyers, the use of digital 
payments for e-commerce platforms has increased since 
the onset of the pandemic. In addition to internationally 
branded payment cards and digital wallets, e-commerce 
platforms provide their own digital wallets for online pay-
ments. The next sections look at payments and credit.
4.3.1  Payments via e-Commerce during the COVID-19 
Pandemic 
The COVID-19 crisis has reinforced the role of digital 
payments for economic and financial inclusion. The 
onset of the COVID-19 crisis had a significant impact on 
how payments are made in e-commerce platforms. These 
are likely to be sustained in the long-term. The research 
found that growth in digital payments was linked to the 
quality of the ecosystem, particularly the agency network. 
Countries with a weak mobile-payments ecosystem had 
to rely on cash during the COVID-19 crisis.We identified two main trends:
First, the fear of contagion has encouraged e-com-
merce platforms to adopt digital payments in most 
countries, moving away from cash-on-delivery solutions 
and opting for mobile wallets or in-app payments. Prior 
to the crisis, Jumia’s cash on delivery constituted between 
70 and 90 percent of its payments. Since the pandemic, 
Jumia discontinued cash on delivery and enforced digital 
payments in such countries as Kenya that have well-devel-
oped ecosystem. In India, Flipkart’s PhonePe introduced 
contactless delivery of groceries from nearby stores amid 
the coronavirus lockdown. To minimize contact, the Pho-
nePe app has enabled contactless payments by requiring 
users to scan a QR code at merchants accepting PhonePe. 
(They have over 10 million merchant acceptance points 
in India.) They have also introduced a “Pay Now” feature 
on the stores’ pages, enabling customers to make the 
payment remotely from within the PhonePe app without 
having to scan a QR code.33 
In Latin America, the COVID-19 lockdowns initially led to 
drop in sales during the second half of March, as busi-
nesses and consumers had to adjust to the new normal. 
After the initial period of slow activity, sales on e-com-
merce platforms increased in April, as more consumers 
got accustomed to shopping online and bought more 
purchases in bulk. The platform also saw a steady increase 
in first-time users during this period. Volume of payment 
transactions at Mercado Pago grew 127 percent due to 
high levels of online payments used on the Mecado Libre 
platform during this period. Ninety-four percent of all pay-
ments on the e-commerce platform come from consum-
ers using Mercado Pago online wallets. Mercado Pago 
unique wallet payers grew over 155 percent year over 
year throughout Latin America; Mexico led with 252.8 
percent growth, and the number of payers in a quarter 
surpassed a million for the first time.
A second finding is that in countries where the pay-
ments ecosystem is weak or agent networks were 
forced to close during the lockdown, e-commerce 
platforms have to rely largely on cash. While Jumia was 
able to discontinue cash on delivery in countries such 
as Kenya, other platforms had the opposite effect and 
were forced to switch back to cash because merchants 
were unable to withdraw their money from agents. For 
example, FarmCrowdy in Nigeria discontinued mobile 
payments because the agent network was disrupted, 
and sellers could not easily cash out their payments. 
33.   In addition to accelerating the use of digital payments, PhonePe has also started offering users of the digital wallet a COVID-19 hospital-
ization insurance policy called Corona Care, which is purchased directly via the PhonePe mobile app. Geared toward the population that 
does not have access to insurance, the product requires a one-time payment of approximately $2–3 and covers between $650 and $700 in 
hospitalization charges. The only caveat is that this is open to age groups 18–55, but no medical tests are needed before purchase. Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  27
In Ethiopia, low penetration of mobile money forced 
Hello Market to rely on cash-on-delivery payments for 
deliveries in Addis Ababa and different forms of cash 
deposits in banks or mobile-money agents outside of 
the capital. In contexts where agents play a critical role 
for the delivery of welfare payments and other basic ser -
vices, governments should coordinate with banks and 
mobile-money providers to ensure that agent networks 
remain operational in areas where their services are most 
needed. This may require incentives and/or subsidies to 
ensure agents’ liquidity and financial viability in periods 
of slow economic activity. Clear policies should also be 
designed to regulate agents who operate both essential 
financial services and retail businesses deemed nones-
sential (Hernandez and Kim 2020).
4.3.2  Lending via e-Commerce during the COVID-19 
Pandemic
The COVID-19 crisis forced e-commerce platforms to 
adopt a variety of new policies, balancing the need 
to manage increased risks and forbearance for strug-
gling borrowers in the short term. There is limited data 
to assess the impact on volumes and values of credit, 
but the research has shown that e-commerce platforms 
responded to the crisis with increased forbearance for 
borrowers, decreased exposure to new loans, and a vari-
ety of rapid responses to aid struggling vendors on the 
platform. 
We observed the following three trends:
First, many platforms decided to provide at least some 
forbearance to existing MSME clients—eliminating late 
fees, instituting debt moratoriums, and taking other 
measures. Sellers who already had an established rela-
tionship with the platforms were given discounted terms 
for short-term loans, often between three months to one 
year, to cover losses and economic hardship. In the United 
States, the coronavirus pandemic hit small businesses hard, 
and many of them are also sellers on the Amazon platform. 
With Amazon focusing on shipping essential items or reduc-
ing shipping volumes, some small merchants complained 
that they might struggle to repay their Amazon Lending 
loans if they could not make sales. Amazon paused its mer -
chant loan repayment for over a month during this period 
(until April 30). In Brazil, MercadoLibre extended a 30-day 
grace period for repayment of loans for more than two 
million consumers and eliminated late fees for more than 
150,000 merchants to alleviate the financial burden faced 
by them. It is also extending a $144 million credit line to 
help Brazilian MSME businesses facing a sharp drop in the 
economic activity caused by the pandemic. Loans will help 
MSME sellers on the platforms in Brazil. In India, Flipkart is offering special offers on loans that sell-
ers can avail through Flipkart’s Growth Capital program. 
A three-month moratorium period has also been imple-
mented on existing loans availed through the program, 
relieving sellers of making a payment during the period. 
Any additional amount on a seller’s existing loans sanc-
tioned during this period will have an extended financial 
limit with a six-month moratorium period. Additionally, 
the platform has offered other concessions to sellers, 
including providing its sellers the flexibility of choosing 
to work or not work during the lockdown period, without 
any impact on performance metrics; a health insurance 
plan specific to COVID-19, to cover the sellers along with 
their families and employees; and waiving storage fees for 
April, under its Fulfilled by Flipkart service, which allows 
sellers to store their inventory in Flipkart Fulfillment Cen-
ters for faster deliveries.
Second, e-commerce platforms were reluctant to lend 
to new MSMEs during the crisis due to the increased 
risk of nonperforming loans. Although the data avail-
able is limited, discussions with platforms highlighted that 
new loan originations to MSME sellers on e-commerce 
platforms declined in the weeks immediately after the 
COVID-19 outbreak, as many platforms wanted to limit 
their exposure to the risk of nonperforming loans. In Latin 
America, the MercadoLibre credit platform Mercado 
Credito decreased loan originations to sellers and con-
sumers and saw a 16.5 percent decline over the previous 
quarter. For a large part, the decline was intended to man-
age their financial exposure to merchant and consumer 
credit amid a global pandemic. In India, the lockdown 
forced millions of businesses to discontinue operations 
partially or fully, making them unviable for new financing 
and forcing them to rely on their own savings or informal 
credit sources to manage liquidity during the downturn.
Third, the crisis triggered rapid responses from plat-
forms to help firms affected by the crisis, which was 
possible thanks to their access to data. In China, Ali-
baba is offered $2.86 billion in loans via its affiliate, Ant 
Financial’s MYBank, to help companies affected by the 
coronavirus. This includes preferential terms to firms 
located in Hubei: a zero-interest rate on a 90-day loan 
and a 20 percent discount on rates for a one-year loan. 
In Hong Kong, Alibaba and HSBC offered rapid-approval 
loans for 1,800 MSMEs operating in Tmall to recover from 
low sales during the pandemic. Loans up to $500,000 are 
being offered with an interest rate of one percent until 
June 30. No documents or collateral are required to get 
the loans, but applicants provide Cainiao (a data aggre-
gator) with inventory information and operational status 
for data analysis. 28  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
5.  CONCLUSIONS AND  
RECOMMENDATIONS
The paper has provided an overview of the role of 
e-commerce and digital financial services during the 
COVID-19 crisis. This is a fast-evolving and complex 
ecosystem that involves interrelated regulatory frame-
works linked to trade, finance, logistics, data protection, 
and consumer protection, among others. This paper ana-
lyzed only selected areas of the e-commerce ecosystem, 
particularly those related to financial services and linked 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. It did not analyze deeper 
structural issues, such as competition and contestability 
in e-commerce markets, gender and digital capabilities, 
and the regulatory frameworks for financial consumer pro-
tection, data protection, cybersecurity and others. Further 
research should be conducted on these topics. 
The list below summarizes the main policy recommenda-
tions.
a) Policy maker understanding of the importance of 
e-commerce to the economy is critical at a time when 
the retail commerce is adversely affected. Lockdown 
policies should take into account how an e-commerce 
supply chain works and ensure that various elements 
are treated as essential categories. The availability of 
low-cost data services and access to learning oppor -
tunities for digital skills drive usage of e-commerce 
on mobile apps or the Internet. Development of an 
end-to-end curriculum through universities or other 
educational channels on how to sell on e-commerce 
platforms—this includes sourcing, branding, market-
ing, and customer fulfillment—is critical for the growth 
of the digital economy. 
b) Digital financial services are critical for participation in 
the digital economy. e-Commerce platforms need to 
integrate seamlessly with the national payment system 
and offer different payment methods to target differ -
ent segments of the population. c) Governments should coordinate with banks and 
mobile-money providers to ensure that agent net-
works remain operational in areas where their services 
are most needed. This may require incentives and/
or subsidies to ensure agents’ liquidity and financial 
viability in periods of slow economic activity. Clear 
policies should also be designed to regulate agents 
who operate both essential financial services and retail 
businesses deemed nonessential.
d) e-Commerce platforms can play a key role in facilitat-
ing access to credit for small businesses, either directly 
or in partnership with banks or other licensed lenders. 
Governments need to develop adequate and propor -
tional regulatory frameworks to encourage the sound 
development of this market, including participation in 
the credit-reporting system, financial consumer protec-
tion, and data protection. This would encourage com-
petition and reduce the risk that vendors will “lock-in” 
to the largest platforms in the market.
e) As e-commerce business models have evolved, the 
role of intermediaries has expanded rapidly to pro-
vide financial services that would be typically handled 
by regulated PSPs. Regulators need to be aware of 
emerging risks within the e-commerce ecosystem due 
to unregulated intermediaries issuing financial prod-
ucts and/or providing services or moving funds on 
behalf of merchants or regulated PSPs. 
f) While no global e-commerce regulatory framework is 
commonly agreed upon, awareness of emerging non-
bank players within the e-commerce ecosystem and of 
the potential risks posed by them is a good starting 
point for developing a national-level regulatory frame-
work. Risks to the financial ecosystem include (i) credit 
and liquidity risks, (ii) operational and reputation risks, 
(iii) cyber risks, and (iv) consumer-protection risks.
g) Regulators and e-commerce platforms should con-
sider introducing simplified onboarding processes and 
proportional due-diligence processes to facilitate the 
enrollment of new merchants while ensuring compli-
ance with AML/CFT rules.  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  29
6.  WORKS CITED
Abcomm (Associação Brasileira de Comércio Eletrônico). 2020. “Crescimento do E-commerce e o 
Coronavirus.” Accessed June 11, 2020. https://abcomm.org/noticias/ecommerce-coronavirus. 
Alibaba. 2020a. “Taobao Live Accelerating Digitization of China’s Retail Sector.” Press release, 
March 30, 2020. Accessed June 11, 2020. https://www.alibabagroup.com/en/news/arti-
cle?news=p200330. 
———. 2020b. “Alibaba Group Announces March Quarter and Full Fiscal Year 2020 Results.” 
Press release, May 22, 2020. https://www.alibabagroup.com/en/news/press_pdf/p200522.pdf.
Amazon. 2018. 2018 Annual Report. https://s2.q4cdn.com/299287126/files/doc_financials/annu-
al/2018-Annual-Report.pdf.
———. 2020. “Amazon.com Announces First Quarter Results.” Press release, April 30, 2020. 
https://s2.q4cdn.com/299287126/files/doc_financials/2020/Q1/Amazon-Q1-2020-Earnings-
Release.pdf.
Megaw, Nicholas. 2019. “Amazon Seeks to Revive Its Faltering Loans Business.” Financial Times, 
June 14, 2019. https://www.ft.com/content/1eb61d50-81fb-11e9-b592-5fe435b57a3b.
Bhalla, Tarush. 2020. “Decline in e-Commerce Hits Payment Firms.” Mint (blog), April 13, 2020. 
https://www.livemint.com/industry/retail/digital-payments-in-slow-lane-as-e-commerce-travel-
services-face-disruption-11586691564420.html.
CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor). 2020. “Rapid Account Opening in a Pandemic: 
How to Meet AML/CFT Rules for Social Assistance Payments.” COVID-19 Briefing, July 2020. 
Accessed August 15, 2020. https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/rapid-account-open-
ing-pandemic. 
Choueiri Group. 2020. How COVID-19 Is Changing Consumers’ Daily Life in Saudi Arabia. 
Survey report, April 21, 2020. http://www.choueirigroup.com/media/85830/Chouei-
ri-COVID-High-compressed-1-.pdf.
Facebook. 2020. “Introducing Facebook Shops: Helping Small Businesses Sell Online.” Accessed 
August 15, 2020. https://about.fb.com/news/2020/05/introducing-facebook-shops. 
Facebook for Business. 2020. “Introducing Facebook Shops, a New Online Shopping Experi-
ence.” Announcement, May 19, 2020. Accessed August 15, 2020. https://www.facebook.com/
business/news/announcing-facebook-shops. 
FATF (Financial Action Task Force). 2017. Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Mea-
sures and Financial Inclusion, with a Supplement on Customer Due Diligence. http://www.
fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/content/images/Updated-2017-FATF-2013-Guidance.pdf.
Govindarajan, Vijay, Anup Srivastava, and Luminita Enache. 2020. “Understanding India’s Chilly 
Reception of Jeff Bezos.” Harvard Business Review, January 22, 2020, updated January 23, 
2020. https://hbr.org/2020/01/understanding-indias-chilly-reception-of-jeff-bezos.
Greene, Jay, and Abha Bhattarai. 2019. “Attention, Walmart Executives: Amazon’s Coming After 
Your Low-Income Shoppers.” Washington Post, June 18, 2019. Accessed June 11, 2020. 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/06/18/amazons-growing-prime-fo-
cus-americas-poor. 
Hernandez, Emilio, and Dave Kim. 2020. “Agent Networks: Vital to COVID-19 Response, in Need 
of Support.” CGAP (blog), April 27, 2020. Accessed August 15, 2020. https://www.cgap.org/
blog/agent-networks-vital-covid-19-response-need-support.
Ho, Johnny, Daniel Hui, Aimee Kim, and Yuanyuan Zhang. 2020. “Cautiously Optimistic: Chinese 
Consumer Behavior Post-COVID-19.” McKinsey, March 31, 2020. Accessed June 11, 2020. 
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/consumer-packaged-goods/our-insights/cautiously-opti-
mistic-chinese-consumer-behavior-post-covid-19. 30  Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Hong, Iris. 2020. “Covid-19 to Redefine B2B Payment Landscape in China.” Asia Times Financial, 
August 8, 2020. Accessed August 15, 2020. https://www.asiatimesfinancial.com/covid-19-to-re-
define-b2b-payment-landscape-in-china.
Iansiti, Marco, and Karim R. Lakhani. 2020. “Competing in the Age of AI.” Harvard Business Review, 
January–February 2020. https://hbr.org/2020/01/competing-in-the-age-of-ai. 
Jumia. 2020. “Jumia Issues Shareholder Letter from Its Co-founders.” Press release, April 17, 2020. 
https://apnews.com/Business%20Wire/62e750a4cf0841ceaf086a1193f319d2.
Kalra, Aditya. 2019. “India’s RBI Says Foreign Firms Can Process Abroad, but Must Store Data 
in India.” Reuters, June 26, 2019. Accessed August 15, 2020. https://www.reuters.com/article/
us-india-data-localisation-idUSKCN1TR26D.
Kass, Elliot. n.d. “India’s New E-Commerce Regulations Challenge Big E-Retailers.” American 
Express. Accessed June 11, 2020. https://www.americanexpress.com/us/foreign-exchange/arti-
cles/e-commerce-regulations-in-india-challenge-for-retailers. 
Kim, Eugene. 2018. “Amazon Has Partnered with Bank of America for Its Lending Program: Sources.” 
CNBC, February 14, 2018, updated February 15, 2018. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/14/
amazon-and-bank-of-america-partner-for-lending-program-but-growth-has-stalled.html.
Li, Jane. 2020. “China Is Using Digital Coupons to Entice People to Get Shopping Again.” Quartz, 
April 1, 2020. Accessed June 11, 2020. https://qz.com/1828923/china-issues-digital-cou-
pons-to-aid-coronavirus-economic-recovery. 
Lipsman, Andrew. 2019. “Global Ecommerce 2019: Ecommerce Continues Strong Gains amid 
Global Economic Uncertainty.” eMarketer (blog), June 27, 2019. Accessed 11 June 2020. 
https://www.emarketer.com/content/global-ecommerce-2019.
McIntyre, Georgia. 2020. “Amazon Lending: How to Determine If an Amazon Loan Is Right for Your 
Business.” Fundera (blog), September 12, 2020. Accessed June 11, 2020. https://www.fundera.
com/blog/amazon-lending. 
MercadoLibre. 2016. Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2015. US Securities and Exchange Commission 
Form 10-K, February 26, 2016. http://investor.mercadolibre.com/static-files/1c2696d5-3372-
4150-bd7b-31261b11f531.
———. 2020. Annual Report Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934 for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019. US Securities and Exchange Commission 
Form 10-K, February 14, 2020. http://investor.mercadolibre.com/static-files/5cfa8a5d-6208-
4cf6-bc76-488daafb7101.
Mondato. 2020. “What’s Up with WhatsApp? A Case Study in Payments.” Mondato (blog), July 8, 
2020. https://blog.mondato.com/whatsapp-payments-case-study-brazil.
PYMNTS. 2020. “WhatsApp Pay Gets Approval for Phased India Rollout.” PYMNTS.com (blog), 
February 7, 2020. Accessed August 15, 2020. https://www.pymnts.com/digital-payments/2020/
whatsapp-gets-approval-for-india-rollout.
Reserve Bank of India. 2019. Discussion Paper on Guidelines for Payment Gateways and Payment 
Aggregators. Accessed June 11, 2020. https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/PublicationReportDetails.
aspx?UrlPage=&ID=943.
Robbins, Damien. 2020. “Taobao Live Could Be a Key Growth Driver for Alibaba.” Seeking Alpha, 
June 8, 2020. https://seekingalpha.com/article/4352469-taobao-live-be-key-growth-driver-for-
alibaba.
Rossolillo, Nicholas. 2020. “Alibaba and Tencent Show Some Businesses Will Be Fine during the 
Coronavirus Meltdown.” Nasdaq, March 22, 2020. https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/alibaba-
and-tencent-show-some-businesses-will-be-fine-during-the-coronavirus-meltdown-2020. Embedding Digital Finance in e-Commerce Platforms during the COVID-19 Pandemic  31
Salaudeen, Aisha. 2020. “How Flutterwave Is Helping SMEs in Africa ‘Keep the Lights On’ during 
the Pandemic.” CNN, May 28, 2020. https://www.cnn.com/2020/05/28/africa/flutterwave-coro-
navirus-africa/index.html.
Sen, Anirban. 2018. “Amazon, Flipkart Power New User Base Growth in e-Commerce in India.” Mint  
(blog), December, 20, 2018. https://www.livemint.com/Companies/lurjUhGPebAdExiucyJeAN/
Amazon-Prime-Flipkart-Plus-lead-ecommerce-user-base-growth.html. 
Sen, Sunny. 2019. “Flipkart and PhonePe Are Looking at ‘Different Paths Leading to Different Out-
comes.” Tech2, December 23, 2019. https://www.firstpost.com/tech/news-analysis/flipkart-and-
phonepe-are-looking-at-different-paths-leading-to-different-outcomes-7817311.html.
Tong, Frank. 2014. “Alibaba and Partners Obtain a Banking License in China.” Digital Commerce 
360, October 2, 2014. https://www.digitalcommerce360.com/2014/10/02/alibaba-and-part-
ners-obtain-banking-license-china.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2019. “Global e-Commerce 
Sales Surged to $29 Trillion.” Press release UNCTAD/PRESS/PR/2019/007, March 29, 2019. 
https://unctad.org/press-material/global-e-commerce-sales-surged-29-trillion.
Williams, Charles. 2020. “COVID-19: China’s e-Commerce.” Global Risk Insights, May 29, 2020. 
https://globalriskinsights.com/2020/05/covid-19-chinas-e-commerce.
World Bank. 2019. “E-Commerce Can Boost Job Creation and Inclusive Growth in Developing 
Countries.” Press release, November 23, 2019. Accessed June 11, 2020. https://www.world-
bank.org/en/news/press-release/2019/11/23/e-commerce-can-boost-job-creation-and-inclu-
sive-growth-in-developing-countries. 
Wu, Wenzhuo. 2020. “Is Targeting Vouchers a Successful Strategy for Brands.” Jing Daily, June 10, 
2020. http://jingdaily.com/are-targeting-vouchers-a-successful-strategy-for-brands.
Xinhua. 2020. “e-Commerce Still a Propeller of China’s Poverty Alleviation amid COVID-19.” Xin-
hua.net, April 30, 2020. Accessed June 11, 2020. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-
04/30/c_139021893.htm. 
Zhang, Daniel. 2020. “Daniel Zhang Shares New Relief Initiatives for SMEs.” Alizila, April 7, 2020. 
https://www.alizila.com/daniel-zhang-shares-new-relief-initiatives-for-smes.Annex II: Examples of Key Facts Statements  33
