CASE STUDY   |  October 20191Engaging with Country Offices  
to Embed Digital Finance: USAID
ESTELLE LAHAYE
USAID considers digital financial services (DFS) to be a means of accelerating development 
and supporting a country’s journey to self-reliance. USAID is a decentralized donor and 
consequently, its DFS practice seeks to influence country offices to incorporate DFS into their 
programming to support the achievement of broader development goals. But how can a small technical team at headquarters influence a large decentralized organization to prioritize DFS?
Background
USAID believes digital financial inclusion can be an enabler of key development goals such 
as food security and resilience, women’s economic empowerment, and improved health. 
Evidence supports the idea that DFS provides vulnerable and excluded populations access 
to safe, affordable, and secure financial services that can improve their ability to weather 
financial shocks and invest in health, education, and productive economic activity. 
USAID also believes that safe, open, and reliable DFS can foster an inclusive ecosystem 
that local governments and the private sector can leverage to build markets, generate 
jobs, and empower women and youth. Consequently, DFS can play an important role in 
helping U SAID p artner c ountries on t heir journey t o self-reliance —a USAID priority aimed at 
supporting partner countries to plan, finance, and manage their own development.
In this context, USAID’s DFS practice—housed at its headquarters in Washington , D.C.—
provides support to its country offices (“Missions”) to integrate DFS into their program 
portfolios a nd strategies. Ho weve r, Missions often s upport m ultiple  development ob jectives 
set by five-year s trategies t hat include s ector-specific pr iorities r anging f rom go vernance 
and security, to access to essential services, to resilience. The link to DFS, in many cases, 
is therefore not obvious.
Mission en gagement t o em bed DF S
An engagement wi th a Mission is successful when a Mission has commi tted resources 
to new opportunities, establishes dedicated staff responsibilities, and/or integrates DFS CASE STUDY
October 2019 2
ENGAGING WITH  COUNTRY OFFICES TO  EMBED DIGITAL FINANCE: USAID1 Mission engagement as an approach and sustained uptake as a goal ar e applicable not just to the DFS 
practice team but to all USAID’s headquarters units that are required to support field Missions.
2 A developmental evaluation is an approach to ongoing adaptation of interventions thr ough the use of 
evaluative thinking and tools. It includes having one or more evaluators integrated into the program, project, 
or activity to contribute to modifications in program design and targeted outcomes and to document both these modifications as well as the decision-making process. Source: “Developmental Evaluation for USAID. ”Outreach
Early
Middle
Mature• Identify prospective partner Missions with the strongest entry points, alignment of
priorities,
 and capacity.
• DFS team reaches out to selected Missions for initial conversations and to gauge interest.
•
A DFS market assessment is often proposed as a learning opportunity; if interested, a  
scope of work is developed collaboratively.
•DFS market assessme nt completed; essential step because development objectives
where DFS can 
a make difference to drive progress are identified.
•
Findings and recommendations are shared with the Mission and serve as a basis of  
discussion to soli dify the scope of work.
• DFS team starts working in partnership with the Mission to implement 
recommendations th at emerged from the assessment.
•
Mission starts seeing the value of DFS (e.g., they might assign staff to do work on DFS  
or might request additional support from the DFS team).
•Mission starts taking ownership—e.g., specific financial resources allocated to DFS,  
implementing partners pushed to digitize payments, add
, staff or set aside time 
dedicated to DFS.into larger strategic priorities. USAID calls this “sustained uptake.”1 To achieve sustained 
uptake, the DFS practice has taken an “intrapreneurial” approach to testing and developing 
a multipronged model to help and advise Missions. This model continues to be fine-tuned 
based on the team’s use of adaptive management tools, such as a two-year developmental 
evaluation o n uptake.2 Today, the model has become more structured while keeping some 
room for the team to seize opportunities and be responsive to shifting priorities. 
The DFS practice  has focused on  building capac ity of USAID staff and  implementing p artners 
to see DFS not a s an end in its elf but as a mea ns to achieving great er development outcomes. 
The team provides  technical an d advisory s upport t o Missions f or the development o f country 
strategies with a  DFS component,  concept notes, and the design of interventions. The 
team has also developed a variety of tools and resources available to staff such as a market 
assessment tool to evaluate the conditions for DFS  expansion and  adoption and a guidebook 
to help staff identify opportunities in DFS and design potential interventions.
Recognizing that technical and advisory support cannot be used and deployed at all times, 
the DFS team also developed an engagement framework with Missions. Figure 1 describes 
different stages to better determine strategies and align resources accordingly. Currently, 
the team can undertake four to six engagements per year at the level of depth required to 
lead t o sustained up take.
Box 1 provides an example of the evolution of engagements with the Liberia Mission toward 
sustained up take o f DFS.
FIGURE 1.  Stages o f Mission en gagementCASE STUDY   |  October 20193BOX 1.   DFS team’s engagement with USAID/Liberia
USAID/Liberia is an example of sustained uptake. The Mission 
has fully embraced DFS to support Liberia in its journey to self-reliance. It is investing its own resources to further develop the DFS ecosystem, and all of its implementing partners are required to use mobile money to pay for goods and services.
How did this happen?
It was helpful that to start, USAID staff in Liberia did not need to be convinced of the benefits of DFS. In 2014–2015, several offices within the Liberia Mission supported programs to pilot the digitization of teacher salary payments to strengthen the capacity of the Government of Liberia (GOL) and introduce efficiencies in government payments.
During the same period, an Ebola outbreak struck Liberia. 
One of the key bottlenecks in the national response was the limited ability to transfer salary payments, hazard funds, and incentives to frontline health workers. In this context, the DFS team became involved with the Global Health Ebola team to help the Ministry of Health (MOH) strengthen the resilience of Liberia’s public health system. The idea was to introduce mobile money as a payment transfer option for health workers that can be scaled up by GOL for routine and emergency use.
To begin, the DFS team conducted two assessments: (i) to 
gain a clear understanding of health payment systems and (ii) to understand the use of mobile technology and healthworker attitudes and trust in the government. A mobilemoney solution for health workers was introduced in 2016.But the efforts to develop DFS did not sto p there.  With the 
Mission’s strong buy-in and support fo r DFS  as well as 
GOL’s commitment to digitize payments by 2021, the  DFS 
team invested additional resources to scale  earlier efforts 
in health and education and expand the scope  to other 
branches o f government ( e.g., i mmigration s ervices a nd 
trade). Building on the existing assessments,  the team  also 
identified key areas in the DFS ecosystem that need  support  
to scale up: (i) strengthening mobile money regulat ion and 
(ii) developing mobile m oney agent networks  including 
addressing liquidi ty shortages.
The results of these efforts  are encouraging and reinforces the 
DFS case at the Mission level with new investments. I n March 
2018, 20 percent of public-school  teachers in Liberia were 
enrolled in digital salary  payments. This led to a 61 percent 
reduction in cost and a 98 percent reduction in time needed 
to retrieve their salaries.  Digitizing salary payments  improved 
efficiencies at the Ministry of  Education, as well as p erson ally for 
teachers, but most important ly it led to an average of 10.5 
additiona l hours on du ty for t hose teachers . Similar results 
were seen from the MOH pilot enrollment.
Sources: U SAID/Liberia G overnance & E conomic M anagement 
Support P roject; m STAR: M obile S olutions T echnical A ssistance a nd 
Research – Liberia; mSTAR Liberia Mobile Money Project Lessons 
Learned, March 2018; The Potential for Mobile Money to Improve 
Government Salary Payments in Liberia.
DFS sustained uptak e?
There is strong indication that technical support provided to Missions has been useful in 
achieving a healthy level of uptake, while the DFS practice awaits the outcome of longer 
and more mature engagements. 
In October 2018, the team conducted a survey of 16 Missions to measure satisfaction. 
Results confirm the team’s high-quality and valued support to Missions, with 88 percent of 
participants satisfied with the DFS team’s support. In addition, 82 percent indicated that the 
DFS engagement has helped improve the development outcomes set in their programming. 
As a result, the  team is experiencing increased demand from Missions. For example, within 
the past six months, the team has received eight requests for field-level technical assistance 
and/or
 training, as well as three requests for more regular advisory support.4
ENGAGING WITH  COUNTRY OFFICES TO  EMBED DIGITAL FINANCE: USAIDLessons l earned
Mission engagement is a core function of USAID’s DFS practice. A few lessons are 
synthesized below, and b est practice guidance on Mission engagement is also available. 
Establishing c redible t echnical e xpertise i s essential t o influencing c ountry-level 
programming. T he evaluation found that Missions value technical leadership internal to 
USAID that can provide expertise to accelerate country-level strategies. As a result of this 
finding, the DFS team (i) has established fixed points of contact for each Mission and (ii) is 
proactively seeking more involvement in program design and implementation that does not 
rely solely on external imp lementing par tners. 
Aligning with priorities will increase the  likelihood that Missions dedica te financial 
and hum an resources to  DFS. By looki ng at financial inclusion as a means  and not as an 
end, the DFS tea m aligns itself to USAID priorit ies that reflect country-level str ategies. For 
successful engage ment, the tea m needs to demons trate its understanding of how DFS  can 
contribute t o Missions’ priorities. This is done through assessments that i dentify market  gaps  
and recommendations for how to integr ate DFS into exis ting programs or future strategies.
Missions should  be treated like customers to build effective partnerships. T his 
means being proactive, patient, and responsive; maintaining regular  contact; and taking on 
some of the administrative burden  from the Missions. Service offerings need to be adapted to 
Mission needs. This is achieved through a market assessment that not only identifies barriers 
but hi ghlights oppor tunities f or USAID t o support D FS as an a ccelerator o f development 
outcomes and supporter of inclusive digital ecosystems. In turn, the analysis helps the team 
refine and adapt offerings to Missions and scale best practices and lessons to other markets.
Leveraging r elationships t o identify c hampions i s essential t o sustained u ptake. 
DFS champions can help amplify efforts to embed DFS . To this end, the DFS team builds 
and n urtures r elationships w ith operational a nd programmatic Mission staff, implementing 
partners, and other actors who can be champions. Pre-existing relationships are a starting 
point but using tools such as stakeholder mapping is  helpful to identify Mission staff or other 
external stakeholders who are well-connected and respected and could become DFS 
champions. The DFS team is tracking relationships and interactions to further develop  
engagements and to adapt service offerings. 
F UR T HE R R E S O URC E S:
Mission E ngagem ent P laybook
DFS Accelerates  the Journey t o Self-Reliance
The Role of DFS  in Accelerating USAID Education Goals
The Role of DFS  in Accelerating USAID’s Health Goals