                   
1        Evidence Base for Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation (EB4CLA)   Final Report   March 9th, 2018                                           
2   Table of Contents I. ABSTRACT ............................................................................................................................... 3	II. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 3	III. BACKGROUND ....................................................................................................................... 5	IV. PLAN OF RESEARCH .............................................................................................................. 8	V.  PRESENTATION OF DATA AND DATA ANALYSIS .................................................................. 11	VI. DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS................................................................................................... 16	VI. REFLECTION ON METHODS ................................................................................................. 17	VII. CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................... 18	VIII. REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................... 20	IX.  ANNEX 1 – Research Approach .......................................................................................... 22	X. ANNEX 2 – Data collection instruments & schedule ............................................................ 26	XI. ANNEX 3 – Pivot story narratives, expanded ...................................................................... 30	XII. ANNEX 4 – CLAIM learning journal reflection excerpts ...................................................... 44	                                    
3    Evidence Base for Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation (EB4CLA) Final Report  I. ABSTRACT This study - as with others under the Evidence Base for Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation (EB4CLA) framework agreement - attempted to bridge the evidence gap between practitioners’ intuitive sense that Collaboration, Learning, and Adaptation (CLA) contribute to better development outcomes with genuine proof. It utilized a qualitative methodology involving key informant interviews and focus group discussions with the staff and partners of two organizations over an 18-month period in order to draw conclusions about if and how investments in CLA led to better results. Research found that these investments were linked to change in the behavior of partners, particularly in terms of how partnerships were able to evolve over time. Likewise, investments were shown to have an impact on each organizations’ higher-level decision making with regard to intervention logic, which in turn may have helped contribute to one organization’s systemic change objectives.  II. INTRODUCTION   Recent years have seen a growing preponderance of literature on adaptive management (AM) in development circles. This has been in response to the failures of traditional development approaches (Andrews, et al., 2014), a recognition that the complexities of poverty require flexible interventions (Andrews, et al., 2012), as well as a reaction to learning from the field of management theory highlighting the value of AM approaches to good management practice (Engineers without Borders & Kenya Markets Trust, 2014). Within USAID, adaptive management has been championed by the People, Planning, and Learning (PPL) Bureau. They have focused in particular on the interplay between Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation (CLA) (Hinthorne , et al., 2015) on good project management.  The underlying assumption driving much of this literature is that learning, and subsequently adaptation, leads to better results. However, a recent literature review found “no comprehensive review of the evidence base on the effect or impact of CLA on development outcomes” (Dexis Consulting Group, 2017). Furthermore, adaptation can be seen as a goal unto itself, with implementers claiming that they were ‘innovating’ as a means of defending poor planning and weak implementation. Therefore, there is a need to define what good CLA looks like and if causal linkages can be drawn between it and better development outcomes.  This study - as with others under the Evidence Base for Collaboration, Learning and Adaptation (EB4CLA) framework agreement - attempts to bridge the evidence gap between practitioners’                    
4  intuitive sense that CLA works with genuine proof. While focusing on two organizations taking a market systems development approach to their work, results are hopefully of wider interest to donors and implementers across a range of portfolios. Research findings may also be of interest to others outside of the development sphere with an interest in organizational learning, knowledge management, and adaptive approaches to working with complexity.  This research contributes to the wider EB4CLA agenda by analyzing two organizations that have made substantive investments in CLA: the USAID-funded Bangladesh Agricultural Value Chains (AVC) project and Musika, a Zambian non-profit company. The purpose was to analyze what investments into CLA were made by both organizations as well as the rationale behind them; ascertain the extent to which these have impacted on project effectiveness, efficiency, and ability to achieve systemic change; and draw some initial conclusions on the contextual and methodological challenges related to measuring CLA. With regard to the last point, it utilizes a comparative analysis lens to help differentiate between two approaches to CLA. For example, the organizations worked in different countries on different continents with differing management and donor structures. Could these differences offer insight into contextual factors (e.g. funding structures, local culture, duration of programming, management emphasis, etc.) that inhibit or enable CLA?   The research agenda was driven by a desire to test the following hypothesis, that: Systems and processes set up in the name of CLA can impact an organization’s focus on the “right” objectives as well as the sophistication of its learning and response. In turn, the more that an organization can be characterized by high levels of such intentionality and sophisticated learning, the greater its contribution to positive development outcomes.  To test this hypothesis, measures focussed on:  1. Donor and contracting management: Are there open conversations between management and donors about what is working and what is not in the organization, and what is required to accelerate success? 2. Framing: Is there a strategy or strategic framework that guides the organization in managing information and adapting its resource allocation and intervention tactics? 3. Organizational culture, staff capacity and institutional biases: Do staff consistently seek, prioritize and adapt to information and observations that are not formal or easily categorized before engaging with market actors?                    
5  4. Sophistication/quality of learning: Do monitoring staff adapt their metrics and methods for identifying patterns, and are they tracking if systemic change is occurring within the identified patterns?  5. CLA management: Is achieving “ultimate impacts” the consistent focus of decisions to adapt? Do staff successfully influence market actors to use information better themselves, thereby catalyzing CLA capacity within the system?  6. Market reactions to adaptation and foreseeable counter-factual: How have market actors been responding to changes in strategy or activities? Have their behaviors or mindsets changed in response? What could have been some of the foreseeable outcomes if the organization had not made the investments in CLA that it has? 7. Challenges: What are some examples of where ‘useful’ adaptation has not happened and why? Is there fatigue from partners due to reporting or information collection requirements, or from being asked to change strategy too often? 8. Influence of and on other projects: Can the impacts of the organization’s work be disentangled from that of other projects in the country? Has the project influenced other projects in-country to adopt similar approaches to implementation? III. BACKGROUND Within the field of development practice generally and market systems development specifically, the relationship between CLA (or adaptive management in other donor circles) has been well understood. The Making Markets for the Poor (M4P) Guide states, for example, that “a less direct, more catalytic approach requires program managers to provide conditions that are conducive to flexibility, innovation and trial and error.” (Springfield Centre, 2014). This correlation has usually been drawn in one of three ways. Firstly, there are documents that focus on the evidence that market systems development works and then draw a backwards correlation to adaptive management. For example, some have argued that a flexible, adaptive approach to piloting partnerships is crucial to success (Davies 2016). Others have focused on the relationship between measuring for learning as criteria for project effectiveness (Ripley & Major 2015). Related, a recent literature review found a relationship between monitoring for learning and project results (Dexis Consulting Group, 2017).  Then there are those that have attempted to make the argument that working in complex systems necessitates an adaptive approach. For example, the case of the Growth, Health and Governance (GHG) program in Northern Karamoja focused on enabling an organizational culture of learning                    
6  as a principle foundation for project effectiveness (Allana, 2014). Related, Mercy Corps, under its ADAPT learning contract, attempted to make a similar case from its Uganda Revitalizing Agricultural Inputs and New Markets (RAIN) program (Mercy Corps, 2016). Others have drawn parallels between MSD and running a private business, utilizing the concept of ‘lean’ thinking (Rasmussen, 2014). Most recently, MDF has argued there is a necessity to embrace ‘messiness’ (i.e. adaptive management) as a prerequisite of engaging with market systems thinking (Bear & Brekkers, 2018). Lastly, there are those that have attempted to draw on a wider body of evidence to focus on how CLA leads to project effectiveness. For example, a link has been drawn between CLA and staff empowerment, engagement and satisfaction (Shapiro & Salib, 2017). The recent EB4CLA (2017) outlines these results extensively.  Arguably there is knowledge gap in terms of linking these threads. Given the methodological challenge, few have attempted to focus firstly on whether or not CLA was happening at the project level and then attempt to draw a causal pathway to enhanced development outcomes. This study has attempted to contribute to the evidence base on this link.  Conceptual Framework When compiling results, the research team recognized the need for a conceptual framework to differentiate between types of investments that an organization could make into its capacity to undertake CLA well. These categories are referred to as aspects of both organizations’ CLA ‘landscapes’.  A CLA landscape relates to the different levels in which collaboration, learning, and adaptation happen on both AVC and Musika. This framework is informed by USAID’s conceptualization of CLA (2017) which ‘identifies and describes the different components of collaborating, learning and adapting as well as enabling conditions that support their integration into the Program Cycle’. However, it is broader and emphasizes the areas where learning and adaptation happen with regard to external relationships.  For the purposes of explanation, a CLA landscape is broken into three inter-related buckets: (1) Internal processes: refer to organizational and staff management practices, such as consistent messaging, spaces for constructive criticism and open discussion, investment in staff learning and skill-building, as well as an IT infrastructure.                    
7  (2) External processes: refer to the mechanisms by which AVC/Musika establish an intervention with a partner. Included in this bucket are formal vetting processes, due diligence, written agreements, as well as internal meetings address emerging issues across all interventions. (3) High-level strategic decision making: refers to the suite of tools and processes used by both to communicate, investigate and gather intelligence about their operating environment and to adjust Theories of Change (ToC).  
 These buckets allowed the research team a broad enough framework to include all aspects of how CLA influences organizational activities, yet also specific enough to link these to stories of adaptation and learning. Why this study now As mentioned, there has been a growing preponderance of resources written about adaptive management in development. This can be seen in ODI’s Doing Development Differently 
Internal SpacesMessagingTime investments
External FundingMRMTrust/messaging
High-Level Decision-MakingData on market trendsSharing with other dev orgs
The ability to understand and act on market trends enables effective partnerships. In turn, learning from which interventionsare working enables changes tohigh-level strategy. An organizational culture Translates to adaptive Partnerships. These, in turn,foster conﬁdence on the part of staff to be innovative and accepting offailure. An organizational culture that is aligned to learning willorient activities to higher level strategic objectives, which in turn, adapt based on the organizations’ capacity for learning                   
8  resources, Ben Ramalingam’s popular book (2013) and Duncan Green’s blog series – From Poverty to Power (Green, n.d.). While enthusiasm for adaptive management is currently high, this needs to be complemented by a growing evidence base. Otherwise, there is a risk that CLA could go the route of other, past development fads. By making the case that CLA is not simply a ‘nice to have’, but is crucial to project effectiveness, there is a greater chance that these concepts will endure within the sector.  IV. PLAN OF RESEARCH With support from Eric Derks at The Canopy Lab, Pollen Group developed comparative, longitudinal case studies of two organizations in relation to their approach to CLA:  • Partner Organization I: the USAID-funded Bangladesh Agricultural Value Chains (AVC) Project, was a five-year (2013–2018) Feed the Future initiative aimed to improve food security in Bangladesh by strengthening agricultural value chains. Implemented by DAI, AVC aimed to achieve broad-based economic growth and enhance long-term food security in 20 districts of the Southern Delta of Bangladesh by applying a market systems approach. • Partner Organization II: Musika, a Zambian non-profit company founded in 2011 with initial support from the Swedish Embassy in Zambia and UKAID. Musika’s mission is to stimulate and support private investment in the smallholder market. The overarching methodology, essentially ‘following’ the organizations for more than a year, was designed to understand which investments in CLA were the most beneficial for the organizations (and why), and to synthesize learning that could assist other projects working in different contexts to identify the investments that might be appropriate for them. More specifically, the case studies aimed to:  1. Identify and showcase the investments made to foster CLA, and the rationale behind them;  2. Determine the extent to which investments have impacted on project effectiveness, efficiency, and ability to achieve systemic change, and;  3. Draw preliminary conclusions on the role of cultural norms, institutional biases, and programmatic areas on how CLA is applied. Research was qualitative in nature and involved a mix of Key Informant Interviews (KIIs) and Focus Group Discussion (FGDs) with the organizations’ staff and key partners. Following learning and reflection from an initial trip, it was decided that research should emphasize a pivot log                    
9  methodology in order to better understand key decision-making points within the organizations’ life frames that were enabled by investments in their CLA ‘landscapes’.  For the purposes of this study, the key unit of analysis became decision points, or how CLA actually impacted how decisions were made over time. Utilizing the CLA landscape framework, research focused on capturing where decisions were made with regard to: • Internal processes: how did CLA investments impact on how the two organizations were managed day to day? • External processes: how did investments in CLA impact on relationships with external partners over time? • High-level decision making: Most importantly, did investments in CLA mean that Theories of Change were adjusted, or intervention areas scraped? To answer the questions posed above, the research team used a combination of staff observation and shadowing, key informant interviews with both internal and external stakeholders, and review of relevant project documents and guides.  Participants for key informant interviews with staff and management were selected both by recommendation and open call for contributions. Before arriving in each location, Skype and email discussions with senior management were used to identify key staff to interview. Using a snowball methodology, upon completing interviews, the researcher would inquire if the interviewee had suggestions for additional contributors. Finally, an open call was made to all staff to encourage anyone interested in being interviewed to express interest while the research team was in-country. The following table outlines, over the course of the two research visits, how many focus group discussions (FGD) were conducted with project staff, key informant interviews with project and donor staff, initial key informant interviews (KIIs) with project partners, and pivot discussions with partners or staff.  # of  KIIs with project and donor staff # of FGDs with project and donor staff # of initial KIIs with project partners Pivot story discussions (with partners or staff) AVC 13 5 2 7 Musika 8 4 13 9  Staff focus group discussions were organized according to (i) internal team structure to understand the differences and similarities between teams in how they viewed and used CLA                    
10  practices, and (ii) the length of time with the project, in the case of AVC, to understand how CLA practices and organizational culture had changed since the arrival of new management. Interviews with external parties, including other development projects, donor representatives, and private sector partners were organized by senior management or staff. For Musika, those partners selected for initial interviews were based on (i) length of partnership, (ii) sector, and (iii) geographic location, in order to gain a diversity of perspectives. Follow-up and more in-depth interviews were organized based on the ‘pivot’ stories identified. For AVC, all interviews with partners were selected based on the ‘pivot’ stories identified.  The information gathered through KIIs and FGDs was stored in a research project Google Drive with each interview / FGD then synthesized into a summary document at the end of the first research trip. These records and summaries were then used to create pivot tables which identified the: • Type of pivot (strategy or operational) • Learning which prompted the pivot  • Details of resulting pivot • Impact internally • Impact on partner • Impact on system  Tables were then translated into ‘pivot’ stories which were shared with the staff and management involved for verification of findings and additional contributions.  Admittedly, there is an inherent subjectivity to this research methodology. Interviewed staff were currently employed by each organization during the time of interview and were often very proud of the work they were doing (also a by-product of investments in CLA). Similarly, external partners that were interviewed were identified by the organizations themselves. There was no way for researchers to mitigate these risks without losing trust. Instead, the research team relied on a probing methodology to better understand key themes and learning. For example, if multiple individuals in different conversations made a similar point, then it was more likely to be a significant point of learning.  The first trips to both AVC and Musika took place over 15 working days to familiarize the research team with the CLA systems eachproject had in place, how these have been understood and                    
11  internalized by staff, andthe extent to which these have impacted onstaff motivation, working patterns andinteractions with partners.  The second research trip took place over 10 working days and focussed on specific ‘pivot stories’ of CLA in action. In addition, this trip assessed the extent to which the projects’ CLA systems and cultures have evolved since the previous visit and the rationale behind these changes. Internal interviewees were informed beforehand that their responses would be kept anonymous from management and in final publications. In interactions with external parties, if language and logistical constraints permitted, partners of each project were met separately from project staff to enable freedom of expression and opportunities to critique the projects’ methods or goals. Pivot logs allowed the research team to capture stories of change and link them clearly to impact. The drawback, however, was that to capture the link between CLA and impact, a pivot needed to have actually occurred. Even for organizations that have been around for a few years and that prioritize learning and adaptation – such as AVC and Musika - major shifts are still somewhat rare. This is why we have also included, where useful, discussion of decision points where ‘staying the course’ was chosen as the best way forward. This document outlines the key pivots that we were able to identify and capture into coherent narratives, which in turn are used to help answer some of the key research questions.  V.  PRESENTATION OF DATA AND DATA ANALYSIS Findings from this research can be broken into two categories: evidence that each organization had made investments in CLA; and evidence that these investments were linked to any sort of impact. The former is captured in the table below while the latter is summarized further in this section with the use of a pivot log. Component of CLA Landscape Type of Investment Examples  AVC Internal Processes Consistent messaging Staff energy was to be directed towards functions in the market rather than specific value chains, which required consistent reinforcement from management. The creation of informal spaces for increased The management team made several changes to the physical office space as well as created ongoing and one-off opportunities for informal interaction between staff. AVC’s                    
12  interaction Chief of Party did not have an office but rather sits in a grouping of couches in an open area of the office with a whiteboard nearby to help facilitate conversations. Open relationships between managers and staff Field offices were down-sized and some staff brought from the field to Dhaka HQ so they could work in person with other team members. Staff learning and capacity Paying for one-off trainings. For example, during the 2016 transition management brought in an external consultant to provide an internal staff ‘workshop’ to discuss challenges from previous years and provide staff with frameworks for the new approach of facilitation;  Mentorship relationships, which included investing management time to mentor staff who transitioned from administrative or operations roles to technical ones. This mentorship also extended to technical staff that had shown interest in expanding their skills and increasing their confidence with the systems approach. 
External Processes Shared decision-making amongst the project team AVC involved partners in its decision-making using the Adaptive Market Actor Agreement (AMAA) and the Blanket Activity Announcement (BAA). These two processes not only ensured that partnerships reflected the needs of market actors, they also allowed for flexible funding mechanisms that were adaptable to change. Flexibility in the duration, structure, and value of funding The Adaptive Market Actor Agreement (AMAA) was a non-binding agreement that acts as the overarching document for any partnership AVC has with a market actor.  The format was similar to an MoU but with more flexible language that allowed both the Market Actor and AVC technical team to come up with activities without the pressure of grant or procurement funding processes. Effective and timely M&E The Knowledge Management team tracked stated goals, outcomes, and indicators of each intervention that AVC was engaged in. These indicators were included as part of the Adaptive Market Actor Agreements as an Annex, which was done to ensure the indicators were not the focus of the market actors’ actions. At a minimum, these indicators were monitored once per quarter. High-Level Decision Making Capturing of systems-level data AVC invested in bringing in external consultants to support the launch of learning tools including the System Health Indicator and Market Actor Trackers (MATs), which allowed staff to better understand shifts in their operating environment and trends in the behavior of market actors.                      
13  Musika 
   Internal Processes Consistent messaging Musika’s Managing Director has prioritized sending very strong and clear signals to his staff, particularly when framing the organization’s goals, the value of learning and failure, as well as creating an overall atmosphere of collaboration and open communication. The creation of informal spaces for increased interaction Musika offers a variety of spaces for open discussion: physical, virtual, informal, as well as formal. For them, the goal is to increase conversation ‘density’, allowing space for ideas, questions, and learning to emerge. Open relationships between managers and staff Each staff has a line manager, who is responsible for any administrative concerns regarding that staff. As far as technical and strategic discussions go, staff may consult any of their colleagues and are encouraged to gather multiple perspectives. 
Staff learning and capacity • Paying for training courses that staff need to do their job better (e.g. SPSS and statistical analysis) on an as-needed basis; • Mandating field visits for all staff, including non-technical, administrative and management staff. Admin and management staff are given a minimum of one field visit per year where they interact with clients and see interventions first hand; • Hiring for complementary skillsets, and encouraging staff to learn from each other; as well as, • Investing in IT infrastructure to keep staff connected. All staff have access to the company email on their company-provided smartphones with data plans on carriers with good network coverage. Staff have laptops (if needed, e.g. field staff) and internet access provided by the company. Musika has IT staff on hand that are very responsive to staff needs and is available by phone.  External Processes Shared decision-making amongst the project team Staff share ownership over all Musika interventions, are on the lookout for opportunities, and are encouraged to discuss field observations across intervention areas. Flexibility in the duration, structure, and value of funding Flexible funding is enabled by a three-tiered system of grant-making, which subjects interventions to increasing levels of scrutiny depending on their value. Having layers of due diligence means that interventions have more third-party ‘eyes’ to question and analyze investment decisions. Effective and timely M&E Data is collected on a rolling basis, and updates are submitted to the grants committee, which will review the data along with the original MoU/agreement to assess if an intervention is on track. High-Level Decision Making Capturing of systems-level data Understanding what is happening at a high-level across Zambia’s agricultural sector requires a huge amount of data. As such, Musika’s Knowledge Management team conducts a survey each year to update their understanding of demographic make-up, income levels, and broad population trends in the areas in which they work. This is the backdrop on which they operate.                     
  As mentioned, this research was principally narrative-based, i.e. stories were used to convey the link between CLA and project effectiveness. Using the CLA landscape framework, stories were broken into: stories of internal change in how an organization was managed day to day; stories of changes in partnerships; and stories where high-level decision making (e.g. in which sectors to intervene) were impacted by investments in CLA. These in turn are broken into evidence of impact in terms of project effectiveness, better relationships with partners, and any indices that the investment contributed to systemic change as defined by the organization in question. The table below attempts to summarize these stories neatly. They are detailed further as narratives in the final research study and in Annex 3.  Strategy / Operation Learning Pivot Internal impact Partner impact System impact Internal Processes AVC - Contracting mechanisms. AVC develops new contracting mechanism to ensure market actors’ perspectives are accounted for in strategy building process Interventions not market actor led, too much emphasis on project goals rather than business growth goals. Development of BAA to allow submissions from potential partners year-round and AMAA to allow for collaborative strategy development with partners  Increased communication and coordination between technical, operations and knowledge management teams, meaning more effective strategies and learning processes Increased ownership by market actors of business strategies Process of systems changes starts sooner and happens faster (faster feedback loops)                      
 External Processes Musika – Dairy Processor. Musika seeks to expand dairy production in Zambia’s Western Province. Musika identifies  several barriers through learning process: processing capacity, farmer perceptions and transport issues. They issue challenge grant. Milk volumes do not increase. Based on learning, 'support' interventions are added including transport  Success in terms of how to build inclusive dairy markets; research is posted on Musika’s website for other development actors to see  Rapid increase in Western’s milk production and revitalization of processor’s facility Farmers in processor’s catchment areas rapidly increase milk production; household incomes rise AVC – NAAFCO. AVC works with agribusinesses to develop new agri-inputs spray service and product delivery models to reach more smallholders. Agro-input company (NAAFCO) sees more potential in spray service provider model than simple agent product provision model AVC follows partner lead, tests approach by co-designing spray service provider model based on analysis of local context and value for long term business growth Staff confidence increases on piloting strategies with agro-businesses; staff share learning experience among colleagues that encourage and allow competitive performance platform NAAFCO sees value in service model and considers iterating on model and expanding to other geographic areas; NAAFCO values the approach taken by AVC team  Shift from informal spray service provision to formal spray service provision. Other input firms are showing interest in copying the model and taking on more innovative business strategies. Musika – ATS. Musika develops inputs distributions models to expand access to smallholders. They partner with AllTerrainServices on an agent-based model. The model is not working well as agents are not paying back ATS. Musika and ATS agree to pivot to a adjusted model that lessens ATS’ risk. ATS notices some farmers in copper belt are irrigating and providing vegetables to mines. Musika and ATS agree to expand an intervention into the area.  Musika sees success in its inputs strategy and begins to wind down activities by moving into other intervention areas.  ATS develops new market around the copper belt; they have a new business model that opens up the smallholder market Farmers are better able to access quality inputs.                       
 High-Level Decision Making Musika – Financial payments. Musika seeks to improve farmer access to digital payments based on research that farmers will save more without access to direct cash. They partner with a cotton firm, NWK, on a scheme. The model largely fails as financial service providers (first Zoona, then Barclay’s, then MTN) fail to adjust their systems to client needs.  Musika and NWK agree to end initiative. Musika learns that digital payments intervention will need to wait for a better opportunity; they save $89 000 USD to be re-channelled elsewhere.  Limited. NWK mostly loses money on the initiative.  None 
AVC - Facilitation Firms. AVC identifies lack of BDS service providers for traders. AVC works with research and facilitation firms to develop a peer-2-peer platform for SMEs Shift in staff thinking regarding purpose of intervention, seen as opportunity to improve SMEs ability to network and leverage connections outside their traditional social networks 3rd party firms see potential for supply chain role (either as managers or quality control for a fee). AVC attempts to support them but does not receive approval.  AVC develops short-list of future partners for other initiatives and is now working with one in the flower sector.  Traders see value in collaboration, make joint investment in processing equipment, buyers see value in management services AVC embeds useful service (business facilitation) within the agricultural market ecosystem.                    
16  VI. DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS Returning to the initial hypothesis – that investments in CLA allow organizations to focus on the right objectives and enhance the sophistication of learning, in turn leading to improved results – the research study can state unequivocally that both projects have made significant investments into learning and that the CLA ethos is present within all aspects of how they function on a day-to-day basis. Determining the extent to which these investments have led to development impact, however, requires nuance. The following summarizes what this research has led to in terms of learning as well as gaps:  • Internal processes: Both AVC and Musika have made significant investments in internal processes that allow a culture of CLA to thrive, and in turn, foster more adaptive relationships with external partners. These investments involved consistent messaging, the creation of informal spaces for increased interaction, open relationships between managers and staff, as well as considerable investments in staff learning and capacity. • External processes: For both organizations, CLA within partnerships is enabled by shared decision-making amongst the team; flexibility in the duration, structure, and value of funding; as well as effective and timely M&E.  • High-level strategic decision-making for AVC/Musika is enabled by the capturing of systems-level data, which is turn fuels follow-on research.  These investments in CLA, in turn, were linked to change in the behavior of partners, particularly in terms of how partnerships were able to evolve over time. Likewise, investments in CLA were shown to have an impact on higher-level decision making with regard to which sectors to work in. However, it was more challenging to extend that link to development outcomes at the beneficiary level. For AVC, there were a plethora of examples of intentional investments that have been made in building a learning organization, the challenges this involved, and how partners responded. There were some signs of this translating into changes in partnerships with, for example, a subset of facilitation firms as well as NAAFCO.  With Musika, there were more clear examples of a logical connection between existing learning structures and firm-level development outcomes with some early indicators linking these changes to systems-wide change (i.e. Musika’s work in dairy processing).                      
17  Admittedly, these accounts relied on subjective recall from project staff and partners. Nonetheless, when these pivot stories are told in relation to specific investments made by both organizations in their respective CLA landscapes, a clearer picture emerges of how CLA enabled intervention variances that would likely not have happened (and certainly not in a timely fashion) had both projects not invested in CLA.  VI. REFLECTION ON METHODS At the outset, it was known there would be two main drawbacks with this research plan and methods. Firstly, there was a concern that the researchers’ presence would bias responses of staff and market actors. Secondly, the methods chosen did not offer a way to quantitatively answer research questions. However, it was determined that they offered the best means of unpacking how and why learning happens on the two organizations in ways that surveys and questionnaires simply could not. It was also argued that limiting the burden placed on staff was important as they had already made significant time investments into CLA and adding another administrative layer would detract from core activities.  After the first research trips, however, it was clear that a mix of interviews, staff observation and document review was not doing a good enough job of helping to capture the decision points that ultimately shifted some major aspect of either organizations’ strategy or how they operated internally. This meant that while the research team had a good sense of how learning, and subsequently, adaptation was occurring, this was not giving enough information about whether or not CLA had any link to overall effectiveness. This required narrowing the research focus for the second trips to emphasize key decision points utilizing simple pivot logs. One issue that became an unexpectedly thorny methodological challenge was the validity of the goals that both projects are orienting learning towards. A traditional evaluation focuses in some ways on assessing how organizations develop a Theory of Change (ToC) as well as the effectiveness of the activities they undertake in pursuit of said ToC. In our case, we were partly assessing how both organizations’ overall ToCs diverged over time in relation to learning, and whether or not these changes improved project effectiveness. This meant that while projects were practicing CLA, they were in fact changing key elements of project strategy over time, making it more difficult to assess the necessity of these changes with any sort of objective lens. In complexity terms, this meant evaluating in a ‘dancing landscape’.                     
18  To address this issue, the team decided to simply accept the internal logic of each project and to focus energy instead on changes with regard to specific intervention strategies as well as the evolution of specific partnerships. This means that the research team is less comfortable answering questions with regard to links between the ‘high-level strategic decision-making’ bucket of both projects’ CLA landscapes and its relationship to development outcomes. To give an example, the research team is comfortable drawing a link between CLA and a move from working with dairy processors to transporters but is less comfortable assessing whether working in dairy made sense to begin with.  A qualitative approach seems to have made the most sense given the nature of the research questions involved. To get a sense of whether organizational learning was happening and if it led to changes in strategy required asking probing questions and immersing the research team with both organizations sufficiently. This would not be accomplished well with surveys or questionnaires. However, a qualitative approach needs to be bound within some form of structure, in this case a pivot log, which filters out important information from that which is simply interesting. For example, staff at AVC often discussed the physical space of the office but it was clear that this was less influential in promoting a culture of learning than some of the more simple tools and processes that were less exciting to talk about.  Related, a pivot log may not be the most effective tool for analyzing CLA’s contribution to project effectiveness, as it requires a pivot to have actually occurred. In cases where learning led to a decision to ‘stay the course’ it is less useful. A tool that likewise captures decision-making as a unit of analysis but that is broad enough emphasize different types of decisions could add value.  For future researchers undertaking this type of study, it is important to emphasize low-intensity, long-duration relationships with projects. Building a culture of learning takes time and this, in turn, translates slowly into new ways of working with partners. This makes it important to have a longer time horizon in mind when undertaking this type of research and to limit to the extent possible any additional burden of projects/organization staff and their partners.  VII. CONCLUSION Both AVC and Musika have made significant investments in internal processes that allow a culture of CLA to thrive, and in turn, foster more adaptive relationships with external partners. These investments involved consistent messaging, the creation of informal spaces for increased interaction, open relationships between managers and staff, as well as considerable investments                    
19  in staff learning and capacity. For both projects, CLA within partnerships is enabled by shared decision-making amongst the project team; flexibility in the duration, structure, and value of funding; as well as effective and timely M&E.  These investments in CLA, in turn, were linked to change in the behavior of partners, particularly in terms of how partnerships were able to evolve over time. Likewise, investments in CLA were shown to have an impact on higher-level decision making with regard to which sectors to work in. Nonetheless, there is further need to develop, in the absence of a reasonable counter-factual, methodological tools that can connect these dots. For example, the findings captured in this research relate principally to relationships with partners and only make inferences with regard to how those partnerships have led to broader change. This is not the same as drawing a clear and distinct link between CLA within an organization and development goals such as improved household income. While the dairy processing example provides some indication that this link exists, inferences are speculative. Contributions from other EB4CLA learning group members cover areas beyond the scope of this research.                    
20  VIII. REFERENCES Allana, A. 2014. Navigating Complexity: Adaptive Management at the Northern Karamoja  Growth, Health and Governance Program. Available at:  https://usaidlearninglab.org/lab-notes/navigating-complexity-adaptive-management- northern-karamoja-growth-health-governance  [Accessed February 2018] Andrews, M., Pritchett , L. & Woolcock, M., 2012. Escaping Capability Traps through Problem-Driven Iterative Adaptation (PDIA) - Working Paper 299. [Online]  Available at: https://www.cgdev.org/publication/escaping-capability-traps-through-problem-driven-iterative-adaptation-pdia-working-paper [Accessed February 2018]. Andrews, M., Wild, L., Foresti , M. & Samji, S., 2014. Doing Development Differently, The DDD Manifesto Community. Available at: http://doingdevelopmentdifferently.com/ [Accessed February 2018]. Bear, M & Brekkers, H. 2018. In Search of the Sweet Spot in Implementing Market Systems  Development Programmes: Why and How Embracing Messiness is Key to Success.  Available at: https://www.enterprise-development.org/wp-content/uploads/MDF-Case- Study_Messiness_Jan-2018.pdf  [Accessed February 2018] Davies, Gareth. 2016. Getting to Scale: Lessons in Reaching Scale in Private Sector  Development Programmes. Available at: https://beamexchange.org/resources/785/  [Accessed February 2018] Dexis Consulting Group, 2017. Evidence Base for Collaborating, Learning, and Adapting Summary of the Literature Review. Available at: https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/eb4cla_literature_review_summary_spring_2017.pdf [Accessed February 2018]. Hinthorne , L. L., Salib, M. & Ziegler, J., 2015. Exploring the CLA Framework.  Available at: https://usaidlearninglab.org/lab-notes/exploring-cla-framework [Accessed February 2018]. Mercy Corps 2016. ADAPT Case Study: Building an Adaptive Team for Market Systems Development in Acholi, Uganda. Available at: https://www.mercycorps.org/sites/default/files/ADAPT%20Uganda%20case%20study_0.pdf  [Accessed February 2018] Rasmussen, L. 2014. Adapting Lean Thinking to Market Systems Development: Principles and Practices for Donors/Funders.  Available at: http://www.seepnetwork.org/adapting-lean-thinking-to-market-systems-development--principles-and-practices-for-donors-funders-resources-1315.php [Accessed February 2018].                    
21  Ripley, M & Major, A. 2015. The BOSS Project in Timor Leste: Thin Market, Thick Impact?  Available at: https://beamexchange.org/resources/393/. [Accessed February 2018] Shapiro, I & Salib, M. 2017. CLA is Strongly Related to Staff Empowerment, Engagement and  Satisfaction (blog post). Available at: https://usaidlearninglab.org/lab- notes/collaborating%2C-learning%2C-and-adapting-strongly-related-staff- empowerment  [Accessed February 2018] Springfield Centre. 2014. The Making Markets Work for the Poor Guide 2nd Edition. Available at:  https://beamexchange.org/uploads/filer_public/2f/37/2f37e789-1bea-4e83-b3b5- 35e22cc78382/m4popguidech6.pdf.   [Accessed February 2018].  USAID Learning Lab, n.d. The Evidence Base for CLA (EB4CLA).  Available at: https://usaidlearninglab.org/eb4cla [Accessed February 2018]. USAID, 2017. What difference does CLA make to development? Key Findings from a Recent Literature Review.  Available at: https://usaidlearninglab.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/eb4cla_lit_review_briefer_v3_20171127.pdf [Accessed February 2018].                                  
22  IX.  ANNEX 1 – Research Approach Element Measurement method Mgmt interview Staff interview Staff shadowing Partner interviews Document/ M&E data review Donor interview 1. Framing and tools Is there a strategy or strategic framework that guides the project in managing information and adapting its resource allocation and intervention tactics? How has this evolved over time? x x   x  What tools and processes (results chains, strategic reviews, after action reviews, weekly reports, in-house studies, etc.) are in place to contribute to CLA? How often are they used, revisited and revised? x x   x  2. Organizational culture, staff capacity and institutional biases What institutional biases and attitudes do (different levels of) staff display towards CLA? (e.g. box-ticking vs. co-developing a strategy with partners over time iteratively; admitting problems)  x  x    Are they candid in admitting problems and frustrations (without necessarily being prompted)? x  x    Are staff ‘hyper’-observant, curious, fascinated by surroundings, always seeking new ideas? • Do they take initiative to answer nagging questions; spontaneous “what if” and “how might we” conversations? • Do they seek peer review and ask for feedback (formally and informally)? • Do they consistently seek, prioritize and adapt to information and observations that are not formal or easily categorized before engaging with market actors?   x    Is M&E seen as part of every/most staff members’ jobs?  x x x  x  Has organizational structure changed over time to support CLA? How? What effects (positive & negative) has this had on other aspects of the program? x x x    Does management provide the ‘right’ mission and messaging? (e.g.“I want you to disagree with me”, “that was a great conversation”)    x    Has staff capacity - in terms of critical thinking, willingness to iterate and change course - been built? x x x  x  Is there a (positive) atmosphere of dissent and creative tension across the program whereby staff are encouraged and rewarded for sharing new ideas,   x                       
23  Element Measurement method Mgmt interview Staff interview Staff shadowing Partner interviews Document/ M&E data review Donor interview unexpected patterns of change, challenging others and the projects’ assumptions, and admitting failure?  Is management consistent with such messaging even in the face of contractual requirements, M&E targets, and donor visits?  x x    Is management engaged and involved in conversations?  x x    Do they encourage staff to run with new ideas?  x x    3. Sophistication/quality of learning Do (monitoring/all) staff adapt their metrics and methods to gather the ‘right’ information (on patterns of behaviour) as circumstances also evolve? x x x  x  Are behavior and/or attitudinal changes of relevant actors at various levels of the market system monitored?  x   x  To what extent does analysis and formal use of M&E data lag behind collection?  x x   x  Do staff successfully influence market actors to use information better themselves, thereby catalyzing CLA capacity within the system? x x x x x  Is strategy (as reflected in e.g. results chains and associated indicators) becoming more nuanced, sophisticated and complex (in terms of understanding and responding to local realities)? x x  x x  4. CLA management How/why have ‘programmatic pivots’ happened? Can we identify patterns in terms of triggers that motivate changes (i.e. new information (formal or informal), external events, roadblocks, or accomplishments)?  x x   x  Is achieving “ultimate impacts” the consistent focus of decisions to adapt (rather than innovation or experimentation becoming ends in themselves)?     x  What would have been the foreseeable outcomes if the decision to pivot had not been taken?  x x  x   After recognizing that a strategic change is needed, what has been the decision-making process around how to react (i.e. whether to drop, refine and/or add a new strategy)?  x x   x  What has been the time ‘lag’ (and associated cost) between the appearance of the failure/opportunity, the program noticing it, and making the decision to pivot? x x   x                       
24  Element Measurement method Mgmt interview Staff interview Staff shadowing Partner interviews Document/ M&E data review Donor interview  5. Donor and contracting management for CLA (For ‘younger’ projects) Did the timeframe and other constraints of the bidding process and inception phase allow the programme to get the right team in place, and train them adequately? x      Are there open conversations between management and donors about what is working and what is not on the project, and what is required to accelerate success?  x     x Have the program and donors managed to achieve a balance between space to innovate and pivot, versus accountability and reporting to meet donor requirements? • Are qualitative and early signals of systemic change recognized by donors as valid reporting of program impact? x x    x Did the program budget enough for capacity-building?  x     x Has the program used the fungibility of budgets/contracting to invest in ‘unforeseen’ CLA efforts? How easy or difficult was this to do? x     x What is the difference between SIDA, USAID (and other donors) contracting in terms of allowing for adaptive management? x     x 6. Reactions to adaptation and foreseeable counter-factual How have market actors been responding to changes in project strategy or activities? Have their behavior or mindsets changed in response? x x x x x  Are relations with market actors characterized by “us-and-them” type relations, or more collaborative relations? (In the former, the agency (Us) tells implementers (Them) what to do and when to do it, does not want to engage Them in solving implementation issues or developing programming, or adaptations are always considered contractual issues.) x x x x   What could have been some of the foreseeable outcomes if the project had not made the investments in CLA that it has? x x x    7. Challenges Examples where adaptation has not happened and why? x x  x   Does CLA drop in priority during periods that are busy for other reasons? x x                        
25  Element Measurement method Mgmt interview Staff interview Staff shadowing Partner interviews Document/ M&E data review Donor interview Is there fatigue from partners (e.g. due to too many studies, constantly being asked questions or change strategy)? x x x x   Are staff overburdened with CLA-related activities or feel fatigued from constantly being pushed to learn, change strategy, etc? x x x    8. Influence of and on other programs Can the impacts of the program’s work (on partners, value chains, market systems) be disentangled from other programs in the country? x     x Has the program influenced other programs’ in-country to adopt similar approaches to implementation, CLA etc? For what reasons (e.g. access to other pots of funding vs. genuine desire for better outcomes) x     x                    
26  X. ANNEX 2 – Data collection instruments & schedule  Focus Group Discussion (FGD) Guide for project staff  Guidance Note: Research approach in Annex 1 synthesized into following three overarching key questions. Frame discussion with:  • Ask question #1 - how does learning happen and get applied? (15 minutes) o Ask staff to reflect individually and write thoughts on sticky notes o Ask for examples - write on individual sticky notes and post randomly on flipchart o After collecting a large sample (at least 10 stickies) ask group to self-organize examples into different ‘types’ of learning. Allow them to categorize however they see fit. o After categorization ask them to re-organize the stickies by timeline - what happened first? What’s a more recent change? What happened in what sequence? What else was going on at the time? • Ask question #2 - what are enablers and inhibitors of this? (15 minutes)  o Separate another flipchart into ‘Enables’ / ‘Inhibits’ and as people respond write their thoughts under the appropriate category.  • Ask question #3 -  how does this affect project ability to perform/function and achieve outcomes? (15 minutes)  o push on the examples provided above for ‘how learning happens and is applied’ - how did this affect staff performance and outcomes? (i.e. what did staff say and do? What did partners say and do?) o On flipchart separate a page into 2 columns - one heading ‘performance’, one heading ‘outcomes’ - get group to define what performance and outcomes are. o Discuss impact of CLA efforts both internally and externally - post stickies under each heading.  • Final question as wrap up - what improvements or changes need to be made so that you can do CLA better in the future? OR What does a perfect learning environment look like? (15 minutes)  o Include as notes on the enabling or inhibiting sides of the flipchart.   Key Informant Interview (KII) Guide for project staff and management  Guidance Note: Follow structure below with adaptations as needed depending on role / knowledge of interviewee (e.g. operations staff interviews focus internally):  Tell me about your role with ‘x’ project? 1. From your perspective, how does learning happen in ‘x’ project?  2. How have partnerships changed as a result of learning?  3. From your perspective, how has the organizational culture at ‘x’ project shifted over time? 4. From your perspective, what constraints do you see to CLA in project ‘x’? 5. What would a ‘perfect’ learning environment look like to you?                    
27    Research Schedule   Project   Research Period  Activities  AVC Bangladesh   October 2016 Preparation for Research Trip #1 • Discussions on research work-plan via Skype with AVC CoP, Mike Field           AVC Bangladesh            November 6 – 24, 2016 Research Trip #1 • One-on-one interviews (x10) with AVC management and staff in Dhaka, Jessore and Barisal  • Focus group sessions with AVC teams including Knowledge Management, Technical, Operations and Administration • Focus group sessions with project ‘veterans’ (hired previous to CoP transition) and recent hires • Focus group session with Jessore Regional Office staff • Presentation on research aims to USAID Economic Development team  • One-on-one interview with USAID representative to AVC • Informational interview with USAID FtF funded Agricultural Inputs project • Informal interview with AVC private sector partners (during field visit to Jessore)  AVC Bangladesh   January 2017 Synthesis and analysis of initial findings  • Summary of one-on-one and focus group research notes • Discussion of initial findings, identification of gaps and design of follow-up questions for research visit #2 with AVC CoP • Development of framework for communicating good practice in CLA in AVC context and initial description of evidence for impacts on durable development outcomes  Musika Zambia   January / February 2017 Preparation for Research Trip #1  • Discussions on research work-plan via Skype with Musika Knowledge Management Team Manager, Jonathan Mwewa Musika Zambia  February 20 – March 8, 2017 Research Trip #1 • One-on-one interviews Musika management and staff in Lusaka, Kasama, Kabwe/Kapiri Mposhi • Focus group sessions with Musika teams including Knowledge Management, Technical, Operations and Administration • Interviews with Kasama and Kabwe/Kapiri Mposhi Regional Office staff • One-on-one interview with Musika donor representatives • Informal interviews with Musika private sector partners in Lusaka, Kasama and Kabwe/Kapiri Mposhi Musika Zambia Mid-March   Synthesize findings from research visit #1 • Summary of one-on-one and focus group research notes • Discussion of initial findings, identification of gaps and design of follow-up questions for research visit #2 with Musika KMT Manager                     
28  • Iterate on framework for communicating good practice in CLA initially developed through AVC research.  • Identify differences / similarities across both contexts (Bangladesh and Zambia) and evidence for impacts on durable development outcomes AVC Bangladesh Late March   Preparation for Research Trip #2 • Discussions on research work-plan via Skype with AVC CoP Mike Field AVC Bangladesh  April 9 – 20th, 2017  Research Trip #2 • Follow up one-on-one and focus group interviews with AVC staff and management in Dhaka • Follow up conversations with AVC donor, USAID on institutional biases and enabling environment for CLA within AVC and other USAID funded projects • Informal interviews with AVC private sector partners • Presentation of preliminary findings to AVC staff and management as well as USAID Bangladesh Economic Development Bureau  AVC Bangladesh Early May 2017   Synthesize findings from research visit #2 • Summary of one-on-one and focus group research notes • Discussion of findings with AVC CoP • Iterate on framework for communicating good practice in CLA initially developed through AVC research.  • Identify differences / similarities across both contexts (Bangladesh and Zambia) and evidence for impacts on durable development outcomes AVC Bangladesh + Musika Zambia May / June 2017 Cross-context comparison • Continue comparison across Bangladeshi and Zambian projects / contexts • Iterate on and revise framework for communication good practice in CLA in both contexts and evidence for impacts on durable development outcomes Musika Zambia July 2017   Preparation for Research Trip #2 • Discussions on research work-plan via Skype with Musika Knowledge Management Team Manager, Jonathan Mwewa Musika Zambia  August 2017  Research Trip #2 • Follow up one-on-one interviews with Musika staff and management in Lusaka • Field visits to Southern, Central and Western Provinces to conduct KIIs with Musika regional managers and private sector partners under the Inputs, Mechanization, Dairy and Vet Services intervention areas.  • Debrief and analysis of findings from respective field trips between research team participants (Amir Allana, Larissa Gross) • Presentation of preliminary findings to Musika knowledge management staff, gathering of feedback on findings so far Musika Zambia Late August 2017   Synthesize findings from research visit #2 • Summary of one-on-one and focus group research notes • Discussion of findings with Musika KMT Manager  • Iterate on framework for communicating good practice in CLA and connection to more durable development outcomes                    
29  Musika Zambia September 2017 • Iterate on framework for communicating good practice in CLA and connection to more durable development outcomes • Identify differences / similarities across both contexts (Bangladesh and Zambia) and evidence for impacts on durable development outcomes • Development of summary pivot narrative documents and CLA landscape framework for both AVC and Musika • First drafts of final product(s)  Musika Zambia October – December 2017  • Gather feedback on initial drafts from project teams and research team members (Larissa Gross, Amir Allana, Eric Derks) • Incorporate feedback on initial drafts and produce second drafts for wider dissemination (to CLAIM network team for review) • Participate in follow-up CLAIM network meeting in D.C. • Participation and contribution to joint-learning products with CLAIM network members. Musika Zambia January – March 2018  • Finalize product(s) developed from lessons learned  • Participate in final CLAIM network meetings                               
30   XI. ANNEX 3 – Pivot story narratives, expanded  Pivot Story 1 - AVC - Contracting Mechanism  With a change in AVC management in late 2015, the team recognized the following key issues in their grant process which conflicted with the project’s new approach of working with influencers (larger firms) in the agricultural market to catalyze positive shifts in the agri-business sector for both firms and farmers.  In particular the existing grants process:   • was not intuitive to market actors, in particular private sector actors • had a long funding cycle which was a barrier to motivating the private sector • was not adaptive, flexible or easy to adjust throughout the period of implementation • lent itself to AVC inserting itself into the market system rather than following the lead of market actors or focussing on the grantee’s business plans and growth • had deliverables focussed on USAID’s indicators and project objectives • solicited un-strategic requests   AVC decided to create an adaptive funding system that would assist market actors throughout the process in order to compliantly receive USAID funding and act as systems change agents within the market.   Internal Pivot #1 (December 2015 to February 2016): AVC’s Head of Operations researched, developed, gathered feedback on and sought approval from both USAID and DAI HQ on a new proposal solicitation process, the Blanket Activity Announcement (BAA), based on the existing USAID BAA. This modified the objective and the process of receiving USAID funding to be more collaborative and adaptive between AVC and the Market Actor. During this time, AVC’s Head of Ops developed guidance on the BAA process, a Concept Note form and Business Model Canvas form for market actors to submit for review, and the Adaptive Market Actor Agreement (AMAA), similar to an MOU, a non-binding agreement that would be the overarching document for any partnership AVC would have with a market actor.   This agreement allowed both the Market Actor and AVC technical to come up with activities and not be pressured by the grant or procurement funding process. This agreement allowed the flexibility to look at the market actor’s role within the market system and come up with activities that would help achieve overarching objectives of the firm and AVC. In late February 2016, AVC received approval from both USAID and DAI to go ahead with the BAA and AMAA as a pilot. USAID approved fairly quickly while DAI wanted a manual and procedures soon after the pilot. In early March 2016, AVC began receiving concept notes on a rolling basis and the Technical team began working on co-designed AMAAs with market actors.   Internal Pivot #2 (February & March 2016): Chief of Party and Head of Ops work with staff to understand the BAA and AMAA processes and work through initial kinks in the system. Through                    
31  internal discussion technical and operations team flag that the procurement process is too long if AVC intends to provide the same types of services repeatedly via in-kind grants. To reduce the amount of time in finding service providers for AVC’s market actors it was decided to issue Expressions of Interest (EOI) for various scopes that AVC would need over the next calendar year.  This would narrow down the pool of vendors for solicitation purposes allowing for limited competition and a timelier procurement process. Unforeseen at the time, this has also created a pre-selected pool of vendors that AVC could assist in capacity development for the market.  These were service firms (ICT, Marketing, Research) that were auxiliary services to the agricultural sector in Bangladesh. This also created a way for AVC to assist in market linkages between various agricultural business firms and auxiliary services for direct work and partnerships.  Internal Pivot #3 (March to June 2016): AVC puts out EOI solicitations for a number of services that could be used by private agri-businesses including marketing, videography, event planning, market assessments, graphic design, ICT, etc. During this period, the Head of Operations and program representative at DAI worked to codify the process and produce a BAA procedure manual including procedures, work instructions and forms. At the CLA Quarterly Meeting in April 2016, all staff were able to discuss and share their thoughts on the new contracting and market actor engagement process. After over two months of designing activities and several meetings with market actors to gain buy in from the private sector, AVC had yet to finalize an AMAA or move forward to the funding stage. The AVC market leads and the market actors needed more guidance on the process as both were getting stuck in activity designing months in advance instead of kicking off, adapting, and modifying along the way.    The management team, led by Head of Ops, increased investment in ensuring the technical team and market actors understood the AMAA process and didn’t ‘get stuck’ by: • Creating info graphic of process flow for AVC Technical team and held info sessions explaining the process flow, • Establishing a ‘kick off’ meeting to transition the technical team lead and market actor from activities generation phase to grant application phase. When the AMAA module #1 activities were finalized a ‘kick off’ meeting would to take place with the Grants Manager to explain next steps before the Request for Grant Application (RFA), • Creating a guidance sheet for the team lead to use with the market actor to assist in transforming the AMAA into a Grant Application, • Increasing messaging that these are adaptive agreements meaning AVC should work with the market actor to focus on the first couple months of implementation and then, at the quarterly review meeting, design the second half of the first module of activity.  In addition to the challenges of adapting to a new process, in terms of AMAA content, the focus of activities and deliverables was still on AVC’s contract deliverables with USAID and project indicators. To address this, the expected results and the project M&E indicators were removed from the messaging to market actors to re-focus interventions on advancing market system activities to drive business growth and, through that change, AVC indicators could be achieved. It was also decided that the AVC team (technical and KMT) needed to be primary data gatherers, rather than market actors. Lastly, the grants process was found to be an administrative burden to                    
32  both AVC team leads and market actors and involved a long process of due diligence. The grant application needed to be retooled.  Internal Pivot #4 (May 2016): Grantees were still getting stuck in the creation of the grant award budget, especially for activities later in the Period of Performance, so the Head of Operations met with market actors again to instruct them to focus on budgeting the first 3 months of activities so that we could get these grant applications finalized and get a grant request before USAID. Messaging to grantee applicants (market actors) was to have their applications be for the full period of the grant (ex. 6 months) but then the budgets would be for 3 months. This would be explained within the USAID request for Grant Concurrence. This guidance sped up the grant application process and assisted the AVC lead in their interactions with Market Actors.   Two main issues cropped up during this first round of grant applications: (1) there was a heavy administrative burden going back to USAID every time there was a change in a grant award and (2) grant awards are not adaptive or easy to modify. To address these issues, AVC consulted with the USAID COR and created an ‘Adaptive Letter Request’ which added language to their request letters including In-Kind grant ceilings and indicated the grant award would be adaptive and, most likely, be modified within the period of performance.   Lastly, at this stage, the BAA process flow and documentation needed to be linked for financial, grant and audit compliance. The Head of Ops worked with AVC’s Database/TAMIS administrator to create a data entry system to create market actor profiles and track a market actor from concept note to Grant Proposal linking Market Actors to technical procurements and AVC’s Grant Module in TAMIS.  The Liaison Team (created to address the issue of administrative burden with the new grants process) would be responsible for data entry of all market actor documentation pre and post grant award within TAMIS to assist in record management and compliance. The Liaison team uploaded and linked market actors’ data up to July 2016 and then entered documents and forms into the system on a rolling basis from then on.  Internal Pivot #5 (late 2016/early 2017): As first modules were coming to an end, AVC needed to figure out how to issue follow on grants, adapt, and co-design module #2 activities. There was no existing process and AVC’s grant manual had a clause that said follow on grant ceilings could not be larger than the initial grant – this would be counterintuitive for a market systems project. The Head of Operations researched follow-on grants within ADS Chapter 303 and worked with Contract Admins at DAI HQ to get AVC’s grant manual to be modified to match the language within ADS Chapter 303 – therefore a Grant Manual Update request to the USAID CO was needed.  A process flow and infographic were created to assist AVC staff and Market Actors with the Follow-On Grant Process.  Ongoing: There has been continued delays in market actors submitting deliverables on time and needing no cost extensions due to activities not being executed as stated in their initial work plans. The team has discussed changing the deliverables in round two to a quarterly update in presentation form (rather than report) as there is continual MRM data gathering and ongoing technical team support throughout the quarter. Two key points for adaptation were (1) a need for                    
33  a more in-depth post award meeting and (2) involving KMT more in developing the deliverable schedules so that if specific documents were needed by KMT for DQA they would be within the grant agreement.    Pivot Story 2 - Musika - Dairy Processor  Based on research, market intelligence, situational awareness, and field interviews, Musika launched an intervention in the dairy sector in Western region of Zambia in late 2012 aiming to increase incomes and economic health of the region, one of the poorest in the country. Western region has a high cattle population as compared to other parts of the country and vast grasslands. However, most Zambians living in Western region own cattle but do not use them for commercial purposes (milk or meat). The health of cattle herds is poor and results in low milk yields and poor-quality meat. Western region is a net importer of milk as well as goods, in general. So, effectively, cash is flowing out of a region that is already cash-poor.  Intervention #1 {begins late 2012}: Musika cost-shared and partnered with Agriserve on the development of a franchise location in Mongu to serve Western Province. The goal of this intervention was to improve herd health, help the vet sector offer services to the region, and ultimately increase the productive potential of cattle. MRM data collected indicated low sales at the location and this franchise location was eventually closed in 2015. To understand what was underpinning the low sales, Musika held focus groups with local farmers. These focus groups revealed that there was a lack of confidence in drugs sold, there was heavy reliance on traditional practices of cattle grazing, and farmers did not see value in the services offered. From these discussions, Musika identified that there was a need for a ‘pull’ or demand from an output market to encourage further investment in the quality of cattle herds and shift behaviour. This learning informed a strategy development process which included conducting research on the cattle stock in the Western Region and quantifying the commercial potential. This research was used to assess the viability of targeting the milk market and, upon verifying the potential, Musika issued a challenge grant, inviting proposals for solving the milk ‘problem’ in Western Province. This challenge grant was a tool to tackle the ‘problem’ as Western Region was primarily an untapped market with few established actors.   Intervention #2 {begins early to mid 2015}: A national milk processor wins the challenge grant with the idea to refurbish, upgrade, and operationalize an abandoned milk processing facility in Western Region. This intervention was tracked by the MRM team using indicators including volumes of milk sold and number of farmer selling milk to the facility. This information was important in guiding adaptation of the intervention as it evolved. Over late 2015 and early 2016 the facility was upgraded, and the processer hired an extension worker for the area to market to farmers, offering them spot payments for milk which farmers found preferable to bulk payments or contracts. The goal of the extension service was to improve farmers ability to maintain milk quality by providing technical advice. The processer also informed the farmers they would not purchase milk if bacteria count was above a specified level and tested the milk at the buying spot.                     
34  In the first half of 2016, the peak season for milk production, the volumes at the plant were low (~100 L/day of total capacity 20000 L/day). There were not enough farmers delivering milk, even after being approached by the extension worker, and there was not enough milk coming from the farmers who were selling. These poor MRM results pushed Musika to dig deeper with one of their staff going into the field to investigate. At the August 2016 Musika team retreat, the staff person researching the low milk volumes and Directors discussed initial findings on transport issues. Together, the team developed the idea of a transport intervention based on a comparison to the thriving cotton ginner transport model in Mumbwa. This also resulted in a shift in strategy to increase business density around the plant and ‘pull’ milk out of communities. To flesh out this strategy further Musika conducted research with the government vet camps in Western Region. These were community-managed, structured groups where people herded their cattle together, and government VA’s provided outreach and services. Musika did a detailed analysis of the milk potential and where exactly (by vet camp) that potential was in relation to road access. An additional finding of continual intelligence gathering during this intervention was that many communities in the area rely on remittances from wealthy, respected family members that live in other parts of Zambia. This finding informed a short-term strategy detailed below.   Intervention #3 (mid 2016): Musika identified wealthier family members who sent remittances to the target population in Western Region. These remittance senders were very respected within the community and the intervention aimed to leverage these key individuals to: (1) influence communities perceptions about the importance of selling milk and (2) spark investment in the region through the wealthy remittance senders’ networks. Musika supported exposure visits, traditional council announcements to communities, radio announcements featuring the influences / remittance senders up to August 2016. Unfortunately, this intervention began to backfire, as the remittance senders started to use the radio announcements as a way to advertise their own wish to buy milk. They established a company name and expressed their desire to act as middleman. Musika wrapped up the intervention as originally planned and stopped working with them late in 2016 as this did not align with their strategic goals. Through conversations with farmers, there were more that were willing to sell indicating a shift in perspectives. Volumes did increase but not significantly.   Intervention #4: In regard to the transport intervention idea above, based on where vet camps were located and their relative position to road access, Musika signed a deal behind the scenes where they calculated the break-even point for the transporter (10,000 ZMW/month) – the milk processer would pay the transporter, but the transporter also received a commission per litre. In summary, the floor payment per month for the transporter was 10,000 ZMW but there was an opportunity to make more on top of this amount. Musika guaranteed this for 6 months in order to buy down the risk of integrating transport into the milk processers model. Musika also provided a second-hand vehicle for the transporter to use, a capital asset investment.   MRM data collected on this intervention revealed that the transporter far exceeded the floor earning 25,000ZMW and continued this trend in the second month. Seeing an overwhelming business case for this service, Musika cancelled the 6-month floor guarantee as the business case had been proven to the transporter. This learning and adaptation, which did not compromise                    
35  the intervention goal, saved Musika resources. Ongoing MRM data has shown that volumes rose rapidly and hit a peak in 2017 of ~4000L/day achieving 20% capacity of the Western region processing centre. Through intelligence gathering and conversations with partners, farmers becoming more trusting of the daily, regular transport truck and, relatedly, the milk processer. With increased trust, the farmers were now willing to accept payment on credit and the milke processer moved to using digital payments, giving farmers receipts, and reducing the risk of carrying large amounts of cash for spot payments. Some farmers also agreed to sign contracts and began receiving embedded services through the milk processer’s extension officer. There is also interest from cooperatives who are reaching out for collection routes to extend to their locations.   While annual milk volumes processed were increasing, MRM data did indicate a sudden drop in milk volumes just after the wet season (March 2017). This finding triggered an investigation in Musika and though informal conversation with farmers it was revealed that when lowlands flood, cows are moved to highlands far from collection points and where feed is poor. Land owners in the highlands allow the farmers to keep their cattle on their land in exchange for the manure that is used to fertilize their lands. The cattle are entrusted to someone hired by the land owner and farmers stipulate they can use the manure but no milking. This presented a new problem – during this time there is no milk produced, nutrition levels are depleted and there is a lag time to get cows back into milking schedule. Regardless, the milk processer is projecting a doubling of production in 2017 once the cows come back to pasture.  
 Graph: Milk Volumes, Milk Processor Mongu Processing Plant  Intervention #5 (mid 2017): With the learning above on the seasonality of productivity spikes, the goal of this intervention shifted to increasing production year-round. A decision was made at the headquarter level that Musika would work with the transporter to produce offseason cow-feed to sell to farmers as a new line of business. Musika provided a bailer to the transporter but MRM data shows that this is not currently being used where it had been agreed it would be. Prior to the  - 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000 70,000 80,000 90,000
Oct-15Jan-16May-16Aug-16Nov-16Mar-17Jun-17Milk (L)Milk Volumes, ZamMilk Mongu Processsing Plant
Plant onlineExposure visitsScheduledmilk collection service beginsLowland fields flood                   
36  purchase of the bailer no research was conducted on the demand for offseason cow-feed and farmers’ willingness to pay. In addition, the milk processer has already established a contract with an auxiliary feed company which supplies their dairy and other farmers in other parts of the country. This shows that this issue of feed is already being addressed by the private sector and Musika may not have needed to step in. Intervention #5 highlights where the grants process might have broken down in regard to communication between HQ and the field as well as providing enough time for sufficient questioning of the intervention.  Intervention #6 (ongoing) – veterinary service: The goal of this intervention is to increase production by introducing more milk-producing breeds of cattle into Western region. Agriserve, who have a breeding programme division, approached Musika wanting to work on breeding issues to improve milk production. Specifically, Agriserve is trying to promote AI, through partnership with government VAs at the vet camps. This model would provide free medication for the animals but charge for the AI. This arrangement was proposed as Agriserve had seen Ultravetis (their competitor) offer AI but with a low success rate do to the poor health of animals. Altogether, Agriserve proposed a package deal – 24 hours on call vet service, drugs, vaccinations and the AI which the farmers pay for. The MD of Musika was critical of this MOU as Musika is covering a significant amount of the cost. The field office manager who championed the partnership now also sees flaws in the design. Agriserve is charging a significantly lower price than the actual cost which has implications for the financial sustainability of the package offering. AI as a stand-alone has been seen as successful but there is a lag time before milk production benefits will be seen. Intervention #6 is another area where the grants process might have broken down.  Intervention #7 – (MoU signed in mid / late 2017) extension model in response to demand from co-ops, unserved villages with long transport times: The goal of this intervention is to expand the number of farmers benefitting, in particular, those located in areas with transport times too long for milk to survive uncooled, increase milk volumes at  the main plant, and to test a new configuration where farmers receive extension, vet care, and sell milk at a centralized location. Musika and the milk processor have signed a new intervention plan where the processer will establish 3 milk collection centres in the most remote parts of the region aligned with where there is demand. Milk collection centres will have pre-screening and provide cooling tanks so that the milk can then be transported. The vision for this intervention is that these milk collection centres can also be livestock service centres where farmers can access services. The milk processer is paying for the location and procuring the slabs while Musika is procuring the cooling tanks. The processer will partner with others to provide services (transport, collection) and, as such, expand on the model that has already been proven in the earlier phase of the partnership. If these additional services are not provided, Musika will pull funding. The processer currently has two transport companies they are working with and are responsible for finding additional transport options as the profitability of this model has already been proven in the region.  Intervention #8 (small example of learn-adapt-respond): The field office manager for Western speaks directly with the milk processer plant manager in Mongu as part of ongoing review meetings and check-ins. The plant manager has highlighted an                    
37  ongoing issue of milk spoilage before it is even collected i.e. milk that fails the on-the-spot test at sales point. Part of the issue is the collection containers – plastic and contaminated instead of milk-specific stainless steel. The plant manager noticed that a chain of stores sells the appropriate containers and there is a branch in Mongu. Musika HQ arranged a meeting in Lusaka where an MOU is negotiated between the milk processer and the chain store HQ. They will supply the Mongu milk plant with bulk supply of containers, which the milk processer will provide on soft loan to farmers and farmers can pay this off when they supply milk. In this case, Musika acted as facilitator of the connection as Musika and the milk processor HQs had the credibility to push through the idea with the chain store.    Overall implications and impacts of CLA on this intervention evolution: Musika spent over $220,000 on the challenge grant tool (Intervention #2), then spent an additional $6,000 on the exposure visits (Intervention #3) and $39,000 on the in-kind investment of the second-hand vehicle (Intervention #4). The value of this asset is recoverable, as the milk processor will be buying the asset from Musika at its depreciated value at the end of the partnership. Between November 2016 and February 2017, the milk processer bought over 235,000 litres of milk from farmers, which put over US $79,000 into the pockets of smallholder farmers. If the milk volumes would have stayed at October 2016 levels1, which is likely without the additional investments Musika made (Interventions #3 and #4), the milk volumes for the November to February period would have been closer to 85,000 litres, equating to farmer earnings of about US $28,000. Thus, the rate of return on the intervention was multiplied almost three-fold by follow-on interventions that arose out of “CLA” practices.   Pivot Story 3 – AVC - NAAFCO, Input Supply Firms Expand to Southern Delta  Intervention #1 (early 2016): As part of AVC’s strategy to target actors that can catalyze change for not only their immediate supplier and client farmers, but also the wider system, the team worked with NAAFCO to train and brand independent agri-service providers to support farmers with pesticide use. The intention from AVC was to shift the sector from informal spray service provision to formal spray service provision bringing about benefits to the quality of crops produced, building trusting relationships between NAAFCO, the spray service providers and farmers as well as health benefits as chemicals would be less likely to be used improperly.   NAAFCO saw more potential in the spray service provider model than an agent product provision model. This initial intervention brought about a mindset shift within NAAFCO on how to solve problems. They became more willing to take risks and try new models with AVC’s support. During the first six months of engagement, NAAFCO demonstrated commitment to the strategy by investing their own time and resources and wanted to continue trying new things, testing innovative ideas with AVC as a partner. NAAFCO management were excited and very responsive, and AVC found that they were an adaptive, champion partner. These observations, both from the technical and KMT team visits demonstrate the usefulness of AVC’s internal knowledge                                                 1 Assuming milk spot price of ZMW 3/litre, and exchange rate of 9 ZMW/USD.                    
38  management system – ongoing communications between technical staff and private sector partners, quarterly review meetings between technical, ops and private sector partners, liaison team management of deliverables schedule all worked together to provide relevant, up-to-date information on partner engagement.     Intervention #2 (Mid-2016, after first 6-months): NAAFCO moved to replicate the practice in other regions, planning as an input company to look at forward market points, develop a business service group with the intention of capitalizing on the good relationships they had built with end customers. NAAFCO, with support from AVC began to look at mango crops with the intention of acting as a service provider and buyer. With this focus on a new crop, NAAFCO brought in a consultant to teach pruning techniques from Thailand - capitalizing on their direct relationship with the community and keen to work with mango orchard owners in order to get quality product to export it. NAAFCO brought in mango bagging technology which helps to ripen and protect fruit from insects. NAAFCO now had a longer vision of the profit they could make in the mango sector and wanted the best product from the field to access export markets in the region.    Ongoing: In addition to providing information trainings on products to their retailers, NAAFCO wanted to develop a 2-way hotline for more efficient / targeted service of their customers’ needs. The information used for this hotline is sourced from NAAFCO’s customer database and demonstrates the impact of relational investment in their business. As of April 2017, the hotline had reached ~16,500 farmers in 5 months of operation.   Implications and impacts of CLA on this intervention evolution: At the firm level, NAAFCO saw an increase in sales and expansion in both scope (crops) and geographic coverage. At the farmer level, there was reduced waste and overuse of inputs, better crop outcomes and incomes as seen in a video produced by AVC with assistance from EcoVentures International.    Pivot Story 4 - Musika – ATS, Input Distributor  ATS, a major inputs distributor based in Lusaka, has district officers all over Zambia including a location in Central region in Ndola. Musika worked with ATS to pilot and expand a distribution network in Central region where input access was low among smallholders. ATS originally catered towards commercial farmers and was interested in serving the smallholder market.   Intervention #1 (2012): Musika signs an MOU with ATS with the goal of the intervention being to get farmers to buy from the store front in Ndola. There was a perception that demand for inputs was low because farmers didn’t know the store was there, a lack of awareness of how to use inputs, training on chemical use and an implicit assumption that ‘if they know this they will come buy’. Under this agreement, Musika would pick the ATS field officer from the town and travel together to different communities to do outreach. This was to test the assumption that knowledge of the shop would increase demand. Musika cost shared the meals provided at the farmer                    
39  meetings, pitch a business case for increasing yields to farmers, and ATS would provide technical advice on their inputs, market their product, and sell on the spot.   Intervention #2 (2013): Through informal review meetings with ATS, it was found that demand was increasing but sales were not going up in the store location - farmers would make purchases during outreach events but not at the store. This learning led to a decision to shift strategy towards an agent system which ATS was onboard with. The ATS agent would be established in a community or trading centre and ATS would provide stock to the agent on consignment to sell. Musika and ATS cost shared on training for agents including safe handling practices, storage, and other technical issues. ATS’ office provided their vehicle for delivery of products to the agents.   As the model rolled out, ATS had issues with several agents – many were not paying ATS back and, at times, the agents were not being paid by community members. However, net sales were increasing (graph below). ATS sat down with Musika and expressed concern about the agent system and a desire to stop the intervention. At this time, ATS and Musika were also testing a post-harvest promotional sales run – going community to community while the farmers were cash rich. The success of this model prompted further adaptation.  
 Intervention #3 (End of 2013 / 2014): The post-harvest sales run pilot inspired the idea of a mobile sales points – which still involved agents, but their role would be to aggregate demand and place an order with ATS at a designated time. ATS would then bring the products ordered plus extra supply to the point and the agents would get a commission on orders placed. Musika’s support to ATS wound down as this model took off primarily providing monitoring and technical advice. In addition, without Musika support, some ATS agents became providers or stockists for ATS. Around the same time, ATS’s expanded network noticed and brought to Musika’s attention that there were large orders to their agents in the Copper Belt were coming from agro-dealers in the North West (NW).  020040060080010001200
0100200300400500600700
2012201320142015# FarmersSales (ZMW)Thousands
YearATS Smallholder Sales in Central Region
Sales (ZMW)# Farmers                   
40  Intervention #4 (2014): Based on this learning, the ATS and Musika team travelled to NW and conducted an informal market assessment and discovered that there was low input use and very high input prices. There was a ‘monopoly’ of stockists with no provision of technical support. Musika and ATS conducted a formal market assessment to document the sales potential in the NW and identify locations in the NW that have had zero inputs penetration due to poor road infrastructure. At the end of 2014, Musika and ATS signed an intervention plan to buy down the risk to expand into the NW and expand access to inputs and knowledge. The IP stipulated that ATS would travel to NW for 1 to 2 weeks per month and establish an agent model as they had done previously. During those 1 – 2 weeks Musika would cost share the fuel for travel while ATS would use their own vehicle. Musika would also cost share on any trainings ATS decided to do – either to agents or anyone else - on a rolling basis.  Intervention #5 (early 2015): Based on demand from NW, ATS decides they need a central distribution point for the NW out of which their agents could operate. With Musika’s advice, ATS established a franchise agreement with a distributor in NW. This strategy initial worked well but then the partners of the distributor stopped making payments for the stock. ATS took on a large loss and had to go to NW to reclaim stock. ATS sat down with Musika to discuss the need for this central distribution point and their concerns about partnership with existing distributors. After discussion, Musika makes an addendum to the MOU – all fuel support is stopped and Musika agrees to provide an intern for ATS to establish a distribution point in the NW and a motorbike for the intern’s transport needs. This agreement is for 1 year.  Intervention #6 (2016): Musika and ATS hold a review meeting. The intern has left the stockiest they were paired with and the motorbike has been retained with the stockiest. ATS still has to go into NW to provide heavy support to the stockist and agents. As part of review meeting, ATS and Musika crunch the numbers and determine there are not enough sales to justify bringing in permanent staff. ATS wants to try to create demand so they pitch a new proposal to Musika. ATS has noticed in NW there are a number of farms that are producing English vegetables to supply the mines in the Copper Belt. These mines need ongoing supply to feed their staff and are willing to pay a premium price.  The mines are currently procuring vegetables from Lusaka which speaks to an unsatisfied demand. A key constraint for vegetable crops in NW are pests and weeds. ATS decides a way to increase demand could be to offer spray services for those vegetable farmers who are then able to access premium prices. This intervention is ongoing.  Implications for impact and CLA: Throughout all of these MOUs, the key indicators being tracked with ATS and reviewed at review meetings was the number of agents, number of sales, number of communities reached, and number of new agro-input firms operating in the area. Season over season between 2012 and 2015, guided by MRM indicators in their agreement to work together, Musika and ATS tested multiple different models of input sales and distribution. Regular review meetings, a component of the operational elements of the learning landscape, and adapting tactics were paramount. This support continued until the intervention “took off” in 2015. Without adaptation, perhaps the sales would have remained at 2012 and 2013 levels; thus CLA helped greatly enhance the effectiveness of the intervention.                     
41       Pivot Story 5 – Musika – Cashless Payments System  Under this strategy, Musika’s goal, was to spur innovation in the Zambian agricultural sector that spreads and benefits smallholder farmers. Specifically, the goal of this intervention was to develop and pilot a mechanism by which smallholders could be paid digitally, thus reducing cash transactions which improves: (1) security; and (2) financial management by encouraging savings, a step towards bankability. Musika found two partners interesting in developing something together: NWK, a cotton ginner; and Zoona, a service provider. The mechanism used was a grant with specific allowable expenses: R & D, marketing, testing of the system. The goal was for NWK to pay 20,000 of their cotton farmers via a digital finance mechanism.   Intervention #1 (2013): Musika signs grant with NWK and service provider (Zoona) to build and pilot a mechanism to have cashless transfers for the 11 NWK sheds that they buy cotton from suppliers. The grant structure required the partners to pay for expenses up front and then claim from Musika. This process of paying back so the arrangement required partners to have the case available. Musika covered specific costs including programme management such as salary for a programme manager and field staff, operational costs for NWK fields, marketing costs, radio, flyers, and incentives for adoption. Zoona, uses the pot of money Musika provided, to do business analysis, software development, testing, field visit, technical support to NWK field staff, and outreach and training regarding the payment system.   Intervention #2 (2014): Six months into the agreement, Zoona pulled out of the grant therefore, in 2014, they were not ready for roll out. Musika puts an addendum to the MOU, and the money is reallocated from Zoona to NWK with NWK responsible for finding an alternative option – either another service provider or another option. NWK, who bank with Barclay’s, decide to bring the bank onboard in order to use their basic debit card option which allows withdraw and deposit functions. This was seen as a low-cost option to try as they were already with Barclay’s. This option is tested with 1000 farmers given a payment debit card. As the pilot target was 20,000 farmers this is considered a pilot within a pilot and rolled out for the 2015 season. NWK’s buying period is between March and May therefore the impact season by season are discussed below.  Season 1 (March – May 2015): The Barclay’s option was undercut by poor ATM availability with ATMs at times down for a week at a time. Farmers would travel to the ATMs (sometimes up to 50km) to find it not working. Often farmers would see fellow farmers being paid in cash and this led to frustration and social tension. In addition, the Know Your Customer (KYC) process was laborious which restricted the pilot within a pilot group to 1000 farmers.  There was no compromise made by Barclay’s on their KYC process. During the second half of 2015, after buying season ended, Musika and NWK reviewed and decide that Barclay’s is not a good option for the mechanism. No change was made to the grant structure and Musika pushes NWK has to go                    
42  through a tender process to see what options are out there. NWK receives a number of applications from banks and mobile companies and NWK and Musika decide to award MTN the contract. MTN included a few stipulations in this agreement including exclusivity from NWK. This was requested as MTN would be making investments in network strength in certain areas and they wanted a guarantee these costs would be recouped. MTN also negotiated a minimum number of farmers (12,000) that will be paid through the system. Reaching the end of the grant, because of the slow start, Musika gives a no-cost extension for a year.  Season 2 (March – May 2016): NWK begins outreach to farmers to register them on the MTN mobile system but many of the farmers do not have handsets or were not compatible. With this barrier identified, NWK and Musika sign another agreement in which NWK procures 10,000 phones and Musika procures 5000 at 50 kw/phone. NWK distributed the phones along with the seed (cotton seed) early in 2016. MTN’s implementation strategy was not carried out in a timely way - people were not registered properly or were not registered on the mobile wallet. Key low coverage areas were not upgrade before the season finished. MTN alerted NWK in March that they would not be ready. NWK started backtracking with their farmers but it wasn’t all done on time – they had already started picking up the cotton and tried sending payments – these did not go through. Farmers were again frustrated. In May, even for those who were registered and did get money, the MTN agents in the area did not have enough money for the withdrawals.  As a Band-Aid solution, in May, the input shops connected to the ginner - all of these shop owners became mobile money agents to pay out the farmers. NWK was stretched financially as their cash flow needs doubled – they were paying out from HQ through mobile money but then also had to make sure there was enough money in the mobile money agents at the ginners – and all of these activities were paid for up front then expensed to Musika. By 2017, NWK has followed up with MTN sitting with their CEO and entering a complaints process. This process has not moved forward.   Season 3 (March – May 2017): NWK has gone back to cash except for their ginner level traders and labourers who are now all now cashless due to better reception areas. NWK wants Musika to continue supporting them but they did not try a roll out this season. In review meetings between NWK and Musika, NWK does not see it as their responsibility to make the mobile money option work, rather they see it as the responsibility of an NGO or government. Based on their attitude and lack of investment this year, Musika will not be continuing the grant. Musika decided to terminate the agreement freeing up USD $89,000 of unutilized resources that could now be re-allocated to other initiatives.  CLA implications: The partnership was originally for two years (i.e. two seasons) though, following a review meeting, this was extended for a third due to changes in partners. After trying two different systems and dealing with massive logistical missteps, Musika terminated the partnership based on an ongoing MRM process which determined the: - Goal is not being achieved (adoption, momentum was not there) - System was not scalable or durable - Partner (NWK) did not demonstrate sufficient buy-in                     
43       Pivot Story 6 – AVC – Facilitation Firms BDS Services  AVC identified a lack of BDS service providers for traders in the Southern Delta region where business acumen was poor. With this in mind, AVC worked with research and facilitation firms to develop a peer-2-peer platform for SMEs to convene working groups of traders.   Intervention #1: AVC provided business incubation support to NGO spinoffs and SMEs. Through staff observation, AVC determined NGO spinoffs were not receptive to the idea and, generally, had an extractive approach. AVC shifted their energy to SMEs and engaged with facilitation firms (CDC, BIID, LCP) to convene ongoing working groups of SMEs with the intention of increasing business acumen and linking them to potential business opportunities and win-win relationships.  Phase 1 (6 months): The facilitation firms brought onboard by AVC convened informal and formal meetings between traders and other traders as well as farmers. The first few months of meetings were characterized by high levels of distrust between traders and the facilitation firms. The firms expressed that they needed time to allow this relationship to build and took about 4 months to develop trust with the traders. As a way of building trust and planning content, firms engaged community / business leaders informally to share their plans and get input on what information would be most useful for the groups. Traders slowly became interested as they saw an opportunity to gain knowledge that could help grow their business and became concerned about competition from the north moving into the Southern Delta.   AVC monitored and gathered information on the effectiveness of this strategy by observe trainings once a month to understand the usefulness of content. AVC tried to keep a low profile, posing as a member of the facilitation firm when gathering feedback from traders. From these observations during meetings, AVC made the decision to call off their partnership with one firm. Attendees expressed that the content was too general and not useful for the participants.  Intervention #2: With the facilitation firm, AVC supported traders from one working group to attend an agricultural fair in Dhaka. Most had never been to the capital before and didn’t see the fair as a space for them. From this group, through the vendors they were exposed to at the fair, a small group decided to buy a processing machine for pulses. This intervention took the interests expressed by traders in the working group and brought about tangible action.  Phase 2 (6 months): AVC and facilitation firms began a process of determining if large buyers were willing to pay for this convening and BDS services. The business case was framed a potential value-add for large buyers where the facilitation firm would off-sets costs for the buyers by helping traders provide better quality supply with less waste. AVC considered a subscription-based network fee but there was not enough time to demonstrate value to traders yet. For the                    
44  facilitation firms, they see the social impact potential of this arrangement as well as opportunity for a paid relationship with large buyers who see value in their service offering. One facilitation firm has set up office in Jessore (LCP) in addition to their Dhaka office so that they can be close to the clients.   XII. ANNEX 4 – CLAIM learning journal reflection excerpts   February 2017 Progress Report Excerpt - Adaptation of CLA Research Methodology and Implementation  Based on the initial research visit to AVC Bangladesh and the activity findings highlighted above, Pollen Group and Canopy Lab will adapt their research strategy in the following ways for the second research trip scheduled for April 2017: - Increase observation time: As the first research trip was mostly based on recall from staff and management during semi-structured one-on-ones and focus group discussions, the research team will ensure more time is spent observing staff and management CLA behavior in everyday contexts. This will be accomplished during the Quarterly Learning Meeting which falls during research trip #2 (April 2017).  - Focus on ‘pivot analysis’: Building on the strong understanding of the project gained in the first visit, the research team will narrow in on specific stories of strategic pivots made by the AVC team informed by the learning tools, processes, and activities outline above. We anticipate these ‘pivot’ analyses across several examples will highlight trends in how CLA may or may not support more durable development outcomes. This focus will require the research team to review implementation plans and MRM data for each pivot identified and conduct targeted interviews with staff and market actors engaged in the specific pivots. The questions for these targeted interviews with market actors will be developed with feedback from the project contact point for each market actor engaged in a pivot.  - Connecting staff performance to market actor behavior change: Related to the ‘pivot analysis’ focus the research team will also more generally look at how the investments in CLA identified and related impact on staff performance contribute to market actor behavior change and related durable development outcomes. This will require the team to articulate plausible pathways of contribution (from staff behavior to systems change) and develop ‘tests’ to see if these pathways hold. - Focus on trends / iterations on existing CLA tools / processes: Internally, follow-up questions designed for the 2nd research trip will focus on what has changed in the past 5 months between visits with an emphasis on how CLA tools and processes have been adapted to better serve the needs of staff and overall goal of the project. For example, it was identified that the current market actor tracker system is only available from a desktop and is not available on staff mobiles. This may impact staff’s likelihood to use the platform and subsequent usefulness for decision-making therefore we will follow up on if adaptation of this tool is needed and, if needed, what adaptation would be most useful to staff.   September 2017 Progress Report Excerpt – Application of Research Lessons, Initial Findings, and Revised Framing  Building on the lessons learned during the first 6-month research phase, during the 2nd phase Pollen Group and Canopy Lab aimed to:                    
45  - Increase observation time. While the first half of the Musika research visit in late February/March relied heavily on recall from staff and management during semi- structured one-on-ones and FGDs, the research team spent 1 week in the field with staff as they engaged with market actors and relayed information between field offices and HQ. Similarly, the second research visits with both AVC and Musika included more time shadowing staff as well as observing them in formal settings such as learning meetings (e.g. a 2-day AVC Quarterly Learning Meeting in April).  - Focus on ‘pivot analysis’ as a tool for understanding decision-making. While the first research trips focused on contextualizing partners’ approach to CLA, the second research trips involved narrowing PG’s focus to investigate specific stories of strategic pivots made by the project teams. The results from this focus on pivot analysis will be outlined in the final report of the research project as Pollen Group and Canopy Lab are still compiling these narratives.  - Connect staff performance to market actor behavior change. Using the pivot analysis method, the research team looked at how CLA investments allowed staff to identify, vet, and use relevant information. The pivot table framing of ‘impact internally’ to ‘impact on partner’ and ultimately, ‘impact on system’ were used to demonstrate how and when CLA investments allowed staff to make better (i.e. more relevant and effective) decisions about how to engage with a market actor.  - Focus on trends/iterations on existing CLA tools/processes. While this was anticipated to be a significant part of the second round of research, the changes made to learning tools (with the exception of the format of the Quarterly Learning meetings at AVC) were relatively insignificant. So instead of looking at how tools/processes changed over time, the research team focused on staff’s understanding/perception of strategic, partnership and operational changes that had taken place since the project’s inception. This was achieved by building timelines for each of the pivots identified using testimony from staff, management, donors and partners; the latter of which was meant to verify the pivot stories told by project staff and management as well as understand the impact of strategy adaptation on individual partners.  By increasing observation time, we have been able to include more nuance in our pivot stories and the connections seen between CLA activities and strategic decisions. This allows us to communicate a ‘trajectory of change’ which is more reflective of the emergent process of learning and adaptation. In particular, the length of Musika’s operations have allowed a process of ‘organic’ organizational change – i.e. the processes, tools, norms that are deemed to work best persist while those that do not work for the team have fallen away. This has allowed our team to make conclusions about what CLA investments have the highest return on investment when aiming to achieve a particular development goal.  In AVC Bangladesh’s case, this ‘organic’ organizational change process has had to be sped up within a shorter timeline. The AVC management team is still in the process of testing many different types of CLA investments and determining their efficacy therefore it is more difficult for our team to determine what investments will have the most ROI for achieving durable development outcomes. In addition to the iterations on methodology detailed above, building on the findings discussed in Progress Report #1, research trips investigated the following components of CLA:  1. The relationship between informal investments and mentorship, as well as tools/processes, on staff confidence and performance. The importance of the role of leadership, in particular Chiefs of Party/Managing Directors, in setting the tone of the                    
46  organization and actively ‘demanding’ a learning approach of their teams cannot be understated. Learning tools and processes, whether they be monitoring templates, quarterly learning meetings or formal research projects play an important role in structuring the learning landscape and creating a ‘schedule’ of learning but the ability, willingness and consistency of leadership to engage staff on questions of the efficacy of strategy, set the expectation of ownership, and create a culture of dialogue is essential in cultivating a learning organization.  2. The relationship between staff performance with regard to CLA and project outcomes. The research team shifted its focus to telling pivot ‘stories’ which build a narrative of how CLA investments had contributed to a strategic trajectory and informed changes or maintenance of partnerships, strategies or operational activities over time. 3. The relationship between contracting processes and CLA results. The AVC Bangladesh team has invested heavily in adapting its contracting process so that it is useful to the needs of a learning organization. On the one hand, this investment has helped the technical team to adapt their strategies when necessary; on the other, this process has been intensive for both the technical and operational teams. In comparison, Musika has established a grants committee process that is both rigorous (e.g. involves several layers of discussion and evaluation of proposals) and adaptable (e.g. MOUs are expected to be amended). This allows learning and adaptation to be at the center of their activities.  Lastly, based on these initial findings regarding the relationship between CLA and outcomes, the research team has framed how the two programmes operationalize CLA using the following components:  - Operational – the nuts and bolts of how decisions are made once a strategy has been set. For example, Musika’s grants committee structure allows for three types of grant engagements with market actors (component grants or cost-shares, medium grant projects, and challenge funds).  - Strategic – the larger scope of investments into informing existing or new strategic aims. These collaboration and learning activities include targeted research into a sector (e.g. a research paper on uptake of mechanization in agriculture in Zambia and current barriers within a market), investigations into the impact of interventions (e.g. surveys, FDGs, etc.), or conversations with market actors about trends in the agricultural sector.  - Enabling – internal investment in a project’s ability to learn and staff’s ability to perform roles as systems-change agents. This includes hiring practices, investment in staff (training, education, exchange visits, etc.), spaces for open discussion (team meetings, retreats, daily lunch), IT and communication infrastructure, as well as messaging from management.  