 
 
 
EXPANDING  DEVELOPING 
COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ 
USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS 
FOR TRADE   
 
 
 
 
July 2018  
This publication was prepared for review by U.S. Agency for Intern ational Development b y Kati 
Suominen  on behalf of Business for eTrade Development, Inc., and submitted to agreement  officer’s 
representative, Paul J. Feke 
 
 EXPANDING  DEVELOPING 
COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’  USE 
OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE  
JULY 2018 
Kati Suominen  on behalf of Business for eTrade Development, Inc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contracted under AID-OAA -F-17-00015 . 
The author’s views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States 
Agency for International Development or the United States Government. 
 
 CONTENTS  
Figures 18  
Table s 4  
I Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  1 
II Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 5 
III Extent and Development Effects of Platform -Enabled Trade  ................................ ...........................  6 
IV Methodology for a Database on Policies Key to Platform -Enabled Trade  ................................ ...... 13 
V Results of Policy Mapping  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  18 
VI Summary of Findings and Policy Roadmap  ................................ ................................ ....................  44 
VII Next Steps  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 50 
Appendix I – Policy Issues Mapped  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  51 
Appendix II – Limitations to Policy Scoring  ................................ ................................ .............................  53 
 
FIGURES  
Figure 1 - % of Firms that Export, Manufacturers vs. Platform Sellers  ................................ .................. 7 
Figure 2  - % of Total Sales from Exports, Traditional Exporters vs. Platform Sellers  ...................... 8 
Figure 3 - % of Platform Sellers' Revenues Stemming from Exports and % of Sellers Exporting to 
10 or More Markets  by Country (Size of Bubbles is GDP in Current US$)  ................................ ........9 
Figure 4 – Growth of Platform Sellers and Size of Platform Sales in 2011 -15, by C ountry Type 
(Size of Bubbles is GDP in Current US$)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 10 
Figure 5  - Platform Sellers' Annual Export Sales, by Country Grouping  ................................ ............  11 
Figure 6 - Diffusion of Platform Usage and Sales: Distance from the Glo bal Frontier (100%)  ..... 12 
Figure 7 - Analytical Framework  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  14 
Figure 8 - Coverage of Policies Conducive to Platform -Enabled Trade, by Region and Main Policy 
Area ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 18 
Figure 9 - Coverage of Policies Conducive to Platform -enabled Trade, by Country and Main 
Policy Area  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  19 
Figure 10 - Policy Index for Platform -Enabled Trade and Level of Development  ............................  20 
Figure 11 - Policy Index for Platform -Enabled Trade and Trade on Platforms in 2018  ..................  21 
Figure 12  - Policy Index for Platform -Enabled Trade and Ecommerce Development Index  ......... 21 
Figure 13 - Number of Countries that Have Adopted Digital  Infrastructure Policies Conducive 
to Platform -Enabled Trade, by Area (out of 40 Countries  in Total) ................................ ..................  23  
 
 Figure 14 - Number of Countries  That Have Adopted Digital Regulations Conducive to 
Platform -Enabled Trade, by Area  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  25 
Figure 15 - Number of Countries that Have Adopted  Payment Regulations Conducive to 
Platform -Enabled Trade, by Area  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  30 
Figure 16 - Number of Countries That Have Adopted Ecommerce Logisti cs and Trade Policies 
Conducive to Platform -Enabled Trade, by Area  ................................ ................................ .......................  34 
Figure 17  - Number of Countries that Have Adopted Ecommerce Export Promotion Practices 
Conducive to Platform -Enabled Trade, by Area  ................................ ................................ .......................  38 
Figure 18  - Number of Countries that Have Adopted SME Finance Practices Conducive to 
Platform -Enabled Trade, by Area  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  39 
TABLES  
Table 1 - 40 Countries Mapped  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  16 
Table 2 - Relationship between Policy Variables and Platform -Enabled Trade  ................................ . 42 
Table 3 - Policy Roadmap to Fuel SMEs' Use of Platforms for Trade  ................................ .................  47 
Appendix Table I. Policy Areas Mapped  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 51  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           1 
 I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Ecommerce has opened tremendous new opportunities for small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) to 
export and grow. Using global ecommerce and payment platforms such as eBay, Etsy, PayPal, 
Alibaba, and Mercado Libre to connect to tens of millions of online buy ers, small businesse s are 
highly likely to export, export to multiple markets, and derive most of their revenue from exports – 
as opposed to traditional brick -and-mortar businesses of which only a small minority export.  
 
Developing country governments are  increasingly cognizant of the opportunity to use ecommerce 
platforms to help SMEs e xport and import goods and services,  and to fuel inclusive growth in their 
economies. Many governments are also gaining an understanding of the challenges SMEs in their 
countries face to access and use online platforms for trade. And governments tend to be aware of 
the types of policies that  can help SMEs use platforms to engage in trade, such as digital regulations 
that promote innovation and protect consumers, trade facilitation practices that accelerate customs 
clearance, and export promotion practices that build SMEs ’ capacity for succeed ing at ecommerce. 
However, developing country governments still tend to lack:  
 
• An understanding of the state of platform -enabled trade and SMEs’ use of platforms for trade 
in their economies, and the potential for different policies to increase this usage;   
 
• Knowledge about the types of regulations, policies and practices that help SMEs use 
platforms for tr ade, such as  various digital  regulations  essential for the online economy to 
work , online payment laws and practices that fuel cross -border payments , postal services  
that accelerate ecommerce deliveries , and ecommerce export promotion programs  and 
financing programs that support SMEs in becoming online sellers ;  
 
• Understanding of the types of policies and practices other countries are pursuing to fuel 
SMEs ’ use of ecommerce , how exactly those countries have designed their regulations and 
policies , and what replicable , impactful  policy innovations and best practices may be 
emerging around the world; and  
 
• Ability to quickly compare their country to others in the adoption of policies and practices 
key to platform -enabled trade, and a means to track their countr y’s progress vis -à-vis peer 
economies over time.  
 
The purpose of this report is to help mend these knowledge gaps. This report  is produced in a 
public -private partnership “Alliance for eTrade Development” between USAID and four companies  
(PayPal, Google, King & Spalding, and eBay), and aimed  to offer developing country policymaker s: 
 
• New, proprietary data on the growth of platform -enabled trade in goods and 
services and SMEs’ use of platforms to trade in various economies around the world;  
 
• Compilation of 60 “best practice” regulations, policies and practice s that help 
SMEs use online  platforms for trade in six main policy areas – digital regulations, 
payment regulations, digital infrastructures, SME finance, SME export promotion, and 
ecommerce logistics and trade facilitation;  
 
• Pioneering mapping of the adoption  of these 60 policies a nd practices in 40 
countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, and North America;  
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           2 
 • New composite policy index, Policy Index for Platform -Enabled Trade , based on 
the qualitative mapping and enables countries to track and measure their adoption of the se 
60 policies vis -à-vis the adoption by  their peer s;  
 
• Case studies  and several brief summaries o f innovative policies and practices  in 
advanced and developing countries to fuel digitization and trade on platforms;  
• Econometric analysis  of the impact of different policies on the growth of platform -
enabled trade  and the number of platform sellers around the world ; and 
• Policy roadmap  for catalyzing SMEs’ use of platforms for trade, tailored to 
countries’ unique starting points and circumstances.  
 
The findings and recommendations of this study are as follows:  
 
• Platforms are an increasingly significant enabler of SME exports in goods an d 
services , particularly  in developing countries. Analysis of transactions on global 
platforms indicates that platforms are an excellent means for developing countries  to spur 
SME exports: d eveloping country sellers use platforms almost exclusively to expo rt. In most 
developing economies, platform -enabled exports are growing much faster than overall trade 
and economy. Platform -enabled trade also appears to be  a core business for developing 
country sellers that are using platforms: their annual sales volumes  on online platforms are 
as sizable as those of advanced country merchants. Yet developing country SMEs’ use of 
platforms is still very low – less than a tenth of SMEs’ use of platforms in the UK, for 
example. This suggests that better regulations, policie s, and programs are needed to bolster 
developing country SMEs’ access to and use of platforms for trade.  
 
• Most countries have adopted what might be called “low -hanging fruit” policies 
conducive to platform -enabled trade, but many impactful  policies have ye t to be 
widely adopted – and there is backsliding in some areas. Most countries have already 
done the basics, such as made customs information available online, adopted a digital 
signatu res law , and provided credit guarantees for bank loans to SMEs. Howeve r, yet to be 
adopted at scale are such essential policies as safe harbors that provide immunity for 
internet intermediaries from user -generated content  and thus enable platforms to operate , 
online dispute resolution systems that help build consumers’ trust  in transactions on 
platforms, export promotion practices that enable SMEs to bolster their digital readiness and 
learn to use major global platforms to trade , and financing programs that fuel SMEs’ digital 
transformation  and adoption of ecommerce capabili ties. Some countries are turning away 
from good practices in such areas as de minimis  and cross -border data transfer rules.  
 
• There is a significant amount of positive innovation and experimentation  with 
policies conducive to platform -enabled trade  around the world . The study reveals 
numerous exciting policy innovations in both advanced and developing countries  that can 
significantly enhance SMEs’ use of online platforms for trade . For example, Singapore and 
Canada have develop ed extensive new postal services to promote ecommerce in their 
economies and cross -border trade; many Latin American economies such as Peru, Mexico, 
Brazil, and Costa Rica, along with Thailand and Malaysia, have built creative online programs, 
public -private partnerships, and digital transformation initiatives to help SMEs use platforms 
to export; and Korea, UK, and several East African economies have made significant inroads 
into adopting blockchain in customs  in order to facilitate identification of high -risk shipments 
and clearance of low -risk ones.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           3 
 India, Peru, and Tanzania have made significant progress on promoting the use and 
interoperability of online and mobile  payments, while UK has  developed high-impact SME 
finance policies, such as open banking practices that help SMEs secure credit and FinTech 
regulatory sandboxes  that enable financial innovation, including in the area of SME finance . In 
the area of digital regulations, Brazil has created a renowned safe harbor for internet 
intermediaries, while  Colombia and Costa Rica have recently revised their data transfer 
rules to accommodate the data needs of globalizing companies, while also protecting their 
citizens’ data rights. Chile, Malaysia, and Mexico stand out for their promotion of woman -
owned com panies and women exporters.  
 
• The policy index for platform -enabled trade developed in this report is strongly 
correlated with countries’ development levels, but there are also countries that 
outperform their peers at the same level of development . Overall,  advanced 
countries and selected East Asian and Latin American economi es have adopted about 60 -75 
percent of the good policies  and practices  mapped  here, while less developed countries in 
Africa, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Central America have adopted only 20 -35 percent. In 
the top quartile of countries with highest policy coverage are five advanced economies (UK, 
Canada, Korea, Japan, Singapore), three Southeast Asian nations (Indonesia, Thailand, and 
Malaysia), as well as China and Mexico. Tha iland, Malaysia, Mexico, China , and Rwanda 
outperform their peers at the same level of development in the adoption of the mapped 
policies.  
 
• Policies that fuel broadband connectivity, quality of ICT skills and services, cross -
border logistics, and ease for SMEs to comply with regulations boost the number 
of platform sellers . The volume of export sales made on platforms from a country grow s 
in lockstep with the number of platform sellers in a country, which suggest s that the key for 
developing countries to gr ow their platform -enabled trade is to help birth new sellers. 
Econometric results suggest that th e number of platform sellers is significantly shaped by 
broadband connectivity, ICT skills and services, and quality of international logistics. Early 
statisti cal work  suggests that the policy index for platform -enabled trade developed here 
could be a good predictor of the volumes of platform -enabled trade.  
 
Value -Added and Next Steps  
 
There are analogous efforts to ours to identify a composite  policy  index, or a mix of policies, that 
are needed fo r successful economic outcomes to come about. For example, the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) has an  SME Policy Index  that tracks dozens of 
policies found to be conducive to SME development, while the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) 
and United Nations ( UN) track countries’ implementation of a bundle of trade facilitation and 
paperless trade policies. This report is the first effort to date to understand the policy mix that 
optimize s SME use of platforms for trade  – and use of ecommerce in general . It offers new value in 
four ways:  
 
• Fuel cross -country learning of policies and regulations conducive to platform -
enabled trade . The qualitative mapping developed in this report  enables an y policymaker 
or business leader  to access information on what their own country and 39 other countries 
are doing in the policy areas conducive to platform -enabled trade. For example, the 
policymaker can very quickly gain a n understanding how other countri es have adopted and 
designed their e -payments laws, copyright regulations, ecommerce -related postal services, 
or ecommerce export promotion programs ; deepen his or her analysis by referring to case 
studies developed in this report ; and then refer to those policies and practices when 
advocating policy changes in his or her country.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           4 
  
By mapping and tracking policies, this work also readily complements the many indices that 
track economic policy outcomes , such as World Bank’s Doing Business and forthcoming 
doing digital business, and the 2017 USAID -sponsored survey  developed by Nextrade Group  
on SMEs’ views about the enabling environment for ecommerce. These analyses give a sense 
of outcomes and pending c hallenges in various policy areas pertinent to ecommerce, but 
they do not provide guidance on the optimal policies, regulations, and programs 
policymakers are to pursue to mend those challenges. This report fills that gap.  
 
• Enable developing countries to rigorously compare themselves to their peers in 
the adoption of policies and practices conducive to platform -enabled trade, and 
see how “far” they are from global best practice. This work provides a new tool to 
track the adoption and implementation of policies key to platform -enabled trade, and a 
succinct means to perform cross -country comparisons  in the adoption of such policies . As 
such, this tool empowers policymakers in developing countries to quickly diagnose areas 
where their countries have work to do and how their countries fare over time vis -à-vis peer 
economies in the adoption o f policies  and practices  conducive to SME ecommerce . 
 
• Through empirical analysis and reviews of academic literature, h elp developing 
countri es to understand the key policy drivers of platform -enabled trade. Ours i s 
a pioneering effort to provide empirical grounds to policies that, once in place, can propel 
SMEs’ use of platforms for trade. Though our proprietary data on platform -enabled trade are  
limited by years and countries, they do open an opportunity to explor e the interaction of 
policies and platform -enabled trade  flows . This help s policymakers understand the policy 
levers they ought to pull to stimulate platform -enabled trade  in their econo mies. 
 
• Provide customized policy roadmaps for developing countries to fuel SMEs’ use 
of platforms for trade . By mapping policies and practices various countries have already in 
place or have yet to adopt,  this study enables  policy roadmaps customized to ea ch country.  
 
The approach and results can next be leveraged in various ways, such as:  
 
• Expand the set of countries analyzed, to enable rigorous cross -country comparisons and 
identification of a wider range of policy innovations;  
 
• Create a  real-time online  database along the lines of the UN’s database for paperless trade 
policies to systemat ically track countries’ progress in  adopting and implementing policies 
essential to platform -enabled trade  and ecommerce ;  
 
• Use this framework to arrive at regional and global agreements on common policies and 
practices for stimulat ing SME use of platforms  for trade , and to develop capacity -building 
projects for countries to catch up with global good practice;  and  
 
• Use the policy data collected here to create a digital integration index to understand the 
level of compatibility between different co untries’ digital regulations , an important enabler of 
cross -border trade on platforms .  
 
This work is hoped to generate regulatory reforms, trade facilitation efforts, SME export promotion 
programs, and SME financing facilities that materially improve the odds for developing country SMEs 
to use online platforms for trade . This project is ultimately hoped to fuel the growth of platform -
enabled trade and SMEs engaged in platform -enabled trade in developing countries and across all 
segments, such as women -led and rural  enterprises.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           5 
 II. INTRODUCTION  
Ecommerce has opened tremendous new opportunities for small and mid -size enterprises (SMEs) to 
export and grow. Using global ecommerce and payment platforms such as eBay, Etsy, PayPal, 
Alibaba, and Mercado Libre to connect to tens of millions of online buyers , online sellers  are highly 
likely to export, export to multiple markets, and derive most of their revenue from exports – as 
opposed to traditional brick -and-mortar businesses of which only a small minority expor t, and 
typically only to one or two markets.  
 
Developing country governments are increasingly cognizant of the opportunity to use ecommerce 
platforms to help SMEs e xport and import goods and services,  and to fuel inclusive growth in their 
economies. Many governments are also gaining an understanding of the challenges SMEs in their 
countries face to access and use online platforms for trade. And governments tend to be aware of 
the types of policies that can help SMEs use platforms to engage in trade, such a s digital regulations 
that promote innovation and protect consumers, trade facilitation practices that accelerate customs 
clearance, and export promotion practices that build SMEs ’ capacity for doing ecommerce. 
However, developing country governments still  tend to lack:  
 
• An understanding of the state of platform -enabled trade and SMEs’ use of platforms for trade 
in their economies, and the potential for different policies to increase this usage;  
 
• Knowledge about the types of regulations, policies and practices that help SMEs use 
platforms for tr ade, such as  various digital  regulations  essential for the onl ine economy to 
work , online payment laws and practices that fuel cross -border payments , postal services  
that accelerate ecommerce deliveries , and ecommerce export promotion programs  and 
financing programs that support SMEs in becoming online sellers ;  
 
• Understanding of the types of policies and practices other countries are pursuing to fuel 
SMEs’ use of ecommerce , how exactly those countries have designed their regulations and 
policies , and what replicable , impactful  policy innovations and best practices ma y be 
emerging around the world; and  
 
• Ability to quickly compare their country to others in the adoption of policies and practices 
key to platform -enabled trade, and a means to track their countr y’s progress vis -à-vis peer 
economies over time.  
The purpose of this report is to start mending these knowledge gaps. The following section 
describes the extent and impact of platform -enabled trade. Section three focuses on a new database 
on policies and pra ctices that are key to driving SMEs’ use of platform s for trade  and presents data 
from the policy mapping and measurement tool. Section four turns to the results of the analysis and  
previews empirical findings on the relationship between policy environment  and platform -enabled 
trade. Section five summarizes findings and provides a policy roadmap for countries at different 
levels of development  and adoption of good policies and practices mapped here . Section six 
discusses potential future extensions of this work.  
   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           6 
 III. EXTENT AND DEVELOPME NT 
EFFECTS OF PLATFORM -ENABLED 
TRADE   
Ecommerce has revolutionized SMEs’ opportunit ies to sell to new markets. Studies show that using 
the Internet, companies of all sizes are more visible to prospective customers around the world and 
more poised to export and import and scale their sales across markets . Empirical work further 
suggests t hat online ecommerce platforms are particularly powerful catalyst s of SME exports. 
Platforms such as eBay, Etsy, PayPal, Amazon, Alibaba, Jumia, MercadoLibre, Flipkart, and TradeKey, 
among others, instantly connect SME sellers to hundreds of millions of buyers worldwide, enabling 
SMEs to overcome the high costs associated with identifying international customers and gaining 
their trust.1  
 
Empirically, companies that sell on platforms are  much likelier to export goods and services than 
their p eers that do not sell online.  Data drawn on SMEs’ transactions on selected global ecommerce 
platforms show that practically all platform sellers in the analyzed countries export, while only 25 
percent of the “traditional” manufacturing companies export (fi gure 1). Platform sellers also receive 
a very high share, or 94 percent, of their total revenues from exports. Meanwhile, traditional 
exporters on average receive 48 percent of their revenues from exports (figure 2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           7 
 FIGURE 1 - % OF FIRMS THAT EXPORT , MANUFACTURERS VS . PLATFORM 
SELLERS  
 
Sources: Enterprise Surveys (World Bank), various industry sources, and firm -level survey s by Suominen 
(2017).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           8 
 FIGURE 2  - % OF TOTAL SALES F ROM EXPORTS , TRADITIONAL EXPORTERS 
VS. PLATFORM SELLERS  
 
 
Sources: Enterprise Surveys (World Bank), various industry sources, and firm -level survey s by Suominen 
(2017).  
 
 
Platforms appear to enable companies around the world to engage in trade . One key reason is that  
selling on platforms lower s the fixed costs for companies to export and import. For example, 
bringing tens of millions of buyers worldwide to explore sellers’ goods on a single platform , 
platforms can drastically lower sellers’ customer acquisition costs , particularly in foreign markets . 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           9 
 Platforms also lower the informational costs between the parties. For example, c ustomer reviews 
posted on platforms on the various sellers  and their pro ducts  lower buyers’ time and cost of 
screening sellers, and help well -performing sellers signal their quality and quickly gain buyers’ trust. 
Ecommerce platforms such as Amazon and payment platforms such as PayPal also critically lower 
SMEs’ fixed and vari able costs related t o end-to-end fulfillment  and cross -border payments . That 
platforms enable SMEs to do cross -border business with greater ease and lower cost is likely one of 
the reasons why online sellers ’ have greater productivity  growth than do offlin e sellers .2 This 
matters: p roductivity gains are key to economic growth and improved standards of living in 
developing countries.  
 
Platforms are particularly important enablers of  developing country SME  exports . In small developing 
countries, 90 -100 percent of platform sellers export  on platforms , 90 percent of them export to 
more than 10 markets, and companies that export on platform s derive on average 96 percent of 
their platform revenues from exports (figure 3). Meanwhile, some 70 percent of develo ped country  
platform sellers  export, about 50 percent sell to more than 10 markets, and  sellers  that do export 
derive 50 -60 percent of their sales form exports. In other words, while platforms are a very 
important means  for developed country businesses to expand their sales across borders, they are an 
extraordinarily useful means for developing  country companies to expand their export sales.  
 
FIGURE 3 - % OF PLATFORM SELLERS' REVENUES STEMMIN G FROM EXPORTS 
AND % OF SELLERS EXPORTING TO 10 OR MORE MARKETS  BY COUNTRY (SIZE 
OF BUBBLES IS GDP  IN CURRENT US$)  
 
 
Sources: World Development Indicators, various industry sources, and firm -level survey s by Suominen (2017).  
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           10 
  
The growth in the number of platform sellers  has in recent years been significantly higher in 
emerging and developing countries than in advanced economies, which implies that  developing 
countries have been catching up with advanced economies in the usage of platforms  (figure 4). The 
number of online sellers is growing multiple times faster than overall economic growth in these 
economies. Growth does remain robust in several advanced economies that already have a great 
deal of platform -based commerce  and that probably had their growth spurt some years earlier.  
 
FIGURE 4 – GROWTH  OF PLATFORM SELLERS  AND SIZE OF PLATFORM SALES 
IN 2011 -15, BY COUNTRY TYPE (SIZE OF BUBBLES IS GDP  IN CURRENT US$)  
 
 
Sources: World Development Indicators, various industry sources, and firm -level survey s by Suominen (2017).  
 
 
Platform -enabled  trade appears to be very important for developing country companies that are 
selling on platforms. Developing country companies that export on platforms, particularly c ompanies 
in middle income countries, tend to have very similar  export sale  volumes as do platform -based 
exporters in developed countries (figure 5). In other words, developing country sellers that sell on 
platforms do not just sell a few items every now an d then ; rather, they have substantial export 
volumes on platforms , well into five and six figures.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           11 
 FIGURE 5 - PLATFORM SELLERS ' ANNUAL EXPORT SALES , BY COUNTRY 
GROUPING  
 
 
Sources: World Development Indicators, various industry sources and firm -level survey s by Suominen (2017).  
 
 
However, the usage of platforms, both in terms of the number of sellers using platforms and 
platform sales as a share of all retail sales and exports, is considerably higher in advanced economies 
than in developing countries. Usage of platforms is still very low  in most developing countries , 
compared to that of advanced nations. In the dataset analyzed here, the UK has the highest share of 
platform sellers per working population, or “seller density”. It as such the “global frontier” on the x -
axis of  figure 6. A handful of advanced economies are 50 -60 percent from this global frontier, and 
most developing countries have seller density that is less than 10 percent  of UK’s seller densit y. 
Seller density i n least developed countries is barely one percent  of the seller density of the UK.  
 
Similarly, Cyprus in this dataset has the highest share of platform exports of all exports, and is as 
such the global frontier in that dimension (depicted on the y -axis in figure 6 ). The share of platform 
sales of all ex ports in the UK is close to the level of Cyprus, or 96 percent from the level of Cyprus . 
Two middle income nations are 70 -75 percent from Cyprus, and again most developing countries 
are 30 percent or farther from the global frontier of platform exports est ablished by Cyprus. In 
other words, even though platform -enabled trade has been growing in developing nations in 
particular, the usage of platforms is still much rarer in developing countries than in many advanced 
economies, as are export  sales made  via platforms . Granted, the data here are mostly data from 
platforms that were originally started in advanced economies. This means these data may somewhat 
underestimate developing countr y firms’ platform use  – but overall they echo other studies that 
show that the level of online retail sales is much higher in UK and advanced economies than in most 
developing economies.  
 
 
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           12 
 FIGURE 6 - DIFFUSION OF PLATFORM USAGE AND SALES : DISTANCE FR OM 
THE GLOBAL FRONTIER (100%)  
 
 
Sources: World Development Indicators, various industry sources.  
 
 
The diffusion of platform usage across economies has benefits that span export gains.  For example, 
platforms can reduce in -country disparities. A  study by Economic Innovation Group show s that 
while one-half of new enterprise formation in the United States in 2010 -14 was concentrated in the 
20 largest counties such as Los Angeles or New York counties in seven states that represent 20 
percent of Americans, the world of eBay sellers was much “flatter”.3 Only 38 percent of new sellers 
on eBay are in the  20 largest counties ; one-half of the net increase in eBay sellers came from 75 
counties spread across 24 states and accounting for 36 percent of Americans.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           13 
 IV. METHODOLOGY FOR A DA TABASE 
ON POLICIES KEY TO PLAT FORM -
ENABLED TRADE    
Enabling SMEs to use global e commerce and payment platforms appears to be an effective means to 
propel SME exports a nd productivity in developing countries. However, developing country SMEs, 
and particularly rural and women -led companies, face several barriers to making most of the 
opportunity opened by platforms to engage in trade. Data from a USAID -supported survey 
administered by Ne xtrade Group in 2016 -17 in 18 developing nations in Africa, Asia, and Latin 
America indicate that these many barriers include inadequate or restrictive digital, ecommerce, and 
payment regulations; inadequate access to working capital and online loans and o ther digital finance; 
inefficient customs procedures, logistics, and postal systems; entrepreneurs’ lack of skills for cross -
border ecommerce; gaps in cross -border online payments; and trading partner s’ duties and tax es.4 
The very same challenges are highl ighted by Latin American companies in two other Nextrade 
Group surveys carried out in the Southern Cone and Central America .   
While the order and magnitude of these challenges vary by country, for example with African SMEs 
being most hampered by lack of t rade finance and Latin American companies struggling with cross -
border logistics and customs, overall developing country companies are dissatisfied with the 
environment for doing ecommerce and selling on platforms. For example, s mall companies in Latin 
America and Asia give their countries’ enabling environments for cross -border ecommerce a poor 
rating – a score of  5-6 out of a maximum of 10 in Latin America and 4 -5 out of 10 in Africa and 
developing Asia. 
The various constraints for SMEs in developing countries to use global platforms make them to forgo 
new customers, export opportunities, and growth gains. The opportunity cost for developing 
country companies and economies is significant. For example, in the Nextrade Group survey , 
developing country businesses estimate they would score annual revenue gains of 34 percent in their 
domestic markets and 30 percent in international markets if the top -3 obstacles to their ecommerce 
operations were removed.  
Of co urse, poor enabling environments for platform -enabled trade are detrimental also to platforms 
themselves, and can deter platforms from making requisite investments to service certain developing 
countries. Poor enabling environments for platform -enabled tra de in developing countries also 
impede advanced country SMEs from growing their online exports to developing nations.  
While many governments are gaining a better understanding of the challenges SMEs in their 
countries face to doing ecommerce, they tend to  lack knowledge of the specific policies and 
practices that would remove these frictions. This report starts mending this knowledge gap . We 
offer developing countr y policymakers  a roadmap of good policies and practices that enable their 
countries’ SMEs to export and import on global online platforms  – and for platforms to operate in 
their countries and serve SMEs. This report also provides an empirical mapping and measurement of 
these policies and practices in 40 countries around the world , and several case studies of good 
practices that illustrate how various advanced and developing countries have gone about pursuing 
ecommerce -friendly policies and practices. The mapping and case studies  enable countries to 
rigorously compare their own policies to the policies and practices of their peers, and, most 
critically, learn from each other.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           14 
 A. CHOICE OF VARIABLES AND METHODOLOGY FOR POLICY 
ANALYSIS  
Figure 7 describes the analytical framework for this project: with good, “model” regulations, policies 
and practices in place, countries are excepted to be well -placed to expand SME trade on platforms, 
and, over time, spur trade and development gains.  
 
FIGURE 7 - ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK  
 
 
What, then, are the good regulations, policies, and practices that developing countries should 
consider , in order to propel platform -enabled trade and ecommerce in their economies?  
This question was approached here in three ways: (1) analysis of the priority challenges to 
ecomme rce highlighted by SMEs in various developing countries in surveys run with USAID’s 
support in 2016 -17; (2) dialogues  with the partners to this Global Development Alliance and 
selected other ecommerce platforms and logistics providers  on their views o n policies conducive to 
platform -enabled trade; and (3) an academic literature review on research results on the impact of 
such policies on trade, ecommerce, and development.  This method paved the way for the selection 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           15 
 of actionable and empirically sound compon ents in the analysis – components that are grounded in 
academic research , but that also, when put in place, can substantially help SMEs engage in trade on 
platforms. The literature review for each variable is incorporated in an abbreviated version in 
Section IV below.  
The result of this methodology led to the inclusion of six components in the analysis:  
• Digital infrastructures, such as incentives for broadband usage  and pilots to roll out 5G 
networks ;   
 
• Ecommerce and digital regulations, including such is sues as internet intermediary liability 
rules, copyright protection, consumer protection, data and privacy rules;  
 
• Online payment regulations, including policies key for payment platforms to operate and for 
SMEs to use online payments ; 
 
• Ecommerce logistic s and trade facilitation, including policies and processes to sending  and 
receiving goods across borders and shipping them in urban and rural areas ;  
 
• SME capacity -building for ecommerce export s, such as online training programs for SMEs to 
learn how to us e online platforms and digital transformation programs  for SMEs to bolster 
their online sales and marketing capabilities ; and  
 
• Access to credit, such as working capital, credit guarantees, venture capital, and Fintech 
regulations.  
Empirical literature , industry dialogues, and SME surveys alike s trongly suggest  that these  policy  areas 
are essential for  ecommerce and platform -enabled trade to work – and surveys with SMEs seeking 
to engage in ecommerce strongly suggest that developing countries have a great deal of room to 
improve policies in these areas. Furthermore, there are certain key elements within each of these 
areas that are particularly relevant for propelling SMEs’ use of platforms for cross -border trade. We 
identified 60 such sub-components ; these  are listed in Appendix I. The se sub -components  also cover 
two dimensions important to inclusive trade – gender (policies and programs to support women) 
and innovation ( seminal policies and programs that  can create significant new gains, such as open 
banking practices and use of blockchain in customs).  
What, then, are countries around the world doing in these various detailed policy areas? How are 
they adjusting their regulations, policies and practices that facilitate SME trade on platf orms?  
We explore these questions in a granular and rigorous fashion in two stages. The first stage involves 
mapping countries’ practices in the various policy areas on an Excel, with cells consisting of 
qualitative summary information of how a given country regu lates or approaches a given policy issue. 
The mapping was accomplished through extensive desk research and industry inputs  and concluded 
in April 2018 .  
The policy mapping is in and of itself useful for governments to see what their peers are doing in the 
many different areas pertinent to platform -enabled trade, and draw inspiration from good and 
innovative practices around the world. Using the mapping, a policymaker can compare his or her 
country to any other country mapped in any one policy area. Or, if i nterested in any one area such 
as postal innovations for ecommerce logistics, he or she can readily see what 39 other countries are 
doing in this area.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           16 
 Table 1 lays out the countries mapped. The country selection is to ensure countries with different 
levels of development and from different regions are considered. A few advanced economies were 
chosen as putative benchmark countries.  
TABLE 1 - 40 COUNTRIES MAPPED  
 
  
The second stage of the analysis is to enable countries to quickly navigate the maze of qualitative 
data produced in the mapping to compare themselves to their peers in the adoption of policies and 
practices conducive to platform -enabled trade. Here, we convert the qualitative data into a country -
specific quantitative sco re. The scoring methodology is as follows: if a country has a desirable 
regulation, policy or practice in place, it receives a score of 1 (or, in some areas, a maximum of 0.5). 
In some cases particular improvements (such as a digital trade single window th at has been upgraded 
to provide B2B services to the trade ecosystem) merit extra 0.5 points. If a country has a draft law 
or policy planned, it receives 0.5 points instead of 1  point . The total possible score is 60, roughly 
equally distributed across the s ix major policy components .  
The scoring varies somewhat by the type of question asked, as follows:  
• Some of the areas covered are straight -forward yes / no questions (such as whether a 
country has implemented electronic payment of duties). These are simple  to map; they are 
either 0 or 1. In the area of data transfer rules, in cases where a practice or regulation has 
restrictive limitations or exceptions, the score of 1 was reduced by -0.33 by each limitatio n 
or exception.  
 
• Other areas require more analysis and interpretation. One such area is whether a country’s 
postal service is innovating in ecommerce. In this set of areas, we establish criteria that merit 
a score of 1 (such as, a score of 1 on postal innovation is assigned if a country’s post has 
piloted with one or more of the following: parcel lockers, self -service kiosks, drone delivery, 
ecommerce fulfillment centers, or partnerships with ecommerce platforms).  
 
• Still other areas are scored by using a pre -existing index or dataset ; some examples include 
customs tariffs on ICT products and level of postal development. In these cases, we translate 
different numbers and indices into  a standardized index,  employing the “distance from the 
East Asia South AsiaLatin America 
and the 
CaribbeanAfrica Advanced 
Cambodia Bangaldesh Argentina Ghana Canada
China India Brazil Kenya Japan
Indonesia Pakistan Chile Morocco Singapore
Laos, PDR Sri Lanka Colombia Mozambique South Korea
Malaysia Costa Rica Nigeria UK
Myanmar Dominican Rep. Rwanda
Philippines Ecuador South Africa
Thailand El Salvador Tanzania
Vietnam Guatemala Uganda
Mexico Zambia
Peru
Uruguay 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           17 
 frontier” score used in the World Bank’s Doing B usiness, where the globally worst 
performer gets a zero and the globally best performer receives a score of one, and everyone 
else falls in the continuum between 0 and 1. The formula for this calculation is (worst 
performer score – country score) / (worst performer score – best performer score).  
As is common in the creation of a policy index, there are several qualifications and limitations to our 
methodology; these are described in Appendix II.  
 
   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           18 
 V. RESULTS OF POLICY MA PPING  
The data resu lting from the mapping show that advanced economies have adopted many policy 
measures mapped here, while developing countries in Africa and South Asia tend to lag behind 
(figures 8 and 9). Overall, advanced countries and selected emerging economies of Sout heast Asia 
and Latin America have adopted 60 -70 percent of all policies and practices mapped, while poorer 
developing countries in Africa, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Latin America have adopted only 20 -
35 percent  of these practices . In the top quartile  of countries with highest policy coverage are the 
five advanced economies (UK, Canada, Korea, Japan, Singapore), three Southeast Asian nations 
(Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia), as well as Mexico and China. Thailand, Malaysia, Mexico, China 
and Rwanda o utperform their peers at the same level of development in the adoption of the mapped 
policies (figure 10).  
FIGURE 8 - COVERAGE OF POLICIES CONDUCIVE TO PLATFORM -ENABLED 
TRADE , BY REGION AND MAIN POLICY AREA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           19 
 FIGURE 9 - COVERAGE OF POLICIES CONDUCIVE TO PLATFORM -ENABLED 
TRADE , BY COUNTRY AND MAIN POLICY AREA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           20 
 FIGURE 10 - POLICY INDEX FOR PLATFORM -ENABLED TRADE AND LEVEL OF 
DEVELOPMENT  
 
Source for GDP, World Development Indicators.  
 
 
The policy index developed here is highly correlated with the level of platform -enabled trade in the 
economy for countries for which data are available: countries such as Singapore, UK, Thailand, and 
Malaysia that have great deal of platform -enabled trade also tend to have many of the mapped 
policies and practices in place (figure 11). The index is also correlated with Nextrade Group’s 
Ecomm erce Development Index developed with USAID’s support and based on business surveys in 
developing countries (figure 12). Countries where companies report greater struggl es to use 
ecommerce for trade due to regulatory, logistical, payment, and other reasons  also tend to have a 
low number of good policies in place.  
 
Granted, on the basis of this analysis we cannot say that certain policies have caused certain 
economic outcomes. What can be said is that countries that have adopted practices conducive to 
platform-enabled trade and that score high on our policy index also have the most vibrant 
ecommerce economies and most platform -enabled trade in their economies.  
 
 
 
 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           21 
 FIGURE 11 - POLICY INDEX FOR PLATFORM -ENABLED TRADE AND TRADE ON 
PLATFORMS IN 2018  
 
FIGURE 12 - POLICY INDEX FOR PLATFORM -ENABLED TRADE AND 
ECOMMERCE DEVELOPMENT INDEX  
 
 
Source for Ecommerce Development Index, Suominen (2017).  
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           22 
 A. EMERGING POLICY INNOVATIONS AND GOOD PRACTICES TO 
FUEL PLATFORM -ENABLED TRADE  
 
A further analysis of the data suggests that many countries have adopted the easier, “low -hanging 
fruit” policies, such as made customs information available online, a dopted  digital signatures  laws, and 
provided guarantees for loans  issued by banks to SMEs . However, yet to be adopted are such 
essential policies as safe harbors that enable ecommerce platforms to operate  with greater ease , 
online dispute resolution systems that help  build consumers’ trust in trade on platforms, and export 
promotion practices  and financing programs  that enable SMEs  to digitize and  use online  platforms for 
trade. Some countries are turning away from good practices in such areas as de minimis  that 
facilitate s customs clearance of low-value items, and fluid cross -border transfer o f data that helps 
online sellers and platforms better service their customers  in other countries . Most countries have 
also yet to mainstream  support for women -led firms into their policies and programs aimed to 
support SMEs in ecommerce.  
 
The following sec tions discuss these patterns in greater detail, and provide  case studies of innovative 
practices pursued by both advanced and developing countries.  
Digital Infrastructures  
The Internet and fixed and wireless broadband are pillars of platform -enabled trade, and ecommerce 
and trade in general. For example, one study finds that the expansion in  broadband use in  a broad 
sample of countries  in 2000-11 increased trade -to-GDP ratio  by 4.2 percentage point s.5 The Internet 
is also found to reduce the costs of moving products and services from the seller to the buyers; for 
example, U.S. digitally intensive goods and services traded online have 26 percent lower trade cost 
that do goods traded offline.6  
The 2017 Nextrade survey of 3,500 companies in developing countries echoes the need for better  
Internet  connectivity to ecommerce: in least developed countries, small businesses highlight lack of 
good connectivity and IT infrastructures  as a leading impediment for them t o engage in ecommerce.7 
The challenge is amplified in remote and rural areas.8 Other research indicates that small and 
medium -size enterprises that are heavy web users are almost 50 percent likelier to sell products and 
services in foreign markets, and that firms with high -speed broadband and mobile connections are 
much likelier to engage in ecommerce, particularly if their Internet connection speed is higher than 
30 Megabits per second  (Mbps).9 High-speed connectivity prov ided by fixed and mobile broadband is 
a critical enabler of online services and applications, streaming,  browsing , and instant aneous  
transactions.  
Empirical work shows that the combination of supply -side policies (such as long -term broadband 
development p lans and PPPs) and demand -side policies (such as provision of financial incentives for 
businesses to adopt broadband) best accelerate  the diffusion of broadband when broadband 
penetration is low.10 In the countries mapped here, 35 countries have adopted a b roadband plan, and 
33 have also adopted policies to further competition among broadband providers (figure 13). Such  
competition  matters: it is found to raise broadband penetration rates especially in the initial stage 
when the market is just starting, and  later in the advanced stages.11 In the early stages, competition 
can accelerate coverage; in the advanced stages, competition drives providers to seek customers in 
the more remote and rural areas after the “low -hanging fruit” of urban broadband connections  is 
harvested and each provider has only scant opportunities to lower prices to reap new market share.  
In addition to basic broadband, f ast and high -capacity 5G connectivity i s a future differentiator in the 
global ecommerce market, where sellers are incre asingly using virtual and augmented reality tools to 
enable consumers to browse and test products (case 1). However, only 18 countries have so far  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           23 
 adopted a 5G plan or allocated spectra for it – or even started using the so -called 4.5G or LTE -A 
connection.   
The cost of devices such as mobile phones and laptops is often a  leading  impediment to the diffusion 
of the Internet in developing countries . Tax and tariff cuts on ICT products are among key policies 
to propel technology diffusion and e commerce. For example, participation in the 82 -country 
Information Technology Agreement that removes tariff s on 97 percent of I CT products is found to 
increase A rgentina’s economic growth by 1.5 percent and Pakistan and Kenya’s by 1.3 percent.12 Of 
the coun tries mapped here, 18 have joined ITA, and 23 have zero duties on mobile phones and 
laptops. However, five countries still have over five percent tariffs on essential ICT products . 
FIGURE 13 - NUMBER OF COUNTRIES THAT HAVE ADOPTED DIGITAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE POLICIES CONDUCIVE TO PLATFORM -ENABLED TRADE , BY 
AREA (OUT OF 40 COUNTRIES  IN TOTAL ) 
 
 
Case 1: 5G Era  – Korea Paving the Way  
The 5G connectivity is transforming global ecommerce markets, particularly to enable sellers  to use  
virtual and augmented reality tools to enable consumers to browse and test products. For example, the 
Swedish household product and furniture retailer IKEA has created an augmented reality catalog ue app 
that works espe cially well on 5 G to help customers visualize how their selected IKEA furniture would fit 
and look in their own homes.13 Clothing makers such as Adidas have used augmented reality to enable 
customers find the right fit. These same tools can transform online  learning  – consider, for example, 
digital textbooks and augmented reality programs. Offering such immersive experiences will  also be a key 
competitive advantage for  21st century  online businesses .  
Some 78 percent of telecom operators are globally pilotin g 5G, and the technology is expected to be 
more mainstream in 2018  and 2019 .14 Many advanced country governments have launched 5G plans, 
often in close partnership with the private sector. In 2017, Australia announced a 5G policy, including the 
establishmen t of a working group to collaborate with industry, making spectrum available in a timely 
manner; taking part in the international standardization process; and reviewing telecommunications 
regulations to ensure they enable 5G.15 Positively, some developing c ountries such as India have set 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           24 
 targets for 5G rollout; Ericsson has piloted 5G in India believes 5G will enable a $27.3 billion revenue for 
Indian telecom operators by 2026.16  
Many developing countries are still working to roll out 3G and 4G networks . Yet the 5G era is 
approaching  and the technology will be a key differentiator ; in a survey of over 3,000 industry leaders 
from around the world, 83 percent expect 5G to catalyze small business growth, but also tighten global 
competition – and nearly 70 percen t are concerned that without 5G, their country will become less 
competitive in the online economy.17 
South Korea has had a strong national focus since the 1980s on high -quality and high -coverage internet. It 
has the world’s fastest internet (at 41 Mbps in 2 016) and has become one of the first countries to 
formally announce the adoption of a 5G mobile network , with a target of 90 percent 5G penetration by 
2026. 18 According to the Korean telecom operator SK Telecom, 5G has in demos been yielding speeds 
of up t o 19.1 gigabits per second, nearly 1,000 times faster than 4G LTE users enjoy. That speed would 
enable a movie download in fractions of a second, and power sectors where lags in data transmission can 
be life -threatening, such as when driving a car and depe nding on the network for navigation, or when a 
surgeon is operating remotely from a virtual reality headset.  
In addition to low latency, 5G offers high capacity to transmit information. It is as such poised to fuel the 
digitization of Korean industries and  power the machine -to-machine dialogue and transfer of large -scale 
data essential in Internet of Things . It is also expected to benefit consumers and companies in such 
sector s as media and entertainment, public transport , healthcare, energy and utilities.  Globally, IHS Markit 
estimates that 5G can unlock up to $12.3 trillion of revenue across a broad range of industries.19  
5G is capital -intensive – it requires a  change in transport, radio, and core network components . The 
Korean Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning has made significant investments in these elements.  
It has also created a “5G Strategy Promotion Committee,” a public -private consultative group with 
telecom and industry leaders from automotive, healthca re, education, and other sectors  that is studying 
5G converged services.20 Some 20 Korean industry and academic experts regularly meet to analy ze and 
create 5G converged test beds and to improve regulations  around the technology .  
For their part, Korean tel ecoms SK Telecom and LG U+ have already been venturing into ecommerce, 
offering cellular -based wireless payment platforms that allow small retailers, traders and vendors to 
transact.21 5G networks are expected to enable Korean operators to amplify these cap abilities and 
provide new services for industry, government , and consumers.   
 
 
Digital regulations  
Clear and non -restrictive d igital regulations  are essential for online platforms to operate and service 
SMEs, and for SMEs to be able to transact online. M any developing countries have yet to adopt the 
various regulations that have helped digital business flourish in advanced economies. One such key 
regulation that has yet to be widely adopted is a legal liability regime that provides internet 
intermediaries  immunity, or a “safe harbor”, from the content their users post on their portals or 
platforms (figure 14). Brazil stands out ; its renowned safe harbor regime  sets appropriate limits on 
the responsibility of providers for hosting or transferring third -party content. The regime is 
analogous to section 230 of the Communications Decency Act in the United States.22 Its success 
owes in part to how it was crafted: through a multi -stakeholder drafting procedure among different 
interest groups, such as Internet comp anies and civil society.23 Companies implementing the law see 
it as a major improvement to the previous, more ambiguous liability law (case 2).   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           25 
 FIGURE 14 - NUMBER OF COUNTRIES THAT HAVE ADOPTED DIGITAL 
REGULATIONS CONDUCIVE TO PLAT FORM -ENABLED TRADE , BY AREA 
 
 
Case 2: Internet intermediary liability – Brazil  
Internet intermediaries such as ecommerce, payment, and social media platforms fuel the flow of 
information online by helping individuals and companies find, share and access c ontent and interact and 
transact with each other. This in turn improves growth and productivity of other firms in the economy. 
Copenhagen Economics found that internet intermediaries increased EU GDP by €430 billion in 2012, or 
about 3.3 percent of EU’s GD P; of this, €220 were gains from investment, private consumption, and 
exports, while €210 billion was indirect effect of productivity increases in firms serviced by 
intermediaries.24 Additional €640 were consumer benefits from free services, increases in on line 
advertising, and B2B platform revenues.  
In turn, unclear and restrictive liability and copyright regulations deter investors. Regulations holding 
internet services  liable for user -generated content are found to reduce the pool of investors interested  in 
investing in such services by 81 percent. 25 Meanwhile, clarifying copyright regulations to allow websites 
to resolve legal disputes quickly would expand the pool of interested investors by 111 percent , and 
limiting penalties for websites acting in good  faith would expand the pool of interested investors by 1 18 
percent.26 
As a result of these considerations, many countries have put in place liability laws, typically referred to as 
“safe harbors” , that provide internet intermediaries immunity from th e conduct of their users. Safe 
harbors also protect intermediaries from user -generated content, such as when that content violates a 
third party’s copyright.  
The Brazilian liability regime is often lauded as a global best practice. In its Marco Civil Internet law of 
2014 that defines Internet users’ rights, Brazil has a “safe har bor” that sets appropriate limits on the 
responsibility of providers for hosting or transferring third -party content. The law was a hard -won 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           26 
 compromise between different interests such as Internet companies and civil society , which engaged in a 
participato ry, multi-stakeholder drafting procedure.27  
The Brazilian regime is analogous to section 230 of the Communications Decency Act in the United 
States , which is hailed as key for the growth of American online platforms .28 It covers  Internet service 
providers ( ISPs) and Internet application providers (IAPs), such as social media websites and search 
engines for third -party content , and protects  them from civil liability arising from damages related to 
hosting content generated by third parties.29 IAPs’ liability i s limited to cases where they fail to remove 
damaging content in a timely manner after a judicial order or, in cases of sexual content or nudity, after 
the request of the injured party or its legal representative. In general, however, internet i ntermediari es 
are under the law  seen as conduits of information , not its generators . Also Chile’s copyright law of 2010 
specifies similarly that internet intermediaries are not liable for user content on their sites if they take 
appropriate actions in response to off icial notices.30  
 
 
Several countries are currently pursing reforms in their data privacy and cross -border data transfer  
regimes. The most notable example is Europe’s General Data Protection Regime (GDPR) that t ook 
effect in May 2018 and applies also to non -EU companies that deal with E uropeans’  data. GDPR is in 
simulations and surveys shown to impose heavy implementation costs on companies seeking to 
operate in Europe – and is expected to have negative impacts on E uropean consumers’ enjoyment 
and cost of retail, financial, and other services .31  
So far, m ost of the mapped 40 countries allow cross -border data transfer ( some simply because they 
do not have data regulations yet in place ), but also 26 countries require user consent as a pre -
requisite for the transfer of data. Some limit data transfer also in certain sector s and geographies. 
For example, in Latin American countries, user con sent alone justifies transfer of data, while Nigeria 
additionall y requires that the foreign country where data are transferred has adequate data 
protections. In some countries such as Canada, state and provincial governments have their own 
regulations on data transfer. Positively, some economies  such as Costa Rica and Colombia have 
recently found ways to relax their data regimes to accommodate the needs for globalizing companies 
and foreign investor s, without sacrificing data privacy  (case 3).  
 
 
Case 3: Data transfer rules – Costa Rica and Colombia on a reform path 
Comp anies that are platforms or sell on platforms thrive on access to data on their operations, 
customers, and market s. Many developing country companies and platforms have markedly improved 
their operations and sales after systematizing data collection and an alysis from domestic and foreign 
customers. For example, b y running its mid -Africa and Middle East online booking operations on Amazon 
Web Services, South African travel booking website Travelstart has realized operational cost savings of 
43 percent and re duced downtime by 25 percent.32 Using real-time data streams of its 1.5 million 
bookings in Southeast Asia to predict future demand patterns and correct operational problems , ride 
hailing platform Grab serving Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Vietn am and Philippines  has 
realized  30-40 percent savings in operations , improved customer service , lowered the cost to 
customers.33 
Many countries are making reforms to the privacy laws, to find a balance between data privacy and online 
services and commerce. Costa Rica and Colombia have come to realize the benefits of allowing cross - 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           27 
 border data transfers to attract investment in sectors such as BPO and ecommerce platforms. Both 
countries pursued legal reforms in 2017, prompted by dialogue s between public and p rivate sectors .  
In Co sta Rica , the reform  terminated a previous requirement for companies to register different 
databases held by their different business units  when  those units shared information with each other. 
With the reform, only transfers related to the sale of that information require reg istration. As such, the 
reform facilitates internal data transfers within companies with operations in Costa Rica – while also 
limiting companies’ ability to disseminat e or sell of data to third parties. Costa Rica also dropped its 
unique concept of “super -user,” which gave Citizens Data Protection Agency Prodhab unrestricted 
access to all data on all listed databases . The concept was difficult for companies to adhere to because it 
ran against their confidentiality agreements.  
For its part,  Colombia added the U nited States  on the list of safe nations for data transfer purposes.34 
The measure was crucial for Colombia to enable small Colombian companies to use American cloud 
services, and to retain U.S. companies in the country.35 Consider, for example a major industry in 
Colombia, call centers that serve U.S. companies needing client service in Spanish: without clear rules 
that specify  that their  data can be transferred  to the United States , those companies might want to find 
another location for their call cen ters. 36 Similar issues pertain to ecommerce platforms. For example, 
given that it can now access user data and transfer it  to San Diego, California, for analysis and improve its 
services in Latin America , the U.S.  company PriceSmart Inc., the largest opera tor of online membership 
warehouse clubs in Central America and the Caribbean, has  recently established a presence in Colombia.   
 
 
Across developing countries, sm all online businesses tend to highlight copyright issues as a major 
challenge for them to enga ge in ecommerce. Positively, all countries mapped here have in place 
copyright regulations that include limitations and exceptions (such as principles of “ fair use ” or “fair 
dealing ”) that balance the public policy objectives of protection of intellectual property  rights  and the 
development of new Internet services. Specifically, the principle of fair use allows the use of content 
for certain purposes  such as research  without the need for permission from or payment to the 
copyright holder.  
Another important  regulatory area for platform -enabled trade to work is consumer protection. 
Consumers after all need to trust online sellers, ecommerce delivery, and online payments in order 
for ecommerce to take off. One of the best and most scalable means to build consumer trust in 
ecommerce is online dispute resolution (ODR), which e nables prompt online dispute settlement for 
contractual breaches in ecommerce transactions. While of the mapped countries 29 have some 
method for consumers to file complaints online to a government agency, most do not have an ODR 
system in place. Notable exceptions are Mexico, wh ere Concilianet, an online dispute resolution 
system run by the Federal Consumer Attorney’s Office (PROFECO) ena bles prompt online courts -
managed dispute resolution; and China, where the Supreme People’s Court has opened a cyber -
court  to handle IP and ecommerce -related cases (case 4). One area highlighted by legal experts that 
would make ODR  even more scalable is crowdsourcing of rulings from a panel of experienced 
buyers and sellers.  
 
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           28 
  
Case 4: Online dispute resolution for consumer protection – Mexico and China pioneer  
Consumer trust in products and services sold online , delivery services , and online payments is essential 
for ecommerce markets to develop and online companies and digital economies to grow. Consumers in 
many countries still do not trust the online economy. In a 2017 Mobile Economy Forum survey of 6,500 
consumers in 10 leading economies , 40 percent o f consumers stated they do not use more apps and 
services because of trust concerns.37 Such concerns can stem from bad user experiences, negative 
reviews, and concerns about  security of  personal data and identity theft. In another global survey, 86 
percent of customers take some kind of remedial action as a result of trust concerns, and typically stop 
using the service.38 Or they  sue: in China, ecommerce -related complaints have overwhelmed courts.  
One method for consumers to air grievances and seek remedies  and for courts to respond promptly is 
online dispute resolution (ODR).  Many online companies have their own dispute settlement systems: 
eBay, for example, has resolved 60 million minor disputes between small merchants and buyers each year 
through a semi -automated online system is able to resolve most disputes between buyers and sellers.39  
Recent research suggests that government -supported  ODR is accelerating the resolution of disputes in 
various countries  and reducing personnel costs in court systems.  In Mexico, Concilianet, an online 
dispute resolution system run by the Federal Consumer Attorney’s Office (PROFECO), was created as a 
pilot in 2008 to enable consumers who had purchased goods or services either electronically or offline to 
initiate and resolve  complaints or claims against major companies  on an online platform . Two companies 
participated in the pilot; by , 2009 five joined, and by 2017, there were more than 90 participating 
companies , such as  major airlines and retailers  from MercadoLibre to Walmart.40 
Concilianet complainants can seek an order for the merchant to comply with the bilateral contract; 
however, seeking monetary damag es requires judicial action through traditional channels.41 Because ODR 
is purported to resolve the voluminous  disputes  over rather small payments , there are no minimums for 
claims that can be brought .42 The system is free for the consumer to use and obviate s a trip to 
PROFECO’s local office; instead, users can monitor progress with their complaints online. The hearing 
takes place in a virtual courtroom with all parties present. There are two potential outcomes to any one 
ruling: an agreement between consumer  and the merchant ; or a referral of the case to the competent 
judicial authority.  
In 2008 -17, Concilianet attended to 28,000 cases in eight years and resolved 94 percent.43 In 2012, it was 
reported that the consumers have recovered on average 101 percent of  their claims.44 In its early days, 
the system was found to reduce the time for resolving disputes by nearly 50 percent.45 Concilianet is 
viewed as useful for consumer trust precisely because it includes court personnel in the process .  
In China, cybercrimes  and ecommerce -related lawsuits have created an enormous backlog in courts. For 
example, Alibaba reportedly receives some 4 million customer complaints annually and cases that do not 
get resolved out -of-court are then taken to a court. To manage the stream  of complaints, China’s 
Supreme People’s Court has opened a cyber space court to handle IP and ecommerce -related cases in 
Hangzhou, capital city of Zhejiang Province. The cyber -court piloted in 20 18; ecommerce cases in the 
Hangzhou court escalated from 600  in 2013 to 10,000 in 2016.46 In 2017, China’s Central Government 
granted approval for the Hangzhou court to tackle all cyberspace cases in the country, including ones 
related to  online shopping, product liability in ecommerce, Internet service contract disputes, and online 
loan and copyright issues. The court is armed with hi -tech devices that allow plaintiffs to file cases and 
upload evidence online, and judges have been trained and are well -equipped to handle larger caseloads. 
Complaints can b e filed in five minutes; plaintiffs’ identity can be verified through Alipay online or by 
showing their ID to a court clerk in Hangzhou.47 Court hearings are conducted via online video sessions. 
Judges deliver verdicts by the Internet to deliver verdicts. I n its first case – copyright infringement dispute 
between an online writer and a web company – the online video chat trial took 20 minutes.48 Also UK  
and Canada have piloted cyber -courts.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           29 
 Taxation of online transactions is another area of policy change and controversy, and one that is 
shaping platforms cost structures and developing country businesses’ ability to sell goods and 
services online at home and abroad. Several countries are consi dering or introducing the so -called 
“Netflix taxes” to tax the sales of services provided by foreign internet services. For example, in 
January 2018, Uruguay introduced a 22 percent tax on online services such as AirBnB and Uber . 
Colombia has recently required banks  that proces s card payments for online services to collect 19 
percent value added tax  (VAT) on those payments  before the payment reaches the seller.49 Thailand 
has recently updated its proposals to levy VAT on non -resident providers of electronic services to 
Thai consumers. VAT registration is mandatory to non -resident providers  if their annual sales 
exceed Baht 1.8 million (about $58,000).50 These types of t axes merit careful consideration of trade -
offs. Since digital services , domestic and foreign,  affect practically all industries, taxes on them can 
have impacts on  productivity, new business creation, and investment. Furthermore, taxes can 
undermine a public policy objective to diffuse digital technologies and services across all segmented 
of the society: the poor tend to be the group most sensitive to such taxes and fees.51 
 
Another policy that is key for online sellers and buyers to transact is making digital signatures legally 
equivalent to hand -written signatures. Digital signatures can d ramatically accelerate online 
transactions and make them more secure. For example, in Estonia, digital signatures have been the 
foundation for such e -services as registering a company online, e -banking, and e -voting. Digital 
signatures are among the techno logy solutions that help Estonians file taxes in five minutes.52 
Practically all countries analyzed here  have accepted digital signatures as enforceable in courts. 
However, in some such as in El Salvador, digital signatures law has yet to be implemented; th is is 
causing uncertainty among online sellers and the private sector in general as to which type of 
signature is legally binding.  
Online payments  
Electronic payment systems have proliferated around the world, enabling individuals and business to 
transact at lower cost. O nline payments and their interoperability across borders is also found to be 
key for cross -border ecommerce – and expand  countries’ trade, SMEs’ participation in trade, and 
creation of cross -border supply chains.53 However, payments systems do not work optimally in 
cross -border commerce. Lack of affordable and reliable online payments to transact with foreign 
buyers and sellers is a leading barrier for SMEs to engage in cross -border ecommerc e. Partly as a 
result of payments challenges, most s mall online sellers  in developing countries  are “Facebook 
merchants” that market their goods on social media platforms but do not send or receive payments 
online – and thus are harder -pressed to transact across borders with foreign buyers .  
Positively, gov ernments appreciate the importance of online payments; nearly all countries mapped 
here have introduced digital cash programs to expand o nline payments in their economies  (figure 
18). India has been particularly proactive in turning toward cashlessness thr ough financial incentives 
and new government -sponsored apps that help entice Indians to transact electronically (case 5) . In 
31 of the mapped countries  including India , there have been efforts to fuel interoperability of the 
many types of payments systems;  however, only in some have there been very robust, concerted 
efforts by the private sector and regulators to propel the interoperability of online payments. Peru, 
Tanzania, and Brazil stand out in particular; analysts have attributed their success to the fact that 
interoperability was private sector -led and in the interest of the payments and banking industries, 
rather than imposed on them by the government (case 6).  
As online solutions and payments grow more ubiquitous, concerns about security of online 
payments accentuate, and so does  the need to better identify firms and individuals that are 
transacting. One game -changing solution that is already piloted is the use of biometric technology 
such as fingerprint scanning to identify users making payments. India’s Aadhaar , the world’s largest  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           30 
 digital, biometrics -based ID database, is fueling interoperable payments and financial inclusion to 
people without mobile devices. It is by court order voluntary : Indians can opt out if they have 
concerns about the  security of their  personal data. Some countries are experimenting with 
blockchain -based ID solutions. For example,  the Financial Services Agency of Japan has been  working 
on a new digital ID powered by blockchain technology to make banking more efficient for Japanese 
consumers – a possibly promising solution also for business clients.54 A consumer with an account at 
one of the participating banks would use the blockchain -powe red digital ID to access banking 
services at other banks involved in the program. Japan is researching similar technology for awarding 
government contracts.  
FIGURE 15 - NUMBER OF COUNTRIES THAT HAVE ADOPTED PAYMENT 
REGULATIONS CONDUCIVE TO PLATFORM -ENABLED TRADE , BY AREA 
 
 
Case 5: Overnight to Digital Cash? – India  
India has made considerable and fast inroads in making its society cashless . According to a recent study, 
Indians’ costs of accessing cash are among the highest in the world .55 The costs tend to rise with size of 
population – but even controlling for population size, India st ands out, faring especially poorly in terms of 
ATM access compared to such countries as Kenya, Nigeria, or Egypt. The problems amplified in small  
cities: one study found that residents of Delhi collectively spent 6 million hours and $1.5 million to obtain 
cash, while residents of Hyderabad spent twice as much on a per capital basis, or altogether 1.7 million 
hours and $500,000.56 
 
In many advanced c ountries, digitization of payments has been pushed by industry that has agreed to 
waive users’ processing fees. In 20 18, India set out to reform, becoming the first nation to subsidize the 
use of digital cash such as eWallets, mobile banking, through 10 pe rcent discounts on online payments for 
insurance policies, rail tickets and highway toll charges. The government also waives service tax on online 
transactions below 2,000 rupees and created a 0.75 percent discount for digital payments at gas stations. 
Government also got rid of 500 and 1,000 -rupee notes. The demonetization drive prohibited form 80 -90 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           31 
 percent of currency by November 2016. Digital transaction volumes grew 43 percent between 
November and December 2016.57 
 
The results of the campaign were to ma ny observers very significant . The volume of transactions doubled 
2016–17 and was expected to grow from 32 percent in 2013 –14 to 62 percent in 2017 –18. The 
transactions at points of sale  are expected to exceed transactions at ATMs by 2022, both in terms of  
volume and value.58 Granted, most people d id not digit ize completely: a survey found that respondents 
who keep more than 2,000 rupees as minimum cash in hand is 29  percent  in case of credit card users, as 
compared to 12  percent  in case of cash -only users .59 Mobile -based payment methods have taken off 
faster than debit and credit cards.  
 
Non-cash payments  surge d immediately following the demonetization policy enacted in November 2016, 
when cash in circulation fell by two -thirds, driving hopes that the shock would kick -start India’s transition 
to a cashless economy. By March 2017, d igital transactions had increase d by 33 percent by volume and 59 
percent by value from November 2016.60 The most notable surge in cashless payments was over 
infrastructure introduced over the past several years : the Immed iate Mobile Payments System (IMPS) and 
United Payments Interface (UP I), which support instant payments using mobile phones and provide the 
infrastructure for new payment applications , and the g overnment -sponsored Bharat Interface for Money 
(BHIM)  app, which  enables payment by anyone with a bank account and smartphone. The app connects 
to Aadhaar numbers, India’s universal identification, opening opportunity for a payments network with 
hundreds of millions of new Aadhaar -enabled bank accounts.  
 
The National Payments Corporation of India has launched BharatQR Code, an interm odal system for 
payments that eliminates the need for point -of-sale terminals in consumer transactions and enables 
customers to pay participating merchants by scanning a unique QR code with their smartphone camera, 
with no new technology required on the se ller’s end. The key in the system is interoperability: users can 
pay for goods or services using the new BHIM app, other UPI -enabled apps and mobile wallets, or debit 
and credit card accounts, and merchants only need to register with a bank to receive payments.  
 
Low adoption of smartphones, still at less than 30 percent of the population , could constrain India’s 
journey to cashlessness . India  has however created a workaround , the so -called *99# system, which 
allows resid ents to make payments using SMS with their basic mobile phones . These payments have  
spiked since the demonetization campaign sta rted. Ecommerce platforms have been enthusiastic, with 
Alibaba being an investor in Indian mobile wallet firm Paytm and Faceboo k’s WhatsApp planning to launch 
its own digital payments service in India.  
 
 
 
 
Case 6: Interoperable payments – Peru, Tanzania, and Brazil  
Getting different payment products and systems to interoperate is a major priority for the development 
of domestic a nd cross -border ecommerce  to ensure buyers and sellers can transact seamlessly even if 
they use different payment systems. Interoperability also helps promote competition among providers, 
reduce fixed costs on users, and enable economies of scale.  
Peru ha s created a fully interoperable payments system based on voluntary participation  by the private 
sector .61 Peru’s interoperable platform Billetera Movil (BIM) launched in 2016 resulted from a four -year 
collaborative effort coordinated by Peru’s Bankers Association. BIM is interoperable among three 
telecoms and over 30 financial institutions. The existing netwo rk of about 30,000 bank branches are also  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           32 
 included in the BIM network. The rules of the game for BIM were set in the 2013 National Law for 
Electronic Money. Banks, service providers, telecommunications companies agreed to sign onto the 
system after it had the support of key government officials, the bank superintendent, and the Central 
Bank. Ericsson won the bid to develop the technical capabilities of the BIM platform and telecom 
operators Entel, Claro, and Movistar partnered to diffuse the platform  nation wide.62  
BIM initially enabled peer -to-peer payments, cash -in/cash -out and mobile top -ups and merchant payments. 
The low fees ($0. 18 per transaction) were to help Peru’s poor to participate. The fees went to Pagos 
Digitales Peruanos, the company established  to oversee BIM.63 Participating banks will only start getting a 
return on their investment from these products when cross -selling opportunities become available.  
In its first four months of operation, BIM secured 120,000 users and is expected to scale to 5  million 
users by 2021.64 By the second half of 2017, it had 400,000 users. The industry also expects the platform 
to help deliver to the unbanked other banking products, such as microcredit, micro -insurance and micro -
savings. BIM has encouraged the Associa tion of Banks of Paraguay to explore similar initiatives with the 
country’s incumbent service provider Tigo Money. One significant challenge BIM has faced to date is the 
limited uptake  in rural regions , which is attributed to banks’ limited engagement in r ural areas ad 
prioritization of their  urban client ele.  
Like Peru, Tanzania has enhanced interoperability of payments through an industry -led drive.65  The 
standards that supported interoperability and the technical switches among the systems were developed  
first by the telecom industry. The process of setting standards involved regular meetings to define 
participation criteria, clearing and settlement principles, handling of disputes, principles for intra -party 
compensation (or interchange) and interparty r isk. Tigo, Airtel, Zantel, Vodacom were first -mover s, 
interconnecting via bilateral APIs. There were no regulatory manda ted; industry participated voluntarily . 
The c entral bank however provided rules for consumer protection, risk management, and contacts w ith 
regulators. There were also workshops and training sessions to ensure the stakeholders, operators and 
banks were working toward a common goal.  In May 2014, the participants agreed to create a use case – 
define rules for wallet to wallet transfers. 66 The final agreement on the system was attained in September 
2014.  
Brazil has pursued a similar approach. In 2013, the government issued regulat ions for  the mobile market  
and endorsed, but did not mandate, interoperability a mong payment providers.  Each provi der was 
requested to outline how it intended to integrate in to the  financial system. Various partnerships emerged 
spontaneously, such as in  2013 between Zuum, Vivo, and MasterCard and between Meu Dinheiro with 
Claro and Badesco; and in 2018 between MasterC ard, TIM, leader in the prepaid market, and Caixa, a 
Brazilian bank and the second largest government -owned financial institution in Latin America.67 
Interoperability of cross -border payments is typically harder to accomplish because operators often want 
to hold on to their  share in a given market, and because of each country’s government and central bank  
needs to be engaged and supportive of interoperability  for it to happen. One good example is the 20 18 
agreement among  some of the largest telecommunication s companies in Africa, Vodafone Group and 
MTN Group, to allow their respective customers to make mobile payments across their networks, 
including across borders between Vodafone subscribers in Kenya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
and Tanzania , and MTN users in Uganda, Rwanda, South Sudan and Zambia.68 The goal was to f uel 
remittance payments in the region; the value proposition was very strong for users in that the 
partnership cut fees for cross -border transfers from 20 percent to 3 percent or l ess. Critically, the 
participating countries’ c entral banks approved cross -border fund transfers . Both companies have since 
formed further partnerships. For example, MTN has created a pilot partnership  with Airtel Burkina Faso , 
to facilitate payments betwe en Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast.  
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           33 
 Countries ’ regulations for online payments are becoming  more sophisticated, but much still needs to 
be done. Three -quarters of the mapped countries have established electronic payment  laws that  
define regulatory requirem ents and contractual issues related to e-payments ; poorer countries have 
recently made great strides in this area . For example, in 2017 , Laos passed the National Payment 
System (NPS) Law aimed to provide clarity to industry , create a payments department wi thin the 
central bank to issue licensing to both payment service providers and payment system operators, 
and pave the way to attract  innovative  and affordable payment solutions to the country. The Central 
Bank of Myanmar recently removed restrictions on th e participation of international payments 
companies in Myanmar’s domestic payments industry, a move widely applauded by global  financial 
services.69 Positively, 36 countries have put in place a clear  set of procedures  for payment providers 
to seek payment licenses. However, only some explicitly allow the use of foreign currency in e -
transactions , for facilitating cross -border payments . Ghana and Tanzania, for example, mandate these 
transactions be made only in local cu rrency.  
The tightening of anti -money laundering (AML) and know your customer (KYC) rules has made it 
harder for small firms to use banking services and electronic payments. KYC laws can be prescriptive  
and result in box -checking  exercises for financial institutions that are vetting potential customers. 
This provides little room for adjusting controls to high -risk and low -risk customers; thus low -risk 
customers that merit bank accounts experience delays , and due diligence resources  are not 
optimally targeted at high-risk customers. The aim of a risk -based approach (RBA) in KYC is to 
make controls more pragmatic and commensurate with risks. RBA was first proposed by the inter -
governmental Financial Action Task Force on Money Launderi ng (FATF), and a number of countries 
have revised their AML laws to be in line with FATF recommendations.70 26 countries have in place 
some type of risk -based approach .  
Ecommerce logistics and trade facilitation  
The q uality of ecommerce logistics, ease of trade compliance, efficiency of postal and logistics 
services, and customs clearance times are extremely important for SMEs’ participation in cross -
border ecommerce, given buyers’ growing demands for fast and reliable delivery. Surveys indicate 
that logist ics is also the main bottleneck to ecommerce  in developing countries . SMEs struggle in 
domestic ecommerce with rural last -mile delivery and quality of postal  services; in cross -border 
ecommerce, the main challenges are total cost of delivery to the end con sumer  and arcane customs 
procedures. 71   
To be sure, governments have made a great deal of progress in recent years on trade facilitation, 
including by signing and moving toward the implementation of the Global Trade Facilitation 
Agreement (TFA) that streamlines customs procedures  and border clearance  especially in 
developing economies. Some TFA commitments, such as for expedited clearance , online payment of 
duties , and av ailability of customs information  online  are especially relevant for ecommerce se llers 
accustomed to doing their business online . About 60 percent of the countries mapped here have 
adopted these measures  (figure 16) . Such measures can be very impactful  in combatting graft and 
expanding trade. D igitizing customs clearance is found to reduce border compliance time for 
imports on average from 110 hours to 37 hours , and significantly reduce corruption in customs.72 
Trade flows grow  as a result of such reforms : firm -level data from Uruguay shows that if all 
shipments subject to physical inspe ction cleared customs within a day, exports would increase by 
almost 6 percent.73 
Single window systems that enable SMEs to deposit electronically all documents related to border 
clearance in one single place are another means to reducing SMEs’ trade compli ance costs. For 
example, OECD has found that single windows can lower trade costs by 14.5 percent in low -income 
countries.74  Out of 40 countries mapped, 10 have adopted electronic  single windows, per data from  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           34 
 the United Nations. At the start of 2018 , Sing apore took its single window to the next level by 
introducing a National Trade Platform with a gamut of B2B and G2B services to help SMEs engage in 
trade, such as to get access to low -cost logistics and trade finance.  Developers can build new trade -
related  services directly on the platform.  
FIGURE 16 - NUMBER OF COUNTRIES THAT HAVE ADOPTED ECOMMERCE 
LOGISTICS AND TRADE POLICIES CONDUCIVE TO PLATFORM -ENABLED 
TRADE , BY AREA 
 
Customs around the world have been concerned about small parcels shipped by small businesses, 
given customs’ lack of visibility i nto the contents  of these parcels  and often limited paper trail on the 
SMEs  that sent them . The optimal solution is not, however, to saddle small businesses with onerous 
paperwork or open  and inspect  every parcel that enters a country. Rather, the key is risk-targeting  
that enables both trade facilitation and customs security .75 Risk-targeting based on big data, 
predictive analytics, and machine learning can help customs identify illicit shipments and fraudulent 
transactions aimed to avoid duties, while acce lerating customs clearance of legitimate trade.  
Singapore and UK have pioneered in the use of predictive analytics in customs in order to  quickly 
identify  fraudulent customs declarations and accelerate clearance of licit shipments. Especially 
usefully, UK , South Korea and Peru have been piloting blockchain in customs. Blockchain’s 
properties appear terrific for border clearance, both to ensure high -quality, real -time data on 
shippers and on the authenticity and origin of goods, and to provide all border ag encies have access 
to the same data on the same shipment in real -time. In January 2018, 18 countries in East Africa 
seized on these opportunities, announcing a “Digital FTA”, a web of blockchain ledgers and enables 
easy generation of certificates of origin .76  
Logistics  costs do not end at the border. For example, parcel delivery costs can be much higher for a 
rural company than an urban one in the same country, given that the “drop density” in rural areas is 
much lower – after all, shippers’ scale economies  are much less if they d eliver, say,  ten parcels in an 
hour to one urban neighborhood than when the y deliver  two parcels over a trip of five hours to a 
remote rural area. The differences in scale economies in shipping penalize  rural buyers and sellers 
simply for being rural.  
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           35 
 In the dataset, 25 countries have pursued innovative ecommerce services in their postal systems, 
such as piloting drone  delivery , parcel lockers, and self -service kiosks, and automated ecommerce 
fulfillment centers. Such innovative eco mmerce services have not only fueled ecommerce; they have 
become the core business and growth driver  for postal services in countries such as Singapore (case 
7).77 Often posts’ turn to ecommerce is  motivated  precisely by the realization that ecommerce can 
be a revenue driver at a time whe n letter mail business withers. At the same time, in Universal 
Postal Union’s (UPU) ranking, which considers  postal operation efficiency, internationalization of 
postal services, competitivene ss in all main markets, and adaptability of posts’ b usinesses models, 
most Africa, Latin America and Caribbean, and Middle Eastern countries score well below 50 on a 0 -
100 scale. According to the UPU, a country can fully realize the benefits of ecommerce o nly by 
addressing all four dimensions of measurement.  
 
 
Case 7: Upgrading postal systems for ecommerce – Singapore  
In a survey of 24,333 consumers in 24 countries, the post accounted for 72 percent of most recent 
cross -border deliveries, while 16 percent o f deliveries were with other carriers and 13 percent of 
consumers did not know who delivered their parcel.78 The efficiency and quality of postal services, 
essential for ecommerce markets to grow, are still limited in developing countries. Singapore Post 
Limited (“SingPost”), a company started by the government but by now listed in the stock exchange, has 
been a frontrunner in reimagining postal services for the ecommerce era, and building itself into a hub for 
ecommerce shipments across Asia. In 2003, SingP ost began implementing a series of corporate 
restructuring measures and customer offerings with the aim to generate more revenue for financing 
future development.79 Facing  flattening revenues in 2008 -09 and trends of  “e-substitution”, lifestyle 
changes, and  technology adoption  in Singapore ,80 SingPost decided to upgrade its technolo gy systems  and 
ecommerce logistics capabilities. It acquired a logistics company, Quantium Solutions, which enabled it to 
grow its regional footprint, and to concentrate greater re gional growth in vPOST, an online shopping and 
shipping service.  
SingPost has since been working to become a technology -driven ecommerce logistics solution that serves 
as a “one -stop, full service, end -to-end ecommerce logistics solution to brands and ret ailers” that want to 
export or tranship via Singapore to other markets in the Asia -Pacific.81 Its eCommerce logistics network 
now spans 19 markets across Asia Pacific, Europe and the U nited States.  
The centerpiece of SingPost’s ecommerce business is the Re gional eCommerce Logistics Hub opened in 
2016, which is a $ 180 million, three -story, 553,000 square feet (equal to ten soccer fields) facility housing 
a fully automated parcel sorting facility able to handle up to 100,000 parcels a day, and end -to-end 
sorting, shipping and returns management capabilities that enable quicker order fulfilment.82 SingPost built 
the facility in collaboration with brand owners and last -mile fulfilment players. The facility’s two major 
value propositions are automation of the sort ing system and warehouse; and efficient fulfillment of cross -
border shipments to destinations worldwide.  
To accommodate ecommerce shoppers requiring speed and convenience, SingPost has also built a 
network of Self -service Automated Machines (SAMs) that en able people to drop off their registered 
parcels or mail rather than waiting in lines.83 In unmanned smart post offices , users can get hold of p ostal 
staff via video conferencing.84 SingPost has also created POPStations  where customers can pick up their 
parcels, using their mobile or fingerprint as identification.85 Such parcel lockers have expanded also across 
Europe; the growth of parcel lockers is seen as the key behind Eastern Europe’s cross -border 
ecommerce. Deutsche  Post DHL has used them since 2002 and there are now more than 5 million 
registered users.86 SingPost is also bringing to market Smart Post Offices, smaller , automated facilities that 
cater to the younger segments of the population.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           36 
 SingPost has also brough t together retailers, brands, logistics companies to develop new retail and 
logistics solutions.87 For example, consumer goods company Unilever has created with SingPost a virtual 
kitchen for consumer s to try out different products through an augmented real ity headset.88 Another 
experiment is the FairPrice@SingPost mobile app, a future supermarket where smart lighting in the store 
connects to a shopper’s mobile app  that then guides the shopper to the items he or she  needs.89  
With the support from the Singapor ean government’s Economic Development Board, SingPost has also 
launched a Centre of Innovation set up to research new logistics and postal services and products, and is 
working to position SingPost to lead in such areas as driverless cars and sharing econo my.90 SingPost has 
also tested drones, uniquely integrating in its drones an authentication system and an app for recipients to 
ensure that they got the package  and to select their preferred delivery date and time.  
SingPost reported  very strong , 171 percen t revenue growth in its ecommerce operations 2016 -17, much 
above 1 .5-1.7 percent growth rates in its postal services and other logistics business es.91 SingPost’s 
ecommerce capabilities have enticed leading platforms t o invest in Singapore. For example, ecom merce 
portal Lazada Singapore owned by Alibaba moved its warehouse operations to SingPost Regional 
eCommerce Logistics Hub to better service its Southeast Asia client base. SingPost and Lazada are 
working on a “click and collect” service whereby shoppers c an collect or return their online purchases.92 
It has also enabled customers expand their online footprint through a marketplace program that helps 
propel sales on channels such as Amazon, Sears, and Walmart.93  
 
 
Trade policy can also  be used to lower ecommerce logistics  costs . An array of studies indicate that 
reforms to facilitate trade in low -value items through increasing de minimis  levels is a “silver bullet” 
for improving trade and economic growth. Higher de minimis rates accelerate customs clearance, 
increase consumer welfare, lower costs for SMEs to secure inputs from around the world, and 
typically increase government revenue and trade in low -value items, the hallmark of platform -
enabled trade.94 Higher de minimis  levels also ease ecommerce returns from foreign buyers of 
domestic goods. Both the United States and the Philippines have significantly increased their de 
minimis levels in 2016 to tap these gains. However, in the dataset, only three countries have de 
minim is levels above $200, the benchmark recommended by the International Chamber of 
Commerce.  
Ecommerce export promotion for SMEs  
Particularly small non -exporter firms in developing countries point to  their capabilities  to export  as 
an impediment to starting to sell online and selling across  border s.95 Export promotion policies are 
meanwhile widely found to increase trade. For example, one study found that a dollar spent on 
export promotion generates $ 18 of exports.96 There is some evidence that export promotion  
focused on new exporters rather than occasional or experienced exporters generates  higher 
returns. Export promotion agencies that provide bundled services (such as consulting and trade 
missions) tend to perform best.97 Case studies suggest that success ful ecommerce export promotion 
may also require multifaceted approaches, such as one -on-one training, financial support, and training 
by ecommerce platforms.  
Most countries mapped in their study have an export promotion agency, and in 25 counties that 
agency h as been offering some types of training programs for companies to use ecommerce as a 
means to export. For example, PromPeru -sponsored “PYME Peruanas al Mundo” (Peruvian SME s to 
the World) is a full -scale training and information portal for Peruvian SMEs th at want to export or 
import using ecommerce. The online  courses are extensive, covering such topics as use of platforms, 
marketing, and other areas ; PYME Peruanas al Mundo also has seminars in various  Peruvian  cities.  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           37 
 Peru has also created strategic partnerships with DHL and various digital and content service 
providers  to help SMEs engage in trade .  
In Mexico, ProMéxico has program “Mexico Exports in One Click” (“México Exporta EnUnClick”), 
whereby ProMéxico help s Mexi can companies access 130 million international buyers making $300 
billion in cross -border purchases during 2018. The program is multifaceted, consisting of platform 
partnerships with Alibaba, Amazon, and eBay , discounts and i ncentives offered by  service pr oviders 
such as  UPS, digital transformation projects for existing exporters to export online , and seminars 
and workshops  for SMEs to learn to sell online .  
Several other countries have partnered with one of the major ecommerce platforms such as eBay, 
Alibaba, or Rakuten to train SMEs  to do ecommerce and use these platforms . For example, in 20 18, 
Rakuten Belanja Online, the local affiliate of Japanese e -commerce giant Rakuten, started offering 
ecommerce courses to Indonesia’s SMEs. Alibaba has also been very  active in forming public -private 
partnerships.  
In 12 of the 40 countries  mapped here , export promotion agencies have mounted their own 
ecommerce platforms or established programs to help SMEs readily onboard global platforms (figure 
17). For example, Kor ean export promotion agency KOTRA has website buyKOREA.org, a B2B e -
market place which connects international buyers and Korean suppliers. It enables product search, 
online transactions, EMS shipping, and online video meetings and buying offers. Buyers can  see new 
Korean products which are registered daily and pay by credit cards easily. The Korean government 
supports online sellers also by operating overseas logistics centers in 22 locations in 12 countries . 
Korea Trade Investment Promotion Agency helps SM Es with customs clearance, inventory 
management and cargo collection . Real-time shipping status is available in buyKOREA.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           38 
 FIGURE 17 - NUMBER OF COUNTRIES THAT HAVE ADOPTED ECOMMERCE 
EXPORT PROMOTION PRACTICES CONDUCIVE TO PLATFORM -ENABLED 
TRADE , BY AREA 
 
Instead of building their own platforms – an effort that takes considerable resources – some export  
promotion agencies enable SMEs to sell on large, global platforms. For example, UK Department for 
International Trade’s  E-Exporting Program  has a tool for  UK SMEs to identify their ideal platform 
and gain preferential rat es to use a platform to export.  In Costa Rica, export promotion agency 
Procomer has an alliance with Alibaba, i -Gourmet, and Amazon  that offer Costa Rican SMEs 
discounts for using their services. Pro Ecuador has an innovative EcuadorExquisito campaign where 
Ecuadorian food and cooking is bee n webstreamed to Chinese shoppers on Tmall. Pro Ecuador  has 
also run a  campaign to promote onli ne sales of Ecuadorian mangos  in China. These recently gained 
access to the Chinese market , after 13 years of negotiations between the two countries.  
Six countries mapped here have also provided financial incentives for exporters to build their digital 
capabilities and start using ecommerce to export. This is useful in that the target companies have 
already overcome the challenges related to exporting, and can focus on using ecommerce and 
platforms to expand their exports. For example, Malaysia External Tra de Development Corporation 
(MATRADE) has an eTrade program to promote exporter SMEs’ use of various ecommerce 
platforms, such as Alibaba, JD, TMall, Amazon, eBay and Daganghalal. SMEs can get RM5,000 (about 
$1,300) to cover listing and marketing fees , as w ell as costs of translation and Amazon fulfilment 
fees. Between October 2014 and May 2017, 955 companies joined the eTRADE Program.98 
Seven of the mapped countries have special programs for women exporters, though these are not 
specific to ecommerce. For ex ample, ProChile has a program Mujer Exporta that aims to help 
women's companies to export. The program offered training during 2017 via several regional 
workshops in Chilean cities.  
SME finance  
Access to capital – from working capital to early-stage financing and trade finance – is in surveys 
found to be a key constraint for SMEs to engage in trade and use platforms to export.99 Practically all 
governments have sought to expand SME finance in recent years. The staple product is a 
government  guarantee on a bank loan to an SME, aimed to reduce banks’ risks of lending to SMEs. 
Of the mapped countries, 35 countries have conventional government credit guarantee programs in 
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           39 
 place, and 33 offer some form of direct loan to SMEs (figure 18). Empirica lly, these programs have a 
mixed record. However, banks in general regard  guarantee schemes as the most effective 
government program to support SME financing in developed and developing countries . Some 
schemes such as Chile’s Fondo de Garantía para Pequeño s Empresarios (FOGAPE ) and French 
Oséo ’s guarantee scheme have been found to be very effective in expanding  SME credit and SME 
growth.100  
Often government guarantees and loans have helped expand SME lending during cyclical economic 
shocks that tend to hit S MEs harder than large firms.101 Loan guarantees have  also been found to  
have additional ity – they have helped companies obtain additional loans and loans on better terms 
than these firms would otherwise get, rather than substituting for loans that would anyway have 
been made. It is however not clear whether guarantee schemes expand funding on the “extensive 
margin”, to firms that might otherwise not get a loan at all.102  
FIGURE 18 - NUMBER OF COUNTRIES THAT HAVE ADOPTED SME  FINANCE 
PRACTICES CONDUCIVE TO PLATFORM -ENABLED TRADE , BY AREA 
 
Governments around the world are showing growing interest  also in early -stage financing in order 
to nurtur e tech start-ups. This is also positive for platform sellers  that are early in their life cycles . 
26 of the mapped countries have a government equity fund that invests directly in SMEs. For 
example, in 2016, the Thai Government launched a $570 million venture fund for Thai start -ups.103 
The Ministry of ICT also stated it would establish a $285 million Digital Economy Fund targeting 
technology ventures.  
Granted, the idea that government should “pick winners” among private companies is controversial 
– and evidence of the performance of comp anies backed by government venture capital funds is 
mixed. Studies suggest that government -backed funds do not have particularly good results. 
However, syndicates involving governments and private investors do outperform purely privately 
managed funds . 104 Evidence also suggests that governments may best  support early -stage funding by 
acting as limited partners ( that is, as funds of funds)  that invest in privately managed funds with 
professional venture capitalists that in turn invest in companies  – nine coun tries in the sample have 
adopted this strategy.105   
 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           40 
 Notably, 21 countries have created specific financing programs for women entrepreneurs. Such 
programs are typically formed to overcome what empirical literature suggests are gender biases 
among lenders and  investors.106 Research on  the role of the  government in  expanding lending to and 
invest ments in  women -run businesses is still scant; however, it appears that government could help 
incent ivize lenders and investors back women, or possibly finance women -led firms  directly. In 
Canada, Busi ness Development Canada’s Women in Technology Fund seeks to foster the creation of 
the next generation of millionaire Canadian women technology entrepreneurs. W ith $70 million to 
be invested over five years, it is the largest venture capital fund in North America dedicated solely to 
investing in early -stage women -led technology companies across sectors. As part of the program, 
$60 million are dedicated to direct investments in women -led tech firms in seed stage, Series A stage 
and sometimes in the Series B stage, alongside accelerator partners, investors and other corporate 
venture partners  where Business Development Canada forms part of a syndicate or is a lead 
investor.  Also Mexico has a program whereby micro, small, and medium -sized enterprises with at 
least a 51  percent female ownership are eligible for loans from 50,000 to 5 million pesos (or up to 
about $500,000) with 12 -13 percent interest for five years.107 
Some countries have created ecommerce -specific funding mechanisms. Korea has creative, 
ecommerce -specific credit guarantees to promote e -commerce transactions. The loan guarantee is a 
service to guarantee loans t hat ecommerce buyers might get from a financi al institution. Banks 
transmit information to The Korean Credit Guarantee Fund (KODIT) for buyers to apply for the 
guarantee, and KODIT conducts credit investigation and issues the e -guarantee. China has a similar 
scheme in place.  
There are several initiat ives around the world to establish the appropriate regulatory frameworks to 
ensure SME s' access to finance. The quickly spreading practice of “open banking” – data-sharing 
between banks and other financial service providers such as payment providers and on line lenders 
through APIs or shared data platforms – is expected to expand SMEs’ access to fast -disbursing loans. 
The European Union has been particularly proactive, driving open banking through the updated 
version of the Payment Services Directive 2 (PSD2 ). McKinsey suggests that open banking is 
conducive to loan underwriting and risk analysis of “thin file”, small and nascent borrowers.108  
Open banking practices are applied in many countries by the private sector and large banks. Of the 
40 mapped countries , seven mandate or actively encourage open banking, and a number of others 
such as Singapore have promoted and recommended it to the  country’s  financial services 
community. Some have sought to establish standards for open banking . In Malaysia, the Central Bank 
is aiming to create an Open API Implementation Group with members drawn from the Central 
Bank, financial industry, fintech companies and relevant key stakeholders , with the goals of 
develop ing Open API standards , including open data specifications, se curity standards, and oversight 
arrangements for access by third party service providers.109  
The UK has been very active in creating new ways to fuel  SME finance  (case 8). For example, the  UK 
has pioneered in lowering FinTechs’ time and money to market to w ith the regulatory sandbox 
approach, whereby companies can bring to market a new financial product or service without 
needing to meet all applicable regulations . The approach is found to help energize financial services 
and innovation . The sandbox  approach is spreading fast – 17 countries especially in Asia -Pacific have 
adopt ed it or are  considering it, and Mexico adopted it as part of its new FinTech law . Some 
countries also see the sandbox approach as improving financial inclusion.110  
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           41 
  
Case 8: UK’s pioneering programs to boost finance for SMEs in the digital era  
The UK has pioneered high -impact SME finance practices, including online lending and open banking. In 
2014, the UK enacted a law that required large lenders to refer to alternative and s maller lenders SMEs 
whose credit applications have been rejected. The motivation was banks’  decreased interest after the 
financial crisis  to lend to SMEs. Mandated to perform more extensive due diligence on borrowers, banks 
saw their fixed costs of loan ap provals rise, which i ncentivized them to work on larger  loans and with 
well-known borrowers . Yet still most UK SMEs only approached their main bank for finance, and over a 
third gave up completely if the ir application was  turned down, rather than shopping the application 
around. The law was to make banks to encourage SMEs to look elsewhere  for funding . The sharing of the 
financing information – which, in addition to loans, covers factoring, asset -based lending and trade finance 
– occurs via online referral portals that help match the rejected SMEs to alternative lenders.  
Banks in UK and European Union  are also today required to share proprietary data, in a regulated and 
secure way, under the U.K.’s Open Banking Standard and Europe's Payment Services Directi ve 2. In 2018, 
the UK government set out to accelerate Open Banking by mandating that banks that hold a data on their 
SME customers’ financials and other business vitals share that information, if permitted by the SME, with 
non-bank lenders  analyzing the SME’s  creditworthiness. Granted, b anks also benefit as SME borrowers ’ 
data is fully portable. F or example, a borrower can ask an ecommerce platform  for data on the 
borrowers’ sales  on the platform and pass that data to a bank , for the bank to use in it s credit analysis. By 
virtue of these new mandates, European SMEs in essence become controllers and carriers of their data . 
This should encourage new lenders, faster credit decisions, and fewer defaults.  
The UK has also  lowered FinTechs’ time and money to bring their offering to market with the “sandbox” 
approach, whereby companies can bring to market a new financial product or service for a period 
without securing all  regulatory approvals that would ordinarily  be required. UK has also worked to solve 
anoth er critical problem: the fact that each country has its own financial services regulations that do not 
interoperate well, which forces FinTechs that are scaling across markets  to adopt rules and apply for 
licenses specific to each new market. For example, in February 2017, UK’s Financial Conduct Authority 
(FCA) and the Ontario Securities Commission of Canada signed an agreement to refer to one another 
innovative businesses seeking to enter the other’s market and help them navigate regulations and lower 
time to market.111 The deal is hailed as a template for cross -border regulatory collaboration in the 
FinTech market. For its part, the Ontario Securities Commission of Canada had earlier concluded a 
similar deal with the Australian Securities and Investments Com mission.112  
 
 
A dozen g overnments in the dataset have promoted equity crowdfunding, where companies seek 
financing through online platforms from accredited investors. Equity crowdfunding has opened 
financing to companies that may not have extensive investor networks or that are run by women or 
minorities. Legislation and regulatory oversight are viewed  as important for promoting  the 
crowdfunding market , such as by keeping the costs of securities issuance reasonable  and by  lowering 
the incidence of fr audulent practices.113 Most advanced countries have enacted equity crowdfunding 
laws and Latin American and Asian economies a re considering such laws. Brazil has been a Latin 
American frontrunner; i n August 2017, Brazil’s Commissão de Valores Mobiláros (CVM)  created a 
new exemption for issuers of securities to raise funding on platforms that have been approved by 
CVM. Issuers may raise up to BRL 5 million (about $1.5 million) under the exemption within 180 
days. Most African countries have yet to develop or p ass crowdfunding laws.  
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           42 
 B. PRELIMINARY LOOK AT IMPACT OF POLICIES ON PLATFORM -
ENABLED TRADE  
Countries with policies conducive to platform -enabled trade also have more platform -enabled trade 
and more sellers selling on platforms than countries that have fewer good policies in place. To what 
extent and which  policies actually drive and cause platform -enabled trade?  
This section explores these questions through a preliminary econometric analysi s. Since the volume 
of platform sales appears to grow in lockstep with the number of sellers, the key for countries to 
grow their platform -enabled trade volumes is growing the number of platform  sellers  – at least at 
first, before focusing on growing the sales of promising sellers . To explore causal relationships 
betwe en policies and the number of platform sellers, we regress the number of platform sellers in 65 
countries  over five years  on variables that capture different p olicy dimensions  mapped in this report , 
such as broadband connectivity, logistics quality , and tax policy.  
We cannot use our policy index as an independent variable because it is from 2018 while data on 
platform sellers are from 2011 -15. Rather, we employ  proxy variables  that capture different 
dimensions of the policies mapped above  and that are available for earlier years  – fixed broadband 
usage , ICT export levels (as a proxy for the sophistication of ICT service ecosystem and ICT skills) , 
and liner shipp ing quality (as  a proxy for logistics cost and quality) , all from World Bank’s 
Development Indicators. Since larger economies tend to have more sellers, we control for the size 
of economy; GDP data are also from the World Development Indicators.  
Table 2 shows the results. The number of platform sellers , after controlling for the size of the 
economy , is significantly shaped by broadband connectivity, ICT readiness and skills, and quality of 
international logistics. Though not significant, trade ope nness enters with a positive sign.  These 
results suggest that policies conducive to better Internet connectivity, digital services ecosystem, and 
cross -border logistics are essentia l for platform -enabled trade  to flow .  
TABLE 2 - RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POLICY VARIABLES AND PLATFORM -
ENABLED TRADE  
 
 
 
 
 
This is a pioneering attempt to capture the  policy  drivers of platform -enabled trade . However, there 
are a few  limitations for making causal inferences:  
Dependent variable: Number of platform sellers
Independent Variables
Log of GDP0.99
(17.58)***0.926
(18.29)***0.817
(8.13)***
Fixed broadband penetration0.355
(9.66)***0.297
(6.33)***
ICT services0.206
(4.10)***
Liner shipping quality0.006
(3.22)***
Openess to trade0.108
(1.19)
Observations 325 325 245
R-squared 0.49 0.6 0.62 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           43 
  
• It is plausible that the analysis has an endogeneity problem – namely that countries with a 
great deal of platform -enabled trade are likelier to enact policies  related to ecommerce than  
are countries where ecommerce is only starting. In other words, while adoption of good 
policies may increase platform -enabled trad e, increase in platform -enabled trade may induce 
countries to adopt good  policies to begin with .  
 
• The analysis here omits several variables that likely impact a country’s success in platform -
enabled trade, especially in platform exports, such as the policies of the country’s trading 
partners. Our dataset on platform transactions does not define countri es’ export markets, 
however.  
 
• Further data runs with policies  mapped here (such as  specific digital regulations, SME 
ecommerce export promotion  programs , or payments laws) can reveal additional patterns . 
It will be possible to better establish how policies mapped in the above sections (for 2018) 
are related to transactions  with future transactions -level data  (for example for 2019 -20).    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           44 
 VI. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND 
POLICY ROADMAP   
This study has aimed to improve developing countries’ knowledge of the state of platform -enabled 
trade and SMEs’ use of platforms for trade in their economies, and the potential for different types 
of policies to increase this usage . We have reached the fo llowing results:  
• Platforms are an increasingly significant enabler of SME trade  in goods and 
services in developing countries, in particular. Developing country sellers use global 
platforms almost exclusively to export. In most developing economies, platfo rm-enabled 
exports are growing much faster than overall trade and GDP. Platform -enabled trade also 
appears to be the core business for developing country sellers that are using global 
platforms: their annual sales volumes on platforms are as sizable as tho se of advanced 
country sellers. Yet SMEs’ use of platforms is still very low in developing countries – less 
than 10 percent of the level of platform usage in the UK, for example. This suggests that 
better policies, programs, and incentives are needed to bo lster developing country SMEs’ 
access to and use of platforms for trade.  
 
• Most countries have adopted what might be called “low -hanging fruit” policies 
conducive to platform -enabled trade, but many impactful  and positive policies 
have yet to be widely adop ted. For example, yet to be adopted at scale are safe harbors 
that provide immunity for internet intermediaries from user -generated content, online 
dispute resolution systems that are shown to significantly accelerate dispute resolution and 
build consumers ’ trust in trade on platforms, equity crowdfunding laws t hat help  stimulate 
start-up finance, and export promotion practices that enable SMEs to bolster their digital 
readiness and learn to use major global platforms to trade.  
 
• There is a significant amoun t of positive innovation and experimentation in 
policy areas conducive to platform -enabled trade . The study reveals numerous 
exciting policy innovations in both advanced and developing countries. For example, 
Singapore and Canada have developed extensive n ew postal services to promote 
ecommerce in their economies and cross -border trade; many Latin American economies 
such as Peru, Mexico, Brazil, and Costa Rica, along with Thailand and Malaysia, have built 
creative online programs, public -private partnership s, and digital transformation initiatives to 
help SMEs use platforms to export; and Korea, UK, and several East African economies have 
made significant inroads into adopting blockchain in customs, to facilitate the identification of 
high-risk shipments and  clearance of low -risk ones. India, Peru, and Tanzania have made 
significant progress on promoting the use and interoperability of digital payments; UK has 
introduced several ground -breaking SME finance policies, such as open banking and FinTech 
sandboxes;  and Brazil has created a renowned safe harbor for internet intermediaries.  
 
• The policy index for platform -enabled trade developed in this report is strongly 
correlated with countries’ development levels, but there are also several 
frontrunners that outperform.  Overall, advanced countries and selected East Asian and 
Latin American economic have adopted about 65 -75 percent of the policies mapped, while 
less developed countries in Africa, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Latin America h ave 
adopted only 20 -35 percent of these policies and practices.  
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           45 
 • Policies that improve broadband connectivity, the quality of ICT skills and 
services, cross -border logistics, and the ease for SMEs to comply with 
regulations  are positively associated with the growth of the number of platform 
sellers . The volume of export sales made on platforms appears to grow in lockstep with the 
number of sellers in a country, which suggest that the key for developing countries to grow 
their platform -enabled trade is to b irth new platform sellers. Econometric results suggest 
that the number of platform sellers is significantly shaped by broadband connectivity, ICT 
skills and services, and quality of international logistics. Future data on platform sales is 
required to esta blish causality between the policy variables mapped here and platform -
enabled trade. However, early statistical work, albeit with a limited sample, suggests that the 
policy index for platform -enabled trade developed here could be a good predictor of 
platfo rm-enabled trade volumes.  
How can developing countries improve their enabling environments for platform -enabled trade? The 
policy areas mapped here, along with the policies and practices in countries around the world, 
should provide a starting point. The p olicy mapping suggests that there are two main types of 
countries: countries  that are at the start of their journey to tak e advantage of the opportunities 
platforms offer for their SMEs and that still have only some of the essential policies and practices in 
place; and countries where platform -enabled trade has taken off and whose policies also tend to be 
more encompassing.  
The first set of countries tend to be low -income countries in Africa, South Asia, and parts of 
Southeast Asia and Central America. Thes e economies still need work on the basic digital 
infrastructures such as diffusion of 4G networks and ICT skills across the society; ease of doing 
business online, including digital business registration, online lending , and e -filing of customs 
paperwork; postal ecommerce logistics; and export promotion and SME credit systems conducive to 
ecommerce.  
These economies should consider rolling out 5G networks, furthering cashlessness and 
interoperability of online payments, removing tariffs on ICT products, and  digitizing customs 
operations further, including considering the use of  blockchain in customs, as done in  East Africa. 
Critically, these economies need to provide more legal certainty for p latforms and online buyers and 
sellers through the establish ment o f safe harbors for internet intermediaries, rules that enable cross -
border data flows, and enforc ement of  balanced and robust consumer protection laws.  
Some excellent examples for the se economies might be Malaysia that has quickly transformed itself 
into a digital  economy ; Peru, Brazil, and Ecuador that have experimented with creative online export 
promotion programs ; and India and Brazil that have furthered cashlessness and interoperab ility of  
payments  systems in their economies . Rwanda has been extraordinarily tenacious and systematic in 
driving ICT sector development.  
The second set of countries are those that already have a significant amount of platform -enabled 
trade and many online sellers. These include advanced economies , China , and many count ries in 
Latin America and Southeast Asia. In these economies, the priority is to roll out 5G networks; refine 
of digital regulations conducive to platform sales, such as to establish safe harbour laws as done in 
Brazil ; ensur e free cross -border data flows as done in Singapore, and establish online dispute 
resolution forums, as done in Mexico and China.  
These economies can also significantly bolster the quality of their logistics and border clearance 
processes. For example, the y can copy elements of Singapore’s sophisticated postal system and data -
driven border clearance , and develop use cases for AI and blockchain in border clearance and 
logistics, as has been done in Korea and UK. The next step for these economies is to furthe r the  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           46 
 digitization and interoperability of their trade and finance ecosystems , for example to fuel SME 
lending  through FinTechs . These countries can also learn from Malaysia and Mexico’s work to 
promote SME ecommerce exports , and from the United States tha t has raised its de minimis  level to 
$800 to reduce customs ’ workload related to incoming low-value items . 
All economies can do much better to support women -led companies to engage in trade on online 
platforms, such through incentiv es for women -led firms t o adopt broadband and digital capabilities , 
and robust financing programs to help women -led firms  access loans and equity f inance . An 
important measure is for government agencies to disaggregate trade and performance data by 
gender.  
Table 3 highlights var ious of these measures; nearly all are being implemented by at least one 
country covered in this study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           47 
 TABLE 3 - POLICY ROADMAP TO FUEL SME S' USE OF PLATFORMS FOR TRADE  
Further 
digitization  • Prioritize diffusion of fixed broadband across the society and SMEs  
 
• Pilot and roll out 5G networks enabling high -speed and  high-capacity 
connections and competitive, next generation retail and services  
 
• Undo tariffs on ICT products  
 
• Build women -led firms' digital ca pabilities, for example through incentives to 
deploy fixed broadband  
 
Develop 
regulatory 
frameworks for 
platform -
enabled trade  • Establish safe harbor regimes that provide internet intermediaries immunity 
from liability for user -generated content  
 
• Establish data transfer regimes conducive to  SMEs’  cross -border business  
 
• Create balanced consumer protection laws and practices that build consumer 
confidence but do not place onerous compliance costs on SMEs  
 
• Promote online dispute resolution (ODR)  systems; at the minimum, ensure 
consumer compla ints can be submitted done online and are handled promptly  
 
• Limit and weigh the trade -offs of restrictive OTT regulations on competitive 
internet services  
Fuel online 
payments   
• Further cashlessness  and diffusion of online payments, such as  through 
financial incentives for people to use online payments and reduce transaction 
fees 
 
• Encourage (but do no t necessarily mandate) interoperability of payment 
systems, domestically and cross -border, including in consultation with private 
sector leaders and central banks  
 
• Provide clear licensing rules for payments platforms and providers  
 
• Put in  place risk -based approach (RBA) to Anti-Money Laundering/Combating 
the Financing of Terrorism  checks  
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           48 
 Fuel ecommerce  
logistics and 
trade facilitation  • Implement TFA and paperless trade commitments  
 
• Adopt blockchain in customs, to secure and facilitate trade , and develop use 
cases for blockchain in trade facilitation  
 
• Accelerate the adoption of digital single windows; consider next -generation 
single window systems that are platforms for B2G, G2B, and B2B services 
for SME traders  
 
• Encourage posts to embrace ecommerce as a core business and adopt  
ecommerce fulfilment strategies  
 
• Set up centers of innovation in in land and rural logistics, such as to test 
middle -mile and last -mile drone delivery  
 
• Stimulate competition and non -discrimination in courier, warehousing, 
shipping and logistics business  
Promote SME 
ecommerce 
exports   
• Develop scalable online services and information tools for SMEs to learn 
about using platforms to export  
 
• Work with platforms to create channel management programs that enable 
SMEs to quickly onboard on platforms that are best suited for their 
products and services  
 
• Establish creative web -streaming programs on ecommerce platforms to 
showcase local products to foreign B2C and B2B buyers  
 
• Incentivize existing exporters to become platform sellers, such as through 
funding or co -funding their digital transformation  
 
• Provide financial support for companies and collectives to export using  
ecommerce  and pursue  specific  ecommerce  export projects  
 
• Engage ecommerce platforms in PPPs and to provide training for SMEs to 
learn to use and readily onboard ecommerce platforms  
 
• Engage with ecommerce ecosystem  players  to better  understand and 
respond to platform sellers’ needs  
 
• Consider AI -powered online training portals customized to each company’s 
unique circumstances, market opportunities, and needs  
 
• Promote peer learning among SMEs that are seeking to sell on platforms or 
have successfully done so  
 
• Promote women -led firms  online exports,  such as through training and 
financing   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           49 
  
 Expand  SMEs' 
access to finance  • Promote alternative finance solutions, such as  through the establishment of 
equity crowdfunding laws  
 
• Adopt a regulatory sandbox, for regulators to assess market acceptance and 
regulatory needs around new online lending and finance solutions  
 
• Encourage open banking and portability of business es’ data across digital 
ecosystem, such as between ecommerce platforms and banks  
 
• Adopt a fund -of-funds to expand  VC investments in ecommerce and digital 
businesses  
 
• Consider  ecommerce credit guarantee to incentivize larger online 
transactions  
 
• Support  women’s financial inclusion  and offer robust loans and equity 
financing for women -led companies   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           50 
 VII. NEXT STEPS   
Developing country SMEs  have an unprecedented opportunity to use global online platforms to sell 
their goods and services at home and abroad, grow their businesses and employ people, and 
improve their lives. This report is a pioneering effort to analyze the design of a range of regulations, 
policies, and practices conducive to SMEs' use of platforms to trade around the world. Th e approach 
and results can be leveraged in various ways, such as  to: 
 
• Expand the set of countries analyzed here, to enable rigorous cross -country comparisons 
and identification of a wider range of policy innovations;  
 
• Creat e a real-time online database along the lines of the UN’s database for paperless trade 
policies to systematically track countries’ progress on implementing policies essential to 
platform -enabled trade;  
 
• Use th e framework employed here to develop common international policies and practices 
to stimulate SME use of platforms for trade , and to develop capacity -building projects for 
countries that are lagging behind  in SME ecommerce ; and  
 
• Use policy data collected here to create a “digital integration index” to analyze the 
interoperability of countries’ digital regulations, and  identify ways to further it.   
 
This work is hoped to generate regulatory reforms, trade facilitation efforts, SME  export promotion 
programs, and SME financing facilities and policies in developing countries that materially improve the 
odds for developing country SMEs to engage in cross -border ecommerce, specifically on  online  
platforms. The project is ultimately hope d to fuel the growth of platform -enabled trade and help 
SMEs engaged in platform -enabled trade across  developing countries and all firm segments, 
particularly women -led and rural enterprises.   
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           51 
 APPENDIX I – POLICY ISSUES MAPPED   
 
Digital infrastructure policies
Broadband plan and development programs in place
5G development plane and licensing in place
Level of competition among fixed broadband providers - ITU data
Level of competition in wireless local loop - ITU data
Information Technology Agreement member - WTO data
2016 applied MFN tariffs on cellphones (HS code 851712) - WTO data
2016 applied MFN tariffs on laptop computers (HS code 847130) - WTO data
Quality of ICT laws - World Economic Forum data
Incentives for women-led companies to use broadband or innovate in tech
Digital regulations
Liability rules for internet intermediaries 
Copyright limitations and exceptions - use of "fair use" standard
OTT regulations affecting Internet services - internet services' requirements to be licensed? 
Data transfer rules
Limits in certain sectors or by certain subnational jurisdictions
Limited with jurisdictions with weaker laws or not branded as "adequate"
Requires user consent (always, or in jurisdictions not governed by adequacy standard or other arrangement)
GST/VAT on digital sales
Online dispute resolution (ODR) in place
Complaints can be filed online
Digital / video-based court procedings
Electronic signatures admissible, legal, and enforceable
Digital business registration and licensing
Payment regulations
To create infrastructure for electronic payments
E-payments law in place
Risk-based approach (RBA) KYC regime in place
Regulatory requirements differentiated by type of payment service and its respective risks?
Central banks mandates (or lack thereof) to use the home country's currency in payments (on- or offline payments)
Rules on how to obtain a payments license exist
Capital requirements for payments providers defined
Auditing and reporting requirements for payment providers defined
Privacy requirements for payment providers defined
To incentivize use of electronic payments
Demonetization programs to promote digital payments
Regulations or programs to fuel interoperability of online payments
Immutable national ID in place, such as based on blockchain or biometrics 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           52 
  
Trade facilitation for ecommerce
De minimis threshold for entry of goods
De minimis  for informal entry
Publication of existing import-export regulations on the internet (UN data)
Electronic submission of customs declarations (UN)
Expedited shipments (UN)
Separation of release from final determination of customs duties, taxes, fees and charges (UN)
E-payment of customs duties and fees (UN)
Risk management practices in place (UN)
Electronic application of preferential certificate of origin (UN)
Electronic single window in place (UN)
Single window provides services for SMEs and trade intermediaries 
Engagement in trade-related cross-border electronic data exchange (UN)
GATS commitment on liberalizing courier services
Existing trade facilitation policy/strategy incorporates special consideration of women involved in trade (UN)
Government has introduced trade facilitation measures to benefit women involved in trade (UN)
Use of blockchain in customs
Innovative postal services such as drones and ecommerce fulfillment and warehouses; collaboration with ecommerce 
platforms 
UPU postal development index
SME export promotion
Online training programs for SMEs to export through ecommerce 
Online services, such as government-sponsored ecommerce platform or channel management platform
Financing for digital transformation for exporters to use ecommerce
Public-private collaboration to traing SMEs to use platforms for trade
Assistance to SMEs with logistics in cross-border ecommerce
Programs for women-led firms in exports and ecommerce
Government-led surveys or studies on SMEs' use of ecommerce and their constraints
SME credit
To build SME finance infrastructure
Regulatory sandboxes for FinTech
Open banking / Open APIs mandated
Banks mandated to refer non-qualifying SME loan applications to alternative finance providers
Regulatory framework for equity crowdfunding
To provide funding
Credit guarantees or direct loans for micro and small working capital loans 
Direct loans from government to small or micro firms
Equity for tech and digital businesses (government as general partner, such as runs a venture capital fund, invests directly)
Equity for tech and digital businesses (government as limited partner or fund of funds, investing in VCs that invest in SMEs)
Specific equity programs for exporters (or VC investments expressly for exporting)
Programs to finance or guarantee ecommerce transactions
Financing prgrams or entities for women-led companies - grants, debt or equity 
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           53 
 APPENDIX II – LIMITATIONS TO 
POLICY SCORING  
The policy scoring aims to capture the most essential elements that countries should have in place 
when they seek to help SMEs use platforms to trade across borders and compete successfully in the 
21st century di gital economy. As in any effort to establish a composite policy index, there are a 
number of caveats and limitations to this methodology:  
• Quality of implementation.  The quality of implementation is key for any policy to work. 
We here primarily map policie s “on paper”, but not the quality of implementation. However, 
the outcome variables give a sense that countries that have good policies in the books are 
also ones that attain better SME ecommerce outcomes.  
 
• Weighting.  The index  covers  several different dom ains, such as regulations, trade 
facilitation, and SME export promotion. It could be argued that one of these main categories 
matters more than another, or one matters more at a given point in time than another – for 
example, SME ecommerce export promotion  matters little in the absence of internet 
connectivity. However, there is also no particular reason to weigh t one domain  more than 
another – rather, the assumption here is that at the end of the day, all the mapped areas 
matter for platform -enabled trade to work .   
 
• Limited sample size . The index here covers only 40 countries; thus the  universe of 
possible policy innovations countries may be pursuing and that could become a sub -category 
in the index ar e inherently not covered.  
 
• Limits of data collection.  The policy data for this pilot index is harvested from 
government portals and other websites, rather than from surveys  sent to governments. As 
such, the quality of the data is as good as the information  available online.  In future 
iterations , collection of data via questionnaires fielded to government agencies and perhaps 
local think -tanks could be a useful approach.  
 
• Policy may not be needed.  In some areas we score, such as the use of biometrics in 
payments or open banking  mandates  for SME  lending, the private sector is in many countries 
leading the way and no particular government mandate is required. This is the case, for 
example, with open banking  practices – many banks are pursuing these practices without 
being forced to do so . The qualitative mapping produc ed in this project captures such 
promising  private sector activity.  When these areas are scored and quantified , it is assumed 
that the government mandate can accelerate and formalize a good practice (such as expand 
and accelerate open banking practice s).  
 
• Timing of data. The data are collected in late 2017 and early 2018, and the scoring is at 
this point indifferent to the timing of any one policy’s starting date. For example, some Asian 
economies such as Korea and Japan had broadband plans already in the 1990s, while some 
African economies adopted them much later.  It can thus be expected that  these Asian 
countries would be much farther a long in harvesting the gains from broadband penetration 
on ecommerce. Time-series data that show ed the year when a given policy was adopted  
would provide a more comprehensive picture of  the impacts of regulations on economic 
outcomes and to platform -enabled trade. However, the effort here is primarily focused on 
building a policy index benchmark ed to 2018.     
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           54 
  
• Countries’ differing starting points.  The countries analyzed here are at very different 
levels of development – and thus it could be argued that least developing countries should 
not be compared to advanced economies that have had certain components in place for 
years. For example, Korea and Japan have had 3G and 4G networks for yea rs and are now 
well on their way working toward 5G, while Bangladesh is still seeking to diffuse 3G and 4G 
networks . This could suggest that developing countries are compared “unfairly” and should 
be weighted differently. However, we have here opted not to  weight countries, so as to 
enable fast and straight -forward comparisons across economies – just like is done in most 
leading global indices.  We have also chosen to highlight here the policies and practices of the 
countries that are frontrunners in platfor m-enabled trade, so as to inspire countries to 
leapfrog. For example, many countries considering digital single windows could learn from 
Singapore’s National Trade Platform that is also a platform of B2B and G2B services  for 
SMEs in trade. Similarly, count ries could learn from Singapore and UK’s application of 
predictive analytics and blockchain in customs.  
 
• Interoperability of regulations with trading partners.  The analysis here focuses 
primarily on domestic policies, as governments have control over them.  However, this 
choice also means that this analysis does not fully account for the factors that impact SMEs’ 
use of platforms for trade in foreign  markets, such as tariffs and de minimis  levels in other 
countries. This study also does not measure whether a  country’s domestic digital regulations 
interoperate well with those of its key trading partners, so that the country’s SMEs could 
apply the same consumer protection laws, data privacy laws, and copyright laws when 
serving foreign customers  as they apply a t home . This lack of interoperability in digital 
regulations in Europe has been found to significantly impede intra -EU ecommerce and is 
shown in Nextrade surveys to concern SMEs – but our analysis does not at this juncture 
capture this friction.  
 
• No theor etical or econometric model.  One critical challenge in the process of 
developing the policy index for platform -enabled trade is the lack of a theoretical framework 
on the success drivers for ecommerce or platform -enabled trade. In other words, there is 
no model that would tell which ex act components make for an optimal enabling policy 
environment for SMEs to use platforms for trade. For example, while there are studies on 
the factors that are critical for ecommerce (such as fluid online payments, logistics,  and 
hospitable regulations), it is not clear what the binding constrains to ecommerce in any one 
economy, or what the optimal sequence for addressing the various constraints is. Survey 
data do suggest that logistics, digital regulations, and finance are k ey impediments to 
ecommerce in most countries, but also that the relevance of these barriers and other  issues , 
such as online payments quality or connectivity, var ies widely across countries and across 
firm segments .114 Similarly, ecommerce  platforms  have informed views on what tends to 
work to stimulate platform -enabled trade. The main limitation to modeling  the drivers of 
ecommerce to date has been the lack of consistent data on ecommerce and platform -
enabled trade. The statistical analyse s performed in this study with actual data on platform -
enabled trade are a pioneering step in the right direction. However, still more work needs 
to be done, including with time series data and data with control variables , to establish more 
firmly which po licies are particularly critical for platform -enabled trade . 
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           55 
 Notes  
1 By leveraging cloud -based tools, entrepreneurs can lower capital expenditures and barriers to 
enter new markets much below those required of the traditional brick -and-mortar companies.  
 
2 See World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends  (Washington, DC: World 
Bank).  
 
3 Economic Innovation Group . 2016. “The New Map of Economic Growth and Recovery”  (May) 
https://eig.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/05/recoverygrowthreport.pdf  
 
4 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Ecommerce Development Index.” Rep ort for the USAID (April)  
https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00MP8T.pdf  
 
5 Riker,  David.  2014.  “Internet  Use and Openness  to Trade,”  US International  Trade  Commission  
Working  Paper  2014-12C (December).  
 
6 U.S. International Trade Commission. 2014. “Digital Trade in the U.S. and Global Economies, Part 
2.” Publication Number: 4485 (August) < http://www.usitc.gov/publica tions/332/pub4485.pdf >. 
 
7 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Ecommerce Development Index.” Report for the USAID (April)  
https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00MP8T.pdf  
 
8 World Bank, World Development Indicators . 
 
9 Ben-Aoun Peltier, Leila, and Adel Ben Yossef. “Does Internet Speed Matter? Impact of Internet 
Speed on E -Applications Adoption by Firms in Luxembourg,” Draft 
http://unice.fr/laboratoires/gredeg/contenus -riches/documents -telechargeables/evenements -1/papiers -
3en/ben -youssef.pdf  
 
10 Filippo Belloc, Antoni o Nicita, and Maria Alessandra, 2012 “Whither policy design for broadband 
penetration? Evidence from 30 OECD countries,” Telecommunications Policy , 36, 5, June, Pages 382 -
398 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0308596111002163  
 
11 T.H. Grubesic, “Inequities in the broadband revolution,” Annals of Regional Science, 37 (2003), pp. 
263-289; Filippo Bello, Antonio Nicita, and Maria Alessandra Rossi, “Whither policy d esign for 
broadband penetration? Evidence from 30 OECD countries,” Telecommunications Policy Volume 36, 
Issue 5, June 2012, Pages 382 -398. 
 
12 Stephen Ezell and John Wu, “How Joining the Information Technology Agreement Spurs Growth 
in Developing Nations,” Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, May 22, 2017 
https://itif.org/publications/2017/05/22/how -joining -information -technology -agreement -spurs -growth -
developing -nations  
 
 
                                                 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           56 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
13 Sagar Taman, “Will 5G truly transform our lives?” Enterprise Innovation, A ugust 24, 2017 
https://www.enterpriseinnovation.net/article/will -5g-truly-transform -our-lives-1244626393  
 
14 Nestor Arellano, “Telecom Operators Gearing Up for 5g: Ericsson Survey,” ItinCanada , 13 
October 2017 http://www.canadait.com/index.php/iot/2298 -telecom-operators -gearing -up-for-5g-
ericsson -survey  
 
15 Corinne Reichert, “Australia announces 5G strategy,” ZDNet, 12 October 2017 
http://www.zdnet.com/article/australia -announces -5g-strategy/  
 
16 “5G to offer $27 bn biz opportunity for India by 2026: Ericsson,” ET Telecom , 22 May 2018 
https://telecom.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/5g -to-offer-27-bn-biz-opportunity -for-india-by-
2026-ericsson/64273725  
 
17 Qualcomm, “5G will lift mobil e into a technology that changes the world” 
https://www.qualcomm.com/invention/5g/economy 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603770/the -5g-economy -how-5g-will-impact -global -industries -
the-economy -and-you/ 
 
18 OpenSignal, Global State of Mobile Networks,” Au gust 2016 
http://opensignal.com/reports/2016/08/global -state-of-the-mobile -network  
 
19 Qualcomm, “5G will lift mobile into a technology that changes the world,” 
https://www.qualcomm.com/invention/5g/economy  
 
20 Cho Jin -young, “Korean Gov’t, ICT Industry to J ointly Develop Integrated 5G Services,” 
BusinessKora, 21 April 2017 Globadata blog http://businesskorea.co.kr/english/news/ict/17914 -5g-
commercialization -korean -gov percentE2 percent80 percent99t -ict-industry -jointly -develop -
integrated -5g-services  
 
21 “Sout h Korean telcos bank on 5G and digital as traditional business stagnate,” Globadata blog 
https://www.globaldata.com/south -korean -telcos -bank-5g-digital-traditional -business -stagnate/  
 
22 “Brazil’s New Internet Law Could Broadly Impact Online Privacy and Data Handling Practices,” 
Hogan Lowells, May 16, 2014 
http://ehoganlovells.com/cv/92a5426dc5d9947a6ef3abd4eb988b549ae2472b  
https://www.hldataprotect ion.com/2014/05/articles/international -eu-privacy/marco -civil-da-internet -
brazils -new-internet -law-could -broadly -impact -online -companies -privacy -and-data-handling -practices/  
 
23 Nicolo Zingales, 2015. “The Brazilian approach to internet intermediary liability: blueprint for a 
global regime?” Internet Policy Review , 4(4). https://policyreview.info/articles/analysis/brazilian -
approach -internet -intermediary -liability -blueprint -global -regime#footnote8_9leydx8  
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           57 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
24  Ellersgaard Nielsen, Katrine, Bruno Basalisco, and Martin H. Thelle.  2013. “The impact of online 
intermediaries on the EU economy,” Report prepared for EdiMA (April) 
https://www.copenhageneconomics.com/dyn/resources/Publication/publicationPDF/6/226/0/The 
percent20impact percent20of percent20online percent20intermediaries p ercent20 - percent20April 
percent202013.pdf  
 
25  Matthew Le Merle, Raju Sarma, Tashfeen Ahmed and Christopher Pencavel. 2016. “The Impact of 
U.S. Internet Copyright Regulations on Early -Stage Investment A Quantitative Study,” 
https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/uploads/Strategyand -Impact -US-Internet -Copyright -
Regulations -Early-Stage -Investment.pdf  
 
26  Matthew Le Merle, Raju Sarma, Tashfeen Ahmed and Christopher Pencavel. 2016. “The Impact of 
U.S. Internet Copyright Regulations on Early -Stage Investment A Quantitative Study,” 
https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/media/uploads/Strategyand -Impact -US-Internet -Copyright -
Regulations -Early-Stage -Investment.pdf  
 
27 Nicolo Zingales, 2015. “The Brazilian approach to internet intermediary liability: blueprint for a 
global regime?” Internet Policy Review , 4(4). https://poli cyreview.info/articles/analysis/brazilian -
approach -internet -intermediary -liability -blueprint -global -regime#footnote8_9leydx8  
 
28 “Brazil’s New Internet Law Could Broadly Impact Online Privacy and Data Handling Practices,” 
Hogan Lowells, May 16, 2014 
http:// ehoganlovells.com/cv/92a5426dc5d9947a6ef3abd4eb988b549ae2472b  
https://www.hldataprotection.com/2014/05/articles/international -eu-privacy/marco -civil-da-internet -
brazils -new-internet -law-could -broadly -impact -online -companies -privacy -and-data-handling -pract ices/ 
 
29 Nicolo Zingales, 2015. ‘The Brazilian approach to internet intermediary liability: blueprint for a 
global regime?” Internet Policy Review , 4(4). https://policyreview.info/articles/analysis/brazilian -
approach -internet -intermediary -liability -bluepri nt-global -regime#footnote8_9leydx8  
 
30 Ministry of Foreign Relations of Chile, ”Chile: Últimos Avances En Materia De Propiedad 
Intelectual,” https://www.direcon.gob.cl/wp -content/uploads/2014/04/Informe -de-Propiedad -
Intelectual -Direcon -25-04-2014.pdf , accessed on 30 September 2017.  
 
31 “Economic Impact Assessment of the Proposed European General Data Protection Regulation,” 
Deloitte , 16 December 2013  https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/about -
deloitte/deloitte -uk-european -data-protection -tmt.pdf  
 
32 Amazon Web Services. 2017. “AWS Case Study: Travelstart.” https://aws.amazon.com/solutions/ 
case-studies/travelsta rt/. 
 
33 See for example, “Grab becomes the largest Tableau Online customer in Asia Pacific with more 
than 1,000 interactors .” Tableau , 3 April, 2017 https://www.tableau.com/about/press -
releases/2017/grab -becomes -largest -tableau -online -customer -asia-pacific -more -1000 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           58 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
 
34 Draft Regulation also provides an updated list of countries granted adequacy status by Colombian 
data protection authority, which includes Costa Rica, the EU Member States, Iceland, Mexico, 
Norway, Peru, Serbia, South Korea, the U.S., and the  countries granted adequacy by the European 
Commission.  
 
35 Draft Regulation also provides an updated list of countries granted adequacy status by Colombian 
data protection authority, which includes Costa Rica, the EU Member States, Iceland, Mexico, 
Norway, Peru, Serbia, South Korea, the U.S., and the countries gr anted adequacy by the European 
Commission.  
 
36 Bloomberg Law, “Colombia Adds U.S. to List of Data -Transfer -Safe Nation,” August 14, 2017 
https://www.bna.com/colombia -adds-us-n73014463125/  
 
37 Mobile Ecosystem Forum, “Global Consumer Trust Report 2017,” 
https://mobileecosystemforum.com/wp -
content/uploads/2017/06/MEF_Global_Consumer_Trust_Report_2017.pdf  
 
38 In a 2017 CIGI -IPSOS survey of 24,225 Internet users in 24 countries, 82 percent of respo ndents 
were concerned about their privacy regarding cybercriminals; 74 percent were troubled by internet 
companies, 67 percent by other online users and 65 percent by their government; and 65 percent 
were uneasy about potential governmental impact on their  online privacy. 
https://www.cigionline.org/internet -survey  
 
39 “eBay -style online courts could resolve smaller claims,” BBC, 16 February 2015 
http://www.bbc.com/news/uk -31483099  
 
40 For Concilianet website, see https://concilianet.profeco.gob.mx/Concilianet /faq.jsp; for participating 
companies, see: https://concilianet.profeco.gob.mx/Concilianet/archivos/ProveedoresParticipantes.pdf  
 
41 “PROFECO, “Preguntas Frequentes,” Accessed March 20, 2018 
https://concilianet.profeco.gob.mx/Concilianet/faq.jsp  
 
42 Louis F. Del Duca, Vikki Rogers, and Colin Rule, 2010. “Designing a Global Consumer Online 
Dispute Resolution (ODR) System for Cross -Border Small Value -High Volume Claims,” Uniform 
Commercial C ode Law Journal , Vol. 42, p. 221.  
 
43 “Resuelve la Profeco 94% de las quejas atraves de Co ncialnet,” Negocios , July 8, 2017  
http://www.milenio.com/negocios/profeco -quejas -concilianet -plataforma_electronica -
proteccion_consumidor -onu-milenio_0_989301093.html  
 
44 Procuraduría Federal del Consumidor, “Memoria Documental: Conciliación a través de medios 
electrónicos: Concilianet, 200 8 a 2012,” Profeco, 30 August 2012 
https://www.profeco.gob.mx/transparencia/resol_comite/anexos_informe/MD -%20Concilianet.pdf  
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           59 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
 
45 Louis F. Del Duca, Vikki Rogers, and Colin Rule, 2010. “Designing a Global Consumer Online 
Dispute Resolution (ODR) System for Cross -Border Small Value -High Volume Claims,” Uniform 
Commercial Code Law Journal , Vol. 42, p. 221 . 
 
46 Dani Deahl, “China launches cyber -court to handle internet -related disputes, The Verge , August 18, 
2017 https://www.theverge.com/tech/2017/8/18/16167836/ china-cyber -court -hangzhou -internet -
disputes  
 
47 Rafia Shaikh, “China Opens Its First “Cyber Court” to Resolve Disputes Online,” wccftech , August 
19, 2017 https://wccftech.com/china -opens -cyber -court/  
 
48 “Chinese ‘cyber -court’ launched for online cases,” BBC, August 18, 2017 
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology -40980004  
 
49 Vasilis, Douzenis, “Colombia introduces tax exemption on basic mobile handsets despite fiscal 
struggles”, GSMA blog, 28 April 2017 
https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/connected -society/colombia -introduces -
tax-exemption -on-basic-mobile -handsets -despite -fiscal-struggles/  
 
50 “Thailand,” AvalaraVATlive Country Guide: https://www.vatlive.com/country -guides/asia/thailand/  
 
51 At Kearney. 2013. “Taxing Telecom,” 
https://www.atkearney .com/documents/10192/1046683/Taxing+Telecom -
The+Case+for+Reform.pdf/88c2d30c -f0d4-4496-b7e3-ab9298d09ced   
 
52 Rob Wile, “Estonia Might Have the Most Efficient Tax Filing System in The World,” Business 
Insider , 17 February 2012.  
 
53 Deloitte, The Economic Imp act of Online Payments: Breaking Barriers in Europe,” 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Docume nts/about -deloitte/deloitte -uk-
economic -impact -of-online -payments -tmt.pdf  
 
54 Justin Lee, Japan regulator aims to deliver new digital ID powered by blockchain,” 
Biometricupdate .com, 31 October 2017 http://www.biometricupdate.com/201710/japan -regulator -
aims-to-deliver -new-digital -id-powered -by-blockchain  
 
55 Bhaskar Chakravorti, “Ind ia’s Botched War on Cash,” Huffpost,  16 December 2017  
https://www.huffingtonpost.com/bhaskar -chakravorti/indias -botched -war-on-cas_b_13647026.html  
 
56 See Bhaskar Chakravorti, “India’s Botched War on Cash,” Huffpost,  16 December 2017  
https://www.huffingtonpost.com/bhaskar -chakravorti/indias -botched -war-on-cas_b_13647026.html  
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           60 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
57 Sean Creehan, “Demonetization Is Catalyzing Digital Payments Growth in I ndia,” Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco, 12 April 2017  https://www.frbsf.org/banking/asia -program/pacific -exchange -
blog/demonetization -is-catalyzing -digital -payments -growth -in-india/  
 
58 IDC, “Digital Payments in India to Supersede Cash & Non -Digital Payments by 2022, IDC 
Reports,” 22 December 2017 
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prAP43454117&pageType=PRINTFRIENDLY  
 
59 Bhaskar Chakravorti, “India’s Botched War on Cash,” Huffpost,  16 December 2017  
https://www.huffingtonpost.com/bhaskar -chakra vorti/indias -botched -war-on-cas_b_13647026.html  
 
60 Sean Creehan, “Demonetization Is Catalyzing Digital Payments Growth in India,” Pacific exchange 
Blog, April 12, 2017 https://www.frbsf.org/banking/asia -program/pacific -exchange -
blog/demonetization -is-catalyzing -digital -payments -growth -in-india/  
 
61 America s Market Intelligence. 2016. “Payments in Latin America: Under Digital Transformation,” 
(October)  
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/557dd429e4b035c8591b78e0/t/5807dfdfbe6594bf4a4a3769/147
691108  
 
62 Pablo Antón Díaz and Tomás Conde. 2017. “Modelo Peru: Unique Model, Unique Challenges, 
Bright Future,” Center for Financial Inclusion at Accion and Institute of International Finance 
(January) 
http://www.centerforfinancialinclusion.org/storage/documents/Modelo_Peru_CFI_IIF_Brief_2017.01.
30.pdf  
 
63 FinTech Future, “BIM, Peru’s first mobile money wallet: lessons learnt,” April 28, 2017 
http://www.bankingtech.com/2017/04/perus -first-mobile -money -wallet -bim-lessons -learnt/  
 
64 “Billetera electrónica: Más de 120,000 usuarios serán afiliados por el BCP,” Gestión , 18 March 2016 
https://gestion.pe/economia/empresas/billetera -electronica -120-000-usuarios -seran -afiliados -bcp-
114657  
 
65 Omoneka Musa, Charles Niehaus, and Martin Warioba, “How Tanzania Established Mobile Money 
Interoperability, CGAP, March 4, 2015  http://www.cgap.org/blog/how -tanzania -established -mobile -
money -interoperability  
 
66 International Finance Corporation, “Achieving Interoperability in Mobile Fin ancial Services: 
Tanzania Case Study,” 
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/8d518d004799ebf1bb8fff299ede9589/IFC+Tanzania+Case+stu
dy+10_03_2015.pdf?MOD=AJPERES  
 
67 Americas Market Intelligence. 2016. “Payments in Latin America: Under Digital Transformation,”  
(October) 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           61 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/557dd429e4b035c8591b78e0/t/5807dfdfbe6594bf4a4a3769/147
691108  
 
68 “Vodafone M -Pesa and MTN Mobile Money agree to interconnect mobile money services,” 
Vodafone , 21 April 2015 https://www.vodafone.com/content/ index/media/vodafone -group -
releases/2015/m -pesa-mtn.html  
 
69 “Visa welcomes opening of Myanmar’s domestic payments industry,” Mizzima , 12 January 2017  
http://www.mizzima.com/business -domestic/visa -welcomes -opening -myanmar%E2%80%99s -
domestic -payments -indust ry 
 
70 Effective Implementation of the Risk -Based Approach,” ACAMS TODAY, 7 March 2016. 
https://www.acamstoday.org/effective -implementation -risk-based -approach/  
 
71 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Ecommerce Development Index.” Report for the USAID (April)  
https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00MP8T.pdf  
 
72 World Bank, “Trading across Borders: Technology Gains in Trade Facilitation,” Policy note as part 
of Doing Business 2017  
http://www.doingbusiness.org/~/media/WB G/DoingBusiness/Documents/Annual -
Reports/English/DB17 -Chapters/DB17 -CS-Trading -across -borders.pdf  
 
73 Volpe Martincus, Christian, Jerónimo Carballo and Alejandro Graziano (2016), “Customs”. IDB 
Working Paper Series IDB -WP-705, June 9 
https://publications.ia db.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7689/Customs.pdf?sequence=1  
 
74 OECD, “Single Windows as Trade Facilitators,” Presenttaion at the Regional Policy Dialogue, Red 
VUCE, Santiago, 5 -6 December 2013 
http://redvuce.org/docs/Single_Window_Evidence_Chile2013.pdf  
 
75 Suominen, Kati. 2015. “Fueling the Online Trade Revolution: New Customs Security Framework 
to Secure and Facilitate Small Business Ecommerce,” CSIS Policy Paper (April) 
https://w ww.csis.org/analysis/fueling -online -trade -revolution . 
 
76 “Africa’s first digital free trade area for rollout in 2018,” tralac , 8 January 2018 
https://www.tralac.org/news/article/12574 -africa -s-first-digital -free-trade -area-for-rollout -in-2018 
 
77 See, for example, SingPost’s 2017 Annual Report: 
https://www.singpost.com/sites/default/files/publications_file//13.%20Financial%20Review%20and%20
Outlook.pdf  
 
78 “IPC cross -border e -commerce shopper survey 2017,” International Post Corporation ipc -cross -
border-e-commerce -shopper -survey2017.pdf  
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           62 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
79 Jackie Wu, “Postal reform in Singapore,” Hong Kong Legislative Council Secretariat, 10 August 
2015 https://www.legco.gov.hk/research -publications/english/essentials -1415ise18 -postal -reform -in-
singapore.htm  
 
80 Jackie Wu, “Postal reform in Singapore,” Hong Kong Legislative Council Secretariat, 10 August 
2015 https://www.legco.gov.hk/research -publications/english/essentials -1415ise18 -postal -reform -in-
singapore.htm  
 
81 See, for example, SingPost’s briefing on ecommerce: 
https://www.singpost.com/sites/default/files/publications_file//7.%20eCommerce.pdf  
 
82 “Groundbreaking Ceremony for SingPost Regional eCommerce Logistics Hub,” SingPost News 
Release, 7 November 2014  
https://www.singpost.com/sites/default/files/news_pdf_fil e_upload/2015/08/pr20141107.pdf  
 
83 Tai Weizhen, “SingPost launches new flagship facility with ‘future -ready’ features, services,” Today , 
9 October 2017  http://www.todayonline.com/singapore/singpost -launches -new-flagship -facility -
future -ready -features -services 
 
84 Tai Weizhen, “SingPost launches new flagship facility with ‘future -ready’ features, services,” Today , 
9 October 2017  http://www.todayonline.com/singapore/singpost -launches -new-flagship -facility -
future -ready -features -services  
 
85 Melissa Lin, “Post and pay for parcels at SingPost's enhanced PopStation,” The Straits Times , 15 
October 2014 http://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/post -and-pay-for-parcels -at-singposts -
enhanced -popstation  
 
86 See Di Caprio, Alisa,  Steven Beck, Ying Yao, and Fahad Khan (2016 ), “2016 Trade Finance Gaps, 
Growth, and Jobs Survey”, Asian Development Bank Briefs No. 64 (August) 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/190631/trade -finance -gaps.pdf  
 
87 See SingPost 2017 letter to shareholders 
https://www.singpost.com/site s/default/files/publications_file//1.%20Letter%20to%20shareholders.pdf  
 
88 Tai Weizhen, “SingPost launches new flagship facility with ‘future -ready’ features, services,” Today , 
9 October 2017  http://www.todayonline.com/singapore/singpost -launches -new-flagship-facility -
future -ready -features -services  
 
89 Tai Weizhen, “SingPost launches new flagship facility with ‘future -ready’ features, services,” Today , 
9 October 2017 http://www.todayonline.com/singapore/singpost -launches -new-flagship -facility -
future -ready -features -services  
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           63 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
90 Nicole Tan, “New postal technologies in the works with SingPost's Centre of Innovation,” 1 
November 2016 https://www.channelnewsasia.com/news/singapore/new -postal -technologies -in-the-
works -with-singpost -s-centre -of-i-7697442  
 
91 See Singapore 2017 financial review and outlook 
https://www.singpost.com/sites/default/files/publications_file//13.%20Financial%20Review%20and%20
Outlook.pdf  
 
92 Lee Xin En, “Lazada moves warehouse to SingPost logistics hub,” The Straits Times, 18 May 2017 
http://www.straitstimes.com/business/lazada -moves -warehouse -to-singpost -logistics -hub 
http://www.straitstimes.com/business/lazada -moves -warehouse -to-singpost -logistics -hub 
 
93 See SingPost’s briefing on ecommerce: 
https://www.singpost.com/sites/default/file s/publications_file//7.%20eCommerce.pdf  
 
94 See Kati Suominen. “ The Silver Bullet for Fueling Small Business Exports in the Ecommerce Era: A 
Plurilateral on De minimis,”  Globalization 4.0 (blog), Kati Suominen, 21 April 2017, 
https://katisuominen.wordpress.com/2017/04/21/silver -bullet -to-fire-up-small-business -exports -
plurilateral -agreement -on-de-minimis/.  
 
95 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Ecommerce Development Index.” Report for  the USAID (April).  
 
96 Olarreaga, Marcelo, Stefan Sperlich and Virginie Trachsel. 2015. “Export Promotion: What 
Works?”  Working paper (31 August) https://www.unige.ch/degit/files/3714/4102/9892/Trachsel.pdf  
 
97 Volpe Martincus, Christian and Jerónimo Carba llo. 2010. “Export Promotion: Bundled Services 
Work Better.” World Economy 33, 12 (December).  
 
98 “Pushing The Exports of Malaysian Furniture Through e -Commerce,” Malaysia External Trade 
Development Corporation (MATRADE) Press Release, 22 May 2017  
http://w ww.matrade.gov.my/en/archive/154 -press -releases/press -releases -2017/3942 -pushing -the-
exports -of-malaysian -furniture -through -e-commerce  
 
99 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Ecommerce Development Index.” Report for the USAID (April).  
 
100 Beck, T., A. Demirgüç -Kunt, and P. Honohan, 2008. Finance for All? Policies and Pitfalls in 
Expanding Access. World Bank, Washington, DC; and Mullins, William and Patricio Toro, 2017, 
Credit Guarantees and New Bank Relationships, University of Maryland Working paper; Lelarge, C., 
Sraer, D and Thesmar, D. 2010. Entrepreneurship and Credit Constraints: Evidence from a French 
Loan Guarantee Program. In: Lerner, Joshua and Antoinette Schoar , editors,  International Differences 
in Entrepreneurship . NBER Books.  
 
101 James A. Wilcox and Yukihiro Ya suda. 2008. “Do Government Loan Guarantees Lower, Or 
Raise, Banks’ Non -Guaranteed Lending? Evidence from Japanese Banks.” Draft for World Bank 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           64 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
Workshop on Partial Credit Guarantees, 13 -14 March 2008 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFR/Resources/Wilcox Yasuda_PCG%26JapaneseBanks_FINAL.
pdf 
102 See for example D’Ignazio, Alessio and Carlo Menon. 2012.  “The Causal E ffect of Credit 
Guarantees for SMEs: Evidence from Italy,” SERC Discussions Paper 123 
http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/58555/1/__lse.ac.uk_storage_LIBRA RY_Secondary_libfile_shared_repository
_Content_SERC%20discussion%20papers_2012_sercdp0123.pdf  
 
103 Shiwen Yap, “Bangkok launches $570m venture fund targeting Thai startups,” Deal Street Asia , 25 
April 2016 https://www.dealstreetasia.com/stories/thailand -bangkok-launches -570m -venture -fund-
targeting -thai-startups -38600  
 
104 Douglas J. Cumming, Luca Grilli, Samuele Murtin, 2017. “Governmental and independent venture 
capital investments in Europe: A firm -level performance analysis panel,” Journal of Corporate Finan ce 
Volume 42, February 2017, Pages 439 -459; T . Luukkonen, M . Deschryvere,  and F. Bertoni. 2013. 
“The Value Added by Government Venture Capital Funds Compared with Independent Venture 
Capital funds,” Technovation  33, 4–5 (April–May), pp. 154-162 
 
105 Douglas J. Cumming, Luca Grilli, Samuele Murtin, 2017. “Governmental and independent venture 
capital investments in Europe: A firm -level performance analysis panel,” Journal of Corporate Finance 
Volume 42, February 2017, Pages 439 -459; T Luukkonen, M Deschryvere, F Bertoni. 2013. “The 
value added by government venture capital funds compared with independent venture capital funds,” 
Technovation Volume 33, Issues 4 –5, April –May 2013, Pages 154 -162 
 
106 See, for example, Alesina, A., Lotti, F., & Mistrulli, P. E. 2013. ‘Do women pay more for credit? 
Evidence from Italy. Journal of the European Economic Association , 11, 45 –66.; Calcagnini, G., Giombini, 
G., & Lenti, E.  2014. Gender differences in bank loan access. An Empirical Analysis. Italian Economic 
Journal, 1, 193 –217.; and Sarah K. Harkness. 2016. “Discrimination in Lending Markets: Status and 
the Intersections of Gender and Race,” Social Psychology Quarterly  79, 1. 
 
107 “Programa Mujeres Pyme,” Blog del Emprendedor, Government of Mexico, 30 January 2017 
https://www.inadem.gob.mx/programa -mujeres -pyme/  
 
108 Laura Brodsky and Liz Oakes, “Data sharing and open banking,” McKinsey & Company, 
September 2017.  
 
109 Celine Wan Sh i Ann and Norariefah Mohd Iqbal, “Open Application Programming Interface (API): 
A Financial Revolution,” BNM Quarterly Bulletin , Fourth Quarter 2017 
http://www.bnm.gov.my/files/publication/qb/2017/Q4/p8_fa1.pdf  
 
110 See, for example, Ivo Jenik “Regulatory Sa ndboxes: Potential for Financial Inclusion?” CGAP blog, 
17 August 2017 http://www.cgap.org/blog/regulatory -sandboxes -potential -financial -inclusion  
 
 
  
EXPANDING DEVELOPING COUNTRY SMALL BUSINESSES’ USE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS FOR TRADE           65 
                                                                                                                                                   
 
111 Financial Conduct Authority, “FCA and OSC sign Co -operation Agreement to support innovative 
businesses,” P ress Release, February 22, 2017 https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press -releases/fca -and-
osc-sign-co-operation -agreement -support -innovative -businesses  
 
112 Heidi Gordon, “Ontario and Australian securities regulators become fintech friends,” Canadian 
Securities Reg ulatory Monitor , November 3, 2016 
http://www.securitiesregulationcanada.com/2016/11/ontario -and-australian -securities -regulators -
become -fintech -friends/  
 
113 See, for example, Salman Alibhai, Simon Bell, and Gillette Conner. 2017. What’s Happening in the 
Missing Middle? Lessons from Financing SMEs. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
http://documents.worl dbank.org/curated/en/707491490878394680/pdf/113906 -
WhatsHappeningintheMissingMiddleLessonsinSMEFinancing -29-3-2017-14-20-24.pdf  
 
114 Suominen, Kati. 2017. “Ecommerce Development Index.” Report for the USAID (April)  
https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00MP8T.pdf  
 