Exploring Blockchain Applications 
to Agricultural Finance
Identifying use cases for emerging technologies to reach 
financially excluded smallholders means looking beyond 
the hype to develop a clear understanding of these 
technologies’ unique features, costs, and benefits. And 
because few innovations have generated as much hype 
as distributed ledger technologies (DLT), more commonly 
referred to as blockchain,1 CGAP set out to understand 
how this emerging technology could enable broader and 
more inclusive markets for agricultural finance. This Brief 
summarizes CGAP’s approach and offers insights into the 
applicability of DLT to agricultural finance in a developing 
country context. Importantly, this Brief does not attempt 
to provide comprehensive background on the technology 
itself—additional resources are provided for readers who 
would like a deeper understanding of this evolving space.
Understanding DLT
Before analyzing how DLT can be applied to agricultural finance, 
it is important to understand the nature of the technology 
itself. First, as the name suggests, DLT is built around the 
concept of a ledger, or shared record of transactions. 
However, unlike traditional ledgers that are maintained by 
a trusted third party (e.g., government land registries, credit 
bureaus), DLT theoretically provides a mechanism for creating 
a shared record of transactions among several institutions or 
individuals in the absence of a trusted arbiter.
What makes DLT unique?2
• It is distributed . Peer-to-peer communications are used 
to record, share, and synchronize ledger data among 
multiple devices referred to as “nodes.”
• It includes a mechanism for achieving consensus . Information 
can be added to the shared ledger only when the 
participating nodes reach a consensus that the transaction is 
valid. There are several ways to achieve this consensus, but 
the aim is to avoid the need for a central authority.3
• It is programmable . Software applications (often referred 
to as “smart contracts”) can be embedded into the ledger 
and programmed to execute a specific task when certain 
conditions are met—for example, initiating a payment 
from buyer to supplier upon delivery of a good or service.4
DLT can take many forms, with key differentiators, including 
whether participation in the ledger is open to the public 
or restricted to certain parties. Additionally, both public and private ledgers can include permissions, which provide 
participants with specific privileges and capabilities as they 
pertain to key functions, such as reading and writing data to 
the ledger or contributing to consensus.
The best known DLT, the Bitcoin Blockchain,5 is an example of 
a public, “unpermissioned” ledger, in which anyone can view 
data on the ledger, write new transactions, and participate in 
building consensus around the validity of a given transaction. 
On the other hand, many emerging DLT implementations in 
the financial services industry are private, permissioned ledgers.
Of course, assigning permissions and limiting participation 
to a select group raise important questions about the core 
advantages of DLT, which was originally intended to be a 
mechanism for overcoming a lack of cooperation and trust. 
Private or consortium ledgers still require participants to 
cooperate in the management of the DLT and to agree on 
a set of governance rules. At the same time, permitting 
only select participants to read, write, or validate data on 
the ledger potentially reintroduces some of the same trust 
issues that exist in a conventional ledger—namely, that one 
or more parties must be trusted to maintain the ledger’s 
integrity. While the sensitive nature of data written to 
distributed ledgers in some use cases (e.g., financial records) 
limit the viability of public, unpermissioned ledgers, the 
decision to add restrictions involves trade-offs that have 
important implications for the use of DLTs where there is a 
lack of trust and weak institutional capacity.6
Applicability of DLT
DLT pilots and proofs of concept are underway across a range 
of applications, including financial services and supply-chain 
management. But despite the hype surrounding DLT, a thorough 
understanding of its limitations and careful evaluation of its 
applicability are important to any successful implementation.
Where there is a strong, trusted, third party that has the capacity 
to manage a centralized ledger, the anticipated benefits of a 
DLT-based solution over a more conventional approach should 
be weighed against the costs and risks of implementing this still 
nascent technology.7 Furthermore, lack of trust in and of itself 
may be a barrier to effective DLT implementations. For example, 
some applications will require several organizations—which 
may be in the public and private sectors, direct competitors, 
or from different industries—to work together to establish 
and maintain systems and governance structures. Trust in 
1 The terms “blockchain” and “distributed ledger technology” are often used interchangeably. But blockchain is only one type of DLT (see R3 2017).
2 For an overview of the technology and its potential development applications, see Nelson (2018) and Natarajan et al. (2017). For a glossary of 
key terms, see Reuters (2017).
3 For more on distributed consensus, see Seibold and Samman (2016).
4 For more on the use of smart contracts in DLT, see SWIFT (2016).
5 For a history of the Bitcoin Blockchain and DLTs, see Iansiti and Lakhani (2017).
6 For more on the debate over the use of private, permissioned ledgers in financial services, see Irrera (2015).
7 For a perspective on the limitations and costs of using DLT for development applications, see Pisa (2018).BRIEF
July 2018The rapid pace of technological transformation across the developing world has important 
implications for the financial inclusion of the world’s poor. Amid this change, new technologies 
that enable inclusive agricultural finance have garnered heightened interest. From mobile phones 
to drones, digital tools may one day overcome longstanding barriers to reaching the world’s 500 
million smallholder farming households (Christen and Anderson 2013).2
8 For more information on how technology and financial services can improve the efficient functioning of agricultural value chains, see Mattern 
and Ramirez (2017).Table 1. Framework for evaluating the relevance of DLT to a given use case
Benefits of DLT Does this use case require. . .
Transparency Shared data among several parties?
Shared Control Collaboration across sectors, industries, or with competitors for common benefits?
Disintermediation Two or more parties to make an exchange without the intermediation of a third party?
Immutability An immutable record of transactions that can be used for financial audit, provenance, or 
any other compliance with regulation?
Reduced Transaction Costs Low transaction costs?
Resilience A high degree of resilience with no single point of failure?
Interoperability The ability for participants on different networks and using different systems (one of which 
is based on DLT) to transact directly with one another?
data written to the ledger is another potential roadblock, 
because participants need to trust that the data were entered 
correctly and completely. Additionally, in cases where the 
data represent a physical asset (e.g., land, crops, livestock), 
DLT alone does not prevent the asset from being altered or 
transferred without corresponding changes being made to the 
ledger. This raises another concern: What legal or regulatory 
framework would be required to enforce transactions or other 
agreements that are recorded on a DLT?
Adding to the issues surrounding the viability of DLT in 
developing countries is the sheer complexity of these 
new technologies. Poor connectivity, a lack of computing 
power required to run a node, low penetration of devices 
that can interact with DLT (e.g., smartphones), and limited 
technological skills are all potential obstacles. Also, because 
DLTs are nascent and rapidly evolving, their interoperability 
with one another and their ability to integrate with existing 
systems represent additional challenges.
Table 1 offers some guidance for those seeking to evaluate 
the applicability of DLT. The evaluation criteria consist of 
seven key questions related to the features of DLT. This 
framework is qualitative and there is no set number of 
criteria that a use case must meet to warrant further 
consideration. For certain use cases, it may be important 
to answer yes to each of the questions in Table 1, while 
in other cases, the potential for DLT to meet one or more 
of these criteria may be sufficient. The weight assigned to 
any one criterium depends on the importance of its related 
benefit to enabling a given use case.Opportunities in 
agricultural finance
Lack of formal identification, collateral, and credit histories; 
difficulties in contract enforcement; and the high cost of 
serving geographically dispersed customers are just a few 
of the myriad obstacles standing between smallholders 
and formal financial inclusion. The inability to access 
formal financial services affects the efficient functioning of 
agricultural value chains because producers may be unable 
to maximize their yields and buyers may struggle to ensure 
an adequate supply of agricultural commodities. Financial 
services not only allow smallholders to invest in their farms, 
they can help to relieve liquidity constraints that make it 
difficult for buyers to pay farmers on delivery and force 
cash-strapped smallholders to sell their crops at lower 
prices in exchange for faster payment.8
When evaluating the applicability of DLT to agricultural 
finance using the proposed framework, several features of 
the technology emerge as particularly relevant. The need to 
share information across several parties—including between 
the public and private sector, among competitors, and 
across industries—means that both transparency and shared 
control are important benefits of DLT. Disintermediation 
can also help to overcome barriers to agricultural finance, 
because business agreements can be enforced when there 
is no third-party intermediation. Last, but not least, the use 
of DLT to verify the identity of smallholders is fundamental 
to each of the identified use cases (see Box 1).
Box 1. The role of digital identity in DLT solutions
One of the benefits of DLT lies in its potential use of cryptography to verify ownership of data stored on the ledger and used 
to fulfill know-your-customer requirements. For example, identifying data such as a birth certificate could be written to the 
ledger and signed using a customer’s cryptographic “key pair” (consisting of a public and private key).a This helps to prove 
that the data belong to the individual holding the corresponding private key. In turn, this key pair can be used to prove the 
customer’s identity when opening a financial account or performing a transaction. Such applications also open the door to 
creating “self-sovereign” identities, in which individuals choose when and what data they want to share with other parties.b, c
However, while DLT can assist in authentication, identity management, and user control, it is not sufficient as a standalone 
solution for proving identity. Indeed, a DLT-based digital identity still depends on a “real world” ID to which it is 
linked when it is created (e.g., birth certificate, national ID, passport, etc.) (Yaga et al. 2018). Therefore, lack of formal 
identification may remain an obstacle in certain contexts.
a. Vryanis (2013) offers a concise, clear explanation of public key cryptography.
b. For more on digital identities, see Singh (2017).
c. For more on self-sovereign identities, see Tobin and Reed (2017).3
Based on the proposed framework for evaluating the 
potential of DLT use cases, there may be several use cases 
for DLT in agricultural finance.
Collateralization . The collateralization of assets such as 
land, livestock, machinery, warehoused crops, or even 
payments owed to smallholders for produce pledged or 
delivered could enable smallholders to access financing 
for inputs, working capital, and post-harvest liquidity. By 
creating digital records of these assets on a distributed 
ledger (e.g., land registries, moveable asset registries, 
warehouse receipts, invoices), financial services providers 
(FSPs) may be amenable to lending that is based on this 
collateral. Relevant features of DLT include transparency 
(ability of several parties to view assets on the ledger), 
shared control (ability of competing financial institutions 
to use the ledger), and disintermediation (ability 
to use smart contracts to automate the transfer of 
ownership of assets in the event of default without the 
intervention of a third-party).
Supply Chain Management . Data on smallholder 
agricultural production could be stored on a distributed 
ledger and used to track the provenance of agricultural 
commodities. This may allow for certifications such as fair 
trade and single origin, which in turn, increase the value 
of commodities for stakeholders along the value chain. 
Storing production records on a distributed ledger may also 
unlock new opportunities for smallholders to obtain credit 
from FSPs. Relevant features of DLT include transparency 
(ability of value-chain stakeholders to view the movement 
of goods through the value chain) and immutability (ability 
to determine provenance of goods).
Credit Bureaus . FSPs often lack information about 
smallholders’ creditworthiness. Recording smallholders’ 
borrowing and repayment histories in a decentralized 
credit bureau could open new opportunities for 
financing. Importantly, DLT could be used to record 
loans extended by value-chain actors such as off-
takers and agridealers, which typically are not visible to 
the financial sector. Relevant features of DLT include 
transparency (ability of multiple financial institutions 
and value-chain actors to view individual credit 
histories), shared control (ability of competing lenders 
to collaborate in maintaining the credit bureau), and 
disintermediation (ability to create a trusted record of 
lending transactions in the absence of a central authority).
Contracts.  A lack of formal, enforceable contracts between 
smallholders and the buyers to whom they have pledged 
their crops can lead to situations in which these smallholders 
choose to sell to a third-party (side-sell). This means that 
such agreements are often of limited utility when seeking 
to access financing from a financial institution. Posting 
contractual agreements on a distributed ledger in which 
all major buyers in a value chain are participants could 
help mitigate side-selling and allow smallholders to use the 
agreements as a guarantee of repayment when applying for 
credit from formal financial institutions. Relevant features 
of DLT include transparency (ability of financial institutions 
and buyers to view pledged crops), shared control (ability 
of multiple, competing buyers and financial institutions to 
cooperate in maintaining the ledger), and disintermediation 
(smart contracts allow for enforcement of agreements in the 
absence of a trusted third party).Design considerations
Given the unique characteristics of agricultural contexts, a 
DLT solution would need to be designed accordingly. The 
following factors determine what design features would be 
most appropriate:
• Capability of the smallholder . Smallholders may not 
have the capacity or devices such as smartphones 
that are required to interact directly with a distributed 
ledger.9 Therefore, it is expected that transactions 
involving smallholders would be, at least initially, largely 
“on behalf of” or “over the counter.” The DLT will need 
to support an access control layer to manage different 
roles and permissions.
• Privacy of sensitive financial and personal data . 
Information about smallholder financial and agricultural 
transactions that will be recorded by the DLT is likely 
to be sensitive. Therefore, data on the ledger should 
be encrypted and available only to users with the 
appropriate permissions.
• Overall governance and control . Clear rules for 
participation in and maintenance of the DLT (including 
system upgrades and protection against attacks) will 
be important to ensure that the actors involved have 
confidence in and trust the DLT-based infrastructure. 
Appropriate governance will be necessary to set the 
rules by which the system will operate.
Based on these considerations, it is likely that permissioned 
public ledgers or permissioned consortium ledgers would 
work best in the context of smallholder agriculture.
From theory to implementation
DLT is more than just a new technology. It represents 
a change of mindset and a shift in how individuals and 
institutions interact. It provides a means to build a 
distributed system of records with a high degree of 
transparency and robustness, without the need to rely on 
a central authority or trusted third party. Theoretically, 
DLT is most applicable to systems in which several actors 
wish to cooperate, but do not have a high degree of 
trust in the other participants. Agricultural finance, which 
encompasses a diverse set of actors and suffers from 
information asymmetries that undermine efficiency, offers 
several potential applications.
However, as with any new technology, several obstacles 
will need to be overcome before DLT can be deployed at 
scale to unlock financing along agricultural value chains. 
Access to a reliable electricity supply, sufficiently powerful 
computers, and 3G coverage are essential for DLT to 
function properly—and this can be a challenge in some 
remote rural areas. Additionally, technological literacy will 
pose a significant hurdle as participants interact with a 
technology that remains poorly understood even in the 
developed world.
Trusted actors that ensure the smooth functioning of DLT 
is paramount—even in a system designed to operate 
without third-party intermediation. Setting up the DLT, 
recruiting participants, and developing the rules on which 
the system runs calls for cooperation between participating 
institutions and would likely require technical and financial 
9 CGAP found that an average of just 5.5 percent of smallholders across six markets surveyed owned a smart phone(Anderson 2015, 2016).4
July 2018
All CGAP publications  
are available on the  
CGAP Web site at  
www.cgap.org .
CGAP
1818 H Street, NW
MSN IS7-700
Washington, DC 
20433 USA
Tel: 202-473-9594
Fax: 202-522-3744
Email:
cgap@worldbank.org
© CGAP , 2018
AUTHOR:
Max Matternsupport from outside actors such as donors. One or 
more actors would need to be trusted to manage the 
cryptographic keys tied to customer identities (including 
their issuance and mechanisms for dealing with lost or 
compromised keys).
Smallholders who lack internet-connected devices like 
smartphones would need to rely on a third party to read 
and write data on their behalf, while participants such as 
financial institutions would need to trust that data entered 
by others are accurate (e.g., did the warehouse properly 
record the quantity of grains stored by a farmer seeking 
to borrow against its value?). Governments would also 
need to put in place appropriate legal and regulatory 
frameworks that recognize the use of digital ID to meet 
know-your-customer requirements, recognize records 
of asset ownership stored on the ledger, and provide 
enforcement mechanisms for DLT-based contractual 
agreements.
Any DLT solution for agricultural finance should be as 
simple and straightforward as possible and should not 
pretend to have eliminated the need for some degree of 
shared trust among participants. In some cases, industry 
and the public sector may choose to test certain principles 
of DLT, such as cooperation around maintaining a shared 
ledger, in a controlled context where strong third-party 
enforcement would not require a full DLT implementation. 
Otherwise, initial attempts at implementing DLT solutions 
for agricultural finance should focus on a robust minimum 
viable product—for example, a distributed ledger that 
allows a small number of banks to record formal loans to 
their existing customers. Over time, as the technology is 
proven and early issues are ironed out, more participants 
and types of data can be added, thereby facilitating a 
greater number of use cases and increasing the overall 
contribution of DLT to smallholder financial inclusion and 
the efficient functioning of agricultural value chains.
References
Anderson, Jamie. 2015, 2016. “CGAP Smallholder Household 
Surveys: Building the Evidence Base on the Agricultural Lives 
of Smallholder Households.” Washington, D.C.: CGAP. http://
www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/small_holders_data_portal/
Christen, Robert, and Jamie Anderson. 2013. “Segmentation 
of Smallholder Households: Meeting the Range of Financial 
Needs in Agricultural Families.” Focus Note 85. Washington, 
D.C.: CGAP, April. http://www.cgap.org/sites/ default/files/
Focus-Note-Segmentation-of- Smallholder-Households-
April-2013.pdf
Iansiti, Marco, and Karim R. Lakhani. 2017. “The Truth about 
Blockchain.” Harvard Business Review . January-February. 
https://hbr.org/2017/01/the-truth-about-blockchain
Irrera, Anna. 2015. “The Public vs. Private Debate on 
Blockchain.” Financial News , 28 September. https://www.
fnlondon.com/articles/blockchain-fintech-the-public-vs-
private-debate-20151001Mattern, Max, and Rossana Ramirez. 2017. “Digitizing 
Value Chain Finance for Smallholders.” Focus Note 106. 
Washington, D.C.: CGAP, April. http://www.cgap.org/
publications/digitizing-value-chain-finance-smallholder-
farmers
Natarajan, Harish, Solvej Karla Krause, and Helen Luskin 
Gradstein. 2017. “Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) and 
Blockchain.” FinTech note, no. 1. Washington, D.C.: World 
Bank Group, December. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/177911513714062215/pdf/122140-WP-PUBLIC-
Distributed-Ledger-Technology-and-Blockchain-Fintech-  
Notes.pdf
Nelson, Paul. 2018. “Primer on Blockchain: How to Assess the 
Relevance of Distributed Ledger Technology to International 
Development.” Washington, D.C.: USAID, April. https://www  
.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/15396/USAID-
Primer-Blockchain.pdf
Pisa, Michael. 2018. “Reassessing Expectations for Blockchain and 
Development.” CGD Note. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global 
Development, May. https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/  
reassessing-expectations-blockchain-and-development-cost-
complexity.pdf
R3. 2017. “What Is the Distinction between a Blockchain 
and Distributed Ledger?” Blog post, 12 July. https://www  
.r3.com/blog/what-is-the-distinction-between-a-blockchain-
and-a-distributed-ledger/
Reuters. 2017. “Fintech Glossary: Crypto Edition.” Reuters , 
23 August. https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-fintech-
crypto/fintech-glossary-crypto-edition-idUSKCN1B31RR
Seibold, Sigrid, and George Samman. 2016. “Consensus: 
Immutable Agreement for the Internet of Value.” KPMG. 
https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/06/
kpmg-blockchain-consensus-mechanism.pdf
Singh, Prem. 2017. “Digital Identity: Changing the Way 
Financial Institutions Connect with Consumers.” Fi nTech 
Insights . PWC India. https://www.pwc.in/consulting/financial-
services/fintech/fintech-insights/digital-identity-changing-
the-way-financial-institutions-connect-with-consumers  
.html
SWIFT. 2016. “Distributed Ledgers, Smart Contracts, Business 
Standards and ISO 20022.” SWIFT, September. https://www  
.swift.com/resource/distributed-ledgers-smart-contracts-
business-standards-and-iso-20022
Tobin, Andrew, and Drummond Reed. 2017. “The Inevitable Rise 
of Self-Sovereign Identity.” White Paper. Sovrin Foundation, 
released September 2016, updated March 2017 https://
sovrin.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/The-Inevitable-  
Rise-of-Self-Sovereign-Identity.pdf
Vryanis, Panayotis. 2013. “Public-Key Cryptography for Non-
Geeks.” Medium . Blog post, 28 August. https://medium  
.com/@vrypan/explaining-public-key-cryptography-to-non-
geeks-f0994b3c2d5
Yaga, Dylan, Peter Mell, Nik Roby, and Karen Scarfone. 
2018. “Blockchain Technology Overview.” Draft NISTR 8202. 
Gaithersburg, Md.: National Institute of Science and Technology, 
U.S. Department of Commerce, January. https://csrc.nist  
.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/nistir/8202/draft/documents/
nistir8202-draft.pdf