  
 
 
 
. 
 
FEED THE  FUTURE  BANGLADESH DIGITAL 
AGRICULTURE ASSESSME NT FOLLOW -ON 
 .  
AN UPDATED REVIEW OF THE AGTECH 
LANDSCAPE FOR FEED THE FUTURE  
  
PUBLIC VERSION  
 
Prepared through the Digital Frontiers Project  
 
June  2020  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report is made possible by the generous support of the American people through the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) under the Feed the Future 
initiative. The contents of are the responsibility of Strategic Impact Advisors and  the Digital 
Frontiers project (Cooperative Agreement No. AID -OAA -A-17-00033) and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government.  
 
 
 
Date of publication: June 2020  
 
Dates of assessment:  March 14 - May 20, 2020  
 
Assessment te am: Strategic Impact Advisors: Hamilton McNutt (Senior Technical Specialist), 
Sarah Sitts (Technical Manager and Writer), M. Ataur Rahman (In -country Specialist)  
 
Cover photo credit: Feed the Future Livestock Production for Improved Nutrition Activity  
 
Acknowledgements : Strategic Impact Advisors thanks all of the respondents to this 
assessment, with special acknowledgement to those who went the extra mile to provide us 
detailed information and access: ACI, Field Buzz, mPower , and the Feed the Future  Livestock 
Production for Improved Nutrition Activity .  
 
 
USAID contact: Farhad Hossain , fhossain @usaid.gov  
 
 
  Contents  
List of Acronyms  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  2 
I. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  4 
II. Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  5 
A. Methods  5 
B. Limitations  5 
III. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  5 
A. Enabling Technology in Bangladesh  5 
i. Mobile Phones  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  6 
ii. Mobile Internet  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  7 
iii. Mobile Financial Services  ................................ ................................ ................................  9 
B. Agtech Tools and Stakeholders  10 
i. Agtech Solution Categories ................................ ................................ .............................. 10 
ii. Agtech Stakeholders  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......11 
iii. Hardware  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 16 
iv. Product Lifecycle Phase  ................................ ................................ ................................ .17 
v. Geography and Scale  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....18 
vi. Results  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 18 
vii. Challenges  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 21 
C. Evaluating Tools  22 
i. Accessibility  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................... 22 
ii. Data Protection & Security  ................................ ................................ .............................. 23 
iii. User Experience  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............. 24 
iv. Finances  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 24 
v. Growth Outlook  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 25 
D. Agtech During the First Months of the COVID -19 Pandemic  26 
IV. Conclusions and Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ............... 27 
Annex 1: Database  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................. 31 
Annex 2: Survey and Interview List  ................................ ................................ ....................... 32 
Annex 3: Standard Interview Questions  ................................ ................................ ................ 35 
 USAID/Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    1 List of Acronyms  
 
 
a2i Access to Information  
AIS Agricultural Information Service  
agtech  
AWS  Agriculture technology  
Amazon Web Services  
B2B Business -to-business  
ERP Enterprise resource planning  
GDPR   General Data Protection Regulation  
IVR  Interactive voice response  
KII Key informa nt interview  
LTE Long -term evolution  
MFS   Mobile financial services  
MNO  Mobile network operator  
PII Personally  identifiable information  
PoC Proof of concept  
SaaS  Software as a Service  
SIA Strategic Impact Advisors  
SMEs   Small and medium enterprises  
 
  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
2 Executive Summary  
 
As digital solutions for agriculture continue to grow around the world, a landscape teeming with 
numerous  actors and tools has emerged in Bangladesh.  Feed the Future commissioned this study 
as a follow -on to a 2018 assessment in order to deepen and update its understanding of the 
country’s digital agriculture landscape. Under the Digital Frontiers Activity, Strategic Impact 
Advisors conducted this assessment in March through May of 2020. The report contains the 
findings of remote consultations with 37 institutional actors in Bangladesh’s agriculture technology 
(agtech ) sector and 16 digita l tool users – including farmers, livestock service providers, and 
extension workers.  
 
A database of 43 active  digital tools identified by the assessment was provided to Feed the Future 
under this report . A modified version1 of 31 active tools is attached  to this public version (see 
Annex 1),  allowing the user to search tools by a number of characteristics . Almost all of the tools 
were developed in Bangladesh.  
 
Key Findings  
 
The infrastructure and usage of enabling technologies , upon which  agtech relies to operate and 
reach users, continue to grow . Socio-cultural and financial barriers to usage of mobile phone and 
internet  are declining , while  high-speed mobile network coverage  expands , and mobile money  
use has become widespread . However, significa nt gender inequalities remain in the ownership of 
mobile phones and internet usage; a lack of understanding of how mobile phones and internet 
work was the most commonly cited barrier among women.  
 
The many purposes that digital agriculture tools offer can  be classified into eight categories , 
defined in the Solution Categories section of the report . Among surveyed tools:  
 
    
16 offer user -specific 
diagnostics   
10 have supply chain 
management functions  
  
.  
15 provide general 
agricultural advisory 
information  
  
9 include a significant data 
collection function  
 
14 provide information and 
advice around shifting 
conditions   
6 allow or facilitate  financial 
services   
.  
11 offer market linkages  
 
  
5 support value -added services  
 
                                                      
1 To protect commercially sensitive information and honor our confidentiality agreement with respondents, 
the public list excludes tools in development, in major decline, or with a failed proof of concept. Compet itive 
and sensitive information has been removed.  
Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
3 Many stakeholders are active in Bangladesh’s agtech landscape. Farmers are key targeted 
users, but face skill and access limitations around using smartphones, and generally are un willing 
to pay for digital services. Agribusinesses of all sizes are targeted users of agtech, and some 
larger companies develop digital tools themselves ; however, multiple  large agribusinesses 
indicated limited awareness of Bangladesh -grown agtech. Bangla desh’s tech start -up landscape 
is rapidly growing – with venture capital ists, angel investors, and incubators now support ing start-
up firms – and has seen some initial investments in agriculture. Financial institutions and mobile 
network operators are enga ged as developers and partners of agtech tools.  Bangladesh ’s 
government is involved in agtech as a tool developer/owner, user, and funder  that also plays an 
important role in promotion . NGOs also develop and promote tools and may act as a funder for 
the de velopment of others, on behalf of the donors for which they implement. Gender inequality 
is evident throughout the agtech landscape, with reduced participation of women in most 
stakeholder groups. W omen are rarely targeted users by commercial tech develope rs, as they 
are underrepresented in roles for which the solutions are designed.  
 
Respondents gave a wide variety of answers around the results their tools have achieved. Much 
of the quantitative data was operational or commercial (e.g., number of new customers, value of 
orders received ); others gave some insight into outcomes with behavior change data reported by 
users. Four solutions reported quantitative impact -level data, generally around increased yields 
and increased revenues or profit margins of users. Frequent challenges  cited by tool proponents 
include: limited digital skills of users, limited high -speed network coverage, hesitance around 
digital adoption, changing behaviors and relationships among users, limited willingness to pay, 
and donor re strictions.  
 
We evaluated  surveyed digital tools along five categories to provide a snapshot estimation of their  
quality, scalability, and sustainability. Tools have high  accessibility when their intended users 
can very easily access and use the necessary  technology; the most accessible  tools targeting 
farmers d o not require more than a basic mobile phone. Amid the many factors around data and 
user security , compliance with international standards and protocols are positive signs . User 
experience  is inform ed by user perspectives or reviews when possible; where relevant, customer 
help lines indicated commitment to client experience, while abrupt suspension of other tools 
raised questions around causing harm to users. A number of tools have very uncertain finances 
to continue;  many are dependent on raising more donor funding. Among the 25 tools intended to 
earn revenue, around half are currently generating revenue and two report profits . Many tool 
proponents had very few specifics on their growth plans , though  some demonstrate recent 
increases in user numbers and are pursuing a concrete plan to grow.  
 
The assessment’s consultations occurred within 1 -7 weeks of Bangladesh’s COVID -19 
shutdown , which commenced on March 22. Respondents reported a mix of impacts. M ost tools 
with an e -commerce function have seen a significant increase in use. Some tools providing 
information to farmers have seen an uptick in usage, but another has seen reduced use and is 
scaling down call agent hours. Data collection tools are provid ing valuable insights into market 
conditions in areas that are difficult to reach. Limited mobility has delayed testing and roll -out of 
new tools, while private funding pipelines have frozen amid uncertainty. Nonetheless, some 
respondents were optimistic t hat the results of the shutdown will lead to increased interest among  
Bangladeshis in using digital services in the future.   
 
 
 USAID/Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    4 I. Introduction  
 
As digital technology transforms the world and ushers in the Fourth Industrial Revolution, it is 
harnessed to strengthen production and markets in myriad ways. USAID’s Digital Strategy, 
released April 2020, tasks  the agency to use digital technology to improve development outcomes 
while strengthening the openness, security, and inclusiveness of national digital ecosystems. 
Innovations using digital technology to strengthen agriculture rapidly emerge around the wor ld, 
and private, public, academic, and non -profit actors pursue diverse solutions to improve 
agricultural production and strengthen agricultural market systems. The Feed the Future initiative 
recognizes the power of agricultural technology  and seeks to lev erage it across its country 
programs.  
 
Agriculture is Bangladesh’s largest economic sector and employer, while food security is a 
challenge in the world’s most densely populated country that is highly vulnerable to natural 
disasters. Feed the Future progr ams in Bangladesh aim to support inclusive and sustainable 
agriculture -led growth, strengthen resilience, and enhance private sector competitiveness; many 
of its activities have integrated agricultural technology  solutions. The Bangladeshi government’s 
“Digital Bangladesh” initiative, which envisions the country transforming into a middle -income, 
digitally -based economy, underscores national policies and investments around digital 
development, including a gricultural technology . As interest in digital agricu lture solutions abounds 
in Bangladesh, a landscape of many actors and tools has emerged.  
 
This study builds on a previous Feed the Future assessment of the digital agriculture ecosystem 
in 2018. USAID commissioned this assessment in order to build a deeper , up-to-date 
understanding and organization of the country’s digital agriculture landscape. USAID seeks to 
better understand the specific digital tools and technologies that exist in Bangladesh, with a focus 
on solutions that have reached a level of scale that can be leveraged across the Feed the Future 
portfolio to improve the reach of activities to the 28 million people in the Zone of Influence.   
 
The terms “agtech” and “digital agriculture” are used synonymously in this report, as are digital 
“tools” and  “solutions”. Per the instruction of USAID, any initiatives using mobile phones were 
considered relevant (e.g., a call center), as they use digital technology. The types of agtech  with 
which  technology users interact include apps, websites, SMS, interactiv e voice response (IVR) / 
outbound dialing, call centers, and radio. The content behind some of these interfaces relies on 
remote sensing and other technologies. The ag riculture technology  we focus on here is 
distinguished from what has traditionally been known as “agricultural technology”  – referring to 
agricultural techniques that farmers can adopt for the cultivation, harvesting, and processing of 
crops that can be adopted by farmers  – though agtech can be a means of spreading information 
about these strategies.  
 
Following a description of our methodology, we present the findings of our assessment. We look 
at how the enabling technology environment has changed since the previous report, a nd then 
describe trends within Bangladesh’s ag riculture technology  industry  – including the different 
purposes that the solutions aim to serve; the actors involved as tool users, developers, owners, 
and funders; the types of hardware used; geographies wher e tools are active; the types of results 
tools have achieved; and common challenges faced. We evaluate ag ricultural technology  
solutions along five key factors: i. Accessibility, ii. Data & Security, iii. User Experience, iv. 
Finances, and v. Growth Potent ial. This report is supplemented by a database of active  digital 
tools in Bangladesh  (Annex 1) .  
 Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
5 II. Methodology  
 
A. Methods  
 
Strategic Impact Advisors (SIA) commenced the study with desk research, reviewing the previous 
assessment conducted in 2018 as well as online res ources . On March 11, SIA sent an online 
survey to 15 project implementers and 280 agribusinesses. Created in SurveyMonkey, the survey 
asked respondents to describe the digital agricultural tools they use. We received responses from 
five implem enters and two agribusinesses.   
 
In-person key informant interviews (KIIs) were planned under this assignment. However, with the 
declaration of COVID -19 as a global pandemic in the assignment’s third week, and subsequent 
restrictions on both international and in -country mobility, KIIs were done remotely. SIA conducted 
31 KIIs with institutions (program implementers, technology firms, agribusinesses, etc.) using 
remote conferencing between March 30 and May 7. For most interviews, we used a structured 
intervi ew format, focused on the details of the digital tools that interviewee organizations use and, 
in many cases, had developed. The list of interviewed organizations is included as Annex 2 and 
the interview question set as Annex 3.  In May, SIA sent follow -up emails to a number of 
interviewees to solicit  additional  detail s. Many, but not all, responded.   
 
In-person KIIs with digital tool users had also been planned. Under the remote approach, we 
asked institutions to share phone numbers of some of their users w ith us. Two institutions 
provided them. Between April 20 and May 20, interviews were conducted via phone in Bangla 
with 16 individual users, including farmers, livestock service providers, and extension workers.   
 
B. Limitations  
 
Most of the information in th is report is self -reported by the developers and owners of digital tools. 
Because SIA had very limited ability to independently verify the information, it is worth 
acknowledging that some answers could be skewed. In particular, some interviewees may have 
overrepresented the reach of their tools. Many tool developers and owners are actively trying to 
promote their tool, either to capture more users or funders, or as part of a general goal to promote 
their organization.  In responding to an assessment conducted for Feed the Future , a major funder, 
it is likely that a number of respondents were incentivized to be overly positive about their tool.  
 
It is also possible that user KII answers are skewed, as tool owners are lik ely to give numbers for 
the more active, positive users. SIA took this possibility into account when analyzing user 
feedback.    
 
III. Findings   
 
A. Enabling Technology in Bangladesh  
 
Agtech tools rely on existing infrastructure and usage of enabling technolog y. This section offers 
a current look at three of these: mobile phones, mobile internet, and mobile financial services 
(MFS), with a focus on changes since the 2018 assessment.  
 
 Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
6 i. Mobile Phones  
 
Since July 2018, the number of mobile phone subscriptions in Bangladesh has increased by 
approximately 13.1 million to 165.6 million .2 Growth has occurred across all four mobile network 
operators (MNOs), and respective market shares have remained almost id entical, as shown in 
Figure 1.3 Basic network coverage now spans almost all of the country; some delta islands in the 
southwestern most part of the country (Khulna division) remain without service.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GSMA’s 2019 data in Table 15 shows that 86% of adult Bangladeshi men own a mobile phone, 
versus 61% of women — a much larger gender gap than seen in most other countries, and just 
slightly a narrower gap than measured in Bangladesh in 2017 and 2018.6  
 
While ownership of mobile phone s did not change much between the two years, GSMA found 
significant changes to the most important barriers to ownership cited. Affordability has declined 
as a barrier, as has accessibility (e.g., network coverage). Family disapproval was also less often 
cited as a key barrier; though it was still cited by 11% of women as the primary barrier they face. 
Security -related concerns have remained low. Perceived lack of relevance is still a significant 
factor, though it declined by almost 50% among women. Skills r emain a key barrier among both 
sexes. More women cite mobile use skills as a challenge, while men heavily cite reading and 
writing difficulties as their main skills challenge.    
 
 
 
 
  
                                                      
2 This figure, roughly equal to the population of Bangladesh, is not the number of unique mobile users; 
some mobile users have multiple phones.  
3 Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission, btrc.gov.bd, accessed 9 March 2020.  
4 GSMA Network Coverage Maps, accessed 21 May 2020  
5 GSMA, The Mobile Gender Gap Report, March 2020  
6 GSMA, The Mobile Gender Gap Report, February 2019  
  GSMA, The Mobile Gender Gap Report, February 2018   Men Women  
Basic phone  19% 13% 
Feature phone  31% 26% 
Smartphone  36% 21% FIGURE 1  TABLE 1: Mobile ownership in Bangladesh  
Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
7 TABLE 2: IMPORTANT BARRIERS CITED BY NON -MOBILE OWNERS  
 2018 data7 2019  data8 
Do you own a mobile phone?   Men  Women  Men Women  
Yes 86% 58% 86% 61% 
If no, which of the following are important factors stopping you from owning a mobile phone?   
Affordability: Handset / SIM cost  25%  25%  12%  8% 
Affordability: Credit cost  10%  4% 2% 1% 
Skills: Do not know how to use a mobile  25%  25%  19%  31%  
Skills: Reading / writing difficulties  39%  24%  46%  21%  
Relevance: Mobile is not relevant for me  25%  30%  24%  16%  
Safety: Personal safety  2% 3% 2% 4% 
Safety: Strangers contacting me  2% 5% 0% 1% 
Safety: Information security  10%  3% 4% 2% 
Accessibility: Battery charging  10%  6% 4% 2% 
Accessibility: Network coverage  10%  6% 0% 5% 
Accessibility: Family does not approve  19%  23%  6% 11%  
Accessibility: Access to support agent  6% 2% 2% 2% 
Accessibility: ID 10%  4% 6% 3% 
 
Mobile phone data specifically around smallholder farmers is several years old; in 2016, 73% of 
smallholder farmers owned a mobile phone.9 The proportion has likely increased since then. As 
the barriers to mobile phone ownership decrease, we can expect to see mobile penetration grow 
to even higher levels in Bangladesh. Increasing mobile literacy could accelerate expanded mobile 
use, especial ly among women.  
 
ii. Mobile Internet   
 
Investment during 2018 and 2019 extended the footprint of LTE infrastructure,10,11 though limited rural 
3G/4G coverage is still an issue cited by a number of interviewees. In total, Bangladesh has 95.2 
                                                      
7 GSMA, The Mobile Gender Gap Report, February 2019  
8 GSMA, The Mobile Gender Gap Report, March 2020  
9 CGAP National Surveys of Smallholder Households, 2018  
10 https://www.budde.com.au/Research/Bangladesh -Telecoms -Mobile -and-Broadband -Statistics -and-
Analyses %20, accessed 9 March 2020  
11 Long -Term Evolution (LTE) is a standard for wireless broadband communication for mobile devices and 
data terminals  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
8 million mobile internet subscribers.12 GSMA found that the proportions of men and women using 
mobile internet both increased by 3% from the 2018 data to 2019. There was a dramatic decline 
in the proportion of both women and men who reported that they did not use mobile in ternet 
because they do not think it is relevant for their lives, from 41% to 16%. The most commonly cited 
barriers are now handset cost and literacy difficulties; interestingly, a higher proportion of men 
cited these as barriers than women. After relevance , the most commonly cited barrier for women 
was disapproval of family.   
 
TABLE 3: IMPORTANT BARRIERS CITED BY NON -USERS OF MOBILE INTERNET  
 2018 data13 2019 data14 
As a mobile phone user, do you use mobile internet?   Men  Women  Men  Women  
Yes 30% 13% 33% 16% 
If no, which of the following are important factors stopping you from using the mobile internet?  
Affordability: Handset cost  16% 15% 21% 11% 
Affordability: Data cost  13% 8% 9% 7% 
Skills: Do not know how to access internet on a mobile  19% 8% 14% 10% 
Skills: Do not know how to use a mobile  12% 9% 6% 4% 
Skills: Reading / writing difficulties  25% 16% 20% 12% 
Skills: Do not have time to learn how to access internet  9% 9% 12% 4% 
Skills: Not sufficient support in learning to use internet  8% 7% 5%  4% 
Relevance: Internet is not relevant for me  41% 41% 16% 16% 
Relevance: Insufficient content in local language  10% 8% 6% 7% 
Safety: Harmful content (self/family)  2% 9% 7% 9% 
Safety: Strangers contacting me  5% 7% 4% 7% 
Safety: Information security  4% 6% 3% 5% 
Accessibility: Internet drains my battery  6% 2% 6% 6% 
Accessibility: Network coverage  6% 5% 7% 13% 
Accessibility: Family does not approve  4% 16% 4% 13% 
Accessibility: Access to support agent  1% 2% 1% 1% 
                                                      
12 Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission, March 2020  
13 GSMA, The Mobile Gender Gap Report, February 2019  
14 GSMA, The Mobile Gender Gap Report, March 2020  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
9 Accessibility: Slow connection / Cannot do  what I want  6% 6% 3% 4% 
Accessibility: No access to internet -enabled phone  5% 4% 4% 2% 
 
Mobile internet usage is expected to increase, as high -speed coverage expands, the cost of 
handsets goes down, and doubts over its relevance subside.  
 
iii. Mobile Financial Services  
 
There are approximately 30 million  active MFS accounts in Bangladesh, up from 21 million in 
early 2018. As of February 2020, 15 banks offer mobile financial services.15 The number has 
declined by three from 2016; several banks withdrew t heir licenses  after finding that they could 
not operate in the market as hoped . bKash continues to dominate the market, capturing around 
80% of market share.16 Much of the remaining market share is captured by Rocket, at 17%.17  
 
A crucial aspect of MFS is t he network of agent s, through whom  customers are able to make 
deposits and withdrawals , among other services. There are nearly 1 million agents deployed 
across the country.18 Agents are a critical part of the MFS ecosystem, and have proven to be one 
of the most effective service delivery channels for small -scale agricultural lending; Bangladesh 
Bank offers agents a 0.5% commission for each agricultural loan deployed to encourage outreach 
to the smallholder farmer segment.   
 
While MFS have taken off for indiv iduals and consumer -to-business transactions, business -to-
business (B2B) transactions are still emerging. While electronic and card -based payments can 
be used for B2B transactions, the Bangladesh Mobile Financial Services Regulations did not allow 
for B2B transactions until 2018, and they have not yet been fully realized in practice. A number of 
agtech developers expect significant value could result from integrating B2B payment functions 
into their platforms.    
 
The lack of interoperability between provide rs has been a challenge for MFS. In December 2019, 
the ICT Division and Bangladesh Bank signed an MoU to create an Interoperable Digital 
Transaction Platform. The platform is intended to allow a wide array of transaction types (including 
financial transact ions, transfers, e -commerce, M -commerce, bill payment, merchant payments, 
remittance exchanges, machine -to-machine payments) across financial service providers.19 Such 
a platform would enable clients of financial service providers, including mobile money pr oducts, 
to transact from one provider account to another for a minimal cost, and would support agtech 
solutions by providing a more streamlined payment experience for their users. As of late 2019, 
the platform was expected to become operational within a ye ar;20 it is still pending at the time of 
writing.     
 
  
                                                      
15 Bangladesh Bank, https://www.bb.org.bd/fnansys/paymentsys/mfsdata.php , Accessed 8 May 2020  
16 United News of Bangladesh, “Fintech MFS: Mobile Wallet for Easy Money Transfer, Payment & Savings 
in Bangla desh,” 1 March 2020  
17 United News of Bangladesh, “Fintech MFS: Mobile Wallet for Easy Money Transfer, Payment & Savings 
in Bangladesh,” 1 March 2020  
18 Mamun Rashid, “Financial inclusion: Banking going beyond banks,” The Daily Star,  18 February 2020  
19 ibid 
20 “MFS Interoperability in a year: Palak,” The Daily Star , 10 November 2019  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
10 B. Agtech Tools and Stakeholders  
 
SIA collected  information for 43 agtech solutions ; much of the information  is shown  in the public 
database  of active tools ,21 linked in Annex 1. All of the solutions included in the database are 
either in active use or being prepared for future use. Solutions that were not included in the full 
database are:   
● Tools that were previously active but no longer have active users;   
● Digital finance tools that may provide value to actors within the agricultural market system 
but are not specifically targeting them (these fall under the category of enabling 
technology, addressed in the previous section);  
● Tools used only for internal monito ring and evaluation purposes; and  
● Tools that were not identified through the course of this assessment.   
Almost all of the tools were developed in Bangladesh.  
 
i. Agtech Solution Categories  
 
Many tools have multiple purposes; on average, individual tools pursued 2 of the eight product 
offering categories.  Below is a summary of the tools and categories : 
 
 16 tools offer user -specific diagnostics : With data generally provided by 
photos or sensors, the solutions use human expertise or automated data 
processing to send farmers a diagnosis of an issue and prescribed remedy.   
 
 15 tools provide general agricultural advisory information : Static content 
that exists independently of shifting conditions, this information is generally 
focused on tips for effective cultivation of specific crops.     
. 14 tools provide information and advice around shifting conditions : Most 
of these solutions have a weather forecast component; a smaller number 
provide current information around disease/pest outbreaks or mar ket prices. 
The tools may also provide advice on specific actions to take.   
 11 tools offer market linkages : These tools help users identify and/or do 
business with providers or buyers. This category includes e -commerce 
platforms.   
 
 10 tools have supply chain management functions : These platforms collect 
supply chain data that helps agribusinesses make data -driven decisions, 
especially in areas like procurement and inventory. Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) solutions are included in this categor y, as are Farmer 
Management Information Systems and Traceability functions; the latter two are 
still forming and will probably be more robust in a future landscape.  
 
                                                      
21 To protect commercially sensitive information and honor our confidentiality agreement with 
respondents, the public list of 31 tools excludes tools in development, in major decli ne, or with a failed 
proof of concept. Competitive and sensitive information has been removed.  
Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
11  9 tools include a significant data collection function : A number of 
respondents noted t he increasing value of data on last -mile markets in 
Bangladesh, which has historically been difficult and expensive to obtain. In 
addition to commercial and financial data uses, some tools also collect valuable 
data for researchers and  policymakers.22  
 6 tools allow or facilitate financial services : Some tools integrate digital 
payments so transactions can be conducted directly, while others facilitate data 
for loan or insurance applications and selection. The number should be 
interpreted in the context o f general mobile money tools being excluded from 
the list.   
 
 5 tools support value -added services for agriculture : These tools help 
providers organize and deliver services used by farmers, such as 
mechanization and veterinary care.   
 
Some tools are mad e to target specific branches of agriculture. We found:  
 
  
24 with specific 
content or  
design for crops  10 designed  
for livestock  6 targeting 
aqua culture  
 
Most of those tools target only one branch, but several tools target two or all three branches.   
 
ii. Agtech Stakeholders  
 
This section profiles the types of agtech stakeholders  in Bangladesh , including :  
• Developer : Plays a lead role in conceptualizing and designing tools  
• Owner : The ‘provider’ of the tool who ensures it is operational and maintained;  may hold 
proprietary rights and receive revenues  
• Partner : May support  the development, operations , and/or promotion of a tool, technically 
or financially  
• Funder : Provides partial or full, one -time or ongoing  funding in the form of a grant, 
contract, loan, or equity investment  
• User: The customer who uses the tool to support  corporate or individual  activities in 
agriculture  
Many actors can play multiple roles; for example, an agribusiness can be a developer, ow ner, 
and user of agtech solutions.  
 
                                                      
22 Multiple implementers mentioned the use of mobile data collection tools for project monitoring and 
evaluation; however, these were generally only used for int ernal purposes rather than for the general 
agricultural system, and excluded from the database.  
Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
12 Women are underrepresented in many of the stakeholder groups. A combination of social norms, 
household and childcare responsibilities, and personal perceptions of safety mean women tend 
to be less mobile and involved in  commercial interactions than men. While digital technology might 
seem to offer a promising solution , the underrepresentation of women as stakeholders in the 
agtech space means that products will rarely be designed for them. Below, w e offer quick 
observations on gender in multiple stakeholder groups, followed by a longer analysis  focused on 
women farmers . 
 
The most notable change to the stakeholder landscape since 2018 is the rapid growth in the 
start -up industry . One player estimates that the numb er of start -up companies and enabling 
institutions have grown by a factor of 10 since then.23 Institutions that support start -ups generally 
offer a combination of fundraising, networking, and mentorship opportunities.24 Interviewees 
involved in this sector n ote that it is still in its infancy. Though investment in agtech is scant — 
with the exception of food e -commerce — multiple investors express significant interest in agtech. 
One speculates that they see fewer start -ups in agtech because they cannot be eas ily developed 
in the capital, Dhaka, but expects to see their prevalence grow as a result of the COVID -19 
pandemic, as actors see a reliance on manual transactions limiting the efficiency of food 
distribution during a crisis.  
 
FARMERS  
As users: Farmers, es pecially smallholders, are often targeted users of digital tools. There is 
general agreement that smallholders have little willingness to pay for digital services — especially 
beyond modest amounts of network data — as they have been accustomed to getting information 
and extension services for free from government and NGOs. Because smartphone ownership is 
limited among low -income, smallholder households, many digital tools targeting smallholders are 
designed to work with basic or feature phones. Initiatives  using an app may distribute 
smartphones and data to lead farmers,25 who may be expected to share the information with 
farmers or even take on an aggregation role.   
 
Gender: Women’s share of the agricultural labor force is estimated at over 50%,26 but women’ s 
roles in farming tend to differ from men’s. (See longer text box below.)  
 
AGRIBUSINESSES  
Diverse actors comprise the agribusiness category, ranging in size from individual agri -preneurs  
to international companies, who work on the inputs and/or outputs sides of crop production. Large 
companies noted a lack of digitization in the supply chain, and some plan to digitize further once 
the small er enterprises they do business  with adopt more d igital technology. As lack of data and 
transparency at the last mile compound challenges in doing business with smallholder farmers, 
multiple products are under development to improve supply chain data.  
 
                                                      
23 Tina Jabeen, Investment Advisor, Startup Bangladesh, 7 May 2020  
24 These include: Bangladesh Angels, Bangladesh University Startup Accelerator, Grameenphone 
Accelerator, Robi Ventures (r -ventures), Startup Dhaka, and the government’s own incubator called Startup 
Bangladesh.  
25 Called “ICT Champions” by some programs  
26 FAO, The State of Food and Agriculture 2010 –11. Women in agriculture: closing the gender gap for 
development , 2011.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
13 As users: Agri-preneurs such as livestock service pr oviders, small traders, and retailers are more 
likely than smallholder farmers to use a smartphone; consequently, apps are more commonly 
developed for their use. They may also be engaged to help smallholders participate in online 
activities. A step larger than agri -preneurs, small and medium enterprises ( SMEs ) are also 
targeted users of tools, especially those to support financial record keeping and access to finance. 
Large companies use off -the-shelf software products for finance and ERP. Some of the large r 
companies reported  looking into using tools that have been developed in Bangladesh, but none 
said that tech companies have marketed to them. Tech companies, in turn, have cited a lack of 
IT budgets as a constraint in getting subscriptions from agribusine sses.  
 
Gender: Women -owned agribusinesses are generally smaller than men’s in terms of revenues 
and number of employees.27  
 
As developer -owners:  Some large companies develop  digital tools themselves that inform and 
engage others in their supply chain. Some are self -funded, while a number rely on donor co -
funding to varying degrees.  
 
CONSUMERS  
As users: Some digital tools engage the end of the supply chain: consumers. Sometimes, 
consumers are linked directly with producers, or they shop in an online sto re. To date, these e -
consumers are concentrated in Dhaka and are in the middle -upper economic strata.   
 
Gender: It is in this category that women are estimated to form the greatest share of users.   
 
TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES   
As developer -owners: Tech companies that develop and often own digital tools are of different 
sizes and have different business models . Start-ups are increasingly prevalent  in the landscape . 
This category also includes some consultancy firms with technology departments that develop  
technology to serve and expand their client base. Some IT firms may be contracted to build 
specific software pieces or functionalities of tools, but they are not an area of focus under this 
assessment.   
 
Gender: One respondent estimated that 20% of tech s tart-ups are women -led. All of the tech 
companies behind tools in this assessment’s database are run by men.28 
 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS   
As developer -owners: Mobile money tools developed and /or owned by financial institutions may 
facilitate lending or insurance arrangements .  
 
As users: Many more financial institutions are intended users of tools that collect information on 
potential borrowers in the agriculture sector, offering an alternative data source that can be used 
                                                      
27 Md.Shajahan Kabir, Mirjana Radovic Markovic and Dejan Radulovic, “The Determinants of Income of 
Rural Women in Bangladesh,” Sustainability, 21 October 2019  
28 A possible exception could be argued with Win Miaki, which has a male CEO but female Chair.   Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
14 during underwriting. Financial institutions may also integrate tools into their lending or insurance 
approaches ; if farmers have the information to improve their crop  or avoid damage , more loans 
may be repaid or fewer insurance claims filed .  
 
MOBILE NETWORK OPERATORS (MNOS)  
Key to the functioning of any mobile -based agtech tool, MNOs have multiple types of involvement. 
Their commercial incentive is likely to increase data use and build customer stickiness ,29 though 
some claim social impact is the primary goal.  
 
As developer -owners: Some MNOs have (co -)developed and own  their own agtech tools , such 
as Grameenphone’s Smart Farm solution.   
 
As partners : MNOs may offer free services of the tool  to their subscribers , such as free calls to 
call centers, and may capture a share of the revenue.  
 
GOVERNMENT  
As developer / owners : The government of Bangladesh has developed many  of its own digital 
tools . Other  tools  are developed by an NGO in collaboration with the govern ment and then handed 
over to the government to maintain. The government is owner of an important foundational 
technology resource for agtech, the Bangladesh Meteorological Department, which uses satellite, 
radar, and other technology to generate the weathe r forecasts used by many tools.30  
 
As users: Uses for digital tools within government include support to data -based decision making 
and provision of information to the public. In addition, extension workers are critical government -
employed users, as digital tools help them access information and comm unicate with farmers 
without in -person visits.  
 
As funders: While the government receives outside funding for some of its tools, it also acts as 
a funder  for start -up tech firms  and new ideas – through Startup Bangladesh, housed in the ICT 
Division , as we ll as through  the Access to Information  (a2i) service ’s innovation lab .   
 
Gender: In 2012, 7% of the extension staff at the Department of Agricultural Extension  were 
female.31  
 
RESEARCHERS   
As users: Researchers are sometimes secondary users in the tools  examined under this 
assessment. In one case, the research agenda became a major driver in the tool’s rollout, which 
in hindsight is seen as a contributor to the tool’s decline among intended farmer users.   
 
 
                                                      
29 ‘Stickiness’ is the extent to which customers continue to use a particular company’s product or services.  
30 The Department has also put out its own free, Android weather app, which gets a 4.4 -star rating from 
697 reviewers on Google Play.  
31 Malone et al 2013 in M. Mamun -ur-Rashid, M. Kamruzzaman and Emad Mustafa, “Women Participation 
in Agricultural Extension Services in Bangladesh: Current Status , Prospects and Challenges,” Bangladesh 
Journal of Extension Education , Volume 29, 2017, pp.93 -107. Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
15 IMPLEMENTERS (NGOS)  
As users : Many NGOs use dig ital survey tools to measure indicators among their beneficiary 
groups, in accordance with project monitoring and evaluation plans. Beneficiary use of digital tools 
can also generate additional data for implementers.  
 
As developers: Implementers  generally  operate on fixed periods of donor -funded projects, 
though some have maintained ongoing digital platforms outside of project periods. NGOs 
generally look for a public or private entity to take over tools they develop as the long -term owner.   
 
As funders: Some implementers act as funders  by supporting other organizations to develop 
tools , generally as a sub-award  under their larger project  with a donor.   
 
DONORS  
As funders:  Donors fund NGOs, agribusinesses, tech companies, and government in the 
development of agtech tools. The government’s Startup Bangladesh initiative in the ICT division 
has served as a donor over the past three years by granting  seed funding to start -ups o f up to 
$12,000 – with tranche disbursement tied to performance milestones . Donors vary in their 
restrictions of what they will fund and require grantees to report. Some developers choose not to 
pursue funds from more restrictive donors.   
 
INVESTORS  
As fu nders: Unlike most donors, investors generally require a robust commercial plan. Venture 
capital firms are emerging in Bangladesh, and some provid e mentorship and networking support 
in addition to finance, but the sector is still nascent and has little eng agement with agtech to date. 
Several agtech developers have secured venture capital from foreign venture capital firms. MNOs 
have also support and invest in start -ups, such as Robi’s r -ventures 2.0. Bangladeshi angel 
investors offer another source of ca pital; some participate under the Bangladesh Angels platform,  
while others operate independently . At the time of writing, Startup Bangladesh is preparing to start 
making equity investments in start -ups, complementing its seed grants and non -financial 
incubation support .  
 
Women and Agtech  
 
A compilation of research found that the most common roles for women in agriculture in 
Bangladesh include:  
● In crop agriculture : Nursery raising and seed sowing, weeding. All aspects of vegetable 
production. Harvesting and processing (threshing, husking, winnowing, parboiling, 
driving).  
● In livestock : For cattle: Cleaning shades, feed collection and preservation, feeding, 
dung collection, grazing. For poultry: Collection of breeds, cleaning of shades, feed 
collection and preparation, treatment, feeding, egg collection and preservation, selling 
birds and eggs.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
16 ● In fisheries : Preparation and application of feed, fish catching, guarding from 
predators.32  
 
Across sectors, women tend to have limited roles in transacti ons — from purchase of inputs to 
sale of the harvest. Not only do women tend to be less mobile than men, but social norms 
discourage women from interacting with men outside of their family, and only a small minority 
of extension agents and agribusiness fie ld workers are female. While digital technology could 
presumably bridge some of these mobility and social barriers and allow women to participate in 
more areas, experience shows limited impact to women’s agency when access to resources is 
addressed in a va cuum.33 For example, an Oxfam’s PROTIC project  found that giving 
Bangladeshi women smartphones and data packs was inadequate to ensure their access to 
the digital tools, as a number of their husbands took over as the household’s primary user of 
the device. In many countries, men tend to take the primary role in using agricultural technology. 
This report’s  Enabling Technology section showed that women have reduced rates of 
ownership of all types of mobile phones and significantly less use of mobile internet compared 
to men. A multitude of factors influence whether women farmers will use agtech.  
 
Among the s urveyed tool developers and owners, most did not know the proportion of their 
users that are female; generally, they estimated that they comprise a very low proportion (e.g., 
less than 20%). For agribusinesses, the proportion depends on the gender ratio of  employees. 
An estimated 7% of extension workers are female. The one area where women are estimated 
to form a majority of users was the consumer group; specifically, individuals ordering food for 
household consumption. This is unsurprising, given women are  often  expected to lead domestic 
responsibilities like meal preparation. Use of e -commerce may have an empowering role for 
these women as it reduces time spent in often high household workloads. However, for the time 
being, this e -consumer demographic is a  middle -upper class urban population, outside the 
demographic of intended Feed the Future beneficiaries.    
 
iii. Hardware  
 
Digital tools can use a variety of hardware or form factors to collect data and reach clients. The 
database (Annex 1) shows the typ es of hardware each agtech tool requires or intends for its 
customers to use their service and sometimes to generate the information that it provides. These 
hardware can be as simple as a basic mobile phone or as complex as a satellite orbiting around 
the Earth. Some solutions use multiple types of hardware in order to reach different users with 
information. Agtech tools in the database use hardware across five categories:   
 
1. Basic/Feature Mobile Phone  (10 tools): The basic or feature mobile phone support 
USSD codes and calls; they are often used to deliver information services via SMS or IVR, 
and are the most typical digital gateway for smallholder farmers in Bangladesh. Tools that 
use basic/feature mob ile phones can also be operated on smartphones.  
 
                                                      
32 M. Mamun -ur-Rashid, M. Kamruzzaman and Emad Mustafa, “Women Participation in Agricultural 
Extension Services in Bangladesh: Current Status, Prospects and Challenges,” Bangladesh Journal of 
Extension Education , Volume 29, 2017, pp.93 -107. 
33 Wei Chang, Lucía Díaz -Martin, Akshara Gopalan, Eleonora Guarnieri, Seema Jayachandran, Claire 
Walsh, “What works to enhance women’s agency: Cross -cutting lessons from exp erimental and quasi -
experimental studies,” J -PAL Working Paper, March 2020.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
17 2. Smart phones / Tablets  (30 tools): Many applications (“apps”) are designed for 
smartphones and tablets . Because access to these devices  and high -speed networks is 
still limited for much of Bangladesh’s smallholder farmer population, findings that show 
that the majority of tools require smartphones or tablets  may lead observers to question 
how well tools are designed for users. However, if  smartphone usage increases in rural 
Bangladesh as rapidly as some expect, users will have a wide array of apps to choose 
from.    
 
3. Computer  (12 tools): Laptop and desktop computers can provide additional functionality 
beyond  smartphones . This type of hardw are is almost exclusively used in office settings 
(i.e., among companies, government, NGOs, researchers), enabling easier access and 
viewing of dashboards and platform management. (Tablets can serve as an alternative for 
computers.)   
 
4. Sensors  (5 tools): Th is category includes devices like weather stations (2), livestock tags 
(2), and vehicle tracking devices (1) that enable relevant data to be fed into an agtech tool 
in order for it to provide improved information and services to its clients. We did not fin d 
any uses of soil sensors. Overall, the prevalence of sensors among Bangladeshi agtech 
was lower than expected.  
 
5. Satellite (2 tools): This category does not mean the agtech tool has its own satellites 
orbiting Earth, but indicates it is using images or re mote sensing data from satellites to 
deliver relevant information that helps the agtech tool provide its service. While most of 
the tools that provide weather information get the data from other services that analyze 
satellite and radar data, two tools use  satellite imagery themselves.    
 
We did not come across any tools that use drones. This may change in the near future, as drones 
offer a unique opportunity to provide remote, up -close imagery at the individual field level and 
capture multispectral images.  This technology is being leveraged for agriculture in a number of 
other countries, and Bangladesh’s legislation around drone use would not pose an obvious 
barrier.    
 
iv. Product Lifecycle Phase  
A tool’s phase in its life cycle provides important context for interpreting a number of factors, 
including its number of users, results achieved to date, finances, and outlook for growth. While 
products do not follow identical lifecycle trajectories, there are sufficient patterns that have given 
rise to a number o f product life cycle models. For this exercise, SIA adapted common lifecycle 
phases, written below. Tools were assigned a current phase by SIA based on interviews.   
 
Development  (5 tools): The core product is under development, which may include 
prototype testing among intended users.   
 
Introduction (14 tools): The core product is complete, likely in a minimum viable product 
stage, and is being rolled out to some users. Some changes to the product may be made 
based on user feedback.     
 
Growth  (8 tools): Af ter demonstrating proof of concept  (PoC) during  introduction, the 
product is achieving or is poised for significant growth.  
 Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
18 Maturity / Stagnation  (5 tools): The product has likely reached the highest number of 
users it will see. (This may or may not be the total addressable market.)  
 
Decline  (5 tools): The product's user numbers are decreasing, or expenses that had been 
relied on for use of the tool are no longer being paid.  
  
PoC Fail  (1 tool): A failed PoC generally is realized during the introduction phase, when 
the tool does not see the level of uptake expected, and thus moves to inactivity (though 
some users may continue short -term use as the infrastructure remains active) instead of 
growth.   
 
The numbers by phase indicate a significant pipeline of t ools that are not yet at large scale but 
may be in the coming years. However, some tools in development and introductory phases may 
not achieve PoC.  
 
Some t ools currently  in decline will likely be inactive in future years – just as some tools previously 
developed are no longer active at the time of this assessment. Decline is a standard part of 
product lifecycles. Some decline happens as users switch to tools that no longer meet their needs. 
Tools that depend heavily on promotion to keep users involved are  more susceptible to decline, 
generally realized when budgets drop. Some private sector owners discontinue tools if they 
produce lower profit margins than expected. Several owners said their tools were intended 
primarily for research purposes without an in tention to be sustained.  
 
v. Geography and Scale   
Many but not all tools target the entire country. Some start up in a particular area while others are 
launched for nationwide use. Some have intentionally limited geography, due to crop cultivation 
areas o r the mandate of a specific initiative. Five tools originate from outside of Bangladesh,34 
and some Bangladesh -grown tools seek to expand internationally. The divisions in Feed the 
Future’s zone of influence ( Khulna, Dhaka, and Barishal ) have the highest concentration of agtech 
tools with active users identified by this assessment. However,  recognizing that the assessment 
unlikely identified all active agtech tools in Bangladesh, these results may be skewed by the 
assessment’s emphasis o n interviewing Feed the Future implementers.  
 
 
DIVISION  Khulna  Dhaka  Barishal  Rangpur  Rajshahi  Chittagong  Mymensingh  Sylhet  
# OF 
ACTIVE 
AGTECH 
TOOLS  27 24 23 20 19 16 15 14 
 
vi. Results  
 
The Results column in the database reflects interviewees’ responses when asked about the 
results or successes the tool has achieved. Most of the interviewees gave non -quantified 
summaries of results. They ranged from the frequent, vague statement, “Our cus tomers tell us 
they are happy with the tool” (and similar variations) to specific changes, such as, “Those with no 
                                                      
34 In addition, many agribusinesses use globally available tools for internal systems; these are not included 
in the database.  TABLE 4: Tools by Division  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
19 credit history can now access bank loans.” Absent quantities, the use of result statements is 
limited, but nonetheless they offer valuable in sights into the types of changes that digital tools are 
making — and what types of changes matter to the tool owner. Other non -quantitative results by 
tool purpose are shown in Table 5.  
 
 
SOLUTION CATEGORIES  RESULT  
 It has led to improvements in cattle health and 
production  
  
 ● The user (company) finds it much easier to 
monitor their field team,  and learn about and 
resolve issues more quickly  
 
 ● A high volume of harvested crops ha s been 
transported using  the system  
 
 
 
 
 
 Field data collection  has provided valuable 
insight  into current market conditions  
 
 ● It has improved the profile of digital agriculture 
among policymakers  
 
 ● It informs other work , such as in rural 
entrepreneurship  TABLE 5: Non -quantitative results  
 
Diagnostics  
 
Value -
added 
services  
 
Market 
linkages  
 
Supply 
chain 
mgmt  
 
Market 
linkages  
 
Supply 
chain 
mgmt  
 
Diagnostics  
 
Market 
linkages  
 
Supply 
chain 
mgmt  
 
General ag 
advisory  
 
Shifting 
conditions  
 
Market 
linkages  
 
Data 
collection  
 
General ag 
advisory  
 
Shifting 
conditions  
 
Market 
linkages  
 
Data 
collection  
Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
20  
 
 
 It improves the knowledge, efficiency, and  
business  of livestock service providers  
 
 ● Farmers are now cultivating new crops  
 
Ten tools reported quantitative evidence of results. Among those, five shared operational results, 
including: number of new customers, increased use of mobile data, amount of funds lent, value 
of orders received, and amount of data for commercial use.   
 
Three tools assessed behavior change among farmer users as a result of information they had 
learned from the tool. Those tools are focused on getting agricultural information to farmers; either 
general agricultural advisory, information on shifting conditi ons, or user -specific diagnostics.  
  
 
 SOLUTION CATEGORIES  BEHAVIOR CHANGE  
  37% of respondents reported that they had 
adopted recommendations  
  
65% of regular users report making at least one 
on-farm change  
•   
Among the initial farmers using the tool, 70% had a 
change in behavior  
   
Four tools have quantitative evidence at the level of impact , as shown in  Table 7.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 6: Quantitative impact results   
Diagnostics  
 
Supply 
chain 
mgmt  
 
Value -
added 
services  
 
General ag 
advisory  
 
Shifting 
conditions  
 
Diagnostics  
 
General ag 
advisory  
 
Shifting 
conditions  
 
General ag 
advisory  
Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
21  
 
SOLUTION CATEGORIES  IMPACT RESULT(S)  
•  • Rice yields increased by 0.92 kg / decimal following 
product  introduction.   
• Participating retailers saw their sales margin 
increase 20 -25%.  
 
• Farmers using the tool  experience an average yield 
increase of 15%.   
On average, the financial benefit to a farmer for 
using  the tool  is €200.   
 
The total estimated revenue that farmers would 
have lost without the forecast is higher than the 
amount invested in the tool to date.  
•   
• Use of the tool increases the rate of successful 
pregnancy in cattle from 50% to 78%.   
 
 
Quantitative impact results like these are extremely useful in understanding the value of a tool. 
Unfortunately, their scant presence in the agtech landscape limits the conclusions and 
comparisons we can make about the potential impacts of individual tools .  
 
vii. Challenges  
 
Specific challenges for individual tools are included in the database. Challenges that arose 
multiple times among institutions included:   
 
● Limited digital skills of users.  Multiple interviewees cited very limited smartphone 
abilities a mong farmers, including in tasks like taking a clear photo. Some agribusinesses 
also found that staff skills were lower than expected, necessitating more training than 
planned.   
● Limited 3G/4G network coverage.  While most smartphone tools have some offline 
functionalities, the inability to use the entire tool in remote areas, where much of the work 
in question takes place, is a challenge for some tools. (Other 3G/4G users reported no 
challenge.)   
● Hesitance around digital adoption.  “Cultural change,” “procras tination,” and “fear of the 
unknown” were some of the specific barriers cited to digital uptake among agribusinesses 
— whether at the head of the company or among the staff.   
● Changing behaviors and relationships . This was cited as a challenge within companies 
and among independent actors as, for example, field staff with low levels of digital literacy TABLE 7: Quantitative impact results  
 
Market 
linkages  
 
Financial 
services  
 
Shifting 
conditions  
 
General ag 
advisory  
 
Shifting 
conditions  
 
Value -
added 
services  
 
Diagnostics  
Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
22 are asked to use agtech tools, or farmers are encouraged to work with new intermediaries 
with whom they do not have  a trust -based relationship.   
● Limited willingness to pay.  Beyond the general consensus that farmers are generally 
not willing to pay for agtech services beyond airtime, some developers were disappointed 
that they could not get agribusinesses or the govern ment interested in subscribing to their 
service.   
● Limitations around donor funding.  Some private firms expressed frustrations with 
restrictions on the funding they received through donors like USAID. Inadequate time, 
bans on any investments that could be c onsidered “commercial,” and intolerance of failure 
were cited as constraints that limited growth of commercial pathways.   
 
The first two challenges were cited by a number of actors seeking to reach farmers as a reason 
for staying away from smartphone -based  tools for now.   
 
Interviewed users tended to mention few challenges, though our sample likely skews toward the 
more successful users. One tool has a misalignment between the owner and users around ideal 
use, with some implications for design.   
 
C. Evaluatin g Tools  
 
SIA selected five areas — accessibility, data & security, user experience, finances, and growth 
outlook — as key indicators for estimating the quality, scalability, and sustainability of digital tools. 
The sections below summarize the factors tha t go into each of the five areas and present 
summary findings from the assessment.    
 
i. Accessibility  
 
Explanation of Criteria  
Accessibility to intended users is an important factor in a tool’s success. One aspect is financial 
and network access to the requisite technology; for example, apps require users to have a 
smartphone, 3G/4G network, and data. Bangladeshis vary in their ac cess to these, especially by 
location and income level. Accessibility can also be evaluated relative to a user’s knowledge and 
skill level. If users do not have baseline skills that support quick uptake of the tool, training is a 
possible solution, but onl y if users and the providers are willing to invest the amount of time 
necessary. A significant accessibility gap also raises questions about the quality of the tool design 
process, per the Digital Development Principle to design with the user.   
 
Summary Fi ndings  
Smartphones are significantly less accessible to smallholder farmers than basic or feature 
phones. Even if farmers are provided with a smartphone and data package, or they are connected 
with an “infomediary” (e.g., farmer ICT champion, retailer) wit h the hardware and digital skills, 
packages expire and infomediaries’ willingness to help may change. Access to 3G/4G coverage 
also remains a challenge — for farmers  and for more advanced user categories. However,  there 
is still value in quickening the exp ansion of smartphone use among farmers. Depending on the 
pace of change, apps may be significantly more accessible to farmers in the coming years.   
 
Technological skill limitations were periodically cited as a challenge across tools — from those 
targeting farmers to agribusiness employees. Because even basic literacy can be a limitation Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
23 among marginalized populations like smallholder farmers,35 tools with high audio functionality can 
be considered the most accessible.  
 
The top tools  in this category present very minimal potential barriers to access. For farmers, these 
are tools that use radio or require only basic mobile phones with audio options. Given the 
challenges of 3G/4G network accessibility in rural Bangladesh, smartphone apps are most 
accessible if their primary function does not rely on network connection. Websites are accessible  
if all their intended users are in office settings or are urban consumers.   
 
ii. Data Protection & Security  
 
Explanation of Criteria  
Safeguarding of data and users’ privacy is an important factor in evaluating the quality and 
responsibility of a digital tool, as recognized in the Principles for Digital Development. Tools that 
collect personally identifiable information (PII), such as a phone number or ID number that is 
linked  to a name, should have clear protocols on how the data is collected and stored, what it is 
used for, security protocols (often with multiple levels), user management, and password security. 
Registration should occur on a closed database with user login re quirements versus. an open file 
format such as Excel or Google Sheets. Other benchmarks included whether the tool providers 
could discuss certain elements of security protocols, user management, and password security 
during the conversation. We also examin ed how data was being used, and whether there was 
informed consent on the part of the user.    
 
Findings  
A few self -reported answers from tool owners provide much less detail than could be collected 
from a data or security audit, but still allows us to draw  some conclusions. We did not encounter 
any tools using customer data beyond what levels of consent have been provided , though this 
could still be occurring . For most of the B2B solutions, the data is owned by the client (i.e., 
agribusiness) using the solu tion, meaning the tool is merely providing a channel for the client to 
create and use data in a more organized way. Most tools that were collecting PII had some level 
of user login database; we did not learn of any using an open file format. Several tool o wners told 
us they are compliant with the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) standards.   
 
A number of tools use well-known and highly secure cloud computing services such as Azure or 
Amazon Web Services (AWS), which build an additional level of  confidence on security. Some 
tools were meant to create data that is shared with third party partners, such as financial 
institutions. For the most part, there was very little information provided on what data sharing 
agreements were in place; while these  data sharing partnerships were planned, they had yet to 
be fully implemented. One t ool shares financial record keeping data with lenders uses Salesforce 
data sharing protocols, which enables the service to assign access to data at a very detailed level.  
 
A few  interviewe e responses a round data and security were concerning . One product manager 
was unable to describe any details around the product’s user security, while another told us  that 
security concerns were not relevant for a product where it should i ndeed be a consideration.  
 
 
 
 
                                                      
35 Bangladesh’s adult literacy rate is approximately 7 4%. UNESCO, 2018.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
24 iii. User Experience  
 
Explanation of Criteria  
A number of factors go into this category. User reviews on Google Play or similar sites  are relevant 
where they exist . We considered the reported experience of users we could interview for five 
tools, including how they describe the tool’s ease of use, value to their livelihoods, and if they are 
aware of a resource they can contact if they need help. Some tools have quantitative user 
feedback or results. We asked all tool owner s about the availability of services to help clients 
(e.g., a customer help line), though they would be redundant for call center services. Reliability of 
the service is a relevant factor; if it gets shut off during challenging times, the user experience i s 
hurt. Also, declining user numbers can reflect poorly on user experience; for example, if user 
numbers significantly drop because promotion campaigns have tapered off, the user experience 
may not be so strong. To a limited extent, we also used reported r esults to draw some inferences 
around user value and experience.   
 
Findings  
Six tools have user ratings on Google Play and other sites where apps can be downloaded and 
reviewed; ratings of tools on our database ranged from 4.3 to 4.7 stars out of 5. The 16  farmers,36 
livestock service providers, and extension officer users with whom we spoke were positive around 
the value that the tools offer.37 Across the board, users reported that all five tools, which included 
smartphone apps, were easy to learn how to use . One tool has a misalignment between the owner 
and users around ideal use, with some implications for design.   
 
Other tools have some level of quantitative user feedback or results indicate positive user 
experience . Eight of the tools have customer help lines, indicating ongoing commitment to 
customer experience.   
 
Two tools had concerning suspensions of service  during challenging times. One weather service 
discontinued messages before a cyclone, because the necessary audio content  to inform users 
of the event  did not exist — an action that may have impacted safety and agricultural production 
if users relied on it for exclusive access to weather information. An e -commerce tool that 
discontinued use during the pandemic, as its drivers were scared to go out . This may have caused 
disappointment among its users on both sides of the transaction during a time when demand for 
e-commerce was skyrocketing.   
 
iv. Finances   
 
Explanation of Criteria  
Financial viability has major implications for a tool’s sustainability. Almost every tool has ongoing 
costs;38 following tool development, ongoing costs often include salaries of call agents and/or 
others responsible for sourcing content, web hosting, and ma intenance, as well as expenses for 
promotion and customer acquisition. Benchmarks to evaluate finances would ideally be relatively 
straightforward, such as annual revenues for the past two years, average revenue per user, 
average customer acquisition costs , and net margins; however, this information is considered 
                                                      
36 Some of the farmers are in “ICT Champion” roles, in which they are expected to support digital use among 
those in their community.  
37 The contacts the tool owners would have and share are likely to skew in this direction, compared to the  
general population of users.  
 
38 The one exception we came across was a Facebook group page.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
25 sensitive and may not be shared. Moreover, a number of tools are not pursuing revenue 
generation models and seek to cover costs through donor funding.   
 
For tools not earning sufficient revenue to cover their costs, we consider whether a reasonable 
plan exists to get there. If the developer is currently reliant on outside funding, is there a 
fundraising history that indicates acumen and ability to achieve buy -in on the tool's value? A 
portfolio of i nvestment that includes private money (i.e., venture capital or angel investors) is a 
reasonable indicator for higher commercial potential, as these types of funding sources often 
conduct sound due diligence on the financial projections of a product. Donor  funding can be an 
effective way for tools to stay active, though limited project funding periods and shifting donor 
priorities can leave tools vulnerable over the long term.   
 
Findings  
Interviewees were willing to discuss their financials to varying degre es of specificity. Some tools 
are bundled into organizational approaches, such as consultancy services or insurance products, 
and do not have independent revenue streams that can be evaluated in these terms.  Of the 25  
tools that are intended to earn their own revenue to cover their costs or make a profit , about half  
are currently earning revenue . Only two report a profit .  
 
Among those without self -sustaining revenue, stated dependency on unsecured donor funding is 
a vulnerability . While donor funding can positively contribute to a tool’s development  — providing  
invest ment  in riskier approaches or subsidizing vulnerable populations  — reliance on donor 
funding raise s concerns around over -dependency, especially when  donor funding is needed to 
continue operati on after the tool has been rolled out for multiple years.   
 
One of our respondents had received funds from private investors in Bangladesh and Singapore, 
indicating a high degree of confidence in commercial viability.   
 
Government tools are evaluated diffe rently . Some tools get donor funding for development, with 
the government as long -term sponsor. Thus, their sustainability depends on government budgets 
and management decisions that extend beyond project funding periods. The government has 
maintained mult iple agtech services for years beyond project funding, such as those run by the 
Agricultural Information Service. However, government requirements to keep their services 
completely separate from privately funded activities may miss some opportunities for e conomic 
efficiency.   
 
v. Growth Outlook  
 
Explanation of Criteria  
As minimum benchmarks for growth potential, a tool should be able to handle growth in the 
number of users (i.e., in terms of bandwidth, finances) and should not be seeing user decline. We 
expect that growth will be highest among tool owners who have a plan for growth, with priority 
focus areas (e.g., geography, value chains, target customers) selected with some evidence -based 
rationale behind them. Ideally, tool owners will have a clear unders tanding of the total addressable 
market that they can and aim to reach, as well as competing tools and services also targeting that 
market. Secured partnerships and funding streams for growth are also a plus.    
 
Findings  
Some tools report negative growth i n user numbers, indicating they are in decline . Often, reduced 
investment in the tool was attributed as a reason. A  tool uninterested in  growth  — the owner Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
26 reported that too many users became too expensive  — also does unwell in this category .  
 
Most of the  tool owners expressed an intention to grow, though many of these had surprisingly 
few details on their growth plans. Many could not clearly define their total addressable market. 
Because many talked about growth hand -in-hand with donor funding, it is poss ible that they intend 
to let donor priorities drive their growth strategies; still, more proactive landscaping and prioritizing 
could be useful for them and lead to more opportunities for growth.   
 
Some tool owners did talk knowledgeably about their total addressable market, and a few were 
able to name specific segments and geographies that they plan to target for growth, based on 
indicators identified through their research. These institutions not only had clearly defined  their 
potential customer base, but  had also developed plans for how they were going to price and 
capture market share through the deployment of differing business models. One example was a 
plan to transition from customizable tech platforms, with limited scale potential, to off-the-shelf  
Software as a Service (SaaS) models.  
 
Some tools are seeing high increases in use during the pandemic, while others are not. It is not 
yet clear how growth during this period will impact long -term growth.    
 
D. Agtech During the First  Months of the COVID -19 Pa ndemic  
 
The COVID -19 pandemic is significantly impacting mobility and markets during the time of this 
assessment. Digital technology has received attention around the globe for its potential to allow 
economic activity and transactions to continue remotely,  mitigating the impact of the ‘shock.’ While 
the KIIs did not focus on pandemic impact, SIA asked interviewees to describe the main impact 
and/or response of their business or digital tool. Through the compiled responses, we can get a 
glimpse into whether and how agtech might be improving the resilience of the agriculture industry, 
including farmers, during the crisis. It is also worth examining how resilient the agtech tools 
themselves are amid crisis and uncertainty. Most of the interviews were conducted within one to 
seven weeks of the start of Bangladesh’s shutdown on March 22.   
 
Unsurprisingly, some tools that allow consumers to make digital purchases online have seen a 
rapid uptick in use. Most of these are platforms that allow urban consumers to order  food products 
digitally (demand is up to 4x pre -pandemic levels ) but also includes an app for farmers to order 
inputs. However, there was no uniform response on farmer usage change for accessing 
information. One respondent reported significant increases i n usage , attributed in part to city  
dwellers relocating to rural land they own during the pandemic and taking up farming . Another 
respondent  reported a slight uptick in use, while yet another reported a decrease in use (calls). 
The latter has also scaled d own service offerings, with fewer agent hours than normal.   
 
Logistics and transportation is a key area affecting the agricultural market system and the 
effectiveness of digital tools specifically. As traditional in -person trading breaks down, an 
increased amount of harvested crop is not getting to market, as agricultural areas are saturated 
with unsold produce. This is another area with diverse responses — even among companies with 
internally -managed transportation networks. One respondent noted that they are essential 
business and have worked with the government to ensure proper permissions for their vehicles; 
another  took a very different path and suspended services because the drivers were scared and 
the owner did not want to force them to work.   
 Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
27 One respondent noted the value of their data collection tool to provide insight into conditions in  
hard-to-reach areas during this time.  
 
A common impact of the pandemic on tool developers has been delayed activities in testing and 
rolling out new tools. One respondent noted a hold on in -person activities to promote their tools, 
such as fairs. Addition ally, those reliant on private funds (such as user subscriptions or 
investments ) have seen their financial pipelines freeze.   
 
As of May 2020 , the situation continues to evolve. SIA expects the future will bring further impacts 
and new responses and adapta tions. For now, we can conclude that some tools are mitigating 
the impact of the COVID crisis and increasing resilience for some in the agricultural market 
system. We can also conclude diverse levels of resilience of the tools to continue operating during 
the crisis, which appear tied largely to the decision making of the people in charge of them.   
 
There is optimism among some respondents that the results of the pandemic shutdown will lead 
to increased interest and trust among  Bangladeshis in using digital  services in the future.   
 
IV. Conclusion s and Recommendations  
 
The sections below offer overarching conclusions and recommendations applicable to general 
stakeholders39 by topic.  
  
TOPIC: ENABLING TECHNOLOGY  
Conclusions:   
● Lack of understanding of how to use a mobile phone is the largest barrier to women’s 
mobile use. Literacy challenges are also a key barrier for both men and women.  
● The last couple of years have seen a dramatic decline in the number of Bangladeshis who 
think mobile phones and mobile internet are not relevant to their lives.  Other barriers have 
also decreased . Combined with increasing affordability of smartphone handsets and 
expanding high -speed network coverage, potential to drive knowledge and behavior 
changes through mobile internet is growing.  
● Multiple platforms enable mobile money, with bKash dominating the market. Mobile money 
solutions for B2B transactions are still emerging.  
Recommendations:   
● In order to accelerate mobile uptake in underserved areas,  especially among women, 
consider building basic and digital literacy.   
  
TOPIC: AGTECH STAKEHOLDERS  
Conclusions:  
● Tool owners report that many agribusinesses have limited willingness to pay for digital 
tools. On the other hand, the agriculture companies we  spoke with had very limited 
knowledge of digital tools in Bangladesh and said they had not been marketed any 
Bangladeshi tools.  
● Digital technology may have some potential to empower women in agriculture, as it can 
bridge some mobility and social norms ch allenges. However, differentiated roles (e.g., 
agricultural transactions are largely a male domain) and other inequalities (e.g., access to 
technology, authority over resources) will likely limit the degree women will benefit from 
                                                      
39 Recommendations made specifically to USAID have been removed from the public version of this 
report.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
28 agtech without other chan ges to their broader empowerment and agency. Women are 
rarely targeted users by commercial tech developers as they are underrepresented in 
roles for which the solutions are designed.  
Recommendations:   
● Maximizing women’s use of and value from agtech  requires significant effort to boost 
women’s agency and empowerment, which should be pursued . In order to increase the 
use and value of agtech to women in their current roles and agency levels: 1) Reduce 
barriers to women’s use of mobile technology, such as improving their confidence to use 
mobile devices , 2) Design tools for women in the areas of agriculture where they tend to 
be more active, such as seedling raising and sowing, processing, or feeding for livestock 
or fish , and 3)  Engage women in the des ign and promotion of agtech wherever possible. 
For example, in tool design, incorporate women as farmers or use women’s voices for 
audio at rates at least equal to men. In promotion, engage women in infomediary roles, 
prioritize participation of women in t rainings, and hold discussions on the value of a woman 
using agtech in addition to her husband.  
   
TOPIC: TYPES OF AGTECH   
Conclusions:                                       
● Among our surveyed tools, the most common solution categories are those providing 
information to farmers around cultivation – whether general or customized.  
● Within the supply chain management category, the farmer management information 
system and traceabi lity solution types are only just starting to emerge.  
● The agtech landscape has a relatively low use of sensors, and no use of drones that we 
found.  
Recommendations:  
• Use of sensors and drones should be increased to keep Bangladesh’s agtech sector 
apace wit h key capacities and innovations.  
  
TOPIC: RESULTS  
Conclusions:  
● Some solutions have quantitative results; they range from the operational, behavioral, and 
impact levels. Four have impact -level results, which are around increased yields and 
incomes.  
● Limited quantitative results available on the impact of individual digital tools presents a 
challenge to comparing their potential results.  
Recommendations :  
● Driving more quantitative measures around digital tools’ outcomes and results – especially 
by thir d-party measurement – would contribute  to a quality agtech environment in 
Bangladesh.  
  
TOPIC: CHALLENGES  
Conclusions:  
● Frequent challenges cited by tool proponents include: limited digital skills of users, limited 
high-speed network coverage, hesitance aro und digital adoption, changing behaviors and 
relationships , limited willingness of intended users to pay for services , and donor 
restrictions.  Any of these challenges can reduce the success of a too l, especially if they 
are inadequately considered in plann ing.   
Recommendations:   
● Consider and plan for  the frequent challenges in agtech development. Emphasize 
designing with the users – even when designing for an anticipated future state with 
increased digital access and skills.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
29  
TOPIC: IMPLICATIONS OF TOOLS ENDING  
Conclusions:  
● Many agtech tools intend to alter users’ sources of knowledge, individual behavior 
choices, and relationships with others in the market system. Thus, shutting down some 
tools could cause major disruptions to users’ live lihoods and lead to loss of income . While 
failed proof of concept or decline may be natural parts of a product lifecycle, we came 
across several concerning cases where tools were shut down for other reasons .  
● In addition to the damage these cancellations can do to users’ l ivelihoods , the experience 
may damage interest and adoption of future digital products if they are expected to be 
short -lived.   
Recommendations:  
● Proponents of digital tools should  prepare a plan – part of or separate from a sustainability 
plan – to reduce  the risk of service interruptions amid unexpected events , and minimize 
negative impacts to livelihoods in case the tool is not sustained.  
● Users engaged under short -term agtech research initiatives should be made aware 
upfront of the short timeline. Ideally, a sustainability plan would enable tools with a 
successful proof of concept to continue.   
  
TOPIC: FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY  
Conclusions:  
● Most tool proponents want their successful solutions to c ontinue long -term. However, we 
found a number of tools operating at scale with very uncertain futures without a pipeline 
or even concrete plan for future funding.  
● Among tools intended to generate revenue, c urrently about half are actively earning 
revenue. Four of those are earning sufficient revenue to cover their costs; only two report 
profits. A number of tool owners reported that donor funding is important for covering costs 
until the tool reaches commerc ial sustainability.  
● Dissonance exists between funders and some private firms that receive funding to develop 
tools. Private developers argue that producing an effective tool is not a linear process, but 
rather must allow for trial and error over time; thi s mindset can conflict with donors who 
are accountable for achieving targeted results in a fixed timeline. Moreover, private firms 
and donors (or their implementers) may conflict on what types of investments are 
appropriate for building a sustainable tool . 
 
Recommendations:  
● Agtech development projects should have  a sustainability plan, which includes financial 
projections that highlight specific assumptions on how much of the total addressable 
market will be captured, expected fixed and variable costs of op erating the tool, and 
revenues from the projected client base. Projections can change as the tool evolves and 
more specifics emerge, but there should be regular analysis of demand (i.e. target users’ 
willingness to pay) for the final tool throughout the pr oject period, to avoid development of 
a mature product with no sustainable market.  
 
TOPIC: DUPLICATION  
Conclusions:  
● Some tools have very similar purposes and set -ups. Duplication is not necessarily a 
problem in itself, as multiple factors will determine which tools fail or succeed, and some 
competition can both increase quality and ensure other options exist if one fails. However, 
the landscape could get over -saturated with similar, unsustainable tools if non market -Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
30 driven incentives (e.g., donor funding,  non-profit organizations’ desire to be seen as 
cutting -edge) play too high of a role. We spoke with NGOs that noted an oversaturated 
market while talking about plans to create new tools themselves.  
● Donor funding carries a risk of propping up tools that have lower quality and commercial 
prospects for success – crowding out the unsubsidized tool in the short -term and possibly 
leaving no long -term solution.  
Recommendations:  
● Before developing new tools,  developers should identify the closest two tools that exist in 
the market and justify why developing a new tool is the best option. While replication is 
not necessarily negative, a successful tool developer will have a strong understanding of 
what else is  active in the landscape.  
 USAID/Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    31 Annex 1: Database  
 
The public database of digital agriculture tools can be accessed at this  link. It includes a 
Definitions tab as well as the Tool tab.  
 
 
 
 
 
  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
32 Annex 2: Survey and Interview List  
 
INSTITUTIONS   
# Date40 Organization / Company  Survey / Interview Participant(s)  
Online survey respondents  
1 March 14  ACDI/VOCA - FtF Livestock Production 
for Improved Nutrition   Muhammad Nurul Amin Siddiquee, Chief of Party  
2 March 15  WorldFish - FtF Aquaculture and 
Nutrition Activity  Jon Thiele, Chief of Party  
3 March 19  International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Center (CIMMYT)  Timothy Krupnik, Senior Scientist  
4 March 19  Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable 
Agriculture  Md. Farhad Zamil, Country Director  
5 April 30  Solidaridad Network  Mohammad Moziball Hoque, Sr. Manager of Supply 
Chain & Business Development   
Remote verbal int erview  
1 March 30  Grameenphone  Imtiaz Mahboob, Smart Agri Product Manager   
2 March 31  Bangladesh Institute of ICT in 
Development (BIID)  Shahid Akbar, CEO  
3 March 31  Bank Asia   Ahsan Alam, Senior Vice President and Head of Agent 
Banking  
4 April 1  ACDI/VOCA - FtF Rice & Diversified 
Crops Activity  Cuan Opperman, Chief of Party  
5 April 1  BRAC Bank (bKash)  Mehmud Ashique Iqbal, Deputy General Manager, 
Business Sales  
6 April 1  Ispahani Agro Ltd  Fawzia Yesmeen, General Manager  
7 April 2   ACI Ltd  Shamim Murad, General Manager, Digital Services  
Faiyead Ahmedhul Hye, Sr. Manager, Digital Platforms  
8 April 2  WorldFish - FtF Aquaculture and 
Nutrition Activity  Jon Thiele, Chief of Party  
9 April 6  CARE  Tania Sharmin, Senior. Team Leader   
10 April 6  ACDI/VOCA - FtF Livestock Production 
for Improved Nutrition Activity   Muhammad Nurul Amin Siddiquee, Chief of Party  
11 April 7   Oxfam  Enamul Mazid Khan Siddique, Head of Climate Justice  
Fatema Janet, Senior Program Officer  
Tapas Chakraborty, Financing Coordinator  
                                                      
40 For interviews that took place in two days due to time zo nes, the date in Bangladesh is provided.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
33 12 April 7  Robi Ahmed Armaan Siddiqui, New Business & M -Money 
Products  
13 April 8  Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable 
Agriculture  Md. Farhad Zamil, Country Director  
14 April 9  mPower  Mridul Chowdhury, Founder & CEO  
Shah Mohammad Mushfiqur Rahman, head of e -Ag 
15 April 10  International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Center (CIMMYT)  Timothy Krupnik, Senior Scientist  
16 April 13  Win Miaki  Dr. Kashfia Ahmed, Chairman  
17 April 14  Digital Green  Sadman Sadek, Country Engagement Coordinator  
18 April 15  Field Buzz  Habib Ullah Bahar, Co -founder  
Alexis Rawlinson, Co -founder  
19 April 16  Fish Bangla  Mohammad Ashrafuzzaman, Owner  
20 April 16  iDE Jeremy Davis, Programs Director - Agriculture and 
Food Security  
21 April 21  Bangladesh SME Corporation Ltd 
(BSCL)  Azad Chowdhury, Head of Business Development  
22 April 22  Parmeeda  Abu Darda, Founder   
23 April 23  LightCastle Partners  Bijon Islam, CEO  
24 April 26  Dept. of Livestock Services  Md. Shamim Hossain, Upazila Livestock Officer -  ICT 
Section  
25 April 27   AgroMars  Mahmud Hasan, Founder and CEO  
26 April 28  Green Delta Insurance  Shubasish Barua, Head of Impact Business & 
Executive Vice President  
Ali Tareque Parvez, Head of Agriculture Insurance  
27 April 28  Aspen Capital  Razi Amin, Founder and Managing Partner  
28 April 29   Direct Fresh   Tanvir Sifat, Head of Strategy  
29 April 30  iFarmer  Fahad Ifaz, Co -Founder and CEO  
30 May 5  Agriculture Information Service  Mohammad Moziball  Hoque, Sr. Manager: Supply 
Chain & Business Development  
31 May 7  Startup Bangladesh  Tina Jabeen, Investment Advisor  
Written correspondence only  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
34 32 May 3  Bangladesh Venture Capital  Md. Mahfijur Rahman, Business Analyst  
33 May 10  SEBA Limited  Iqbal M. Tanvir Ahsan, Senior Business Consultant  
34 May 11  Metal  Amitave Paul, Assistant Manager of Business 
Development  
35 May 19  Banglalink  
 Ankit Sureka, Head of Corporate Communications and 
Sustainability   
36 May 20  Plantix / PEAT  Bianca Kummer,   
 
INDIVIDUAL USERS  
# Date  Occupation / Role  Gender  Tool   
Remote verbal interview  
1 April 20  Livestock service provider  Male  Sudhokko  
2 April 23  Livestock service provider  Female  Sudhokko  
3 April 23  Farmer, housewife41 Female  Sudhokko  
4 April 25  Livestock  service provider  Male  Sudhokko  
5 April 25  Livestock service provider  Male  Sudhokko  
6 April 27  Farmer, ICT champion  Male  Shufola  
7 April 27  Farmer, ICT champion  Male  Shufola  
8 April 27  Farmer, ICT champion  Male  Farmer Query System  
9 April 27  Livestock  service provider  Male  Shurokkha  
10 April 27  Livestock service provider  Male  Shurokkha  
11 May 19  Farmer  Male  Fosholi  
12 May 19  Sub Assistant Agricultural Officer  Female  Fosholi  
13 May 19  Farmer  Male  Fosholi  
14 May 19  Farmer  Male  Fosholi  
15 May 19  Farmer  Male  Fosholi  
16 May 20  Farmer  Male  Fosholi  
 
  
                                                      
41 Not a direct user of the tool, but is familiar with the tool and its impacts.  Feed the Future /Bangladesh Digital Assessment Follow -On                                                                                    
35 Annex 3: Standard Interview Questions   
 
This is the standard list of questions asked in interviews. It was rarely followed exactly, given 
limitations around time and varying applicability to different types of tool interviewees.    
 
1. What was the rationale for the tool's creation?   
2. Who are the target users in Bangladesh, and how did you design for them?  
3. Is it geared toward plant crops, livestock, fish farming, or all?   
4. What institutions funded or invested  in tool development? What is their current role?  
5. Does the product integrate with other platforms in Bangladesh? (e.g., WhatsApp, mobile 
money)  
6. Please tell us about user and data security.  
7. Who owns the data that is collected in Bangladesh?  
8. Are there any cu stomer support services in Bangladesh? (e.g., a phone number to call 
with tech difficulties?)  
9. How is the tool rolled out to users in Bangladesh? If training is a part of roll -out, what is 
the estimated training time? Do you supply any hardware to users?  
10. How many active users does the tool currently have in Bangladesh?  
a. Do you know how many of the users are female?  
b. In what divisions of the country are there active users?  
11. What notable successes / results has the tool realized in Bangladesh?  
12. What challenges hav e you experienced in Bangladesh?  
13. What funding / revenue are you receiving in Bangladesh? (Even if unwilling to provide 
amount, can sources and timelines be shared?)  
14. What costs do you have in rolling out, growing, and maintaining the tool in Bangladesh?  
15. Have you reached the point of positive margins in Bangladesh? If not, what needs to 
happen to get there?  
16. What has your growth in Bangladesh looked like for the past few years, and what do you 
anticipate for it in the coming years?  
17. How would you describe yo ur total addressable market in Bangladesh?   
18. What competitor digital tools are you aware of? How is your product differentiated?  
19. How has the COVID -19 pandemic and accompanying restricted impacted use of your 
tool in Bangladesh?  
20. Is there anything else you wo uld like to tell us? Advice to USAID?  
 
 