TECHNICAL NOTE 
Financial Inclusion  
Beyond Payments
Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
LESSONS FROM SELECT ECONOMIES IN AFRICA AND ASIA
2019
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedTECHNICAL NOTE 
Financial Inclusion  
Beyond Payments
Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
LESSONS FROM SELECT ECONOMIES IN AFRICA AND ASIA
2019
FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS &  
INNOVATION GLOBAL PRACTICE© 2019 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW  
Washington DC 20433  
Telephone: 202-473-1000  
Internet: www.worldbank.org
DISCLAIMER
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, 
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of 
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, 
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part 
of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such 
boundaries.
RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank encourages dissemination of its 
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full 
attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the 
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: 
pubrights@worldbank.org.CONTENTS
Acknowledgments v
Acronyms and Abbreviations vii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1
PART 1: INTRODUCTION 4
PART 2: SCOPE OF REPORT 6
2.1: Financial product scope 6
2.2: Geographic scope 7
2.3: Access channel scope 7
2.4: Temporal scope 7
PART 3: MARKETS, MODELS, AND PRODUCTS 8
3.1: Assessing the Digital Savings Market Opportunity 8
3.2: Digital Savings Account Delivery Models and Characteristics 10
3.2.1: Digital Savings Account Delivery Models 10
3.2.2: Key Digital Savings Account Characteristics 11
3.3: How Innovative Business Models Enhance Savings Account Accessibility 16
3.3.1: Disaggregation of the Digital Savings Account Value Chain 16
3.3.2: Product Tailoring and Customization 17
3.3.3: Leveraging Existing DFS Ecosystems 17
PART 4: DIGITAL SAVINGS POLICY CONSIDERATIONS 20
4.1: G20 HLP 1: Promote a Digital Approach to Financial Inclusion 20
4.2: G20 HLP 2: Balance Innovation and Risk to Achieve Digital Financial Inclusion 21
4.3:  G20 HLP 3: Provide an Enabling and Proportionate Legal and Regulatory Framework for  22 
Digital Financial Inclusion 
4.4: G20 HLP 4: Expand the DFS Infrastructure Ecosystem 23
4.5: G20 HLP 5: Establish Responsible Digital Financial Practices to Protect Consumers 23
4.6: G20 HLP 6: Strengthen Digital Financial Literacy & Awareness 23
4.7: G20 HLP 7: Facilitate Customer Identification for Digital Financial Services 24
4.8: G20 HLP 8: Track Digital Financial Inclusion Progress 24
  iii
iv  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
PART FIVE: FUTURE RESEARCH 26
ANNEXES 
Annex A: E-money accounts offering financial return 28
Annex B: Digitally-enabled, market-based wealth-building products 30
Annex C: Saving-oriented digital transaction accounts 32
Annex D: Savings patterns across focus countries 33
Annex E: Digital savings-relevant indicators from Global FICP survey 34
Glossary of Key Terms 39
References 41
BOXES, FIGURES, AND TABLES
Box 1.  M-Shwari (Kenya) 14
Box 2. Digital Savings Potential at Payments Banks in India 18
Box A:  E-Money Profit-Sharing Arrangements in Tanzania 29
Box B:  Digitally Enabled, Market-Based, Wealth-Building Products in Kenya 30
Box C:  Saving-oriented digital transaction accounts in Uganda 32
Figure 1:  Saving Patterns across Focus Regions (% age 15+) (excluding high income countries) 9
Figure 2.   Reason for not having a financial institution account (% without a financial institution account, age 15+)  9 
(excluding high income countries) 
Figure 3.  Trends in Saving Patterns: 2014 and 2017 (% of age 15+) 10
Figure 4.  Three common digital savings account delivery models 13
Figure 5.  Basic Savings Account Activity under the PMJDY Program 21
Figure 6.  Percentage of Unregistered Population in Focus Regions (2017) 25
Figure D.1:  Saving Patterns among SSA Focus Countries 33
Figure D.2:  Saving Patterns among Asia Focus Countries 33
Table 1:  Summary of Digital Savings Policy Considerations 3
Table 2:  Saving at a Financial Institution among Vulnerable Segments (2017, Percent of Age 15+) 10
Table 3:  Documented Digital Savings Accounts in Focus Countries 11
Table 4:  Primary Driver of Technology and Distribution among Documented Digital Savings Accounts  13 
 (Entity Type, Number of Instances, by Country) 
Table 5:  NBEI Frameworks and Agent Banking in Focus Regions 23
Table 6:  State of Customer Funds Protection in Focus Countries 24
Table 7:  National Identification Systems in Focus Countries 24
Table 8.  Future research questions 28
Table E.1:  Select policy approaches that encourage digital savings 34
Table E.2:  Institutions for which legal/regulatory framework is in place 34
Table E.3:  Select permitted activities among institutional categories  35
Table E.4:  Select permitted activities of retail agents, by institutional category 35
Table E.5:   Requirement to store customers’ e-money funds in a segregated account at one or more  36 
prudentially regulated financial institutions
Table E.6:  Disclosure requirements for deposit products at shopping or pre-contractual stage 37
Table E.7:   Specific rules exist which indicate that financial service providers are liable for any actions or  38 
omissions of the agent   vACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report is a product of the Financial Access and Inclusion team in the World Bank Group’s 
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice. The team was led by Oya Ardic and Ivor 
Istuk and included Helen Gradstein and Loretta Michaels. Jeffrey Allen conducted the research and 
contributed significantly to the drafting. 
The team is grateful for the substantive inputs provided by the peer reviewers Gregory Chen (Lead 
Financial Sector Specialist, CGAP), Matthew Saal (Principal Industry Specialist, CFGDF and GFCFI), 
and Mehnaz Safavian (Lead Financial Sector Specialist, GFCSS), as well as members of the Financial 
Access and Infrastructure team, including Jennifer Chien, Massimo Cirasino, Karol Karpinski, Bal-
akrishnan Mahadevan, Margaret Miller, Harish Natarajan, Douglas Randall and Ghada Teima. The 
team benefitted from inputs and the overall guidance of Douglas Pearce and Mahesh Uttamchan-
dani. Charles Hagner provided editorial assistance, and Naylor Design, Inc. designed and laid out 
the report. 
This report would not be possible without the generous support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
the Netherlands and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, provided through the World Bank 
Group’s Financial Inclusion Support Framework program.
  viiACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ADB Asian Development Bank
AFI Alliance for Financial Inclusion
API application program interface
ATM automated-teller machine
BB Bangladesh Bank
BCBS  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
BCEAO  Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique de 
l’Ouest
BOT Bank of Tanzania
BOU Bank of Uganda
BOZ Bank of Zambia
BSP Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
CB Commercial bank
CBA Commercial Bank of Africa
CBK Central Bank of Kenya
CDD customer due diligence
CFP customer funds protection
CGAP Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
CPMI  Committee on Payments and Market 
Infrastructures
DBBL Dutch-Bangla Bank Limited
DFI digital financial inclusion
DFS digital financial services
DTMFI deposit-taking microfinance institution
EAP East Asia & Pacific
EBL Everest Bank Ltd.
FAFT Financial Action Task Force
FICP  Financial inclusion and consumer protection 
FCP financial consumer protection
FSD Financial Sector Development
GPFI  Global Partnership for Financial InclusionGSMA Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association
HLP High-Level Principle
IFC International Finance Corporation
IMF International Monetary Fund
ITU International Telecommunication Union
KCB Kenya Commercial Bank
KDIC Kenya Deposit Insurance Corporation
KWFT Kenya Women’s Finance Trust
LMI Lower-middle income
MCB Mwanga Community Bank
MNO mobile network operator
MoFP  Ministry of Finance and Planning of Tanzania
MVNO mobile virtual network operator
NBC National Bank of Cambodia
NBEI nonbank e-money issuer
NMB National Microfinance Bank
ODTI Other deposit-taking institution
PMDJY Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana
POS point of sale
PPP purchasing power parity
RBA Retirement Benefits Authority
RBBL Rastriya Banijya Bank Ltd.
RBI Reserve Bank of India
SBI State Bank of India
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa
SoV Store of Value
TPB Tanzania Postal Bank
UNCDF United Nations Capital Development Fund
VSLA Village Savings and Loan Association
WAEMU West African Economic and Monetary Union
WBG World Bank Group
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Innovative, technology-driven savings products are 
emerging across the developing world. Access to reliable 
savings products at regulated financial institutions is 
important for helping low-income and financially under -
served segments safely meet their saving goals. Adult 
populations in many low-income countries demonstrate 
strong saving propensities, yet saving at financial institu-
tions is low. Recognizing this gap, digital financial ser -
vices (DFS) providers are deploying digital savings 
products that have the potential to unlock powerful sav-
ing tendencies in developing countries. Nevertheless, 
digital savings is still nascent, and success has been 
uneven. It is important to identify the market, product, 
and policy factors that have both facilitated and con-
strained digital savings deployments.
The purpose of this report is twofold: (1) to ascertain the 
characteristics of digital savings products and business 
models that enhance savings product access, and (2) to 
identify the policy issues that appear most important for 
fostering digital savings market development. The report 
pursues these objectives by analyzing digital savings 
deployments and DFS policy landscapes in a variety of 
markets across Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. The report 
focuses primarily on digitally-accessible interest-bearing 
deposit accounts held by regulated deposit-taking insti-
tutions, although nonbank entities are frequently integral 
to the deployment models.1 Annexes A-C also discuss 
alternative non-deposit digital savings products that 
enhance consumer choice. In analyzing digital savings deployments across the focus 
countries, the report finds that digital technology and 
innovative business models enable three broad product 
and market properties that advance the savings aspects 
of digital financial inclusion: (1) disaggregation of the dig-
ital savings account value chain, (2) product tailoring and 
customization, and (3) leveraging of existing DFS ecosys-
tems. Value chain disaggregation, which occurs when 
banking institutions partner with nonbanks for the tech-
nology and distribution aspects of digital savings 
accounts, allows for expanded access channels, improve-
ments in the economics of low-cost savings accounts, 
leveraging of different entities’ comparative advantages, 
and scaling up of microbanking institutions. Digital tech-
nology and innovative business models allow providers 
to incorporate greater degrees of accessibility, flexibility, 
affordability, and customization in their savings offerings. 
Finally, an existing DFS ecosystem can help foster com-
petition in the savings product space and facilitate access 
through use of existing infrastructure.
The report discusses key policy issues that enable and 
constrain digital savings market development and offers 
policy considerations within the context of the G20’s 
High-Level Principles (HLPs) for Digital Financial Inclu-
sion. Framing the policy considerations within the context 
of the G20 HLPs is meant to facilitate consistency and 
clarity, as countries consult the HLPs when formulating 
national financial inclusion strategies and action plans. 
Table 1 summarizes the digital savings policy consider -
ations, which are geared toward DFS-relevant policy mak-
ers. Based on current market observations, three policy 
  1
NOTE
1. Much of the report refers to regulated deposit-taking institutions as banking institutions or banks. 2  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
considerations seem most important for facilitating digi-
tal savings account deployments:
• Enable banking institutions to pursue digital savings 
partnerships with nonbank entities.
• Support the development of interoperability between 
banks and nonbank e-money issuers. 
• Harmonize customer due diligence standards for e- 
money wallets and low-risk bank deposits.
The report concludes by outlining a future digital savings 
research agenda that will help calibrate and prioritize dig-
ital savings policy considerations. Digital savings rep-
resents a relatively new area of inquiry for digital financial 
inclusion research. This report largely focuses on sup-ply-side factors in the digital savings market. As products 
mature and more data become available, researchers will 
be able to evaluate questions that bring together supply 
and demand side factors, thus developing a clearer pic-
ture of what works best in the digital savings market. Part 
5 highlights a series of research questions meant to eluci-
date key outstanding issues. These focus on the digital 
savings product attributes that drive responsible uptake 
and usage, as well as product economics and competi-
tion. Policymakers should consider these future research 
topics in concert with the policy considerations discussed 
in this report, as they may judge that certain takeaways 
are tentative for their own markets until important ques-
tions can be addressed.  Executive Summary  3
TABLE 1: Summary of Digital Savings Policy Considerations
HLP 1: Promote a digital approach to 
financial inclusionIncorporate saving elements in national financial inclusion strategies.
Highlight the importance of affordability, flexibility, accessibility, and customization 
in digital savings account offerings.
Facilitate the integration of digital savings account options with govern-
ment-to-person payments, and encourage providers to offer options for earmark-
ing portions of salaries for digital savings accounts.
HLP 2: Balance innovation and risk to 
achieve digital financial inclusionEstablish policy practices for enabling digital savings competition while facilitating 
cooperation and effective partnerships.
Support a “multispeed” approach to digital savings inclusion, as some consumers 
may be ready to move beyond digital savings accounts to digitally-enabled, 
market-based wealth-building products.
HLP 3: Provide an enabling and 
proportionate legal and regulatory 
framework for digital financial inclusionDevelop a legal and regulatory framework that allows banking institutions to 
pursue digital savings partnerships with nonbank entities and conduct limited-  
purpose banking services through retail agent networks. 
Where appropriate, consider regulatory sandboxes for limited-  
purpose, technology-driven digital savings account deployments.
Harmonize, where prudent, the application of a risk-based approach  
to customer due diligence for e-money wallets and bank deposits, as imbalances 
can hinder the acquisition of digital savings customers.
HLP 4: Expand the digital financial 
services infrastructure ecosystemSupport the development of nonbank e-money issuer-to-bank interoperability, 
which serves as the technological backbone for digital savings partnerships and 
distribution strategies.
HLP 5: Establish responsible digital 
financial practices to protect consumersEnsure customer funds protection standards are robust for bank deposits and 
e-money accounts. 
Ensure customers are afforded critical information about digital savings accounts  
at point of opening, noting that information sharing may occur unconventionally, 
such as directly on a mobile phone or through an agent-facilitated document-  
collection process. 
HLP 6: Strengthen digital and financial 
literacy and awarenessIncorporate saving elements in financial education strategies.  
HLP 7: Facilitate customer identification 
for digital financial servicesContinue to implement, refine, and expand national identification systems, and 
align know-your-customer requirements for basic transaction accounts and savings 
accounts.
HLP 8: Track digital financial inclusion 
progressIn cooperation with digital savings providers, gather and publish data on deposits 
facilitated through digital channels, as such information is critical for understanding 
digital savings opportunities and risks.INTRODUCTION
While significant progress has been made in advancing 
access to digital transactional platforms and payments 
services, research and support for second-generation 
forms of digital financial inclusion (DFI), such as digital sav-
ings, credit, and insurance, are more limited. The G20 
describes digital financial inclusion as involving the 
“deployment of digital means to reach financially 
excluded populations with a range of formal financial ser -
vices suited to their needs” (GPFI 2016b, 46). Most DFI 
work thus far has concentrated on digital transaction 
accounts and payment services. These services form the 
foundations of DFI and serve as the gateway to full finan-
cial inclusion. However, DFS providers are expanding their 
range of product offerings to other critical financial ser -
vices areas, including savings. 
Access to savings products at regulated financial institu-
tions is a vital component of financial inclusion. Savings 
products help low-income and underserved populations 
withstand income shocks, manage unpredictable cash 
flows, meet emergency needs, stay ahead of inflation, 
access credit, make personal or professional investments, 
and prepare for future financial needs, such as school fees 
and old age. Savings products also provide a safe place 
for storing wealth, rather than in cash at home or through 
other informal and potentially risky mechanisms. 
Accessible, flexible, and affordable digital savings prod-
ucts could unlock a powerful saving potential, even in 
extremely low-income countries, and bring existing infor -
mal saving into the regulated financial sector. Although 
saving at financial institutions is low in the focus regions, 
saving frequency can be quite high. Recognizing the strong potential of digital savings, a variety of entities 
involved in DFS across Africa and Asia have deployed dig-
ital savings products. Nevertheless, these products are 
young, and success has been uneven. Identifying the 
product, market, and policy factors that have both enabled 
and constrained digital savings development is important 
for policymakers who are seeking to advance DFI. 
This report analyzes digital savings account deployments. 
The report focuses primarily on digitally-accessible, 
interest-bearing deposit accounts held by regulated 
deposit-taking institutions. We refer to these products as 
digital savings accounts. Importantly, nonbank entities, 
such as nonbank e-money issuers (NBEIs), are often 
involved in digital savings account deployment models, 
even though they do not hold the contractual relationship 
with the customer. Additionally, the report principally exam-
ines digital savings accounts that are accessible on basic 
mobile devices or agent-administered point-of-sale (POS) 
terminals. The report’s findings and policy considerations 
are based on an analysis of digital savings account deploy-
ments and DFS policies in 12 developing economies 
across Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), South Asia, and East Asia 
& Pacific (EAP) (collectively, “focus regions”). Annexes 
A-C also take stock of alternative digital savings products 
that are expanding consumer choice in this space.
The report proceeds by clarifying the scope of research, 
presenting product and market findings, offering policy 
considerations, and outlining a future research agenda. 
Part 2 clarifies the financial product, geographic, access 
channel, and temporal scope of the report. Part 3 analyzes 
digital savings deployments in 12 countries across the 
41focus regions. Based on the findings in part 3 and addi-
tional analysis of DFS policy factors in the focus countries, 
part 4 organizes a series of digital savings policy consider -
ations within the context of the G20’s HLPs for DFI. Part 5 
concludes by introducing future research topics that will 
refine stakeholders’ knowledge of digital savings dynam-
ics and help prioritize policy measures. These research questions focus on product economics, competition, and 
perhaps most importantly, factors that drive responsible 
digital savings uptake and usage. We recommend policy-
makers consider these future research topics in concert 
with the findings and policy considerations, as certain 
takeaways may remain tentative in local markets until 
additional questions can be investigated.  Introduction   56SCOPE OF REPORT
2.1 FINANCIAL PRODUCT SCOPE
This report focuses primarily on digitally-accessible inter -
est-bearing deposit accounts held at regulated depos-
it-taking institutions. For ease of reference, the report 
refers to these products as digital savings accounts. All 
of the digital savings accounts examined in this report 
are ultimately held by regulated deposit-taking institu-
tions (collectively, “banking institutions”), even if they are 
facilitated by or pass through financial services offered by 
nonbanks. Consumers can save through a variety of finan-
cial products beyond interest-bearing deposits, including 
more basic store of value (SoV) accounts and more sophis-
ticated market-based wealth-building products, such as 
stocks, bonds, and pension funds. Basic SoV accounts, in 
particular, are well-suited to meet many saving purposes 
in low-income areas, such as withstanding income shocks, 
managing unpredictable cash flows, meeting emergency 
needs, and providing a safe place to store wealth. The key 
difference between the digital savings accounts studied 
in this report and digital SoV accounts is that the former 
group seeks to explicitly incentivize saving by offering a 
contractually specified financial return and compensating 
customers for the time value of money. As such, these 
digital savings accounts help customers build wealth over 
time and save for long-term purposes.
Consistent with a holistic understanding of digital financial 
inclusion, the product scope focuses on formal financial 
services offered in connection with, but that go beyond 
digital transaction accounts. The Global Partnership for 
Financial Inclusion (GPFI), the G20 body focused on finan-
cial inclusion, defines DFI as “the use of digital financial 
services to advance financial inclusion. It involves the deployment of digital means to reach financially excluded 
and underserved populations with a range of formal finan-
cial services suited to their needs, delivered responsibly at 
a cost affordable to customers and sustainable for provid-
ers” (GPFI 2016b, 46). The GPFI further sets out “essential 
components” of DFI, which include a “digital transactional 
platform” and “additional financial services via the digital 
transactional platform” (GPFI 2014, 3). The digital savings 
accounts under review represent a next step in access-
ing a range of formal financial services enabled by digital 
transactional platforms. Having access to wealth-building 
products that offer a financial return is an important step 
in financial inclusion and diversification. 
Although this study focuses primarily on digitally-acces-
sible interest-bearing deposits, market developments in 
some of the focus countries reveal important trends in 
other innovative types of digital savings products. Annex 
A looks at e-wallet accounts offering customers a finan-
cial return. Given their nascence, the policy implications 
of these return-generating e-money accounts are not well 
understood, but they represent an innovative alternative 
to traditional interest-bearing deposits. Annex B explores 
two digitally-enabled, market-based wealth-building 
products, the Mbao pension plan and M-Akiba govern-
ment bond in Kenya. While some market-based products 
may technically constitute investment rather than savings 
products, they are important to highlight in concert with 
digital savings accounts, as they represent a further step in 
savings-related DFI for those individuals seeking to diver -
sify their portfolios. Finally, Annex C explores a number of 
efforts in which providers have focused on offering digi-
tal transaction accounts specifically designed to facilitate 
saving. 
22.2 GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE
To guide the analysis, the study examines digital savings 
deployments and DFS policies in 12 markets across SSA, 
South Asia, and EAP (collectively, “focus regions”), the 
regions most committed to promoting a digital approach 
to financial inclusion. According to the 2016 Maya Dec-
laration Progress Report, DFS represents the top the-
matic target area among SSA members of the Alliance 
for Financial Inclusion and the second most frequent 
thematic target area for Asian members of the alliance 
(AFI 2016a). Furthermore, in a 2015 report investigating 
mobile credit, savings, and insurance, the Groupe Spé-
ciale Mobile Association (GSMA) reported that mobile 
savings products are most prevalent in SSA and Asia 
(GSMA 2015d). Within the regions, the study analyzes the 
digital savings markets in: Bangladesh, Cambodia, Côte 
d’Ivoire, India, Kenya, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Tanzania, 
Uganda, Vietnam, and Zambia (collectively, “focus coun-
tries”). Country selection was based on the availability of 
information on the countries’ digital savings landscapes 
and was intended to represent a range of digital savings 
experiences, rather than focus only on successful cases. 
For instance, at the conclusion of the product research in 
late 2017, digital savings accounts do not appear to have 
emerged in Niger and Vietnam. Incorporating insights 
from these 2 countries’ DFS markets has been valuable 
in isolating some constraining factors not clear in the 10 
other jurisdictions. 
2.3 ACCESS CHANNEL SCOPE
The digital savings accounts studied in this report gen-
erally meet two criteria: (1) account holders can conduct 
cash-in, cash-out transactions through a retail agent net-work, and (2) the account is accessible either on a basic 
mobile device or an agent-administered POS terminal. 
The GPFI defines DFS as “financial products and services, 
including payments, transfers, savings, credit, insurance, 
securities, financial planning and account statements” 
that “are delivered via digital/electronic technology 
such as e-money (initiated either online or on a mobile 
phone), payment cards and a regular bank account” (GPFI 
2016a, 3). The universe of digital channels through which 
consumers can access savings accounts is broad. Such 
channels include internet banking, smartphone-enabled 
banking applications, automated-teller machines (ATMs), 
POS terminals, and basic mobile devices, among others. 
This report focuses on access channels that have played 
a significant role throughout the focus regions in reaching 
unbanked and underbanked population segments. Nev-
ertheless, Internet access and smartphone penetration 
are expanding rapidly in SSA and Asia. Providers and poli-
cymakers should continue to leverage these technologies 
in pursuing innovative DFI strategies.  
2.4 TEMPORAL SCOPE  
Research for this report was conducted in 2017. As such, 
some product characteristics and policy issues discussed 
in this report may not reflect their most recent status upon 
publication. Certain report elements were updated during 
the review process in late 2018. To avoid temporal imbal-
ances, updates were limited to a few select topics. For 
example, the report was updated to incorporate 2017 
Findex data, which was released in 2018. The research 
conducted for this study constituted desk research and 
analysis of publicly available data, laws, regulations, and 
analytical publications, along with information published 
by the digital savings providers.Scope of Report  78MARKETS, MODELS, AND PRODUCTS
This section investigates how digital technology and 
innovative business models enhance savings account 
accessibility. Section 3.1 provides an overview of the 
digital savings opportunity in the focus regions and 
countries. Section 3.2 analyzes delivery models and 
key product features for a selection of digital savings 
accounts in the focus countries. Section 3.3 outlines the 
primary ways in which digital savings delivery models 
and account characteristics advance the saving aspects 
of DFI. Part 3 focuses primarily on supply-side factors. 
Readers should pair the analysis in part 3 with the future 
research questions proposed in part 5, given limited 
data on uptake and usage. Part 5 recommends that 
future research focus on which product attributes are 
particularly important for successful uptake and usage.
Part 5 also recommends additional exploration of prod-
uct viability and competition dynamics. 
3.1   ASSESSING THE DIGITAL SAVINGS  
MARKET OPPORTUNITY
Healthy propensities to save coupled with low formal 
saving in the focus regions indicate a distinct opportu-
nity for affordable, flexible, and accessible digital savings 
accounts.2 Figure 1 captures broad saving patterns across 
the focus regions reflected in the 2014 and 2017 Findex 
surveys. Adults’ propensity to save has historically been 
higher in SSA and EAP than in South Asia, though saving 
was lower across all 3 regions in 2017 compared to 2014. 
Saving propensity remains high in many of the focus coun-
tries (annex d). The percent of adults who save in Kenya, 
Uganda, Zambia, Philippines, Vietnam, India, and Nepal is 
higher than in their respective regions. Saving at a financial institution is low across the focus 
regions. In 2017, only 15 and 17 percent of adults saved at 
a financial institution in SSA and South Asia, respectively, 
while 31 percent of adults saved at a financial institution 
in EAP (figure 1). Less than 10 percent of adults saved at a 
financial institution in Bangladesh, Cambodia, Côte d’Ivo-
ire, Niger, and Tanzania (annex d). 
Low formal saving likely derives from limited access to 
savings products among low-income and rural popula-
tions, and from the perception among low-income indi-
viduals that their savings are not large enough to warrant 
an account at a financial institution, which may entail 
maintenance fees, minimum balance requirements, and 
high indirect access costs (e.g., transportation, time). Fin-
dex data indicate that the primary reason adults in the 
focus regions do not have a financial account is because 
they believe they have insufficient funds to warrant an 
account (figure 2). Distance to financial institutions, cost 
of financial services, and documentation requirements 
are also significant barriers to account ownership. This 
suggests that affordable, accessible, and flexible digital 
savings accounts could fill a significant formal savings gap 
among low-income populations.
Digital savings providers who recognize local saving cus-
toms and tailor their products accordingly could intro-
duce formal saving opportunities to important market 
segments. At 25 percent of adults, saving with a savings 
group definitively surpasses saving at a financial institu-
tion in SSA (figure 1). Among the South Asia and EAP 
focus countries, more adults save with groups in Bangla-
desh, Cambodia, and Nepal than in formal institutions 
(annex d). Roughly the same number of Vietnamese adults 
3  9Markets, Models, and Products  9
save with groups as with formal institutions. Thus, savings 
groups represent a distinct digital savings opportunity, 
provided products offered can be adapted to meet sav-
ings group patterns.
Women, low-income, and rural segments would espe-
cially benefit from accessible digital savings options. 
Table 2 indicates that women, low-income, and rural 
segments have lower access to saving opportunities at financial institutions than the broader population in the 
focus regions. Digital savings providers could play an 
important role in expanding access to savings products 
among these segments. 
Formal saving did not drop as significantly as overall sav-
ing between 2014 and 2017. Saving propensity was lower 
across all 3 focus regions in 2017 compared to 2014 (figure 
3). Formal saving also decreased in EAP and SSA, while East Asia &
Pacific
South Asia
Sub-Saharan
AfricaEast Asia &
Pacific
South Asia
Sub-Saharan
Africa
01 02 03 04 0712014 2017
3753
31
1733
15546 9
251036
6013
169
Saving  
Saving at a financial institution  
Saving with a savings gr oup24
50 60 70 80 01 02 03 04 05 06 0
Saving  
Saving at a financial institution  
Saving with a savings gr oupFIGURE 1: Saving Patterns across Focus Regions (% age 15+) (excluding high income countries)
Source: World Bank Global Findex Database 
East Asia & PacificFamily account
Distance
Cost
Documentation
TrustInsufficient
funds
17
14963
56
73
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0
South Asia Sub-Saharan Africa29
27
2734
24
242021
25191811FIGURE 2.  Reason for not having a financial institution account (% without a financial institution account, 
age 15+) (excluding high income countries)
Source: World Bank Global Findex Database, 201710  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
it increased in South Asia. Meanwhile, formal savers as a 
percent of total savers increased across all 3 regions. More 
research is needed to investigate these saving dynamics 
and their relation to product offerings, including digital 
savings products. The drop in saving propensity may owe 
to a variety of factors. Likewise, while the increase in share 
of formal savers may owe to more stable access to savings 
products at financial institutions, it could also be that more 
informal savers dropped out of the saving pool. 
3.2  DIGITAL SAVINGS ACCOUNT DELIVERY 
MODELS AND CHARACTERISTICS
The digital savings accounts described in this section 
cover 35 digital savings account deployments in 10 of the 
12 focus countries and, while not exhaustive, are repre-
sentative of each country’s digital savings market. Two of 
the focus countries, Niger and Vietnam, did not have any 
digital savings accounts that met the scope of this report 
at the time of the drafting. Table 3 catalogues the digital 
savings accounts in the focus countries.  
3.2.1 Digital Savings Account Delivery Models
Banking institutions serve as the holder of the contrac-
tual relationship with the customer for digital savings 
accounts. This differs from other forms of DFS, such as 
e-wallets, in which NBEIs, in addition to banking institu-
tions, can serve as the holder of the contractual relation-
ship. NBEIs include a variety of entities, such as mobile 
network operators (MNOs), financial-technology compa-
nies, and other retail chains. Regulation generally pro-
hibits NBEIs from holding deposits that can be 
intermediated. The World Bank Group (WBG)’s 2017 
Global Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection 
(FICP) survey indicates that 86 percent of responding 
jurisdictions prohibit NBEIs from using customer funds 
for purposes other than redeeming e-money and execut-
ing fund transfers (WBG 2017a). These restrictions are 
more common in the focus regions.
The types of banking institutions holding the savings 
account relationship with the customer range from 
full-service commercial banks to more limited scope 
niche banking entities. Among the 35 documented digi-
tal savings accounts in this report, 21 are held by a single 
commercial banking entity, an arrangement that occurs 
in 8 of the 10 countries. In 4 instances in India and Nepal, 
a technology platform connects savers to a variety of 
banking institutions. Ten digital savings accounts are 
held by more limited-purpose banking entities, includ-
ing deposit-taking microfinance institutions (DTMFIs) in Source: World Bank Global Findex DatabaseWomenPoorest  
40% Rural
East Asia & Pacific 28 16 28
South Asia 15 10 16
Sub-Saharan Africa 11 9 14TABLE 2: Saving at a Financial Institution among  
Vulnerable Segments (2017, Percent of Age 15+)
FIGURE 3. Trends in Saving Patterns: 2014 and 2017 
(% of age 15+)
East Asia
& PacificSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
AfricaEast Asia
& PacificSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
Africa–5.1–6.14.5
51.757.7
51.8
35.0
26.6 27.3–3.1–1.0
–17.9
Saving  Formal saving Difference in 2017 and 2014 saving patter ns (%) Formal savers as a per cent of total savers (%) 
2014 2017–20–15–10–505
0102030405060
East Asia
& PacificSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
AfricaEast Asia
& PacificSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
Africa–5.1–6.14.5
51.757.7
51.8
35.0
26.6 27.3–3.1–1.0
–17.9
Saving  Formal saving Difference in 2017 and 2014 saving patter ns (%) Formal savers as a per cent of total savers (%) 
2014 2017–20–15–10–505
0102030405060
Source: World Bank Global Findex DatabaseMarkets, Models, and Products  11
TABLE 3: Documented Digital Savings Accounts in Focus Countries
ACCOUNT  
[Account type]ACCOUNT HOLDER  
[Entity class]DRIVER OF TECHNOLOGY 
AND DISTRIBUTION  
[Entity class]TECHNOLOGICAL INTERFACE  
[Service name]
Bangladesh Dutch-Bangla Bank 
Limited (DBBL) Biometric 
Acct.  
[Dedicated]DBBL  
[CB]Mobile phone and POS  
[DBBL Biometric, Rocket Mobile]
Monthly savings scheme 
[Legacy]Mercantile Bank Ltd. (MBL)  
[CB]Mobile phone  
[MYCash: MY Bank Deposit]
Cambodia AMK savings acct.  
 [Legacy]AMK Co.  
[DTMFI]Mobile phone  
[AMK Mobile Banking]
Mobile savings acct. 
[Dedicated]Amret Co.  
[DTMFI]Mobile phone  
[Amret Mobile Teller]
Côte d’IvoireAdvans Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]Advans  
[DTMFI]MTN, Orange  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[MTN Mobile Money, Orange 
Money]
India Savings accts  
[Legacy: broad platform]Multiple banksEko India  
[NBEI: non-MNO]Mobile phone  
[SimpliBank]
Savings accts.  
[Legacy: broad platform]Multiple banksFino Paytech  
[NBEI: non-MNO]POS  
[MicroATM, kiosk banking]
State Bank of India (SBI) 
No Frills Acct.  
[Legacy]SBI [CB]Oxigen  
[NBEI: non-MNO]POS  
[Oxigen CSP Kiosk]
Savings acct.  
[Dedicated]Airtel Payments Bank 
[payments bank]Airtel  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[Airtel Money]
Savings accts. [Legacy]Fino Payments Bank 
[payments bank]Fino Paytech  
[NBEI: non-MNO]Mobile phone and POS  
[Mobile banking, micro ATM, kiosk]
Kenya M-Shwari  
[Dedicated]Commercial Bank of Africa 
(CBA) [CB]
Safaricom  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[M-Pesa]Kenya Commercial Bank 
(KCB) M-Pesa  
[Dedicated]KCB Bank Kenya Ltd.  
[CB]
KCB M-Benki  
[Dedicated]
M-Kesho  
[Dedicated]Equity Bank  
[CB]
Stanbic Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]Stanbic Bank  
[CB]
Kenya Women’s Finance 
Trust (KWFT) Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]KWFT  
[DTMFI]KWFT, Safaricom [DTMFI], 
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone and POS  
[KWFT Mobile, M-Pesa]
PostBank Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]PostBank  
[savings bank]PostBank, Safaricom  
[savings bank],  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[M-Sawa, M-Pesa]
Akiba Mkononi  
[Dedicated]United Bank for Africa  
[CB]Airtel  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[Airtel Money]
EazzySave  
[Legacy]Equity Bank [  
CB]Equity Bank, Equitel [CB], 
[MVNO (subsid.)]Mobile phone and POS  
[Equitel]
continued12  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
TABLE 3, continued
ACCOUNT  
[Account type]ACCOUNT HOLDER  
[Entity class]DRIVER OF TECHNOLOGY 
AND DISTRIBUTION  
[Entity class]TECHNOLOGICAL INTERFACE  
[Service name]
Nepal Savings accts.  
[Legacy: broad platform]Multiple bankseSewa  
[NBEI: non-MNO]Mobile phone  
[eSewa]
Savings accts.  
[Legacy: broad platform]Multiple banksHelloPaisa  
[NBEI: non-MNO]Mobile phone  
[HelloPaisa]
Everest Bank Ltd. (EBL) 
Savings Bank Acct. 
[Legacy]EBL  
[CB]Mobile phone  
[Mobile ATM]
Rastriya Banijya Bank Ltd. 
(RBBL) Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]RBBL  
[CB]Mobile phone and POS [RB Mobile 
Banking, EFTPOS]
Philippines PondoKO  
[Dedicated]BanKO  
[DTMFI]Mobile phone  
[BanKO]
Tanzania M-Pawa  
[Dedicated]CBA  
[CB]Vodacom  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[M-Pesa]
Tanzania Postal Bank (TPB) 
Savings Acct.  
[Legacy]TPB  
[CB]TPB, Airtel, Tigo, 
Vodacom, Zantel [CB], 
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone and POS  
[Popote, Airtel Money, Tigopesa, 
M-Pesa, EzyPesa]
National Microfinance 
Bank (NMB) Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]NMB  
[CB]NMB, Tigo, Vodacom [CB], 
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone and POS [NMB 
Mobile, M-Pesa, Tigopesa]
FINCA Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]FINCA  
[CB]FINCA, Airtel, Tigo, 
Vodacom [CB],  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone and POS  
[FINCA Mobile, Airtel Money, 
Tigopesa, M-Pesa]
CRDB Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]CRDB  
[CB]Mobile phone and POS  
[SimBanking]
Mwanga Community Bank 
(MCB) Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]MCB  
[community bank]MCB, Airtel, Tigo, 
Vodacom  
[community bank],  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[MCB Mobile Banking, Airtel 
Money, Tigopesa, M-Pesa]
Uganda MoKash  
[Dedicated]CBA  
[CB]MTN  
[NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[MTN Mobile Money]
Barclays Group Acct. 
[Dedicated]Barclays Bank  
[CB]Barclays, Airtel  
[CB], [NBEI: MNO]Mobile phone  
[eKeys, Airtel Money]
Zambia Zanaco Savings Acct. 
[Legacy]Zanaco  
[CB]Mobile phone and POS  
[Xapit]
Eaze Save  
[Legacy]Investrust  
[CB]Mobile phone  
[InvestMobile]
Abbreviations: CB: commercial bank. DTMFI: deposit-taking microfinance institution. NBEI: nonbank e-money issuer. POS: point-of-sale terminal. MNO: mobile network 
operator. 
Account type: Legacy describes instances in which a digital channel links customers directly to a savings account within the banking institution’s existing suite of 
products. Dedicated refers to accounts that have been created specifically for digital savings. Legacy: broad platform refers to a few mechanisms in which nonbank 
entities establish savings account connections with a wide range of banking institutions. Markets, Models, and Products  13
Cambodia, Côte d’Ivoire, Kenya, the Philippines, and 
Zambia, specialized payments banks in India, a postal 
savings bank in Kenya, and a designated community 
bank in Tanzania.  
A distinguishing factor among the models for delivering 
digital savings accounts revolves around the institutions 
driving the product’s technology and distribution and, cor -
respondingly, whether the banking institution that holds 
the contractual relationship with the customer pursues a 
substantive partnership with a nonbank entity in furnish-
ing the digital savings account. An entity is said to drive 
the digital savings account’s technology and distribution if 
it owns and operates the product’s primary technological 
interface and drives the distribution strategy. The entity 
itself does not need to perform the distribution function 
alone; rather, it determines or selects the agent distribu-
tion model for the account. 
Partnerships between banking institutions and NBEIs are 
common in the provision of digital savings accounts. Table 
4 captures the classes of entities primarily responsible for 
digital savings account technology and distribution in the 
10 focus countries where accounts exist. Figure 4 depicts 
three common digital savings account delivery models. 
Among the 35 documented digital savings accounts, 23 
involve partnerships between banking institutions and 
NBEIs. Of these, 6 accounts involve distinctly shared tech-
nology and distribution responsibilities between banking 
institutions and MNOs. In the remaining 12 cases, the 
banking institution holding the contractual relationship 
with the customer also drives the product’s technology 
and distribution. 
MNO partnerships account for a greater share of the 
digital savings account models in SSA than in Asia. 
The historically MNO-centric DFS approach in SSA 
and contrasting bank-oriented DFS patterns in a num-
ber of Asian countries likely contribute to the relative 
share of MNO digital savings partnerships. Of the 21 
documented accounts in SSA, 16 involve partnerships 
between banking institutions and MNOs. In Asia, 7 of the 15 documented accounts involve partnerships, 6 of 
which involve non-MNO NBEIs.
3.2.2 Key Digital Savings Account Characteristics
About two-thirds of the products reviewed involve new 
digital channels to legacy bank savings accounts, while 
the remaining products are customized accounts, cre-
ated for the purpose of digital savings. In 23 of 35 cases, 
the product involves a digital channel linking customers 
directly to a savings account within the banking insti-
tution’s existing suite of products. Of these, 2 mecha-
nisms in India, managed by Fino Paytech and Eko, and 
2 in Nepal, managed by eSewa and HelloPaisa, consti-
tute “broad platforms,” whereby the entities establish 
savings account connections with a number of banking 
institutions. In the remaining 12 cases, an account has 
been created for digital savings. The report refers to 
these as “dedicated” accounts, though they may offer 
other services, such as short-term loans. Nine of these 
dedicated accounts involve partnerships between bank-
ing institutions and MNOs, while the remaining three are 
managed entirely by banking institutions. Perhaps the 
most well-known of the dedicated accounts is M-Shwari, 
the Commercial Bank of Africa (CBA) and Safaricom 
M-Pesa digital savings account in Kenya. Box 1 explores 
M-Shwari in more detail. CBA has launched similar prod-
ucts in Tanzania (M-Pawa) and Uganda (MoKash) and is 
expected to launch an analogous product in Côte d’Ivo-
ire (Mumo 2016).
TABLE 4: Primary Driver of Technology and Distribution among Documented Digital Savings Accounts  
(Entity Type, Number of Instances, by Country)
BANGLADESH CAMBODIACÔTE 
D’IVOIRE INDIA KENYA NEPAL PHILIPPINES TANZANIA UGANDA ZAMBIA
Banking institution 2 2 — — 1 2 1 1 — 3
MNO NBEI — — 1 1 6 — — 1 2 —
Non-MNO NBEI — — — 4 — 2 — — — —
Shared (MNO  
and bank) — — — — 2 — — 4 — —Savers Retail agentBanking
institutionMNO
FinTechFIGURE 4. Three common digital savings account delivery models
Icon source: Shutterstock.com (subscription)14  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
Basic mobile phones, also known as feature phones, 
represent the most common technological interface 
through which users access their accounts, although a 
sizable segment of the accounts can be accessed through 
both basic mobile phones and agent-administered POS 
devices. Just over 60 percent of the documented digital 
savings accounts are accessed via basic mobile phones. 
Among these, accounts are accessible through a mix of 
the banking institution’s own mobile-banking platform 
and through a partner NBEI’s mobile-money service. 
Access via an MNO’s mobile-money service is most com-
mon in SSA, where the services of Safaricom, Vodacom, 
MTN, and Airtel all link to digital savings accounts. In 
Asia, where regulations have often blocked MNOs from 
directly offering DFS, it is far more common for banks to 
utilize their own mobile-money applications or partner 
with a non-MNO NBEI. However, in India, the recently 
launched Airtel Payments Bank utilizes Airtel Money as its digital savings channel. In 10 cases, digital savings 
accounts are accessible through both mobile phones 
and agent-administered POS devices, offering more 
flexibility for consumers. In three cases in Tanzania 
involving Tanzania Postal Bank, National Microfinance 
Bank, and FINCA, as well as one case in Kenya involving 
Kenya Women’s Finance Trust (KWFT), savers can access 
their digital accounts through mobile options furnished 
by both the banking institution and an MNO, as well as 
through POS terminals. 
Most of the digital savings accounts offer some level of 
remote account opening, either directly through a basic 
mobile phone or via an agent-facilitated document-col-
lection process, but complete savings account opening 
at a retail agent location is rare. It is uncommon for retail 
agents to have full authority to open a savings account 
on behalf of a banking institution. In six observed Launched in November 2012, M-Shwari is a CBA sav-
ings and loan product available to M-Pesa customers. 
CBA holds the savings account relationship with the 
customer, while Safaricom drives the technology and 
distribution. M-Shwari is completely branchless and 
paperless. M-Pesa users open an M-Shwari account 
via their M-Pesa mobile interface simply by accepting 
the M-Shwari terms and conditions.a Thereafter, users 
can transfer money directly from their M-Pesa account 
to M-Shwari. M-Shwari has no minimum balance, no 
maintenance fees, and no charges on transfers 
between M-Pesa and M-Shwari.b M-Shwari depositors 
earn 7.35 percent interest per annum on their aver -
age daily balance, which is paid quarterly. Users can 
also open a “Lock Savings Account,” which has a 
maturity of one to six months. Despite being a time 
deposit, the Lock account has no penalty for early 
withdrawal. M-Shwari offers 30-day loans for a fixed 
charge of 7.5 percent.c 
M-Shwari has had strong uptake in its five years of 
existence. According to CBA, M-Shwari customers 
have grown from 2.9 million in the first quarter of 
2013 to 12.6 million at year-end 2015, representing 
about 47 percent of the Kenyan adult population. BOX 1
M-Shwari (Kenya)
However, Safaricom reported 30-day active users at 
3.9 million at the end of fiscal 2016 (Safaricom 
2016). Outstanding M-Shwari deposits stood at K 
Sh 7.6 billion (about $74 million) at the end of fiscal 
2015 and K Sh 8.1 billion (about $79 million) in May 
of 2016 (CBA 2016; Safaricom 2016).d M-Shwari 
points to how effective partnerships between banks 
and nonbanks can be in furnishing digital savings 
accounts. 
a.  CBA, “Activate M-Shwari,” http://cbagroup.com/m-shwari/activate-m-shwari/, accessed May 10, 2017. 
b.  CBA, “How M-Shwari Works,” http://cbagroup.com/m-shwari/how-m-shwari-works/, accessed May 10, 2017.
c.  CBA, “M-Shwari: FAQs,” http://cbagroup.com/m-shwari/faqs/, accessed May 10, 2017.
d.  Box 1 conversions utilize the year-end 2016 exchange rate of $1 = K Sh 102.49 (Central Bank of Kenya).Total M-Shwari Users (Millions)
Q1 2013 YE 2013 YE 2014 YE 201502468101214
Source: CBA annual reportsMarkets, Models, and Products  15
cases, savers must visit a bank branch to open a savings 
account, while the status of non-branch account opening 
is unclear for a few cases. In a handful of cases that are 
primarily concentrated in India, direct savings account 
opening appears possible at a retail agent location. For 
four digital savings accounts in Kenya and one each in 
Tanzania and Uganda, customers can open a digital sav-
ings account directly on their mobile device. A common 
approach entails retail agents collecting account-open-
ing information for evaluation by the banking institution. 
According to the Global FICP survey data, about three-
fourths of responding jurisdictions permit retail agents 
to receive and submit to commercial banking institu-
tions deposit account applications (Annex E, Table E.4). 
Less than half (42 percent) of all responding jurisdictions 
allow retail agents to open a customer account follow-
ing a commercial banking institution’s policy (Annex E, 
Table E.4).
The digital savings accounts reviewed in part 3 con-
stitute deposits held by banking institutions and are 
eligible for deposit insurance, where regimes exist. 
Explicit deposit insurance regimes exist in 8 of the focus 
countries (see: table 6, part 4). This stands in contrast 
to e-money accounts, which are generally not insured 
(Izaguirre, Lyman, McGuire and Grace 2016). However, 
two of the focus countries, Kenya and India, have pur -
sued innovative policy approaches in this area. Kenya is 
developing pass-through deposit insurance for e-money 
accounts (Izaguirre et al. 2016). In India, payments bank 
deposits are insured (see: Box 2). Part 5 recommends 
future research on whether knowledge of deposit insur -
ance coverage affects account uptake.     
Most the digital savings accounts reviewed here are low-
cost, marked by low or no maintenance fees and mini-
mum balance requirements, and offer flexible withdrawal 
policies. Low-cost account features, such as low main-
tenance fees and minimum balance requirements, are 
likely important for digital savings uptake among low-in-
come segments. Most of the documented accounts also 
have flexible withdrawal options, while few stipulate 
withdrawal limits. In most cases, providers’ decisions 
to offer low-cost account accounts for certain customer 
segments appear market driven. No more than 10 per -
cent of Global FICP survey respondents mandate low-
cost deposit features, such as limits on opening costs, 
maintenance fees, overdraft penalties, and minimum 
balance requirements (WBG 2017a). Many of the documented accounts offer additional fea-
tures and options, such as:
• Short-term loans. A number of digital savings 
accounts offer customers the possibility of accessing 
short-term loans. In fact, six accounts are directly mar -
keted as savings and loan products. Four of these are 
in Kenya, all involving the Safaricom M-Pesa mobile-
money service. The remaining two are in Tanzania 
and Uganda. Although very convenient, these loans 
can be costly. In the case of the Safaricom/CBA 
M-Shwari loan, a 30-day loan-facilitation fee is set at 
7.5 percent, amounting to an annual effective interest 
rate of 138 percent.3 Part 5 recommends that future 
research explore to what extent demand savings and 
loan products is driven by demand for credit. 
• Term- or recurring-deposit accounts. While some of 
the documented digital savings accounts are avail-
able only as term deposits, many others offer the 
option to open a term- or recurring-deposit account. 
As an example, Dutch-Bangla Bank Limited (DBBL) in 
Bangladesh offers the Deposit Plus Scheme, a recur -
ring deposit, and the Fixed Deposit Receipt, a term 
deposit, through agent-administered biometric POS 
terminals or mobile banking.4 In most cases, the 
banking institution markets the term deposit itself, 
but this is not universally true. For instance, the non-
MNO NBEI Fino Paytech directly markets fixed and 
recurring deposit accounts.5 Additionally, dedicated 
digital savings accounts offer term-deposit options in 
certain cases. For example, M-Shwari and MoKash 
offer the Lock and Fixed Savings Accounts, respec-
tively, both of which offer flexible early withdrawal 
options.6 
• Group accounts. At least six of the documented dig-
ital savings accounts offer the ability to access group 
accounts digitally. These options appear in India, 
Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. Five of the six repre-
sent digital channels to legacy group savings accounts 
at banking institutions. One account, offered through 
a partnership between Barclays and Airtel in Uganda, 
is a dedicated, interest-bearing digital savings group 
account (Barclays, CARE, Plan 2016). As discussed in 
section 3.1, group saving is widespread in SSA and 
certain other Asian countries. Digital group savings 
accounts represent an important effort among DFS 
providers to forge synergies between their savings 
products and local populations’ traditional, familiar 
saving patterns. 16  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
3.3   HOW INNOVATIVE BUSINESS MODELS 
ENHANCE SAVINGS ACCOUNT  
ACCESSIBILITY 
3.3.1 Disaggregation of the Digital Savings 
Account Value Chain
Disaggregation of the digital savings account value 
chain allows for expanded access channels, improve-
ments in the economics of low-cost savings accounts, 
the leveraging of different entities’ comparative advan-
tages, and scaling of microbanking institutions. DFS 
business models are frequently characterized by horizon-
tal structures, whereby providers strike partnerships with 
third parties to fulfill one or more aspects of product 
development and delivery. Disaggregation of the digital 
savings account value chain primarily takes two forms. 
First, banking institutions can partner with a NBEI, which 
assumes primary responsibility for a digital savings 
account’s technology and distribution. Second, a bank-
ing institution may contract with a third party to conduct 
some or all of the digital savings account distribution 
responsibilities. Such value chain disaggregation carries 
distinct financial inclusion advantages that are extremely 
important for the provision of savings accounts: 
• Expanded access channels. Through a combination 
of retail agents and basic devices, digital savings 
accounts provide customers with a wider range of 
access channels than traditional branch-based bank-
ing. Across the focus countries, the primary access 
mechanisms involved in digital savings accounts—
retail agents, POS terminals, and basic mobile 
devices—are far more widespread than analogous 
access channels for traditional savings accounts, such 
as commercial bank branches. Expanded access chan-
nels are important not only for digital savings account 
opening but also for accessibility and flexibility, two 
qualities that are vital for low-income savers, who need 
easy access to savings in case of emergencies. 
• Improved economics of providing low-cost savings 
accounts. Disaggregating the digital savings value 
chain improves the economics of providing low-cost 
savings accounts by lowering distribution costs and 
helping banks mobilize local deposits. Digital tech-
nology and value-chain disaggregation can lower the 
cost of distributing digital savings accounts. Working 
through retail agent networks is more affordable than 
developing full-scale branch outlets. Partnering with 
nonbank entities and leveraging digital technology 
also helps banking institutions achieve faster econo-
mies of scale. The McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) 
estimates that digital technologies and DFS business 
models can lower “the cost of providing financial ser -vices by 80 to 90 percent” (Manyika et al. 2016, 36). 
Digital savings accounts also provide an opportunity 
for banking institutions to improve their cost-of-fund-
ing profile. Local deposit mobilization can reduce 
banking institutions’ reliance on expensive brokered 
deposits, wholesale funding, and long-term debt, 
much of which may also be priced in foreign currency. 
MGI estimates banking institutions in developing 
economies could raise $4.2 trillion in deposits via dig-
ital channels (Manyika et al. 2016). Finally, digital sav-
ings accounts entail an opportunity for providers to 
achieve economies of scope through diversity in 
product offerings. 
• Leveraging comparative advantage among differ -
ent classes of entities. Through partnerships between 
banking institutions and nonbank entities, digital sav-
ings accounts benefit from the relative strengths of 
each party. When banking institutions partner with 
MNO NBEIs in developing and distributing digital 
savings accounts, both customers and providers can 
benefit from the MNO’s distribution and coverage 
potential, as well as the presence of existing mobile 
phones that can serve as the primary account inter -
face. Moreover, MNOs have an economic incentive to 
distribute the product, despite potentially low mar -
gins, as the savings account may enhance loyalty to 
the MNO’s core product offering. Except for the 
mobile device, partnerships with non-MNO NBEIs 
that have a large retail presence offer similar advan-
tages. Partnerships between banking institutions and 
financial-technology companies can benefit from the 
latter’s flexibility, agility, and ability to develop inno-
vative, customizable products. 
• Broadening reach and scale of microbanking institu-
tions. Digital savings business models allow institu-
tions that specialize in microsavings, such as DTMFIs, 
to serve a wider base of customers, thereby expanding 
the reach of their expertise. Globally, DTMFIs, commu-
nity banks, savings banks, and other microfinance enti-
ties maintain expertise in serving local communities, 
including individual small savers, yet expanding their 
customer base can be challenging. Pursuing partner -
ships with MNOs or other NBEIs can provide an effi-
cient avenue for these institutions to achieve scale. In 
Tanzania, for instance, the Mwanga Community Bank 
(MCB) has integrated its mobile-banking service with 
Vodacom M-Pesa, Airtel Money, and Tigo Pesa, allow-
ing customers to access MCB savings accounts from a 
substantial number of outlets and channels. Likewise, 
in Kenya, the DTMFI KWFT has supplemented its own 
KWFT mobile and agent banking service with a Safar -
icom M-Pesa partnership.Markets, Models, and Products  17
3.3.2 Product Tailoring and Customization
Digital technology and innovative business models 
allow for more accessible, flexible, and affordable sav-
ings accounts. Substantial gaps exist in the focus regions 
between overall and formal saving. As established in 
section 3.1, perceptions among low-income segments 
that their savings are too small to warrant an account, 
along with cost of financial services and distance to 
financial institutions, are central impediments of formal 
account uptake in developing economies. Moreover, 
adults may save informally for easier access to their sav-
ings in case of an emergency or for other nearer-term 
uses. Digital savings accounts seek to address many of 
the barriers to formal saving, with low cost features, 
more proximate access channels, and flexible with-
drawal options. Part 5 highlights future research ques-
tions geared toward exploring more precisely the 
connections between digital savings product attributes 
and uptake. 
DFS actors are leveraging technology to tailor products 
to more effectively meet local saving patterns. An exam-
ple of the compatibility between digital savings and 
local customs involves digital group savings accounts. 
To be sure, group accounts are not unique to DFS. 
Indeed, most of the digital savings accounts with group 
options captured in this study represent digital paths to 
existing group accounts at banking institutions. How-
ever, DFS business models allow greater reach to rural 
areas, where savings groups are common. Additionally, 
digital savings accounts allow a better opportunity for 
customization. For instance, the Barclays-Airtel digital 
group account and Airtel Weza (annex C), mimic group 
savings customs by requiring three-PIN authentication, 
analogous to group lock-box procedures. Such a fea-
ture is difficult with traditional branch-based banking, as 
it would require multiple individuals to travel to a bank 
branch. In addition to Airtel Weza, annex C examines 
other non-interest-bearing digital transaction accounts 
that are specifically designed to facilitate saving. For 
instance, certain providers are leveraging technology to 
influence saving behavior through features such as SMS 
saving reminders and labeled products, in which cus-
tomers can easily earmark funds for specific purposes, 
including healthcare and education. A successful labeled 
account example is the M-Tiba mobile health wallet.7 
Annex C also profiles SmartMoney’s digital transaction 
account, which is designed to facilitate saving in rural 
communities, particularly in Uganda. 3.3.3 Leveraging Existing DFS Ecosystems
A prevailing DFS ecosystem can facilitate the develop-
ment and uptake of digital savings accounts through 
existing infrastructure and customer familiarity. Digital sav-
ings accounts are built on many of the same information 
and communication technology elements as digital trans-
action accounts and payment services. Digital transaction 
accounts themselves serve as a gateway to digital savings 
accounts. Furthermore, when low comfort with traditional 
branch banking is a major hurdle to savings-account 
uptake, the digital savings account market benefits from 
the elements of the DFS ecosystem that enhance trust 
and familiarity, such as community-based agents and 
basic mobile phones. A robust DFS market can also help 
customers develop confidence and financial capability to 
move on to more sophisticated products, including digital 
savings. Kenya’s digital savings market, with digital 
wealth-management products such as pensions and 
bonds, exemplifies the influence a strong DFS ecosystem 
can have on market development. 
A robust DFS market can foster healthy competition in 
the savings account space. A thriving market for digi-
tal transaction accounts and payment services can spur 
banking institutions to seek more efficient channels for 
delivering banking services, including savings. In Kenya, 
for instance, a 2017 CGAP report documented a striking 
correlation between growth in mobile money accounts 
and bank accounts (Cook and McKay 2017, 2). In some 
prosperous DFS settings, particularly where nonbank enti-
ties have introduced significant competition to the finan-
cial services industry, dynamic digital savings markets 
have developed. In Tanzania and Kenya, various banks 
and DTMFIs have entered the digital savings space, both 
by pursuing partnerships with MNOs and by developing 
their own digital channels. Part 5 recommends that future 
research further investigate the impact of digital savings 
accounts on competition, including whether terms have 
improved for savers. 
The DFS ecosystem, often in concert with policy action, 
can give rise to new classes of entities that are well posi-
tioned to offer digital savings accounts without traditional 
branch-based banking. Examples of new classes of enti -
ties exist in a number of focus countries. In the Philip-
pines, for instance, BanKO, a “mobile phone-based, 
microfinance-focused savings bank,” aims to serve 
the unbanked and underserved segments through its 
PondoKO savings account, which users access entirely 
through mobile banking and retail outlets.8 Similarly, 
India’s payments banks (Box 2), such as Airtel Payments 
Bank, offer digital savings accounts entirely through 
mobile devices and retail outlets. 18  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
Digital savings providers can effectively pool program-
ming improvements and spur innovations through 
application program interfaces (APIs). APIs are software 
programs that specify how software components should 
interact and how user interfaces should function. An 
open API can enable third-party developers to innovate 
freely and to build new features, functionalities, or sepa-
rate applications on top of preexisting products without 
needing to establish a specific agreement or partner -
ship with the original developer. In practice, fully open 
APIs are not the norm in the DFS ecosystem. Rather, the 
degree of accessibility among DFS providers’ APIs runs a continuum from wholly private to partially open for a 
specified set of partners to fully open to the public (Bank-
able Frontier Associates 2016). Nevertheless, select DFS 
actors are taking advantage of at least some degree of 
API openness to develop digital savings accounts. For 
instance, M-Shwari was built on top of the M-Pesa plat-
form (Bankable Frontier Associates 2016). Open APIs 
can offer a tremendous opportunity for digital savings 
providers to crowd-source high-quality programming 
expertise at a potentially much lower cost than develop-
ing technology in house.
Historically, the Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) DFS legal 
and regulatory framework favored bank-oriented 
DFS. Recognizing the need to leverage digital chan-
nels better to promote financial inclusion, the RBI 
established a new category of institution in 2014—
payments banks—a development that may have a 
significant impact on India’s digital savings landscape. 
As the RBI explained in its 2014 Guidelines for Licens-
ing Payments Banks, “the primary objective of setting 
up of payments banks will be to further financial inclu-
sion by providing (i) small savings accounts and (ii) 
payments/remittance services” among underserved 
segments (RBI 2014b, 2 [2]). The RBI makes clear that 
payments banks should leverage technology to reach 
remote and underserved areas through an extended 
set of access points. In 2015, the RBI granted 11 enti-
ties “in-principle” licenses, along with an 18-month 
window to set up a payments bank. 
Airtel, which became the first to launch its pay-
ments bank in early 2017, offers a fully digital savings 
account with no minimum balance, low withdrawal 
fees, and a 4 percent per annum interest rate.a Cus-
tomers visit one of Airtel’s 250,000 banking points to 
open an account, needing only their Aadhaar number 
to do so. A customer’s mobile number becomes his or 
her account number. Fino Payments Bank, which fol-
lowed Airtel, also offers a suite of savings products 
that customers can access through mobile or POS 
technology. India Post and Paytm Payments Banks are 
also operational, and both appear poised to offer dig-
ital savings accounts soon. 
From a regulatory perspective, payments bank 
deposits are considered deposits and eligible for 
deposit insurance, one of the many properties that 
distinguishes the payments bank license from com-
mon NBEI licenses. The RBI prohibits payments banks 
from lending. They must invest a minimum of 75 per -
cent of customer funds in government securities and BOX 2
Digital Savings Potential at Payments Banks in India
place a maximum of 25 percent of funds in commer -
cial bank deposits (RBI 2014b, 5 [5]). As of now, pay-
ments bank accounts have a limit of Rs 100,000 (about 
$1,472), but the RBI says it will review the limit as war -
ranted (RBI 2014b, 3 [4]).b Payments banks must also 
maintain a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 15 per -
cent of risk-weighted assets, a minimum Tier 1 capital 
ratio of 7.5 percent of risk-weighted assets, and a 
leverage ratio of 3 percent (RBI 2014b, 5–6 [6]). Pay-
ments bank risk-weighted assets will be low, given the 
limited asset classes in which they can invest and the 
relatively low-risk nature of those classes. The RBI also 
recognizes the need for proportional prudential regu-
latory standards for payments banks, as they take on 
limited to no credit risk. The RBI suggests prudential 
requirements for payments banks will largely revolve 
around operational and liquidity risk management 
(RBI 2014b, 7 [10]). In general, payments banks must 
comply with all relevant risk-management, consum-
er-protection, and financial integrity laws and regula-
tions, and they are responsible for the actions of their 
business correspondents. Payments bank accounts 
are eligible for simplified know-your-customer and 
anti-money laundering/combating the financing of 
terrorism standards, provided they meet “small 
account” standards (RBI 2014b, 3 [4]).
Despite their promise, restrictions on revenue 
opportunities and competition from traditional banks 
offering Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana accounts 
may present viability challenges for the payments 
banks. In fact, CDSL, Shri Dilip Shantilal Shanghvi, and 
Tech Mahindra surrendered their payments bank 
licenses before launching (Bhakta 2016). The most 
established payments bank, Airtel, has not been prof-
itable in its first 2 years, but this is not surprising for an 
early-stage, growth-oriented company, and there are 
continuedMarkets, Models, and Products  19
encouraging trends.c Airtel’s savings deposits grew 
substantially over FY 2018, and net interest income is 
positive and growing. Those payments banks that 
position themselves to capitalize on unmet formal 
savings demand should find good opportunities in 
the Indian market. BOX 2, continued
Notes:
a.  Airtel Payments Bank, “Savings Account,” https://www.airtel.
in/bank/saving-account. 
b.  Note: Conversions in box 2 utilize the year-end 2016 
exchange rate of $1 = Rs 67.95 (Reserve Bank of India).
c.  Note: Comments on Airtel’s performance were updated in 
2018. Source: Airtel Payments Bank Ltd, Financial 
Statements (March 31, 2018), https://www.airtel.in/about- 
bharti/equity/results. 
NOTES
2.  In this paper, we use the term propensity to save to represent the share of adults who save in a given jurisdiction. Formal saving in 
Global Findex refers to saving at a financial institution. 
3.  https://sites.tufts.edu/inclusivecommerceblog/2014/01/08/m-shwari-unconventionally-affordable-at-an-apr-of-138/.
4.  Dutch-Bangla Bank, “Agent Banking,” https://www.dutchbanglabank.com/agent-banking/agentbanking.html, accessed May 10, 
2017. 
5.  Fino Paytech, “Savings,” http://www.finopaytech.com/industry-sectors/banking/savings, accessed May 20, 2017.
6.  CBA Bank, “M-Shwari: Lock Savings Account,” http://cbagroup.com/m-shwari/lock-savings-account/, accessed May 15, 2017; 
MTN, “MoKash-My Saving, My Loans: Terms and Conditions,” https://www.mtn.co.ug/Mobile%20Money/Banking/Pages/MoKash.
aspx, accessed May 15, 2017.
7.  M-Tiba, http://m-tiba.co.ke/, accessed August 4, 2017. 
8.  BanKO, “PondoKO,” http://www.banko.com.ph/savings/pondoko-savings-account/, accessed May 5, 2017. BanKO (2015).DIGITAL SAVINGS POLICY  
CONSIDERATIONS
20The purpose of this section is to discuss key policy issues 
that enable and constrain digital savings account develop-
ment and to offer corresponding considerations within the 
context of the G20 HLPs for DFI. Recognizing the central 
role digital technologies can play in driving financial inclu-
sion and inclusive growth more broadly, the G20 developed 
a set of eight HLPs for policy makers and market leaders 
around the world to consult as they contemplate digitally 
enabled financial inclusion methods (GPFI 2016a). This sec-
tion provides specific policy considerations supported by 
policy and market observations for each of the eight HLPs. 
These observations derive from the digital savings product 
findings in part 3, as well as a broader analyses of the dig-
ital savings markets and policy landscapes in the 12 focus 
countries. The discussion below also draws on findings 
from the WBG’s 2017 Global FICP survey results. Annex E 
details key digital savings-relevant FICP data elements. 
Policymakers should use part 4 as a guide for analyzing 
their local digital savings markets. Given that digital sav-
ings account deployments are in their early stages and 
future research is needed to evaluate uptake and usage, 
the policy takeaways below should be read as consider -
ations, rather than recommendations. The future research 
agenda outlined in part 5 will allow for a more compre-
hensive calibration and prioritization of digital savings 
policy considerations. In the meantime, the policy issues 
discussed in part 4 can help policymakers evaluate digi-
tal savings developments in their local markets. Based on 
current research, policies that support bank-NBEI part-
nerships (see: 4.3.i), NBEI-to-bank interoperability (see: 
4.4.i), and harmonization of customer due diligence stan-
dards between banks and NBEIs (see: 4.3.iii) appear most 
important for digital savings development. 4.1  G20 HLP 1: PROMOTE A DIGITAL 
APPROACH TO FINANCIAL INCLUSION
4.1.i) Incorporate savings-specific elements in national 
financial inclusion strategies. Eleven of 12 focus countries 
either have or are preparing a dedicated national finan-
cial inclusion strategy. One country maintains a national 
development strategy with a financial inclusion compo-
nent. Including savings-specific goals in these strategies 
may help accelerate digital savings market development. 
Over half (54 percent) of Global FICP survey respondents 
require deposit-taking institutions to offer basic finan-
cial products (Annex E, Table E.1). A 2016 World Bank 
Group analysis of 17 publicly available national financial 
inclusion strategies found that 13 incorporate savings/
pension-related policy areas (WBG 2016, 8). Both Tan-
zania’s and India’s strategy, two of the longer-standing 
strategies among the focus countries, include savings-re-
lated targets and action items. These countries maintain 
two of the more diverse digital savings markets. Tanza-
nia’s National Financial Inclusion Framework sets a target 
of 25 percent of adults maintaining “two weeks’ worth of 
income in formal savings” (Tanzania National Council for 
Financial Inclusion 2013, v). The Government of India sets 
ambitious savings goals in its Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan 
Yojana (PMJDY) strategy, a core pillar of which involves 
the “Opening of Basic Saving Bank Account of every adult 
citizen” (Ministry of Finance, India 2014, 20 [7.2]). The 
Government of India requires banking institutions to offer 
a PMJDY basic savings account that has no minimum bal-
ance and pays interest (Ministry of Finance, India 2014). 
As of year-end 2016, over 260 million PMJDY accounts 
had been opened, the majority of which are rural accounts 
(figure 5). However, nearly a quarter of these accounts had 
4a zero balance in 2016, which, although improving, still 
indicates low usage. Nevertheless, the relatively high level 
of financial account ownership in India owes, in part, to 
the PMDJY program. Importantly, these savings accounts 
are often available digitally. Fino Payments Bank directly 
markets PMJDY accounts in its suite of savings products.9  
4.1.ii) Highlight the importance of incorporating afford-
ability, flexibility, accessibility, and customization in 
digital savings account product offerings. Section 3.1 
demonstrates that among excluded and underserved pop-
ulations, demand is potentially strong for flexible, accessi-
ble, and affordable digital savings accounts. Encouragingly, 
most of the digital savings accounts analyzed in this study 
offer good withdrawal options, charge minimal fees, and 
maintain low or no minimum balance. Additionally, in light 
of the strong savings group culture and other unique sav-
ing patterns in many developing countries, customized 
accounts could formalize powerful saving patterns. Here, 
too, DFS providers are improving upon existing models. 
4.1.iii) Facilitate the integration of digital savings 
account options with government-to-person pay-
ments, and encourage digital savings providers to 
offer options for earmarking portions of salaries for 
digital savings accounts. The G20’s recommendation 
surrounding the leveraging of large-volume recurrent 
payment streams points to an opportunity in the digital 
savings space. Sixty-seven percent of Global FICP survey 
respondents encourage or mandate recipients of govern-
ment transfers to open an account to receive their funds (Annex E, Table E.1). Globally, one of the chief methods 
for saving involves the earmarking of recurring salary pay-
ments for specific accounts. Many digital savings provid-
ers already facilitate these services. For example, Tanzania 
Postal Bank offers customers a salary account accessible 
through agent and mobile banking.10 Meanwhile, Fino 
Payments Bank in India allows customers both to open a 
designated interest-bearing salary account and to receive 
Aadhaar benefits directly into their savings accounts.11 In 
Côte d’Ivoire, cocoa farmers have an option to designate 
a portion of their earnings from the agriculture value chain 
for a savings account with the DTMFI Advans, through an 
Advans-MTN digital savings partnership (Riquet 2016). 
The actual landing account for G2P payments should be 
that which reaches the client most easily. In many cases, 
this may be an e-money account offered by an NBEI. Pro-
viding consumers with options for redirecting portions of 
large-value payments from landing accounts to digital 
savings accounts could enhance uptake. 
4.2  G20 HLP 2: BALANCE INNOVATION AND 
RISK TO ACHIEVE DIGITAL FINANCIAL 
INCLUSION
4.2.i) Establish policy practices for enabling digital  
savings competition while facilitating effective partner -
ships. Among the focus countries, Tanzania maintains the 
best variety of actors and partnerships in the digital sav-
ings space. Neighboring Kenya, which has a similar policy 
framework as Tanzania, also maintains good diversity in its 2014-Q3 2014-Q4 2015-Q1 2015-Q2 2015-Q3 2015-Q4 2016-Q1 2016-Q2 2016-Q3 2016-Q4
Total Urban Accounts (LS, millions)
Total Rural Accounts (LS, millions)
Percentage of Accounts with Zero  Balance (RS, %)050100150200250300
0102030405060708090FIGURE 5.  Basic Savings Account Activity under the PMJDY Program
Source: Government of India Department of Financial Services, PMJDY Progress ReportDigital Savings Policy Considerations  2122  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
digital savings market but a greater degree of market con-
centration among entities providing technological and 
distribution services. Safaricom dominates these aspects 
of digital savings in Kenya. Kenyan policy makers have 
adopted innovative policy approaches to alleviate some 
of the competition challenges. For instance, to ameliorate 
channel access issues, the Communications Authority of 
Kenya has established specialized mobile virtual network 
operator (MVNO) licenses. Equity Bank, through its sub-
sidiary Equitel (Finserve), acquired an MVNO license in 
2014, which it utilizes to offer digital savings (Muthiora 
2015). In other countries, intense competition between 
banks and NBEIs has likely inhibited digital savings devel-
opment. For example, distrust between banking insti-
tutions and NBEIs in Côte d’Ivoire, which has a mature 
DFS market relative to its counterparts in the West African 
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), has impeded 
digital savings partnerships (Vasudevan 2016). 
4.2.ii) Support a “multispeed” approach to digital sav-
ings inclusion, as some consumers may be ready to move 
beyond digital savings accounts to digitally-enabled, 
market-based wealth-building products. As discussed in 
section 2.3 and annex B, digitally-enabled, market-based 
wealth-building products that advance financial inclusion 
have begun to emerge in select markets. Such products—
which allow users to access tax-advantaged retirement 
accounts (such as Mbao in Kenya), participate in collective 
investment funds (for example, Yu’e Bao in China), and 
acquire individual debt and equity securities (for exam-
ple, M-Akiba in Kenya)—offer innovative opportunities for 
certain users to move beyond basic savings and diversify 
their portfolios. However, they also carry risks that should 
be well understood by regulators and consumers. 
4.3  G20 HLP 3: PROVIDE AN ENABLING  
AND PROPORTIONATE LEGAL AND  
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR  
DIGITAL FINANCIAL INCLUSION
4.3.i) Develop a legal and regulatory framework that 
allows banking institutions to pursue digital savings 
partnerships with nonbank entities. In the most diverse 
digital savings markets, banking institutions strike sub-
stantive partnerships with NBEIs for the technological and 
distribution aspects of digital savings accounts. The best 
policy enabler in this regard is a clear legal/regulatory 
framework for NBEIs. Broadly, NBEI participation devel-
ops in two ways. First, a nonbank entity may be granted 
an independent NBEI license, which gives it autonomy in 
issuing and distributing e-money. Alternatively, in a bank-
based DFS market, regulation might permit a nonbank 
entity to participate in DFS, but only through a direct part-nership and agreement with a banking institution to con-
duct e-money or payment services on behalf of the bank. 
Fifty-nine percent of Global FICP survey respondents indi-
cate their jurisdiction maintains a legal/regulatory frame-
work for NBEIs (Annex E, Table E.2). In the focus regions, a 
solid majority of FICP respondents in EAP and SSA report 
having NBEI frameworks, while less than half of respon-
dents from South Asia report such frameworks (table 5).  
Tanzania and Kenya, which historically followed an MNO-
led DFS model, have seen the most successful bank-NBEI 
digital savings partnerships. Countries such as Cambodia, 
India, and Nepal, which historically required bank-based 
DFS, have taken steps to level the DFS playing field. 
4.3.ii) Enable banking institutions to conduct limit-
ed-purpose banking services through retail agent net-
works. Some markets have seen digital savings accounts 
driven primarily by banks. The best policy enabler in this 
regard is a clear, legally sound standard that permits 
banking institutions to offer limited-purpose banking ser -
vices through an agent network. The status of such agent 
banking standards is uneven across the focus countries. 
Although 11 of 12 focus countries allow agent banking 
arrangements in some form, the clarity of these standards 
is inconsistent. In the focus regions more broadly, most 
FICP survey respondents indicate that agent banking stan-
dards are in place (table 5). Fewer, but still a high per -
centage of respondents, permit banks’ agents to collect 
deposits. Globally, 81 percent of responding jurisdictions 
permit commercial banks to contract with retail agents as 
third-party delivery channels (Annex E, Table E.3), while 65 
percent of respondents permit commercial banks’ agents 
to collect deposits (Annex E, Table E.4).  
4.3.iii) Harmonize, where prudent, the application of a 
risk-based approach to customer due diligence (CDD) 
for e-money wallets and bank deposits. As with other 
DFS, risk-based application of anti-money laundering 
standards and requirements for combating the financing 
of terrorism can help consumers more easily acquire digi-
tal savings accounts. Although 60 percent of Global FICP 
survey respondents report having established CDD simpli-
fications or exceptions for certain accounts or customers, 
many report requirements beyond basic identification, 
particularly for commercial bank accounts (WBG 2017a). A 
unique challenge arises in digital savings when an imbal-
ance exists between CDD requirements for e-money ser -
vices and bank accounts. For instance, a jurisdiction may 
specify CDD tiers in its e-money standard but not in its 
bank regulatory requirements. This poses challenges for 
customer acquisition that utilizes an e-money service as a 
channel to digital savings accounts. Where prudent, reg-
ulators should strive to harmonize CDD requirements for 
e-wallets and bank deposits. Digital Savings Policy Considerations  23
4.4  G20 HLP 4: EXPAND THE DFS  
INFRASTRUCTURE ECOSYSTEM
4.4.i) Support the development of NBEI-to-bank interop-
erability. NBEI-to-bank interoperability is the technologi-
cal backbone of digital savings partnerships. Twenty-three 
of the 35 products documented in this report demon-
strate NBEI-to-bank interoperability. Most products are 
enabled by bilateral interoperability between NBEIs and 
banks. Multilateral arrangements, which would also sup-
port digital savings development, are more limited. 
4.5  G20 HLP 5: ESTABLISH RESPONSIBLE  
DIGITAL FINANCIAL PRACTICES TO  
PROTECT CONSUMERS
4.5.i) Ensure customer funds protection (CFP) stan-
dards are robust for both bank deposits and e-money 
accounts. Digital savings accounts present unique CFP 
challenges, as they often invoke two sets of CFP standards, 
those applicable to bank deposits and others that apply 
to e-money accounts. Relative to basic e-wallets, digital 
savings accounts often entail heightened CFP risk, due to 
higher monetary values and longer horizons. Additionally, 
as opposed to generally strict intermediation standards 
for e-wallets, banking institutions can intermediate the 
funds generated from digital savings accounts, since they 
constitute bank deposits. Thus, it is important that regu-
lators ensure CFP standards for both bank deposits and 
e-money accounts, through which digital savings often 
pass, are sound. Countries without explicit deposit insur -
ance have to rely on a strong safety-and-soundness reg-
ulatory structure to protect bank deposits from run-risk. 
Even when deposit insurance is in place, resolution and 
payout mechanisms have not been thoroughly tested in 
many jurisdictions around the world. More work needs 
to be done to strengthen supervision and resolution 
mechanics. E-money accounts are generally not consid-
ered deposits or eligible for deposit insurance, but NBEIs 
present lower risks than banking institutions and are often 
subject to strict use-of-funds requirements. For instance, 
they usually cannot intermediate e-money and often must hold 100 percent of the value of customers’ funds in a 
segregated account at one or more prudentially regulated 
financial institutions. Eighty-six percent of Global FICP 
survey respondents report such a requirement (Annex E, 
Table E.5). Eight of the 12 focus countries have clear CFP 
standards in place for both bank deposits and e-money 
accounts (table 6). 
4.5.ii) Ensure customers are afforded critical savings 
account information at point of opening, noting that 
information sharing may occur unconventionally, such 
as directly on a mobile phone or through an agent-fa-
cilitated document-collection process. Digital savings 
account disclosure should cover, at a minimum, mainte-
nance fees, withdrawal limits and fees, deposit insurance 
coverage, interest rates, when to expect interest pay-
ments, which banking institution holds the account, and 
how to submit grievances. Holders of digital savings con-
tractual relationships are often further removed from the 
point of transaction than in traditional banking or e-wallet 
and payment services. Strong, transparent FCP standards 
and practices are important for responsibly providing digi-
tal savings accounts. Table E.6 (Annex E) details disclosure 
requirements for deposit products among FICP survey 
respondents. These requirements are uneven across 
regions and institutional class. Notwithstanding catch-all 
liability clauses for providers vis-à-vis their agents (see: 
Annex E, Table E.7), mechanisms for ensuring that sav-
ings account–related information is transmitted through 
unconventional account-opening processes, such as 
directly over a mobile phone or through an agent-facili-
tated document-collection process, are not entirely clear. 
4.6  G20 HLP 6: STRENGTHEN DIGITAL  
FINANCIAL LITERACY & AWARENESS
4.6.i) Incorporate saving-specific elements in financial 
education strategies. Nearly 60 percent of Global FICP 
survey respondents report that a financial capability strat-
egy either exists or is in development in their jurisdiction 
(WBG 2017a). Financial education programs should incor -
porate important saving-specific elements, including but EAST ASIA & PACIFIC SOUTH ASIA SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Legal/regulatory framework in place for NBEIs 82% 43% 70%
Commercial banks can contract with retail 
agents as third-party delivery channels91% 86% 95%
Commercial banks’ agents can receive 
deposits70% 67% 75%TABLE 5: NBEI Frameworks and Agent Banking in Focus Regions
Data source: WBG 2017 Global Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection survey. Figures represent percent of responding jurisdictions.  
See Annex E for additional information. 24  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
not limited to: the benefits of saving; setting saving goals; 
risk versus return; characteristics of various classes of avail-
able savings products; the importance of utilizing savings 
rather than credit, where possible, for income smoothing; 
and the importance of seeking financial return to outpace 
inflation. The final concept is a serious matter, as high and 
volatile inflation rates in certain developing regions can 
put savings value at risk, even over short periods of time. 
4.7  G20 HLP 7: FACILITATE CUSTOMER IDEN-
TIFICATION FOR DIGITAL  
FINANCIAL SERVICES 
4.7.i) Continue to implement, refine, and expand 
national identification systems. As with all financial ser -
vices, lack of identification can inhibit access to digital sav-
ings accounts, particularly when digital savers face uneven 
identification requirements between different classes of 
entities involved in providing a digital savings account. 
Eleven of 12 focus countries have national identification 
systems in place, while 8 countries’ national IDs have e-ID 
features (table 7). Although progress has been made in 
developing and disseminating national IDs, substantial 
population segments still have no official identification. 
Among the focus regions, the issue is most severe in SSA 
and South Asia (figure 6). 4.8  G20 HLP 8: TRACK DIGITAL FINANCIAL 
INCLUSION PROGRESS
4.8.i) In cooperation with banking institutions and 
NBEIs, policymakers should gather and publish data 
on deposits facilitated through digital channels, as 
such information is critical for understanding opportu-
nities and risks. Gauging the impact of and appetite for 
digital savings accounts is challenging due to data con-
straints and the nascent status of most products. Many 
of the future research topics outlined in part 5 depend 
on more robust digital savings data. Bank regulators may 
be in a good position to work with banking institutions to 
develop a tracking framework through regulatory reports. 
As a positive example in this regard, Safaricom has pub-
lished helpful metrics on M-Shwari and KCB M-Pesa per -
formance in its investor presentations. Better collection 
and dissemination of digital savings data would help reg-
ulators, researchers, and the providers understand oppor -
tunities and risks.TABLE 6: State of Customer Funds Protection in Focus Countries
TABLE 7: National Identification Systems in Focus CountriesBANGLADESH CAMBODIA INDIA KENYA NEPAL PHILIPPINES TANZANIA UGANDA VIETNAM WAEMU ZAMBIA
Has explicit deposit-  
insurance regime✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Law or regulation 
requires customers’ 
e-money funds to be 
separated from the 
funds of the e-money 
issuer and held in an 
account (e.g., trust, 
escrow) at one or more 
prudentially regulated 
institutions   ✔ ✔ ✔12 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
BANGLADESH CAMBODIACÔTE 
D’IVOIRE INDIA KENYA NEPAL NIGER PHILIPPINES TANZANIA UGANDA VIETNAM ZAMBIA
Has national ID ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Year established 1973 1975 2001 2009 1971 2011 1999 2014 2014 1975 1994
e-ID13 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔Note: as of 2017
Source: World Bank ID4D datasetDigital Savings Policy Considerations  25
46327
0Sub-Saharan Africa
South Asia
East Asia & Pacific
10 20 30 40 50FIGURE 6. Percentage of Unregistered Population in Focus Regions (2017)  
Source: World Bank ID4D dataset
NOTES
 9.    Fino Payments Bank, “Savings Accounts,” http://www.finobank.com/personal/products/savings-account/, accessed August 10, 
2017.
 10.  TPB Bank, “Salary Account,” http://www.tpbbank.co.tz/personal-banking/salary-account, accessed August 20, 2017. 
 11.   Fino, “Saral Salary Account,” http://www.finobank.com/personal/products/savings-account/saral-salary-account/, and “FAQs: 
Accounts and Deposits,” http://www.finobank.com/personal/customer-care/faqs/accounts-and-deposits/, accessed August 10, 
2017.
 12.    This reflects the RBI’s standard applicable to nonbank prepaid issuers (RBI 2016b, 8). Payments banks are required to hold a 
maximum of 25 percent and a minimum of 75 percent of customer deposits in bank deposits and government securities, 
respectively (RBI 2014b, 5 [5]).
 13.   A physical token that proves an individual’s identity and is used to identify, authenticate, and act as an electronic signature. A 
smart card that contains a contact or contactless chip (World Bank ID4D dataset).FUTURE RESEARCH
Digital savings accounts represent a relatively young advancement in DFI. At this time, it is difficult to thoroughly assess 
certain research questions related to product sustainability, market impact, and key drivers of uptake and usage. While not 
exhaustive, table 8 outlines research questions that will be important to address as digital savings products mature and 
more data become available.
5
26TOPIC RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Product economics Are digital savings accounts viable on a standalone basis?
Do digital savings accounts complement or cannibalize institutions’ existing product 
offerings?
Competition and market impact Does the introduction of digital savings accounts improve terms for savers?
Do digital savings accounts complement or compete with traditional savings products?
Is there evidence of optimization behavior among consumers between digital savings 
accounts and SoV accounts?
Product attributes and design How do product performance and design characteristics, such as reliability and ease of 
use, affect uptake and usage?
Are there specific product attributes that will help close the formal saving gender gap?
To what extent is uptake of credit-linked digital savings accounts driven by demand for 
credit?
What are the risks associated with saving via digital channels that are not present in 
traditional savings products? 
Is there evidence consumers recognize the unique value proposition of digital savings 
accounts?
Do policy-oriented product attributes, such as deposit insurance coverage, drive 
uptake?
Financial inclusion programs or 
policiesHave financial inclusion programs or policies (e.g., requirements, exceptions, tax 
incentives, subsidies) driven digital savings deployment or uptake relative to traditional 
savings accounts?
Which financial inclusion-related legal and regulatory issues have been most conse-
quential for digital savings uptake and usage?TABLE 8. Future Digital Savings Research Questions. ANNEXESNOTE
14.  Number of responding jurisdictions to question addressing e-money interest and profit sharing: 62 out of 124.
E-MONEY ACCOUNTS OFFERING FINANCIAL RETURNANNEX A
Certain e-money accounts offer customers a financial 
return, without requiring users to open a separate digital 
savings account. These e-wallet profit-sharing arrange-
ments provide a simple, accessible, and convenient mech-
anism for storing wealth and earning a productive return. 
The arrangements also introduce healthy competition to 
the digital savings account market, which may incentivize 
more banking institutions to seek methods for expanding 
savings to the unbanked and underserved. In the focus 
countries, the e-wallet products Airtel Money, Tigo Pesa, 
and M-Pesa in Tanzania, as well as bKash, Ucash, Trust 
Bank Mobile Money, and Islami Bank’s mCash in Bangla-
desh, pay customers a return on their e-wallet balance. 
Box A discusses the mechanics behind these arrange-
ments in Tanzania.
A few elements distinguish these products from the digital 
savings accounts on which the report primarily focuses. 
First, they do not constitute deposits and are not eligi-
ble for deposit insurance. However, customer funds are 
generally protected by ring-fencing requirements and 
intermediation restrictions. Second, it is not clear whether these arrangements create a contractual obligation to 
share profits with customers or pay them interest. Even 
if consistent, the programs may be discretionary in cer -
tain cases, and the payout often depends on how much 
interest the financial institution generates on the e-money 
pool in a given period. Third, the e-wallets are generally 
subject to balance limits. Finally, their regulatory treatment 
is uneven across jurisdictions. Whereas Tanzania’s and 
Bangladesh’s e-money standards create a clear path for 
e-money issuers to offer a return on e-wallets, most focus 
countries’ e-money standards either prohibit such activity 
or are ambiguous on the matter. According to the WBG’s 
2017 Global FICP survey data, 13 percent of responding 
jurisdictions allow NBEIs to pay interest on e-money bal-
ances and 8 percent allow profit sharing (WBG 2017a).14
Nevertheless, where they exist, these arrangements en-  
hance consumer choice in the savings product space and 
generally serve the same functional role as digital savings 
accounts from the customer perspective. Thus, more work 
should be done to evaluate these products’ role in savings 
product markets, as well as their regulatory implications. 
28In 2014, Tigo Tanzania, an MNO, became the first 
NBEI in the world to initiate a profit-sharing arrange-
ment on its customers’ Tigo Pesa e-wallet balances. 
Since then, Tigo has made 11 quarterly payments to 
customers in the amount of T Sh 58.1 billion (about 
$26.6 million) (Tigo Tanzania 2017).a Other Tanzanian 
MNOs have followed Tigo’s lead. As of January 
2017, Airtel completed its fifth quarterly distribution, 
returning T Sh 11.8 billion (about $5.4 million) to 
customers (National Newspaper Daily News 2017). 
Vodacom also offers a similar service for M-Pesa cus-
tomers called M-Pesa Faida.b Tigo and Airtel calcu-
late a customer’s return based on their daily e-wallet 
balance, while Vodacom ties return to customer 
“throughput,” a combination of the wallet balance 
and other activity, such as transfers and payments 
(Tigo Tanzania 2017; National Newspaper Daily 
News 2017). The rate of customer return can fluctu-
ate based on the earnings of the trust balance. 
Profit sharing derives from the interest each provider 
earns on the balance of e-money it is required to BOX A
E-Money Profit-Sharing Arrangements in Tanzania
hold in segregated trust accounts at commercial 
banks. Tanzania’s 2015 E-Money Regulation requires 
that the “interest accrued in the trust account shall 
be used for the direct benefit of the electronic 
money holders” (BOT 2015a). Prior to the E-Money 
Regulation, a 2014 Bank of Tanzania circular stipu-
lated the same requirement (Di Castri and Gidvani 
2014). As of June 2016, the cumulative balance in 
e-money trust accounts stood at T Sh 605 billion 
(about $277 million). 
Although providers are required to utilize earned 
interest for the benefit of customers, there is evi-
dence the arrangements are highly beneficial for the 
providers themselves. Tigo, the first mover in the 
customer returns area, experienced significant net 
cash inflow into Tigo Pesa accounts upon offering 
the program. Furthermore, the customer returns 
programs are likely to enhance loyalty, increase 
mobile transactions, and facilitate agent liquidity 
management (GSMA 2015a).
a.  Note: Conversions in box A utilize the year-end 2016 exchange rate of $1 = T Sh 2,186.21 (Bank of Tanzania).
b.  Vodacom, “M-Pesa Faida: What is M-Pesa Usage Benefit?,” https://vodacom.co.tz/mpesa/consumers/m-pesa-faida, accessed  
June 10, 2017Balance on Tanzanian Trust Fund Accounts (billions of T Sh)
Source: Bank of Tanzania; Note: May 2015 value imputed due to anomalous valueJan-13 Apr-13 Jul-13 Oct-13 Jan-14 Apr-14 Jul-14 Oct-14 Jan-15 Apr-15J un-15 Oct-15 Jan-16 Apr-160100200300400500600700Annex A  29DIGITALLY-ENABLED, MARKET-BASED  
WEALTH-BUILDING PRODUCTSANNEX B
In select markets, digitally-enabled, market-based wealth-  
building products have emerged, which, from the DFI per -
spective, represent a step beyond digital savings accounts. 
While some market-based products may technically 
constitute investment rather than savings products, they 
are important to highlight in concert with digital savings 
accounts, as they represent a further step in savings-re-lated DFI for those individuals seeking to diversify their 
portfolios. These products are often accessible via digital 
transactional platforms. For instance, Kenyans can access 
certain digitally enabled, market-based, wealth-building 
products through mobile-money platforms. Box B profiles 
two of these products, the Mbao pension scheme and the 
M-Akiba government bond. 
30Blue MSME Jua Kali Retirement Benefit Scheme 
(Mbao Pension Plan). Mbao is a digitally furnished 
pension scheme available to all Kenyans over the 
age of 18 who are M-Pesa or Airtel Money custom-
ers. The service, which is registered and regulated 
by Kenya’s Retirement Benefits Authority (RBA), orig-
inally began as a retirement product for the informal 
sector in 2009.a However, it has been expanded to 
all Kenyans due to high demand. Customers transfer 
funds to the retirement account via M-Pesa or Airtel 
Money, which charge a small transaction fee.b The 
plan requires members to deposit at least K Sh 20 
(about $0.20) per day, K Sh 500 (about $4.90) per 
month, and K Sh 6,000 (about $58.50) per year.c 
Mbao maintains age-dependent distribution restric-
tions of 3, 10, 15, or 30 years. Savings withdrawals 
are tax-exempt in retirement, unless they eclipse K 
Sh 20,000 (about $195) per month, and all savings BOX B
Digitally-Enabled, Market-Based, Wealth-Building Products in Kenya
withdrawals are tax-exempt for individuals over the 
age of 65.d 
Mbao is the largest “Individual Retirement Benefits 
Scheme” in Kenya by total members, representing 46 
percent of industry membership (RBA 2015). As of 
year-end 2015, Mbao had 75,415 total members, up 
from 39,013 in 2013. However, its share of total indi-
vidual pension assets is not commensurately large. In 
2013, the RBA estimated Mbao’s share of industry 
assets to be less than 0.5 percent (RBA 2013).
M-Akiba Government Bond. The Kenya National 
Treasury launched M-Akiba, a product it describes as 
the “world’s first mobile-based government bond,” 
through a pilot offering in March 2017 and subse-
quently through a larger issuance in June 2017 
(National Treasury 2017). Kenyans can purchase an 
M-Akiba bond for as little as K Sh 3,000 (about $29). 
Mbao Pension Plan Entities and Roles
ENTITY ROLE
Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB) Custodian, trustee, legal account owner
CO-OPTRUST Investment Services Ltd. 
(subsidiary of Co-operative Bank of Kenya)Fund manager
Eagle Africa Insurance Brokers Ltd. Scheme administrator
Safaricom M-Pesa, Airtel Money Transfer platforms
Source: Eagle Africa Insurance Brokers Ltd., Products: Individual Pension PlanAnnex B  31
Previous government bonds required a minimum 
investment of K Sh 50,000 (about $488). The bond 
has a three-year maturity and carries 10 percent 
interest, which is tax free and paid semiannually. 
Customers use their M-Pesa or Airtel Money 
accounts to purchase an M-Akiba bond. The bonds 
can also be sold on the secondary market via M-Pesa 
and Airtel Money on the Nairobi Securities Exchange. BOX B, continued
The government is aiming to raise K Sh 5 billion 
(about $49 million) through M-Akiba, the proceeds 
of which will be used to fund infrastructure projects.e 
Upon release, the National Treasury suggested that 
M-Akiba “is about financial inclusion” and “encour -
aging a strong savings and investment culture” 
(National Treasury 2017).
a.  RBA, “Mbao Pension Plan,” http://www.rba.go.ke/index.php/en/mbao-pension-scheme, accessed March 22, 2017.
b.  RBA, “Mbao Pension Plan FAQs,” http://www.rba.go.ke/index.php/en/component/content/article?id=56, accessed April 20, 2017. 
c.  RBA, “Mbao Pension Plan FAQs”; Note: Box A conversions utilize the year-end 2016 exchange rate of $1 = K Sh 102.49 (Central 
Bank of Kenya).
d.  RBA, “Mbao Pension Plan.”
e.  The National Treasury, “M-Akiba Retail Bond: Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs),” http://treasury.go.ke/makiba/FREQUENTLY%20
ASKED%20QUESTIONS%20-%20M-AKIBA.pdf, accessed June 10, 2017. Mbao Pension Plan Membership
Source: RBA, Retirement Benefits Industry Reports (2013-2015);  
RBA Annual Report (2012–2013)2012
Total members (LS)
Share of total individual plan membershi p (%, RS)010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,00070,00080,000
2013 2014 20154041424344454647484950SAVING-ORIENTED DIGITAL TRANSACTION  
ACCOUNTS
Various DFS providers in the focus countries have devel-
oped non-interest-bearing digital transaction accounts 
that work to incentivize saving through careful user-cen-
tric customization. Although these accounts do not offer 
a financial return, their features are specifically tailored to 
facilitate saving. Examples include digital group savings accounts and labelled accounts geared toward a specific 
purpose, such as healthcare or education. A successful 
labeled account example is the M-Tiba mobile health wal-
let.15 Box C further examines two examples of remarkable 
customization efforts in Uganda.  
32
ANNEX C
NOTE
15.  M-Tiba, http://m-tiba.co.ke/, accessed August 4, 2017. Ugandan DFS providers have put tremendous effort 
into customizing their basic, non-interest-bearing 
e-wallet products to accommodate local saving 
needs. Airtel Weza and SmartMoney demonstrate 
the potential to unlock savings in remote areas, if 
products are tailored to particular saving customs. 
Airtel Weza. Airtel Weza is an Airtel Money-enabled 
group savings account available to Ugandan Village 
Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs). Airtel, 
Grameen Foundation, and Plan Uganda developed 
and launched Weza in 2014.a Grameen drove the 
product design process via a human-centered 
approach, which identified security, convenience, 
transparency, and access to credit as key features of 
any VSLA digital savings product (GSMA 2015). Airtel 
Weza offers a group wallet, ministatements, and the 
ability to link the wallet to formal bank accounts. 
Importantly, Weza is customized to mimic the VSLA 
administration process, including a three-PIN authori-
zation system akin to the lock-box system in many 
VSLAs (Grameen Foundation 2014). Weza provides 
added transparency to the VSLA administration pro-BOX C
Saving-oriented digital transaction accounts in Uganda
cess, as it sends out group SMSs detailing transactions. 
Users visit Airtel agents to deposit and withdraw funds. 
SmartMoney. Founded in 2010 and headquartered 
in Kampala, Uganda, SmartMoney, a financial-tech-
nology company, offers a digital savings account to 
rural African farmers through its proprietary cloud-
based platform, which is operable across all mobile 
networks.b Users need only a basic mobile device to 
access the service. The SmartMoney mobile account 
is designed to facilitate saving and small-value pay-
ments.c SmartMoney places a heavy emphasis on 
education and community involvement. It has a 
strong on-the-ground presence, helping communi-
ties to build ecosystems that facilitate DFS, called 
“E-Villages.”d SmartMoney accounts are free for 
individual users, while businesses and institutional 
customers, such as agriculture companies, schools, 
and churches, pay fees for certain transactions. 
SmartMoney currently has more than 200,000 indi-
vidual customers, 2,500 merchant partners, and 150 
institutional partners.e Its primary geographic focus 
is rural Uganda. It also operates in Tanzania. 
a   Grameen Foundation, “Introducing Airtel Weza in Uganda,” http://www.grameenfoundation.org/introducing-airtel-weza-uganda. 
b   SmartMoney, “Communications Technology,” http://www.smartmoneyinternational.com/communications-technology/, accessed 
April 10, 2017. 
c   SmartMoney, “Mobile Savings and Payments,” http://www.smartmoneyinternational.com/mobile-savings-and-payments/, accessed 
April 10, 2017.
d   SmartMoney, “E-Money Ecosystems,” http://www.smartmoneyinternational.com/e-money-ecosystems/, accessed April 10, 2017. 
e   SmartMoney, “Media and Press,” http://www.smartmoneyinternational.com/mediaandpress/, accessed April 10, 2017. 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 023371318
145962
48
6935272149
70
12256 Côte d’Ivoir e
Kenya
Niger
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Saving Saving at a financial institution  Saving with a savings gr oup
01 02 03 04 05 06 012
5228
10
5
20
1711
34 
24 8
14
14812
Saving Bangladesh
Cambodia
India
Nepal
Philippines
Vietnam
Saving at a financial institution  Saving with a savings gr oup46
59
57SAVINGS PATTERNS ACROSS FOCUS COUNTRIES
ANNEX D
FIGURE D.1: Saving Patterns among SSA Focus Countries (2017)
FIGURE D.2 Saving Patterns among Asia Focus Countries (2017)
  33Annex E details key data points from the WBG’s 2017 
Global Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection (FICP) 
survey that are referenced throughout the report. As in the 
body of the report, Annex E only incorporates Global FICP 
results that have relevance for digital savings, but it is not 
intended to capture all factors from the Global FICP survey 
that could potentially affect digital savings development 
and uptake. The annex organizes data categories by the 
policy considerations (see: Part 4) to which they are most 
applicable. For each data element below, the annex cap-
tures survey results for all countries and the following sub-
groups: lower-middle income (LMI), low income, East Asia 
& Pacific (EAP), South Asia (SA), and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). The sub-groups reflect the focus regions and income 
classes on which the report’s findings are based. Where 
relevant, the annex details survey results from the follow-
ing institutional classes: commercial banks (CBs), other 
banks, other deposit-taking institutions (ODTIs), and non-
bank e-money issuers (NBEIs). These institutional classes 
are most relevant for digital savings development and 
play a role in many of the product deployments detailed 
in the report. For definitions of these institutional classes, 
see the report’s “Glossary of Key Terms.” One-hundred, 
twenty-four jurisdictions participated in the survey. Where 
relevant, the tables below list the number of respondents 
per category. DIGITAL SAVINGS-RELEVANT INDICATORS FROM GLOBAL  
FICP SURVEY
ANNEX E
34POLICY CONSIDERATIONS 1.1 AND 1.3
POLICY CONSIDERATIONS 2.1 AND 3.1All LMI Low income EAP SA SSA
Tax incentive savings schemes 24% 18% 9% 45% 14% 13%
Deposit-taking institutions required to offer basic financial 
products, such as a basic account54% 53% 55% 64% 57% 61%
Encouraging (or mandating) recipients of government 
transfers to open an account to receive their funds67% 76% 55% 100% 71% 65%
Number of responding jurisdictions 124 34 11 11 7 23
CBs Other banks ODTIs NBEIsNo. of responding 
jurisdictions
All 100% 57% 56% 59% 124
LMI 100% 68% 71% 59% 34
Low income 100% 45% 73% 64% 11
EAP 100% 82% 82% 82% 11
SA 100% 71% 71% 43% 7
SSA 100% 70% 78% 70% 23TABLE E.1: Select policy approaches that encourage digital savings
TABLE E.2: Institutions for which legal/regulatory framework is in placeAnnex E  35
POLICY CONSIDERATIONS 1.1 AND 1.3
CBs OTHER BANKS ODTIs NBEIs
Issue e-money All 82% 54% 38% 100%
LMI 81% 55% 42% 100%
Low income 90% 60% 17% 100%
EAP 70% 56% 0% 100%
SA 50% 25% 25% 100%
SSA 95% 57% 56% 100%
Contract with retail 
agents as third-party 
delivery channelsAll 81% 70% 61% 91%
LMI 82% 65% 55% 89%
Low income 80% 60% 63% 83%
EAP 91% 67% 50% 100%
SA 86% 50% 50% 67%
SSA 95% 71% 61% 92%
Act as an agent of a 
financial services 
providerAll 78% 64% 73% 74%
LMI 82% 60% 75% 78%
Low income 67% 60% 75% 43%
EAP 90% 78% 67% 86%
SA 50% 50% 75% 33%
SSA 89% 71% 67% 67%
Number of responding jurisdictions 123 67 60 72
CBs OTHER BANKS ODTIs NBEIs
Identify and/or verify the 
identity of a customerAll 65% 60% 72% 76%
LMI 59% 62% 60% 76%
Low income 25% 67% 80% 80%
EAP 60% 33% 0% 67%
SA 33% 50% 50% 0%
SSA 60% 67% 80% 82%
Receive and submit to 
the institution a deposit 
account applicationAll 74% 79% 88% 55%
LMI 79% 77% 80% 50%
Low income 50% 100% 100% 75%
EAP 70% 50% 100% 20%
SA 83% 100% 100% 0%
SSA 65% 67% 90% 75%
Open a customer 
account following the 
institution’s policiesAll 42% 45% 52% 54%
LMI 46% 38% 30% 73%
Low income 25% 33% 60% 75%
EAP 30% 17% 0% 38%
SA 17% 50% 50% 50%
SSA 40% 33% 40% 90%TABLE E.3: Select permitted activities among institutional categories 
TABLE E.4: Select permitted activities of retail agents, by institutional category
continued36  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
CBs OTHER BANKS ODTIs NBEIs
Open a basic account All 49% 56% 61% 51%
LMI 57% 54% 60% 69%
Low income 50% 100% 80% 75%
EAP 33% 17% 0% 33%
SA 33% 50% 100% 50%
SSA 50% 56% 60% 88%
Receive deposits All 65% 74% 85% 61%
LMI 74% 69% 90% 46%
Low income 75% 100% 80% 67%
EAP 70% 67% 100% 50%
SA 67% 100% 100% 0%
SSA 75% 67% 80% 70%
Number of responding jurisdictions 93 43 32 58TABLE E.4, continued  
TABLE E.5: Requirement to store customers’ e-money funds in a segregated account at one or more 
prudentially regulated financial institutionsPOLICY CONSIDERATION 5.1
100 PERCENT OF 
CUSTOMER FUNDSA FRACTION OF 
CUSTOMER FUNDS NO REQUIREMENTNO. OF RESPONDING 
JURISDICTIONS
All 86% 6% 7% 71
LMI 95% 5% 0% 19
Low income 100% 0% 0% 7
EAP 89% 0% 11% 9
SA 100% 0% 0% 3
SSA 93% 0% 0% 15Annex E  37
POLICY CONSIDERATIONS 5.2
CBs OTHER BANKS ODTIs NBEIs
Minimum balance 
requirementsAll 67% 67% 63% 42%
LMI 66% 58% 55% 50%
Low income 50% 60% 57% 33%
EAP 60% 57% 67% 50%
SA 67% 50% 50% 0%
SSA 68% 62% 67% 38%
Account opening fee All 74% 65% 65% 42%
LMI 67% 56% 53% 14%
Low income 63% 80% 71% 33%
EAP 60% 57% 33% 0%
SA 67% 50% 50% 100%
SSA 73% 69% 75% 14%
Account maintenance fee All 75% 62% 63% 50%
LMI 68% 56% 58% 29%
Low income 63% 80% 57% 33%
EAP 80% 71% 67% 50%
SA 67% 40% 50% 100%
SSA 77% 69% 67% 14%
Account closure fee All 74% 65% 59% 44%
LMI 66% 58% 47% 14%
Low income 63% 80% 57% 33%
EAP 70% 57% 50% 0%
SA 67% 50% 50% 100%
SSA 73% 69% 63% 14%
Deposit insurance 
coverage availabilityAll 65% 58% 53% 29%
LMI 60% 47% 41% 13%
Low income 38% 60% 43% 33%
EAP 50% 57% 33% 0%
SA 60% 50% 67% 0%
SSA 45% 46% 50% 25%
Number of responding jurisdictions 110 53 51 26TABLE E.6: Disclosure requirements for deposit products at shopping or pre-contractual stage38  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
TABLE E.7: Dpecific rules exist which indicate that financial service providers are liable for any actions 
or omissions of the agent 
CBs OTHER BANKS ODTIs NBEIs
All 90% 92% 80% 91%
LMI 89% 92% 78% 93%
Low income 86% 100% 60% 100%
EAP 70% 80% 50% 86%
SA 100% 100% 100% 100%
SSA 89% 86% 78% 92%
No. of responding 
jurisdictions87 36 30 58  39GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Agent banking (also, branchless banking) Third-party “business arrangements of banks and 
non-bank payment service providers that are typically local entities, such as small shops, to 
provide basic payment and transaction account-related services on their behalf” (CPMI and  
WBG 2016, 69).
Commercial Bank “A commercial bank is an institution licensed for taking deposits from the 
general public that is subject to supervision in the meaning of the Basel Core Principles for 
Effective Banking Supervision (BCBS 2012)” (WBG, 2017a, 12).
Digital financial inclusion (DFI) “The use of digital financial services to advance financial 
inclusion. It involves the deployment of digital means to reach financially excluded and  
underserved populations with a range of formal financial services suited to their needs,  
delivered responsibly at a cost affordable to customers and sustainable for providers”  
(GPFI 2016b, 46).
Digital financial services (DFS) “Financial products and services, including payments, transfers, 
savings, credit, insurance, securities, financial planning and account statements that are delivered 
via digital/electronic technology such as e-money (initiated either online or on a mobile phone), 
payment cards and a regular bank account” (GPFI 2016a, 3).
E-money “Monetary value represented by a claim on the issuers which is stored on an electronic 
device such as a chip card or a hard drive in personal computers or servers or other devices such 
as mobile phones and issued upon receipt of funds in an amount not less in value than the 
monetary value received and accepted as a means of payment by undertakings other than the 
issuer” (Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems 2012, 5).  
E-money account “Prepaid instrument based on e-money that can be offered by banks and other 
authorized deposit-taking financial institutions, as well as by non-deposit-taking payment service 
providers such as mobile network operators. Such accounts include prepaid accounts” (CPMI and 
WBG 2016, 69).
E-money issuer An entity that issues e-money. Typically, the entity must be specifically licensed to 
issue e-money by the relevant financial services regulator. 
Interoperability “The ability for different systems to connect with one another” (Arabéhéty et al. 
2016, 1).
Mobile banking Banking transactions and services carried out through a mobile phone. 
40  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
Mobile financial services “Use of a mobile phone to access financial services and execute 
financial transactions” (GSMA 2015a, 72).
Mobile money account/wallet “An e-money account primarily accessed using a mobile phone” 
(GSMA 2015a, 73).
Mobile network operator (MNO) “A company that has a government-issued license to provide 
telecommunications services through mobile devices” (GSMA 2015a, 73).
Nonbank e-money issuer (NBEI) “An issuer of e-money that is not a bank.” (WBG 2017a)
Other Bank “A bank other than a commercial bank” (e.g., regional rural banks, agriculture banks, 
postal banks) (WBG 2017a, 12).
Other Deposit Taking Institutions (ODTIs) An institution authorized to collect deposits or 
savings that does not fit the definition of bank or Financial Cooperative” (e.g., deposit-taking 
microfinance corporations) (WBG 2017a, 12).
Over-the-counter service Services in which “a mobile money agent performs the transactions on 
behalf of the customer, who does not need to have a mobile money account to use the service” 
(GSMA 2015a, 74).
Payment system provider “An entity that provides payment services, including remittances. 
Payment service providers include banks and other deposit-taking institutions, as well as special-
ised entities such as money transfer operators and e-money issuers” (CPMI and WBG 2016, 69).
Point of sale (POS)  “A retail location where payments are made for goods or services. A ‘POS 
device’ denotes a specialised device which is used to accept the payment, e.g. a card reader” 
(GSMA 2015a, 74).
Proportionality “The balancing of risks and benefits against costs of regulation and supervision 
to the regulator, supervisor, and to the regulated and supervised institutions” (GPFI 2016b, 8). 
“Proportionate regulation and supervision involves a supervisory approach commensurate with 
the systemic importance and risk profile of supervised institutions” (BCBS 2015, 5).
Risk-based approach A principle established by the Financial Action Task Force for compliance 
with anti-money laundering standards and requirements for combating the financing of terrorism. 
Generally, the principle prescribes that enhanced measures should be directed toward areas of 
higher money-laundering and terrorist-financing risk, while simplified or calibrated measures 
should be taken where risks are lower (FAFT 2007). 
Transaction account “Broadly defined as an account held with a bank or other authorised and/or 
regulated service provider (including a nonbank) which can be used to make and receive pay-
ments. Transaction accounts can be further differentiated into deposit transaction accounts and 
e-money accounts” (CPMI and WBG 2016, 70).
Trust/escrow account “Account by held by nonbank payment service provider issuing e-money 
with a deposit-taking institution to deposit the outstanding e-money float” (CPMI and WBG 
2016, 70).  41REFERENCES
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2017. Accelerating Financial Inclusion in South-East Asia with 
Digital Finance. ADB, Manila.
AFI (Alliance for Financial Inclusion). 2013. Putting Financial Inclusion on the Global Map: The 2013 
Maya Declaration Progress Report. AFI, Malaysia.
———. 2014. Measurable Goals with Optimal Impact: 2014 Maya Declaration Progress Report. AFI, 
Malaysia.
———. 2015. 2015 Maya Declaration Progress Report: Commitments into Action. AFI, Malaysia.
———. 2016a. Celebrating Five Years of Advancing Global Financial Inclusion. AFI, Malaysia.
———. 2016b. Digital Financial Services Basic Terminology. Guideline Note No. 19. AFI, Malaysia.
Airtel. 2017. “Union Finance Minister Shri Arun Jaitley Launches Airtel Payments Bank.” Media 
Centre, January 12, 2017. http://www.airtel.in/about-bharti/media-centre/bharti-airtel-news/
corporate/union+finance+minister+shri+arun+jaitley+launches+airtel+payments+bank.
AMK. 2015. Annual Report 2015. Accessed May 12, 2017. http://www.amkcambodia.com/file-
upload/jo16-0017-amk-2015ar-engfinal-small-146544672267260.pdf. 
Amret. 2015. Annual Report 2015. Accessed February 15, 2017. https://www.amret.com.kh/amret/
index.php/en/report-and-poblication/annaul-report. 
Arabéhéty, Pablo García, Greg Chen, William Cook, and Claudia McKay. 2016. “Digital Finance 
Interoperability and Financial Inclusion: A 20 Country Scan,” Working Paper, Consultative Group 
to Assist the Poor (CGAP), Washington, DC.
Bankable Frontier Associates. 2016. Payment APIs: What, Why, and for Whom? http://fsdkenya.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/04/16-04-15-Open-APIs-Stuey-Final-Draft.pdf.  
BanKO. 2015. “BPI Globe BanKO: Driving Innovations in Inclusive Finance.” http://www.banko.com.
ph/bpi-globe-banko-driving-innovations-in-inclusive-finance/.
Barclays, CARE, Plan. 2016. “The State of Linkage Report.” Accessed August 2, 2017. http://www.
seepnetwork.org/filebin/savings_led_working_group/The-State-of-Linkage-Report-2016.pdf.
BB (Bangladesh Bank). 2011. Guidelines on Mobile Financial Services (MFS) for the Banks. Accessed 
February 17, 2017. https://www.bb.org.bd/openpdf.php.
———. 2013. Guidelines on Agent Banking for the Banks. Accessed February 17, 2017. https://
www.bb.org.bd/openpdf.php. 
———. 2014a. Guidelines for Customer Services and Complaint Management. Accessed May 13, 
2017. https://www.bb.org.bd/aboutus/regulationguideline/ficsd/cipc_eng.pdf.
———. 2014b. Prudential Regulations for Banks: Selected Issues. Accessed May 13, 2017. https://
www.bb.org.bd/aboutus/regulationguideline/guidelist.php.
42  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
———. 2014c. Bangladesh Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations-2014. Accessed May 13, 
2017. https://www.bb.org.bd/aboutus/regulationguideline/bpss.pdf.
———. 2015a. Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk Management Guidelines. Accessed 
May 13, 2017. https://www.bb.org.bd/aboutus/regulationguideline/aml/aml_cft2015.pdf.
———. 2015b. National Payment System Act. Draft Version. Accessed May 13, 2017. https://www.
bb.org.bd/aboutus/regulationguideline/draftguide.php 
BCBS (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision). 2015. “Range of Practice in the Regulation and 
Supervision of Institutions Relevant to Financial Inclusion.” Bank for International Settlements, 
January 2015. Accessed July 5, 2017. http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d310.pdf.
BCEAO (Banque Centrale des Etats de l’Afrique de l’Ouest). 1990a. Loi Portant Réglementation 
Bancaire. Accessed May 12, 2017. http://www.bceao.int/IMG/pdf/loi.pdf.
———. 1990b. Convention Portant Création de la Commission Bancaire de l’Union 
Monétaire Ouest Africaine. Accessed May 12, 2017. http://www.bceao.int/IMG/pdf/
ConventionCommissionBancaireUMOA2010.pdf.
———. 2000. Dispositif Prudentiel Applicable aux Banques et aux Establissements Financiers de 
L’Union Monetaire Ouest Africaine (UMOA). Accessed May 12, 2017. http://www.bceao.int/IMG/
pdf/dispositif_prudentiel_revu_vf-pdf.pdf.
———. 2011. Textes D’Application de la Loi Portant Reglementation Bancaire. Accessed February 
22, 2017. http://www.bceao.int/IMG/pdf/textes-application-de-la-loi-portant-reglementation_
bancaire.pdf.
———. 2015. Instruction n°008-05-2015 régissant les conditions et modalités d’exercice des 
activités des émetteurs de monnaie électronique dans les Etats membres de l’Union Monétaire 
Ouest Africaine (UMOA). Accessed February 23, 2017. http://www.bceao.int/IMG/pdf/
instruction_no008-05-2015.vf.pdf. 
Bersudskaya, Vera, and Dorieka Kuijpers. 2016. “Agent Network Accelerator Survey: Uganda 
Country Report 2015.” Helix Institute of Digital Finance. Accessed April 22, 2017. http://www.
helix-institute.com/sites/default/files/Publications/070931%20ANA%20Uganda%20Country%20
Report%20-%20FSDU%20-%20Final.pdf.
Bhakta, Pratik. 2016. “Surrendering of Payments Bank Licenses Not a Worry, Says RBI Governor 
Raghuram Rajan.” Economic Times, January 8, 2016. http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/
news/economy/policy/surrendering-of-payments-bank-licences-not-a-worry-says-rbi-governor-
raghuram-rajan/articleshow/52645370.cms.
BOT (Bank of Tanzania). 2006. The Banking and Financial Institutions Act. Accessed May 11, 2017. 
http://www.bot.go.tz/BankingSupervision/BAFIA2006.pdf. 
———. 2010. Risk Management Guidelines for Banks and Financial Institutions. Accessed May 11, 
2017. http://www.bot.go.tz/adverts/PressRelease/RMGS_2010.pdf. 
———. 2013. Guidelines on Agent Banking for Banking Institutions. Accessed February 9, 2017. 
http://www.bot.go.tz/BankingSupervision/GUIDELINES%20ON%20AGENT%20BANKING%20
FOR%20BANKING%20INSTITUTIONS%202013.pdf.
———. 2015a. The Electronic Money Regulations. Accessed February 9, 2017. http://www.bot.
go.tz/PaymentSystem/GN-THE%20ELECTRONIC%20MONEY%20REGULATIONS%202015.pdf.
———. 2015b. The Payment Systems Licensing and Approval Regulations. Accessed February 
9, 2017. http://www.bot.go.tz/PaymentSystem/GN-THE%20PAYMENT%20SYSTEMS%20
LICENSING%20AND%20APPROVAL%20REGULATIONS%202015.pdf. 
BOU (Bank of Uganda). 2004. The Financial Institutions Act. Accessed May 11, 2017. https://www.
bou.or.ug/bou/bou-downloads/acts/supervision_acts_regulations/FI_Act/FIAct2004.pdf.
———. 2011. Financial Consumer Protection Guidelines. Accessed April 22, 2017. https://www.
bou.or.ug/bou/bou-downloads/Financial_Literacy/Guidelines/2011/Jun/Consumer_Protection_
Guidelines_June_2011.pdf.
———. 2013a. The Anti-Money Laundering Act. Accessed April 22, 2917. https://www.bou.or.ug/
bou/bou-downloads/acts/supervision_acts_regulations/FI_Act/The-Anti-money-Laundering-
Act-2013.pdf.
———. 2013b. Mobile Money Guidelines. Accessed February 23, 2017. http://ucc.co.ug/files/
downloads/Mobile-Money-Guidelines-2013.pdf. References  43
———. 2013c. Strategy for Financial Literacy in Uganda. Accessed April 22, 2017. https://www.
bou.or.ug/opencms/bou/bou-downloads/Financial_Inclusion/Strategy-for-Financial-Literacy-in-
Uganda_August-2013.pdf. 
———. 2016. The Financial Institutions (Amendment) Act. Accessed February 22, 2017. https://
www.bou.or.ug/bou/bou-downloads/acts/supervision_acts_regulations/FI_Act/Fin-Amendment-
Act-2016.pdf.
BOZ (Bank of Zambia). 2008. Risk Management Guidelines for Financial Services Providers 
Regulated by Bank of Zambia. Accessed May 12, 2017. http://www.boz.zm/53_
RiskManagementGuidelinesSept2008.pdf.
———. 2015. Interest on the “Trust Account” for Electronic Money Issuers. Accessed April 25, 2017. 
http://www.boz.zm/Circular2015-01CircularonEarningInterestonTrustAccount.pdf. 
———. 2016. Revision of Transaction and Balance Limits for Money Transfer Businesses and 
Electronic Money Issuers. Accessed April 25, 2017. http://www.boz.zm/Circular2016-01RevisedTr
ansactionlimitsforelectronicmoneyissuersandmoneytransferbusinessesPSBCircular1of2016.pdf.
BSP (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas). 2009. Circular No. 649: Guidelines Governing the Issuance 
of Electronic Money (E-Money) and the Operations of Electronic Money Issuers (EMI) in the 
Philippines. Accessed February 27, 2017. http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/Regulations/
attachments/2009/c649.pdf. 
———. 2010a. Circular No. 694: Establishment of Other Banking Offices and Notes to 
Microfinance. accessed February 27, 2017. http://www.bu.edu/bucflp/files/2012/01/Circular-
No.-694-amendment-of-regulations-on-the-establishment-of-other-banking-offices-and-notes-to-
microfinance.pdf. 
———. 2010b. Circular No. 704: Guidelines on Outsourcing of Services by Electronic Money Issuers 
(EMIs) to Electronic Money Network Service Providers (EMNSP). Accessed February 27, 2017. 
http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/regulations/attachments/2010/c704.pdf. 
———. 2015. National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion. BSP , Philippines.
———. 2016a. Circular No. 899: Amendments to the Guidelines on Outsourcing. Accessed 
February 27, 2017. http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/regulations/attachments/2016/c899.pdf. 
———. 2016b. Circular No. 901: Activities and Services Allowable for Micro-Banking Offices. 
Accessed February 27, 2017. http://www.bsp.gov.ph/regulations/regulations.asp?id=3566.
———. 2016c. Manual of Regulations for Banks (MORB). Accessed May 14, 2017. http://www.bsp.
gov.ph/regulations/reg_MORB.asp. 
———. 2017. Circular No. 950: Amendments to Part Eight of the AML Regulations of the MORB 
and MOR for NBFIs. Accessed May 14, 2017. http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/regulations/
attachments/2017/c950.pdf. 
CBA (Commercial Bank of Africa). 2016. Annual Report and Financial Statements 2015. Accessed 
March 17, 2017. http://cbagroup.com/downloads/Annual_Report_2015/.
CBK (Central Bank of Kenya). 2013a. Prudential Guidelines for Institutions Licensed under 
the Banking Act. Accessed May 22, 2017. https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-content/
uploads/2016/08/PRUDENTIAL-GUIDELINES.pdf.
———. 2013b. Risk Management Guidelines. Accessed May 12, 2017. https://www.centralbank.
go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/risk-management-guidelines-january-20131.pdf. 
———. 2014. Guidelines for Application for the Authorisation of Payment Service Providers. 
Accessed May 11, 2017. https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/
Authorisationprocedurespaymentse.pdf.
———. 2015. The Banking Act. Accessed May 11, 2017. https://www.centralbank.go.ke/wp-
content/uploads/2016/08/BankingActOct2015.pdf. 
———. 2016. Bank Supervision Annual Report 2015. Accessed April 24, 2017. https://www.
centralbank.go.ke/uploads/399346751_2015%20Annual%20Report.pdf.
CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor). 2015. “Supervision of Banks and Nonbanks 
Operating through Agents,” Working Paper. CGAP , Washington, DC.
———. 2017. “How Can AMK Strengthen Its Operations with Customer Insights?” Case Study. 
CGAP , Washington, DC.44  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
CGAP and Glenbrook. 2016. “Digital Finance and Interoperability: 20 Country Scan.” Accessed May 
13, 2017. https://www.slideshare.net/CGAP/digital-finance-and-interoperability-20-country-scan.
Cook, William and Claudia McKay (2017), Banking in the M-PESA Age: Lessons from Kenya. CGAP . 
Washington, DC, https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/banking-m-pesa-age. 
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems. 2012. Innovations in Retail Payments. May 2012. 
BIS, Basel.
CPMI (Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures) and WBG (World Bank Group). 2016. 
Payment Aspects of Financial Inclusion. Bank for International Settlements, Basel, and World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 
Di Castri, Simone, and Lara Gidvani. 2014. Enabling Mobile Money Policies in Tanzania. Groupe 
Spéciale Mobile Association (GSMA), London.
EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit). 2015. Global Microscope 2015: The Enabling Environment for 
Financial Inclusion. Sponsored by MIF/IDB, CAF, Accion, and the Metlife Foundation. EIU, New 
York. 
ET Bureau. 2017. “Airtel Rolls Out Payments Bank, to Invest Rs 3,000 Crore.” Economic Times, 
January 12, 2017. http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/airtel-
payments-bank-launches-nationwide-operations/articleshow/56502339.cms.
FAFT (Financial Action Task Force). 2007. “Guidance on the Risk-Based Approach to Combating 
Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing: High-Level Principles and Procedures.” June 2007. 
Accessed July 8, 2017. http://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/reports/High%20Level%20
Principles%20and%20Procedures.pdf.
Financial Inclusion Insights. 2016a. “Bangladesh Wave Report FII Tracker Survey.” Intermedia. 
Accessed May 13, 2017. http://finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/2015%20InterMedia%20
FII%20BANGLADESH%20Wave%20Report.pdf. 
———. 2016b. “Kenya Wave 3 Report FII Tracker Survey.” Intermedia. Accessed March 30, 2017. 
http://finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/InterMedia%20FII%20Kenya%20Findings%20Wave%20
3%2022%20April%202016.pdf.
———. 2016c. “Tanzania Wave 3 Report FII Tracker Survey.” Intermedia. Accessed March 20, 
2017. http://finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/2015%20InterMedia%20FII%20TANZANIA%20
Wave%20Report.pdf.
———. 2016d. “Uganda Wave 3 Report FII Tracker Survey.” Intermedia. Accessed March 30, 2017. 
http://finclusion.org/uploads/file/reports/InterMedia%20FII%20Wave%203%20Findings%20
Uganda.pdf.
Finscope and MAP . 2016. “Finscope Consumer Survey Highlights: Cambodia 2015.” Accessed 
February 2015, 2017. http://www.finmark.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/finscope-
cambodia-pocket-guide.pdf.
FSD (Financial Sector Development) Kenya. 2016. “The Growth of M-Shwari in Kenya—A 
Market Development Story: Going Digital and Getting to Scale with Banking Services.” Case 
Study Series: The Art of Financial Market Facilitation. http://www.fsdafrica.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/11/M-Shwari_Briefing-final_digital.pdf-9.pdf. 
FSD Zambia. 2016. Finscope 2015: Zambia. Financial Sector Development Programme, Zambia. 
Gatti, Gigi. 2013. “Using Mobile Banking for New Microfinance Business Models.” Accessed 
February 28, 2017. http://www.cgap.org/blog/using-mobile-banking-new-microfinance-business-
models.
Githachuri, Kimathi. 2014. “Choosing and Agent Management Model.” Helix Institute of Digital 
Finance blog. Accessed August 2, 2017. http://www.helix-institute.com/blog/choosing-agent-
management-model. 
GPFI (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion). 2014. “Digital Financial Inclusion and the 
Implications for Customers, Regulators, Supervisors and Standard-Setting Bodies.” Issues Paper. 
http://www.gpfi.org.
———. 2016a. G20 High Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion. http://www.gpfi.org.
———. 2016b. Global Standard-Setting Bodies and Financial Inclusion: The Evolving Landscape. 
http://www.gpfi.org.References  45
Grameen Foundation. 2014. “Airtel Uganda, Grameen Foundation and Plan Uganda Introduce a 
New Group Savings Product for Village Savings and Loan Associations.” Press Releases, August 
13, 2014. http://www.grameenfoundation.org/press-releases/airtel-uganda-grameen-foundation-
and-plan-uganda-introduce-new-group-savings-produc-2.
GSMA (Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association). 2015a. 2014 State of the Industry: Mobile Financial 
Services for the Unbanked. GSMA, London. 
———. 2015b. Digital Inclusion and Mobile Sector Taxation in Bangladesh. GSMA, London. 
———. 2015c. Connected Women – Case Study, Airtel Uganda: A Mobile Money Solution for 
Savings Groups. GSMA, London.
———. 2015d. 2015 Mobile Insurance, Savings and Credit Report. GSMA, London. 
———. 2016a. Safeguarding Mobile Money: How Providers and Regulators Can Ensure Customer 
Funds Are Protected. GSMA, London.
———. 2016b. The Mobile Economy 2016. GSMA, London.
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2013. “IFC Mobile Money Scoping Country Report: Nepal.” 
Accessed March 12, 2017. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/944361468280181552/
pdf/950170WP0Box380coping0Reports0Nepal.pdf.
———. 2015. Promoting Financial Consumer Protection in Cambodia. IFC, Cambodia.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2016. “West African Economic and Monetary Union: Common 
Policies of Member Countries.” IMF West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) 
Country Report No. 16/96, March 2016.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2016. Review of National Identity Programs, ITU – DFS 
Focus Group Technical Report. ITU, Geneva. 
———. 2017. Competition Aspects of Digital Financial Services. ITU – DFS Focus Group Technical 
Report. ITU, Geneva.
Izaguirre, Juan Carlos, Timothy Lyman, Claire McGuire, and Dave Grace. 2016. “Deposit Insurance 
and Digital Financial Inclusion.” Brief. CGAP , Washington, DC.
Joseph, Nikhil, and Benjamin D. Mazzota. 2014. “Frugal Finance: How Eko Helps India’s Migrants 
Move and Manage Money.” IBGC Working Paper 14-01, Institute for Business in the Global 
Context, Fletcher School, Tufts University, Medford, Mass. 
KCB Group. 2016. “KCB Investor Presentation, Full Year 2015, Group Financial Results.” March 2, 
2016. Accessed March 18, 2017. https://ke.kcbbankgroup.com/media/financial_reports/KCB_
Group_FY15_Investor_Presentation.pdf. 
KDIC (Kenya Deposit Insurance Corporation). “What’s Covered?” Accessed April 14, 2017. https://
www.depositinsurance.go.ke/index.php/insured-deposits.
Kenya Gazette. 2014. “The National Payment System Regulations, 2014.” August 1, 2014. Accessed 
March 15, 2017. http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/
NPSRegulationsLegalNoticeNo-2-109.pdf.
Khan, Maha. 2014. “Bangladesh Pioneering Unique Models and Innovations for Agent Networks.” 
Helix Institute of Digital Finance. Accessed February 17, 2017. http://www.helix-institute.com/
blog/bangladesh-pioneering-unique-models-innovations-agent-networks.
Macmillan, R., A. Paelo, and T. Paremoer. 2016. “The ‘Evolution’ of Regulation in Uganda’s Mobile 
Money Sector.” The African Journal of Information and Communication, 17. 
Manyika, James, Susan Lund, Marc Singer, Olivia White, and Chris Berry. 2016. Digital Finance for 
All: Powering Inclusive Growth in Emerging Economies. McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey and 
Company, New York.
Mas, Ignacio, and Mike McCaffrey. 2015. “Designing Successful Distribution Strategies for Digital 
Money.” Helix Institute of Digital Finance. Accessed August 2, 2017. http://www.helix-institute.
com/sites/default/files/Publications/Helix_Designing%20Successful%20Distribution%20
Strategies%20for%20Digital%20Money_0.pdf.
Mazer, Rafe. 2016. “Interactive SMS Drives Digital Savings and Borrowing in Tanzania.” CGAP blog. 
Accessed February 10, 2017. http://www.cgap.org/blog/interactive-sms-drives-digital-savings-
and-borrowing-tanzania.46  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
Mazer, Rafe, and Philip Rowan. 2016. “Competition in Mobile Financial Services: Lessons from 
Kenya and Tanzania.” Working Paper, CGAP , Washington, DC.
McCaffrey, Mike, Leena Anthony, Annabel Lee, Kimathi Githachuri, and Graham A. N. Wright. 2014. 
“Agent Network Accelerator Survey: Tanzania Country Report 2013.” Helix Institute of Digital 
Finance. Accessed April 12, 2017. http://www.helix-institute.com/sites/default/files/Publications/
Agent%20Network%20Accelerator_Tanzania%20Country%20Report%202013_0.pdf.
Mehrotra, Aakash, and Denny George. 2015. “Agent Network Accelerator Survey: India Country 
Report 2015.” Helix Institute of Digital Finance. Accessed May 1, 2017. http://www.helix-
institute.com/sites/default/files/Publications/Agent%20Network%20Accelerator%20Survey%20
-%20India%20Country%20Report%202015_0.pdf. 
Ministry of Finance, India. 2014. Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY): A National Mission on 
Financial Inclusion. Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, Government of India. 
http://www.financialservices.gov.in, https://pmjdy.gov.in. 
MoFP (Ministry of Finance and Planning of Tanzania). 2015. Anti-Money Laundering and Proceeds 
of Crime Regulations 2015. Financial Intelligence Unit, MoFP . Accessed April 20, 2017. https://
www.fiu.go.tz/TheAntiMoneyLaunderingAndProceedsOfCrimeACTNO.10Of2009Regulation.pdf.
Mondato. 2016. Digital Payment Systems, Mobile Money Services and Agent Banking: Bangladesh, 
Nepal and Sri Lanka. ADB Consultant’s Report, Project Number TA-8725.
MTN Group. 2017. “Financial Results for the Year Ended 31 December 2016.” Accessed April 22, 
2017. https://www.mtn.com/MTN%20Service%20Detail%20Annual%20Reports1/booklet.pdf.
Mumo, Muthoki. 2016. “CBA to Launch M-Shwari Loan Service in Ivory Coast Next Year.” Business 
Daily Africa, November 28, 2016. http://www.businessdailyafrica.com/corporate/CBA-to-launch-
M-Shwari-loan-service/539550-3468220-12ib9ql/index.html.
Muthiora, Brian. 2015. Enabling Mobile Money Policies in Kenya: Fostering a Digital Financial 
Revolution. GSMA, London.
Nandhi, Mani. 2012a. “Impact of EKO’s SimliBank on the Savings Behaviour and Practices of Low 
Income Customers: The Indian Experience.” Centre for Microfinance, IFMR Research, October 
2012.
———. 2012b. “Mobile Money as a Complementary Form of Savings: A Study of EKO’s SimpliBank 
in India.” Institute for Monetary and Financial Inclusion, Working Paper 2012-7. http://www.imtfi.
uci.edu/files/blog_working_papers/2012-7_nandhi_flyer_2.pdf.
National Consumer Disputes Regdressal Commission. 1986. “The Consumer Protection Act, 1986.” 
Accessed May 1, 2017. http://ncdrc.nic.in/bare_acts/Consumer%20Protection%20Act-1986.html.
National Council for Law Reporting. 2011. National Payment System Act. Central Bank of Kenya, 
Nairobi. 
National Newspaper Daily News. 2017. “Airtel Distributes 3.5bn/- Profit to Customers, Agents.” 
January 19, 2017. http://www.dailynews.co.tz/index.php/business/48017-airtel-distributes-3-5bn-
profit-to-customers-agents.
National Treasury. 2017. “Launch of M-Akiba at The National Treasury-CS Speech.” Republic of 
Kenya. http://www.treasury.go.ke/.
NBC (National Bank of Cambodia). 2010. Prakas on Third-Party Processors (Regulations on Third-
Party Processors). No. B9.010.151 P .K. NBC, Phnom Penh.
———. 2011. Laws and Regulations Applicable to Banks and Financial Institutions. NBC, Phnom 
Penh.
———. 2016. Annual Report 2015. NBC, Phnom Penh.
Nepal Rastra Bank. 2016. Licensing Policy for Institution/Mechanism Operating Payment Related 
Activities-2016. Payment Systems Department, Nepal Rastra Bank, Kathmandu, Nepal. Accessed 
2017. https://nrb.org.np/psd/files/Licensing_Policy_in_English-2016.pdf. 
OECD/INFE (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development International Network on 
Financial Education). 2012. High-Level Principles on National Strategies for Financial Education. 
Accessed August 11, 2017. http://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial-education/OECD-INFE-
Principles-National-Strategies-Financial-Education.pdf.References  47
———. 2014. Concept Note on Financial Education for Long-Term Savings and Investment. 
Accessed August 11, 2017. https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/financial-education/
SeoulFinEduConceptNoteFeb2014.pdf.
Oliveros, Rosa M., and Lucia Pacheco. 2016. “Protection of Customers’ Funds in Electronic 
Money: A Myriad of Regulatory Approaches.” BBVA Research, October 28, 2016. 
Accessed April 26, 2017. https://www.bbvaresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/
Safeguardingelectronicmoneyfunds_en.pdf.
Parvez, Jaheed, and Muhymin Chowdhury. 2016. The Potential of Using Digital Financial Services 
for Savings Groups in Bangladesh. Mobile Solutions Technical Assistance and Research (mStar), 
USAID. 
PHB Development. 2015. FINCA Express Tanzania: Mobilizing Savings through Agency Banking. 
Report prepared by PHB Development for the European Microfinance Platform (e-MFP). www.e-
mfp.eu.
Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation. n.d. Accessed February 27, 2017. https://www.pdic.gov.
ph/.
Phiri, Musapenda J. 2013. “Zambia’s National Strategy for Financial Education.” OECD-World Bank 
Conference on Building Financial Capability, Nairobi, January 30–31, 2013. Bank of Zambia.
RBA (Retirement Benefits Authority). 2013. “Retirement Benefits Industry Performance Report for 
June-December 2013.” December 2013. Accessed April 20, 2017. http://www.rba.go.ke/index.
php/en/statistics/col-550/industry-performance-report.
———. 2015. “Retirement Benefits Industry Report for the Year 2015.” December 2015. Accessed 
April 20, 2017. http://www.rba.go.ke/index.php/en/statistics/col-550/industry-performance-
report.
RBI (Reserve Bank of India). 2006. Guidelines on Managing Risks and Code of Conduct in 
Outsourcing of Financial Services by Banks. RBI/2006/167, DBOD.NO.BP . 40/ 21.04.158/ 2006-
07.
———. 2007. The Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. RBI. 
———. 2008. Payment and Settlement Systems Regulations. RBI.
———. 2010. Guidelines for Engaging of Business Correspondents (BCs). Notification RBI/2010-
11/217, DBOD.No.BL.BC.43 /22.01.009/2010-11.
———. 2011. Opening of “Small Account.” Circular RBI/2010-11/389, DBOD.AML.No. 
77/14.01.001/2010-11.
———. 2013. The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 [As Modified up to January 7, 2013]. Accessed 
May 12, 2017. https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Publications/PDFs/BANKI15122014.pdf. 
———. 2014a. Financial Inclusion by Extension of Banking Services: Use of Business 
Correspondents. Circular RBI/2013-14/ 653, DBOD.No.BAPD.BC.122 /22.01.009/2013-14.
———. 2014b. Guidelines for Licensing of Payments Banks. Guideline. RBI. 
———. 2014c. Guidelines for Licensing of Small Finance Banks in the Private Sector. Guideline. RBI.
———. 2015a. Master Circular on Customer Service in Banks. Master Circular RBI/2015-16/59, DBR 
No.Leg.BC.21/09.07.006/2015-16.
———. 2015b. “RBI Grants ‘In-Principle’ Approval to 11 Applicants for Payments Banks.” Press 
Releases. Accessed January 31, 2017. https://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.
aspx?prid=34754.
———. 2016a. Mobile Banking Transactions in India: Operative Guidelines for Banks. Master 
Circular RBI/2016-17/17, DPSS.CO.PD.Mobile Banking.No./2/02.23.001/2016-2017. 
———. 2016b. Guidelines on Issuance and Operation of Pre-Paid Payment Instruments in India. 
Notification RBI/2016-2017/16, DPSS.CO.PD.PPI.No.01/02.14.006/2016-17.
———. 2016c. Operating Guidelines for Small Finance Banks. RBI/2016-17/81 DBR.NBD.
No.26/16.13.218/2016-17. 
Republic of Zambia. 2007. The National Payment Systems Act. Bank of Zambia.
———. 2015. The National Payments Systems Directives on Electronic Money Issuance. 
Government Gazette, June 26, 2015. Bank of Zambia.48  Financial Inclusion Beyond Payments: Policy Considerations for Digital Savings
———. 2017. The Banking and Financial Services Act, No. 7 of 2017. Parliament of Zambia. 
Riquet, Corinne. 2016. “Digital Financial Services for Cocoa Farmers in Cote d’Ivoire.” CGAP blog, 
August 15, 2016. Accessed February 23, 2017. http://www.cgap.org/blog/digital-financial-
services-cocoa-farmers-c%C3%B4te-d%E2%80%99ivoire.
Safaricom. 2016. “FY 16 Results Presentation.” Accessed March 17, 2017. https://www.safaricom.
co.ke/images/Downloads/Resources_Downloads/FY15-16Presentation.pdf.
Solow, Robert. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 70, no. 1. (February 1956), 65–94.
Tanzania National Council for Financial Inclusion. 2013. National Financial Inclusion Framework: 
A Public-Private Stakeholders’ Initiative (2014-2016). Accessed August 1, 2016. http://
www.afi-global.org/sites/default/files/publications/tanzania-national-financial-inclusion-
framework-2014-2016.pdf.
Tigo Tanzania. 2017. “Tigo Pesa Customers Pocket Tshs. 5.82 b / - (US$26 Million) in Eleventh 
Quarterly Profit Share.” January 23, 2017. https://www.tigo.co.tz/news/tigo-pesa-customers-
pocket-tshs-5-82b-us$-2,6million-in-eleventh-quarterly-profit-share.
Tiwari, Akhand, and Pragya Jain. 2016. “Agent Network Accelerator Survey: Bangladesh Report 
2016.” Helix Institute of Digital Finance. Accessed May 13, 2017. http://www.helix-institute.com/
sites/default/files/Publications/160809%20Bangladesh%20Country%20Report.pdf.
Tiwari, Akhand, and Irene Wagaki. 2016. “Agent Network Accelerator Survey: Zambia Country 
Report 2015.” Helix Institute of Digital Finance. Accessed April 25, 2017. http://www.helix-
institute.com/sites/default/files/Publications/160126%20Zambia%20Country%20Report%20
UNCDF%20Helix%20FINAL%20(1)_0.pdf.
Traki.in. 2016. “Telecom State Oct 2016.” http://trak.in/tags/business/2017/01/10/new-mobile-
connections-stat-reliance-jio-record/.
Umarji, Vinay, and Vimukt Dave. 2016. “Fino Paytech Eyes Payment Bank Launch by Q4 of FY17.” 
Business Standard, October 15, 2016. http://www.business-standard.com/article/finance/fino-
paytech-eyes-payment-bank-launch-by-q4-of-fy17-116101500375_1.html.
UNCDF (United Nations Capital Development Fund). 2014. “Digital Financial Services in Zambia.” 
Mobile Money for the Poor, Briefing Note 1.
United Republic of Tanzania. 2015. The National Payment Systems Act, 2015. Accessed February 9, 
2017. http://parliament.go.tz/polis/uploads/bills/acts/1452062539-ActNo-4-2015-Book-1-10.pdf. 
Vasudevan, Raksha. 2016. “Market System Assessment of Digital Financial Services in WAEMU.” 
CGAP Working Paper, CGAP , Washington, DC.
Villasenor, John D., Darrell M. West, and Robin J. Lewis. 2016. “The 2016 Brookings Financial 
and Digital Inclusion Project Report: Advancing Equitable Financial Ecosystems.” Center for 
Technology Innovation at Brookings, Washington, DC, August 2016. Accessed April 11, 2017. 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/fdip_20160816_project_report.pdf.
WBG (World Bank Group). 2016. Template for the Design of a National Financial Inclusion Strategy. 
World Bank, Washington, DC. 
———. 2017a. Global Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection Survey, World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 
———. 2017b. Tanzania Economic Update, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Women’s World Banking. n.d. “Digital Savings: The Key to Women’s Financial Inclusion?” Accessed 
February 10, 2017. http://www.womensworldbanking.org/publications/digital-savings-the-key-
to-womens-financial-inclusion/.
World Bank. 2014. Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Oversight 
Frameworks and Practices in 114 Economies. World Bank, Washington, DC.
WSBI and PHB Development. 2016. Tanzania Postal Bank: Digital Financial Inclusion through 
Popote. Report prepared for the European Microfinance Platform (e-MFP). www.e-mfp.eu.Annex C: Financial Capability  49
