Financial Sector’s Cybersecurity:
Regulations and SupervisionFINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized© 2018 The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW  
Washington, DC 20433 
T elephone: 202-473-1000 Internet: www.worldbank.org All rights reserved.
This volume is a product of the staff of the World Bank Group. The World Bank Group refers 
to the member institutions of the World Bank Group: The World Bank (International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development); International Finance Corporation (IFC); and Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which are separate and distinct legal entities each organized under its respective Articles of Agreement. We encourage use for educational and non-
commercial purposes.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect 
the views of the Directors or Executive Directors of the respective institutions of the World Bank Group or the governments they represent. The World Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of 
this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The World Bank encourages 
dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.
All queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office 
of the Publisher, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;  
fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS III
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS V
INTRODUCTION 1I.  ARE CYBER-SPECIFIC REGULATIONS NECESSARY? 3
II.  COORDINATION AMONG AUTHORITIES 5
III. MANDATORY REPORTING AND INFORMATION SHARING 7
IV.  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD 11
V.  RESPONSIBILITIES OF SENIOR MANAGEMENT  13
VI.  INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER  15
VII.  INCIDENT RESPONSE 17
VIII.  TESTS AND SIMULATIONS 19
IX.  OUTSOURCING 21
X.  SUPERVISION 23
XI.  CONCLUDING REMARKS 25
REFERENCES 27
FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
IFINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITYIII.  MANDATORY REPORTING AND INFORMATION SHARINGII
III
FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
IIIACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AICPA	 American	Institute	of	Certified	Public	 Accountants	
APIs	 Application	Programming	Interfaces	
ASIC	 Australian	Securities	and	Investment	Commission
BaFin 	 German	Federal	Financial	Supervisory	 Authority	
BCBS 	 Basel	Committee	on	Banking	Supervision	
CAPEC	 Common	 Attack	Pattern	Enumeration	and	Classification	  
	 (MITRE	Corporation)
CCDCOE	 Cooperative	Cyber	Defence	Centre	of	Excellence	
CCI	 Commonwealth	Cybercrime	Initiative	
CERT	 Computer	Emergency	Response	 Team	
CISO	 Chief	Information	Security	Officer	
CPMI	 Committee	on	Payments	and	Market	Infrastructures	
CSIRT	 Computer	Security	Incident	Response	 Team	
CTO	 Commonwealth	 Telecommunications	Organisation	
CybOX	 Cyber	Observable	Expression	
DDoS 	 Distributed	Denial	of	Service	
EBA		 European	Banking	 Authority	
ENISA	 European	Union	 Agency	for	Network	and	Information	Security	
EU 	 European	Union	
FDIC	 Federal	Deposit	Insurance	Corporation	
FinSAC	 Financial	Sector	 Advisory	Center	
FMI 	 Financial	Market	Infrastructure	
FRB	 Federal	Reserve	Board
G7  Group of 7 
GCSCC 	 Global	Cyber	Security	Capacity	Centre	(University	of	Oxford)
GCSP	 Geneva	Centre	for	Security	Policy	
IaaS	 Infrastructure	as	a	Service	
ICT	 Information	and	Communications	 Technology	
IEC	 International	Electrotechnical	Commission
FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITYIVIVACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONSIOSCO	 International	Organisation	of	Securities	Commissions	
ISAC	 Information	Sharing	 Analysis	Center
ISO	 International	Organization	for	Standardization	
IT		 Information	 Technology	
ITU	 International	 Telecommunication	Union	
NATO		 North	Atlantic	Treaty	Organization	
NIST		 National	Institute	of	Standards	and	 Technology	
NYSDFS 		 New	York	State	Department	of	Financial	Services	
OAS	 Organization	of	 American	States	
OCC	 Office	of	the	Comptroller	of	the	Currency
OECD 	 Organisation	for	Economic	Co-operation	and	Development	
PaaS	 Platform	as	a	Service	
SaaS	 Software	as	a	Service	
SOC 	 System	and	Organization	Controls	
STIX	 Structured	 Threat	Information	Expression	
TAXII 	 Trusted	Automated	Exchange	of	Indicator	Information	
UNCTAD	 United	Nations	Conference	on	 Trade	and	Development	
VCDB 	 VERIS	Community	Database	(Verizon)
VERIS	 Vocabulary	for	Event	Recording	and	Incident	Sharing	(Verizon)ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The	author,	Aquiles	A.	Almansi,	 is	a	Lead	Financial	 Sector	Specialist,	 Finance,	Competitiveness	 &	
Innovation	 Global	Practice	at	the	World	Bank	Group	(WBG).	This	paper	draws	on	the	background	
work	of	Dror	(2017),	Nelson	(2017)	and	Taylor	(2017).	Detailed	 comments	 were	received,	
although	 not	necessarily	 reflected	 in	this	draft,	from	Dorothee	 Delort	(Senior	Financial	 Sector	
Specialist),	 Katia	D’Hulster	 (Lead	Financial	 Sector	Specialist),	 Miquel	Dijkman	 (Lead	Financial	
Sector	Specialist),	 Pasquale	 Di	Benedetta	 (Senior	Financial	 Sector	Specialist),	 Valeria	Salomao	
Garcia	(Senior	Financial	 Sector	Specialist),	 Damodaran	 Krishnamurti	 (Lead	Financial	 Sector	
Specialist),	 Harish	Natarajan	 (Lead	Financial	 Sector	Specialist),	 Sang	Man	Park	(Senior	Financial	
Sector	Specialist)	 -	all	of	the	Finance,	Competitiveness	 &	Innovation	 Global	Practice	-	as	well	as	
Iveta	Zdravkova	 Lohovska	 (Consultant,	 Information	 Technology	 Services,	 WBG),	Sandra	Sargent	
(Senior	Operations	 Officer,	Digital	Development	 and	Transport,	 WBG),	Zhijun	William	Zhang	
(Senior	Information	 Technology	 Officer,	Information	 Technology	Services,	 WBG),	Claus	Sengler	
(European	 Central	Bank),	Paul	Williams	 (Bank	of	England),	 and	Rui	Lin	Ong	(Monetary	 Authority	
of	Singapore).
A	special	thanks	goes	to	Aichin	Lim	Jones	(Graphic	 Designer)	 for	her	work	on	the	graphics	design	
of	this	publication.
VFINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISIONFINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY
VVIVIACKNOWLEDGMENTS
1
INTRODUCTION
FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
1According	 to	the	Group	of	7	(G7)	(2016),	cybersecurity 	risks	to	the	global	financial	system	
are	of	critical	concern.		 Attacks	on	cyberspace,	 that	is,	the	space	between	interconnected	
computers,	 are	“increasing	 in	sophistication,	 frequency,	 and	persistence,	 [and]	cyber	risks	
are	growing	more	dangerous	 and	diverse,	threatening	 to	disrupt	our	interconnected	 global	financial	
systems	and	the	institutions	 that	operate	and	support	those	systems.”	 Similarly,	 the	International	
Organisation	 of	Securities	 Commissions	 (IOSCO)	 (2016)	has	“recognized	 that	cyber	risk	
constitutes	 a	growing	and	significant	 threat	to	the	integrity,	 efficiency	 and	soundness	 of	financial	
markets	worldwide.”	 Compounding	 the	problem,	 the	inexorable	 trend	toward	exclusive	 digital	
customer	 interactions	 increases	 the	financial	 sector’s	exposure	 to	cyber	risks.	In	this	context,	
PricewaterhouseCoopers	 (PwC)	(2017)	notes	that	46	percent	of	bank	customers	 are	already	digital-
only,	compared	 with	27	percent	in	2012.	Furthermore,	 those	customers	 interacting	 with	bank	staff	
continue	to	shrink,	falling	from	15	to	10	percent	during	the	same	period.
IBM	X-Force	 Research	 (2017)	reveals	that	the	
financial	 services	sector	was	attacked	 more	than	
any	other	industry	 in	2016,	with	the	average	
financial	 institution	 monitored	 by	IBM	Security	
Services	experiencing	 65	percent	more	attacks	than	
the	average	client	organization	 across	all	industries.	
Moreover,	 there	was	a	29	percent	increase	in	attacks	
from	2015.1		In	this	context,	distributed	 denial	of	
service	(DDoS)	and	ransomware	 attacks	disrupted	
the	provision	 of	financial	 services	 in	several	
countries.	 Money	was	stolen	or	confidential	 data	
“exfiltrated”	 (leaked)	using	other	types	of	malware	
and	“social	engineering”	tricks.
“Cyber	risk,”	frequently	 narrowly	 understood	 as	
the	occurrence	 of	intentional	 or	malicious	 “cyber	
incidents,”	 is	just	one	of	the	many	things	that	can	go	
wrong	in	the	world	of	interconnected	 computers.2 
Information	 and	Communications	 Technology	
(ICT)	risk,	in	turn,	is	traditionally	 understood	 as	
just	one	class	of	operational	 risk,	a	tradition	 that	could	suggest	some	questionable	 analogies	 with	
other	classes	of	such	risk.To	deal	with	the	problem,	 several	leading	
jurisdictions	 have	issued	or	proposed	 detailed	laws,	
regulations	 or	guidelines	 dealing	with	cyber	risk	
or,	more	generally,	 ICT	risk.	The	World	Bank’s	
Financial	 Sector	Advisory	 Center	(FinSAC)	 (2017)	
has	compiled	 and	continuously	 updates	a	digest	
of	this	quickly	growing	 body	of	regulatory	 and	
advisory	work.The	G7	(2016)	sees	the	following	 fundamental	
elements	 “as	the	building	 blocks	upon	which	an	
entity	can	design	and	implement	 its	cybersecurity	
strategy	and	operating	 framework”:	 governance, 
risk assessment, monitoring, response, recovery, 
information sharing, and continuous learning .	
This	paper	presents	the	main	ideas	that	can	be	found	
widely	represented	 in	the	FinSAC’s	 Cybersecurity	
1 For detailed analyses and statistics about cyber incidents, see also Symantec (2017), Synoptek (2017), and Verizon (2017a 
and 2017b). 
2 In addition to intentional incidents, incidents can occur accidentally due to faulty processes, or for purely technical rea-sons. For a discussion of the many things that can go accidentally wrong due to software complexity, see Somers (2017).FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY22INTRODUCTIONRegulations	 in	the	Financial	 Sector	(2017),	which	
coincides	 with	those	of	the	G7’s	fundamental	
elements.	 It	also	outlines	attempts	 to	identify	the	
emerging	 consensus	 on	practices	 to	implement	
regulations,	 as	well	as	on	how	to	supervise	 their	
implementation	 by	individual	 financial	institutions.
The	paper	is	organized	 as	follows:	Section	I	briefly	
presents	 some	different	 viewpoints	 with	regard	
to	the	need	for	financial	 institutions	 to	write	new	
regulations.	 Section	II	discusses	 the	necessary	
coordination	 between	 financial	 sector	authorities	
and	other	state	agencies	 in	the	regulation	 and	
supervision	 of	the	sector’s	ICT	systems.	Section	III	
presents	sample	taxonomies	 (languages)	 used	by	
different	parties	to	talk	about	cyber	“risks”	and	share	
information	 on	cyber	“incidents”.	 Sections	 IV,	V,	
and	VI	outline,	respectively,	 the	responsibilities	 of	
the	Board,	senior	management	 and,	if	the	position	
exists,	the	Information	 Security	 Officer.	Section	
VII	discusses	 incident	 response	 and	recovery.	
Section	VIII	describes	 practices	 regarding	 tests	and	
simulations.	 Section	IX	addresses	 the	increasingly	
critical	issue	of	outsourcing.		 Section	X	presents	
sample	guidelines	 for	supervisors,	 and	section	XI	
contains	concluding	remarks.The	mandatory	 or	suggested	 practices	 identified	
in	this	paper	are	those	of	primary	interest	for	the	
financial	 sector	authorities	 in	charge	of	regulating	
and/or	supervising	 licensed	 banking	 and	non-
banking	 institutions.	 As	more	dimensions	 of	
the	provision	 of	financial	 services	 migrate	
to	the	space	of	interconnected	 computers	 (or	
“cyberspace”),	 other	state	and	regional	 agencies	
—	such	as	European	 Union	Agency	for	Network	
and	Information	 Security	 (ENISA),	 and	national	
security	agencies	 in	some	jurisdictions	 —	will	be	
regulating	 how	operations	 are	to	be	conducted	 in	
their	respective 	domains.	 This	implies	that	financial	
institutions	 in	some	jurisdictions	 will	have	to	abide	
by	a	growing	 number	of	regulations	 pertaining	
to	technical	 ICT	matters	beyond	the	regulatory	
perimeter	 of	the	financial	 sector	authorities,	 such	
as	encryption	 protocols,	 application	 programming	
interfaces	 (APIs),	or	authentication	 mechanisms.	
These	are	outside	the	scope	of	this	paper.
While	the	provisional	 findings	of	this	work	are	
significantly	 enhanced	 by	the	FSB	stocktaking	 of	
existing	regulations	 and	supervisory	 practices	 in	
G20	jurisdictions	 presented	 last	October,	 financial	
sector	authorities	 from	World	Bank	client	countries,	
in	search	of	guidance	 on	whether	 and	how	to	
regulate	and	supervise	 cyber	risk	management	 in	
institutions	 subject	to	their	jurisdiction,	 may	find	
the	main	ideas	here	described	 a	good	starting	point.3FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
3I.  ARE CYBER-SPECIFIC  
REGULATIONS NECESSARY?
Crisanto	and	Prenio	(2017)	note	that	there	are	differing	 institutional	 views	about	whether	
and	how	to	regulate	cyber	risks.		“One	view	is	that	the	evolving	 nature	of	cyber	risk	is	
not	amenable	 to	specific	regulation	 and	that	cyber	issues	can	be	handled	with	existing	
regulations	 relating	to	technology	 and/or	operational	 risk.	The	other	view	is	that	[a]	regulatory	
structure	 is	needed	to	deal	with	the	unique	nature	of	cyber	risk,	and	given	the	growing	threats	
resulting	from	an	increasingly	digitized	financial	sector.”
Commenting	 on	the	United	States	Federal	Reserve	
Board/	Office	of	the	Comptroller	 of	the	Currency/	
Federal	Deposit	Insurance	 Corporation	 (FRB/OCC/
FDIC)	advanced	 notice	of	proposed	 rulemaking	 on	
enhanced	 cyber	risk	management	 standards	 (2016),	
Promontory	 (2017)	notes	that	a	“rulemaking	 that	
imposed	 overlapping	 new	cybersecurity	 standards	
on	top	of	the	multiple	existing	standards,	 without	
any	empirical	 analysis	 of	actual	effects,	would	
be	counterproductive.	 Rather	than	improving	
cybersecurity,	 such	a	rulemaking	 would	divert	
to	unproductive	 compliance 	processes	 the	very	
resources	 that	covered	 entities	could	otherwise	
devote	to	securing	 operations.”		 In	this	context,	
Crisanto	and	Prenio	(2017)	note	that	one	“potential	
benefit	of	regulation	 is	that	it	can	help	ensure	Board	
and	Management	 buy-in.	As	regulation	 makes	any	
issue	more	visible	to	Boards	and	Management,	
regulation	 on	cyber	risk	gives	banks	a	stronger	
incentive	 to	continuously	 invest	in	improved	
cybersecurity.”
Promontory	 points	out	the	multiple,	 overlapping,	
international	 cybersecurity	 standards	 such	as	the	
International	 Organization	 for	Standardization	
(ISO)/	International	 Electrotechnical	 Commission	
(IEC)	27000	(2016),	ISO/IEC-27001	 (2005),	ISO/
IEC-27002	 (2013),	the	System	and	Organization	
Controls	(SOC)	for	Cybersecurity	 of	the	American	
Institute	of	Certified	Public	Accountants	 (AICPA)3,	frameworks	 such	as	the	one	from	the	National	
Institute	 of	Standards	 and	Technology	 (NIST)	
(2017	and	2014),	 	 as	well	as	guidelines	 like	
those	of	the	Committee	 on	Payments	 and	Market	
Infrastructures	 (CPMI-IOSCO)	 (2016),	 and	
regulations	 on	operational	 risk	management	 in	
most	national	jurisdictions..	Management	 failures	occur	because	 too	many	
people	still	see	cybersecurity 	as	a	technical	 matter,	
reserved	 for	the	exclusive	 domain	of	information	
technology	 (IT)	specialists.	 As	Crisanto	 and	
Prenio	(2017)	suggest,	 regulations	 that	actually	
deal	mostly	with	corporate	 governance	 matters	
make	cybersecurity	 more	visible	to	Boards	and	
Management,	 thereby	providing	 stronger	incentives	
to	them	to	take	responsibility	for	it.	Traditional	 ways	of	thinking	about	operational	 risk,	
incorporated	 in	some	regulations	 on	cyber	risk,	may	
not	be	fully	adequate	 to	deal	with	the	new	reality.	
Principle	 25	of	the	Basel	Committee	 on	Banking	
Supervision	 (BCBS)	(2012),	for	example,	 includes	
among	its	essential	criteria	the	provision	 that	“The	
supervisor	 requires	banks’	strategies,	 policies	and	
processes	 for	the	management	 of	operational	 risk	
(including the banks’ risk appetite for operational 
risk)	to	be	approved	 and	regularly	 reviewed	 by	
the	banks’	Boards.”	 However,	 given	the	systemic	
magnitude	 of	cybersecurity	 risk	derived	from	the	
3 http:/ /www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/FRC/AssuranceAdvisoryServices/Pages/AICPACybersecurityInitiative.aspxFINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY44I.  ARE CYBER-SPECIFIC REGULATIONS NECESSARY?system’s	 interconnected	 nature,	it	is	unclear	why	
the	degree	of	cyber	risk	taken	by	an	individual	
institution	 should	depend	in	any	sense	on	the	
Board’s	risk	“appetite”	 for	operational	 risk.	The	
presence	 of	negative	 externalities	 would	suggest	
setting	minimum	 standards	 regardless	 of	such	
“appetite,”	or	any	other	subjective	consideration.4
Technical	 complexity	 (in	the	number	of	potential	
entry	points	for	an	attacker	and	in	the	diversity	 of	services),	 the	capacity	to	deal	with	it,	and	the	potential	
systemic	 impact	of	cyber	incidents	 are	likely	to	be	
proportional	 to	the	size	of	the	financial	 institution.	
As	such,	some	of	the	emerging	 guidelines	 and	
regulations	 fully	apply	to	large	institutions	 only.5  
Since	an	interconnected	 system	is	as	strong	as	the	
weakest	of	its	nodes,	some	jurisdictions	 may	well	
choose	to	consider	 subjecting	 all	interconnected	
institutions	 to	the	same	minimum	 cybersecurity	
standards,	regardless	of	size.
4 For example, the average delay in departures, and the proportion of luggage lost, could indeed be left to an airline’s “risk 
appetite,” but the frequency of crashes probably should not.
5 Standards set forth by the FRB-OCC-FDIC (2016), for example, would apply to all U.S. bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more.5
FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
5II.  COORDINATION  
AMONG AUTHORITIES
“...each distinct aspect of cybersecurity (…cyber crime, intelligence, military issues, 
Internet governance, or national crisis management) operates in its own silo, belonging, 
for instance, to a specific government department or ministry. Each of these silos has its 
own technical realities, policy solutions, and even philosophies .”Klimburg (2017)
Principle	 2	of	the	BCBS	(2012)	requires	the	bank	
supervisor	 to	possess	“operational	 independence”,	
and	the	first	essential	 criteria	for	the	observance	
of	such	a	principle	 requires	that	“no	government	
or	industry	 interference	 ...	compromises	 the	
operational	 independence	 of	the	supervisor,”	
and	that	the	“supervisor	 has	full	discretion	 to	
take	any	supervisory	 actions	or	decisions	 on	
banks	and	banking	groups	under	its	supervision.”	
These	requirements	 are	fully	consistent	 with	the	
supervision	 of	managerial	 behaviors.	 However,	
the	regulation	 and	supervision	 of	ICT	risks,	as	
well	as	the	response	 to	incidents,	 may	require	the	
intervention	of	other	state	agencies.
Many	countries	 have	already	published	 national	
cybersecurity	 strategies,	 frequently	 identifying	
the	state	agencies	 in	charge	of	setting	minimum	
standards	 and	responding	 to	a	cyber	incident.	
References	 to	bank	security	can	already	be	found	
in	the	following	 country	 strategies:	 Australia,	
Austria,	Bangladesh,	 Brunei	Darussalam,	 Canada,	
China,	Colombia,	 the	Arab	Republic	 of	Egypt,	
France,	Ghana,	Ireland,	Italy,	Japan,	Jordan,	Kenya,	
Malaysia,	 Micronesia,	 Morocco,	 the	Netherlands,	
New	Zealand,	Nigeria,	 Norway,	 Poland,	Qatar,	
the	Russian	Federation,	 Saudi	Arabia,	Singapore,	
Slovakia,	 Slovenia,	 Sweden,	 Switzerland,	 the	United	Kingdom	 (UK),	and	the	United	States	
(US).6		National	 cybersecurity	 strategies	 and	legal	
frameworks	 should	clearly	specify	the	respective	
responsibilities	 of	the	financial	 sector	and	other	
authorities,	 such	as	national	 security	 agencies.	 	
Without	 such	clarity,	jurisdictional	 conflicts	 are	
bound	to	arise	when	issuing	new	cybersecurity	
regulations	 or,	even	worse,	when	handling	 cyber	
incidents	in	the	financial	sector.7
A	new	reference	 guide	is	being	developed	 by	a	
host	of	organizations	 to	serve	as	a	single	source	to	
guide	countries	 in	developing	 their	own	national	
cybersecurity	 strategies.		 This	guide	should	also	help	
financial	 sector	authorities	 better	understand	 the	
nature	of	the	institutional	 structure	 required	to	deal	
with	cybersecurity.			 It	is	currently	 being	prepared	
by	the	International	 Telecommunication	 Union	
(ITU),	a	United	Nations	agency,	in	partnership	
with	the	Commonwealth	 Cybercrime	 Initiative	
(CCI),	the	Commonwealth	 Telecommunications	
Organisation	 (CTO),	ENISA,	the	Geneva	Centre	
for	Security	 Policy	(GCSP),	 the	University	 of	
Oxford’s	 Global	Cyber	Security	 Capacity	 Centre	
(GCSCC),	 Intellium,	 Microsoft,	 the	North	Atlantic	
Treaty	 Organization	 (NATO)’s	 Cooperative	
Cyber	Defence	Centre	of	Excellence	 (CCDCOE),	
the	Organisation	 for	Economic	 Co-operation	
6 http:/ /www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity
7 An important example of a legal framework that clarifies the roles of different state agencies is EU (2016), naturally in-
cluding cross-border considerations in the European UnionFINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY66II.  COORDINATION AMONG AUTHORITIESand	Development	 (OECD),	 the	Organization	 of	
American	 States	(OAS),	the	Potomac	 Institute,	
RAND	Europe,	the	United	Nations	Conference	 on	
Trade	and	Development	 (UNCTAD)	 and	the	World	
Bank.	7
FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
7III.  MANDATORY REPORTING  
AND INFORMATION SHARING
Previous	sections	assume	a	common	 understanding	 of	what	is	meant	by	words	such	as	
“cyber”,	“risks”	and	“incidents,”	 as	used	by	the	G7	(2016),	the	International	 Organisation	
of	Securities	 Commissions	 (IOSCO)	 (2016)	and	IBM	(2017),	among	others.	To	understand	
how	different	organizations	 utilize	these	terms	requires	knowing	 their	respective	 “taxonomies”	
(languages)	 is	required.	 All	stakeholders	 need	precise,	common	 languages	 to	share	information,	
either	of	the	mandatory	 kind,	between	supervisory	 institutions	 and	authorities	 or,	to	prevent	the	
spread	of	cyber	incidents,	voluntarily	with	other	potentially	affected	entities.
Taxonomies	 are	languages	 or	conventions	 for	
information	 sharing,	and	there	are	many	of	them.	
For	instance,	 ICT	specialists	 frequently	 work	with	
MITRE	Corporation’s	 “Common	 Attack	Pattern	
Enumeration	 and	Classification”	 (CAPEC),	 a	
“comprehensive	 dictionary	 and	classification	
taxonomy	 of	known	attacks	that	can	be	used	by	
analysts,	 developers,	 testers,	and	educators	 to	
advance	 community	 understanding	 and	enhance	
defenses”.8	 	Regarding	 mechanisms of attack ,	
CAPEC	 identifies	 118	different	 mechanisms	 to	
collect	and	analyze	information;	 152	to	inject	
unexpected	 items;156	 to	engage	in	deceptive	
interactions;	 172	to	manipulate	 timing	and	state;	
210	to	abuse	existing	functionality;	 223	that	employ	
probabilistic	 techniques;	 225	that	subvert	access	
control;	255	that	manipulate	 data	structures;	 and	
262	that	manipulate	 system	resources.	 Regarding	
domains of attack,	 CAPEC	identifies	 403	different	
types	of	social	engineering;	 437	on	the	supply	
chain;	512	on	communications;	 513	on	software;	
514	on	physical	security;	and	515	on	hardware.
Verizon	 offers	the	“Vocabulary	 for	Event	
Recording	 and	Incident	Sharing”	 (VERIS)	 to	help	
organizations	 “collect	and	share	useful	incident-
related	information	 anonymously	 and	responsibly.”9  VERIS	is	a	set	of	metrics	designed	 to	provide	a	
common	language	 for	describing	 security	incidents	
in	a	structured	 and	repeatable	 manner,	namely:	the	
“who”	(threat	actors),	the	“what”	(victim	assets),	
the	“why”	(threat	motives),	 and	the	“how”	(threat	
actions)	 of	each	cybersecurity	 incident.10.	The	
VERIS	Community	 Database	 (VCDB)	 is	an	open	
and	free	repository	 of	publicly-reported	 security	
incidents	in	 VERIS	format.11
Another	 taxonomy	 available	 for	the	automated	
sharing	 (primarily	 among	computer	 systems,	
not	among	people!)	 of	threat	information	 in	
standardized	 format	was	originally	 developed	 by	
the	US	Department	 of	Homeland	 Security.	 It	is	
currently	 maintained	 by	an	open	community12,	
and	is	composed	 of	the	freely	available	 Trusted	
Automated	 Exchange	 of	Indicator	 Information	
(TAXII),	 the	Cyber	Observable	 Expression	
(CybOX),	 and	the	Structured	 Threat	Information	
Expression	(STIX).
Apart	from	highly	specialized	 units	in	financial	
supervisory	 agencies,	 none	of	these	taxonomies	
are	likely	to	be	very	useful	for	information	 sharing	
among	financial	 sector	authorities,	 or	between	
them	and	the	Boards	and	Senior	Management	 of	
8 CAPEC: Common Attack Pattern Enumeration and Classification—A  Community Resource for Identifying and Under -
standing Attacks, https:/ /capec.mitre.org/.
9 “Veris: The Vocabulary for Event Recording and Incident Sharing” at: http:/ /veriscommunity.net.
10 “Vocabulary for Event Recording and Incident Sharing” at: https:/ /github.com/vz-risk/veris.
11 VCDB raw data is available at: https:/ /github.com/vz-risk/VCDB
12 Oasis Cyber Threat Intelligence” at: https:/ /wiki.oasis-open.org/cti/.FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY8
III.  MANDATORY REPORTING AND INFORMATION SHARINGsupervised	 institutions.	 In	this	context,	the	European	
Banking	 Authority	 (EBA)	(2017),	for	example,	
asks	European	 bank	supervisors	 to	map	identified	
ICT	risks	into	the	following	five	risk	categories:
• Availability and continuity risk:	 the	risk	that	
the	performance	 and	availability	 of	systems	
and	data	are	adversely	 impacted,	 including	 the	
inability	 to	timely	recover	due	to	a	failure	of	
hardware	 or	software,	 management	 weaknesses, 	
or	any	other	event.
• Data integrity risk:	 the	risk	that	data	stored	
and	processed	 are	incomplete,	 inaccurate	 or	
inconsistent	across	different	systems.
• Change risk: the	 risk	arising	from	the	inability	
of	the	institution	 to	manage	system	changes	in	a	
timely	and	controlled	manner.
• Outsourcing risk:	 the	risk	that	engaging	 a	
third	party,	or	another	group	entity	(intra-group	
outsourcing),	 to	provide	 systems	 or	related	
services,	 adversely	 impacts	 the	institution’s	
performance	and	risk	management.
• Security risk:	 the	risk	of	unauthorized	 access	to	
systems	from	within	or	outside	the	institution.
Data	integrity,	 and	services	 availability	 and	
continuity	 are	some	of	the	dimensions	 that	may,	
for	many	different	 reasons,	 go	awry	with	the	
ICT	systems	of	a	financial	 institution.	 In	other	
words,	 services can be disrupted and/or data 
compromised.	 Physical	 and	logical	(“bugs”)	 can	
impact	ICT	systems,	 and	institutions	 can	fail	to	
properly	 manage	the	constantly	 changing	 state	of	
their	ICT	systems,13,	and/or	the	external	providers	
of	outsourced	 services.	 Additionally,	 ICT	systems	
can	fail	because	of	security	reasons,	that	is,	when	
someone	 from	inside	or	outside	the	institution	
intentionally	 does	something 	that	disrupts	services	
or	affects	data	integrity.The	EBA’s	first	four	“ICT	risks”	remain,	at	least	
conceptually,	 reasonably	 well	defined	over	time,	
but	“security”	 risks	keep	mutating.	 As	illustrated	 by	
the	CAPEC	taxonomy,	 there	are	literally	thousands	
of	ways	(by	combining	 different	 “domains”	 and	
“mechanisms”	 of	attack)	that	a	financial	institution’s	
ICT	systems	can	be	compromised.		 Attacks	can	
occur	without	penetrating	 ICT	systems;	 or	by	
penetrating	 them	with	or	without	hacking	them;	by	
insiders	or	a	variety	of	outsiders;	 with	or	without	
“social	engineering”;	 with	or	without	physical	
access	to	them	—	and	many	more	ways	yet	to	be	
discovered.	
Once	an	incident	has	affected	the	ICT	systems	of	
a	supervised	 institution,	 EBA’s	taxonomy	 provides	
a	language	 to	communicate	 possible	 answers	as	
to	what	has	happened	 (services	 disrupted	 and/or	
data	integrity	 affected?)	 and	why	it	has	happened	
(autonomous	 system	malfunction,	 or	inadequate	
management	 of	own	and/or	third-party	 systems,	
and/or	 malicious	 third-party	 intervention?).	 	
Although	 only	some	supervisory	 agencies	 may	
have	the	internal	capacity	to	make	productive	 use	
of	strictly	technical	 information,	 as	described	 for	
example	by	the	taxonomies	 of	CAPEC	or	TAXII-
CybOX-STIX,	 all	supervisors	 need	a	taxonomy	 to	
describe	 the	impacts	of	an	incident.	 Once	again,	
EBA	offers	a	helpful	taxonomy	 of	the	possible	
impacts	of	an	incident,	as	follows:14
• Financial impact	 including 	(but	not	limited	
to)	loss	of	funds	or	assets,	potential	 customer	
compensation,	 legal	and	remediation	 costs,	
contractual	damages,	lost	revenue;
• Business disruption,	 considering	 (but	not	limited	
to)	the	criticality	 of	the	financial	services	affected;	
the	number	of	customers	 and/or	branches	 and	
employees	potentially	affected;
• Reputational impact	 based	on	the	criticality	
of	the	banking	 service	or	operational	 activity	
13 The state of ICT systems keeps changing because, in addition to new applications or new features in existing ones, they 
constantly undergo security updates. Any of these changes can break a system at any time.
14 To understand the essentially linguistic (conventional) role of all taxonomies, these impacts are what other parties would perhaps prefer to call the risks associated to an ICT incident.FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION9affected	(e.g.,	theft	of	customer	 data);	the	external	
profile/visibility	 of	the	ICT	systems	and	services	
affected	(e.g.	mobile	or	on-line	banking	systems,	
point	of	sale,	 ATMs	or	payment	systems);
• Regulatory impact,	 including	 the	potential	 for	
public	censure	by	the	regulator,	 fines	or	even	
variation	of	permissions;	and
• Strategic impact,	 if	strategic	products	or	business	
plans	are	compromised	or	stolen.
Supervisory	 taxonomies	 facilitate	 information	
sharing	among	supervisors,	 and	between	 them	
and	supervised	 institutions.	 Given	the	potential	
regulatory impact,	 however,	 supervised	 institutions	
have	limited	incentives	 to	voluntarily	 report	
incidents.	 Consequently,	 some	jurisdictions	 make	
such	reporting	mandatory.	 The	European	 Union	
(EU)	(2016),	for	example,	 regulates	 the	mandatory	
notification	of	a	 significant incident 	as	follows:	
“Banking	 corporations	 shall	notify,	without	
undue	delay,	the	competent	 authority	 of	
incidents	 having	a	significant	 impact	on	
the	continuity	 of	the	essential	 services	
they	provide,	 or	in	case	that	there	is	a	
reasonable	 likelihood	 of	materially	 harming	
business	 operations.	 Notifications	 shall	
include	information	 enabling	the	competent 	
authority	 to	determine	 any	 impact of the 
incident.	 Notification	 shall	not	make	the	
notifying	party	subject	to	increased	 liability.”	
Furthermore,	 it	specifies	 the	following 	
parameters	 as	determining	 the	magnitude	 of	
the	impact:	“(a)	the	number	of	users	affected	
by	the	disruption	 of	the	essential	 service;	
(b)	the	duration	of	the	incident;	and	(c)	the	
geographical	 spread	with	regard	to	the	area	
affected	by	the	incident.”It	is	important	 to	note	that	in	addition	to	establishing	
a	mandatory	 reporting	 requirement,	 the	EU	(2016)	
states its precise purpose (to enable the competent 
authority to determine any impact of the incident ),	
and	it	also	defines	how	to	account	for	such	an	
impact.	Without	stating	the	precise	purpose	of	the	
notification,	 in	many	countries	 the	supervisory	
authority	 could	easily	become	 liable	for	what	
it	does	—	or	does	not	do	—	in	responding	 to	an	
incident.	 As	suggested	 in	section	II,	responding	
to	an	incident	is	likely	to	eventually	 become	the	
responsibility	 of	other	state	agencies,	 such	as	a	
Computer	 Emergency	 Response	 Team	(CERT)	
or	a	Computer 	Security	 Incident	Response	 Team	
(CSIRT),	 possibly	 associated	 with	a	national	
security	agency.	This	in	turn	may	also	require	
mandatory	reporting,	with	a	different	taxonomy.15
Reporting	 on	the	impact	of	an	incident	 to	the	
supervisory	 authority	 should	not	be	confused	 with	
the	voluntarily	 sharing	of	technical	 information	
that	could	help	other	institutions	 take	preventive	
actions.	To	deal	with	the	limited	incentive	 to	
reveal	problems	 there	are	different	 initiatives,	
either	private	or	in	public-private	 partnerships,	 to	
voluntarily	 share	information	 about	incidents	 on	
an	anonymized	 basis.	Crucially,	 this	can	be	done	in	
a	language	 that	facilitates	 the	taking	of	immediate	
preventive	 actions.	For	example,	 one	success	story	
concerns	 the	Information	 Sharing	Analysis	 Centers	
(ISACs)	 in	the	United	States,	which	includes	 a	
financial	 services	 ISAC	automatically	 sharing	
information	 among	members	utilizing	the	TAXII-
CybOX-STIX	taxonomy.
15 Establishing a financial sector CERT or CSIRT as a dependency of the Central Bank is not unthinkable, but in many juris-
dictions, it could potentially create significant contingent liabilities.1010III.  MANDATORY REPORTING AND INFORMATION SHARING
11
FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
11IV.  RESPONSIBILITIES  
OF THE BOARD
“...we seem conceptually trapped in thinking of the new challenges of cyberspace as being 
purely technical, instead of being very much human.”
Klimburg (2017)
Principle	 25	of	BCBS	(2012)	requires	supervisors	
to	verify	that	a	bank’s	strategies,	 policies	and	
processes	 for	the	management	 of	operational	 risk	
are	approved	 and	regularly	 reviewed	 by	the	Board	
—	and	that	the	Board	oversees	 their	effective	
implementation.	 Consistent	 with	this	general	
principle,	 regulations	 and	guidelines	 specifically	
dealing	with	cyber	risk	(for	example,	 the	Australian	
Securities	 and	Investment	 Commission	 [ASIC]	
(2015);	CPMI-IOSCO	 (2016);	FRB-OCC-FDIC	
(2016);	Ireland	(2016);	and	Israel	(2015))	typically	
require	that	the	Board	of	supervised	 institutions:	
(i)	approve	a	written	ICT	strategy	aligned	with	
the	institution’s	 overall	business	 strategy;	 (ii)	
approve	a	comprehensive	 ICT	risk	management	
framework;	 and	iii)	oversee	senior	management’s	
effective	 implementation	 of	both	the	strategy	and	
risk	management	framework.
In	several	regulatory	 documents,	 the	Board’s	role	
is	expected	 to	go	well	beyond	that	of	adopting	
strategies	 and	frameworks	 to	encompass	 the	
oversight	 of	their	effective	implementation.	 Ireland	
(2016),	for	example,	 requires	the	Board	to	“receive	
reports	on	significant	 cyber	incidents”,	 and	so	
does	Israel	(2015).	ASIC	(2015)	not	only	asks	to	
“review	the	level	of	Board	and	Senior	Management	
oversight	 of	cyber	risks,”	but	also	“how	frequently	
risks	are	updated.”The	Central	Bank	of	Ireland	(2016)	requires	
the	Board	to	receive	“updates	 on	the	scenarios	
considered	 and	the	development	 and	testing	of	
disaster	recovery	 and	business	 continuity	 plans.”	
and	to	understand	 “what	the	objectives	 of	these	are	in	terms	of	maintaining	 availability	 of	critical	
IT	systems	and	business	operations.”	 Furthermore,	
it	expects	the	Board	(as	a	whole)	and	Senior	
Management	 to	“possess	 sufficient	 knowledge and 
understanding	 of	the	IT-	related	risks	facing	the	
firm,	and	[to]	take	steps	to	ensure	that	these	risks	are	
well	understood	 and	properly	managed	 throughout	
the	firm.”	They	should	also	be	able	to	demonstrate	
to	supervisors	that	these	steps	have	been	taken.	
The	findings	of	the	“Bridging	 the	Technology	 Gap	in	
Financial	 Services	Boardrooms’ 	report	by	Accenture 	
(2015)	suggest	that	the	required	 knowledge and 
understanding	 are	still	rather	scarce.	According	 to	
that	report,	“only	6	percent	of	Board	members	 and	
3	percent	of	CEOs	at	the	world’s	largest	banks	have	
professional	 technology	 experience.	 In	addition,	 43	
percent	of	the	banks	have	no	Board	members,	 and	
nearly	30	percent	have	only	one	Board	member,	
with	professional	 technology	 experience.”	 Ho	
(2015)	has	an	answer	for	such	a	knowledge	 gap:	the	
Monetary	 Authority	 of	Singapore	 “expects	that	the	
Board	be	regularly	 apprised	on	salient	technology 	
and	cyber	risk	developments.”	 Furthermore, 	
financial	 institutions	 “should	 have	in	place	a	
comprehensive	 technology	 risk	and	cybersecurity 	
training	program	 for	the	Board.	Such	a	program	
may	comprise	 periodic	 briefings	 conducted	 by	
in-house	 cyber	security	professionals	 or	external	
specialists.	 The	goal	is	to	help	equip	the	Board	with	
the	requisite	knowledge	 to	competently	 exercise	its	
oversight	 function,	 and	appraise	the	adequacy	 and	
effectiveness	 of	the	financial	 institution’s	 overall	
cyber	resilience	program.”FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY1212IV.  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARDV.  RESPONSIRV.  
13FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
13V.  RESPONSIBILITIES  
OF SENIOR MANAGEMENT
The	Bank	of	Israel	(2015)	serves	as	a	representative	example	 of	the	duties	of	an	institution’s	
senior	management	regarding	cybersecurity	regulations	and	guidelines,	as	follows:
• Creating	 the	cyber	risk	management	 framework	
and	overseeing	its	implementation;
• Formulating	the	corporate	cyber	defense	policy;
• Implementing	 and	consistently	 maintaining	
the	cyber	risk,	including	 allocating	 sufficient	
resources;
• Monitoring	 the	effectiveness	 of	the	cyber	defense,	
and	coordinating	 with	internal	and	external	risk	
management	entities;
• Receiving	periodic	reports	on	cyber	threats;
• Receiving	 periodic	 reports	 on	relevant,	
internal	and	external	cyber	incidents	 and	their	
implications;	
• Discussing	 the	operative	 implications	 of	cyber	
risks,	and	providing	 guidance	 and	control	over	
the	implementation	of	any	required	changes.
Senior	management	 needs	to	receive	periodic	
reports	on	cyber	threats	and	incidents	 to	design	the	
appropriate	 cyber	risk	management	 framework	 and	
cyber	defense	policy,	very	much	as	the	Board	needs	
to	receive	the	same	information	 to	understand	
and	approve	such	framework	 and	policy,	and	to	
oversee	their	effective	 implementation	 by	Senior	
Management.	 Neither	in	the	case	of	the	Board	nor	
that	of	Senior	Management,	 however,	 regulations	
make	clear	the	point	of	receiving	 reports	on	cyber	incidents	 beyond	that	of	informing	 eventually	
necessary	 adjustments	 in	strategies,	 policies,	 risk	
management	 frameworks,	 disaster	recovery	 and	
business	continuity	plans.	
Dealing	with	cyber	incidents	 may	require	taking	
business decisions	 that	would	normally	 not	make	
sense	to	delegate	to	ICT	staff.	For	example,	 if	it	
is	found	that	unknown	 malware	 has	compromised	
a	critical	system,	who	is	to	be	held	personally	
responsible	 for	taking	the	decision	to	shut	down	the	
system	until	the	problem	is	resolved	or,	alternatively,	
continue	providing	 the	system’s	services	while	ICT	
staff	work	to	neutralize	 it?	This	type	of	business	
decision	requires	choosing	 between	a	(financially,	
reputationally,	 regulatorily)	 costly	disruption	 of	
services	now,	and	the	possibility	 of	a	catastrophic	
disruption	 later.	Such	a	problem	 would	seem	to	
fall	under	the	purview	of	Senior	Management	 and/
or	executive	 members	 of	the	Board.	In	this	regard,	
financial	 sector	regulations	 on	cyber	risk	do	not	
explicitly	 delineate	 how	such	critical	decisions	 are	
to	be	made	regarding	 the	responsibilities	 of	Senior	
Management.	 As	discussed	 in	section	VII,	only	
those	regulations	 dealing	with	incident	response	
require	an	explicit	assignment	 of	responsibilities	 in	
the	incident response	plan.FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY1414V.  RESPONSIBILITIES OF SENIOR MANAGEMENT
15FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
15VI.  INFORMATION  
SECURITY OFFICER
As	noted	in	sections	IV	and	V,	existing	regulations	 assign	concrete	responsibilities	 regarding	
ICT	security/cybersecurity 	to	the	Board	and	Senior	Management.	 Although	 less	common,	
some	regulations	 already	require	the	appointment	 of	an	Information	 Security	Officer,	Chief	
Information	 Security	Officer	(CISO),	or	Chief	Cyber	Defense	Officer.	The	National	 Institute	of	
Standards	 and	Technology	 (NIST)	(2017)	framework	 assumes	its	existence,	 and	the	New	York	
State	Department	 of	Financial	 Services	(NYSDFS)	 (2017)	requires	a	CISO.		However,	 subject	to	
certain	conditions,	the	latter	allows	for	the	hiring	of	an	independent	contractor.
Israel	(2015),	Korea	(2016)	and	the	German	
Federal	Financial	 Supervisory	 Authority	 (BaFin)	
(2017)	provide	 similar	job	descriptions	 for	
the	CISO.	Israel	(2015)	states	that	this	officer	
“shall	report	to	a	senior	executive	 of	the	banking	
corporation,	 and	shall	officially	 be	given	the	
authority	 to	influence	 any	decisions	 that	affect	the	
banking	corporation’s	 exposure	 to	cyber	risks.”	As	
this	entails	helping	to	manage	trade-offs	 between	
business	 and	cybersecurity	 objectives,	 all	these	
regulations	 emphasize	 the	need	to	prevent	conflicts	
of	interest.	BaFin	(2017),	for	example,	 requires	
separating	 this	function	 from	the	internal	audit	
and	the	areas	responsible	 for	the	operation	 and	
further	development	 of	the	IT	system.16,	as	well	as	
providing	it	with	adequate	resources.
Another	important	 role	for	the	CISO	is	to	lead	the	
institution’s	 continuous	 learning	on	cybersecurity.	Israel	(2015)	asks	the	CISO	to	“promote	 cyber	
threats	awareness	 and	provide	 training	 on	
mitigation	 processes	 across	the	banking	corporation	
including	 employees,	 suppliers,	 partners	 and	
customers.”	 Korea	(2016)	expects	the	CISO	to	
“develop	 an	educational	 program	to	strengthen	 the	
ability	of	executives	 and	employees	 to	deal	with	
information	 security,	and	to	formulate	 and	execute	
an	annual	educational	 plan.”	Directly	related	to	this	
educational	 role,	Israel	(2015)	also	requires	the	
CISO	to	“initiate	and	execute	cyber	exercises.”Finally,	BaFin	(2017)	creates	the	obligation	 for	
employees	 of	the	institution,	 as	well	as	IT	service	
providers,	 to	provide	immediate	 and	comprehensive	
information	 to	the	Information	 Security	Officer	on	
all	known	IT-related	 issues	affecting	the	institution.	
Requiring	 this	reporting	 from	IT	service	providers	 is	
related	to	the	handling	 of	outsourcing,	 as	discussed	
in	section	IX.
16 The Chief Information O could, for example, be reluctant to approve IT security features that hinder project delivery.FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY1616VI.  INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER
17FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
17VII.  INCIDENT RESPONSE
CPMI-IOSCO	 (2016)	states	that	a	“Financial	 Market	Infrastructure	 (FMI)	should	involve	its	
Board	and	Senior	Management	 appropriately,	 for	example,	 as	part	of	crisis	management	
teams.”		 However,	 financial	 regulations	 on	cybersecurity	 typically	 do	not	explicitly	 list	
incident	response	 responsibilities	 for	members	 of	the	Board	and/or	Senior	Management.	 These	
responsibilities	 are	expected	 to	be	assigned	in	the	institution’s	 incident response plan.	 EBA	(2017),	
for	example,	 requires	“a	documented	 incident	management	 and	escalation	 process,	that	also	
provides	guidance	 on	the	different	incident	management	 and	escalation	 roles	and	responsibilities,	
the	members	of	the	crisis	committee(s)	and	the	chain	of	command	in	case	of	emergency.”
NYSDFS	 (2017)	details	the	required	 content	of	
their	incident	response	plan	as	follows:
• The	internal	 processes	 for	responding	 to	a	
cybersecurity	event;
• The	goals	of	the	incident	response	plan;
• The	definition	 of	clear	roles,	responsibilities	 and	
levels	of	decision-making	authority;
• External	 and	internal	 communications	 and	
information	sharing;
• Identification	 of	requirements	 for	the	remediation	
of	any	identified	 weaknesses	 in	Information	
Systems	and	associated	controls;
• Documentation	 and	reporting	 regarding	
Cybersecurity	 Events	and	related	incident	
response	activities;	• The	evaluation	 and	revision,	 as	necessary, 	
of	the	incident	 response	 plan	following	 a	
cybersecurity	event.
Although	 assigning	 decision-making	 responsibilities 	
is	essential,	 doing	so	only	in	the	context	of	a	plan	
may	be	counterproductive	 if	such	a	plan	is	not	
sufficiently	 general	in	nature.	If	the	concept	of	a	
“plan”	is	narrowly	 understood	 as	detailing	 well-
defined	steps	to	deal	with	well-defined	 contingencies, 	
such	as	fires	or	earthquakes,	 it	may	be	unhelpful	 in	
the	constantly	 evolving	 and	unpredictable	 realm	of	
cyber	incidents.17
17 In a Cyber Crisis Simulation Exercise (CCSE) delivered by the World Bank there were two groups composed of senior op-
erational risk staff representing, respectively, the Senior Management teams of two banks facing severe cyber incidents. One of the teams assessed the situation as described in the scenario and responded accordingly; the other had problems 
because it did not have a “plan” for it!FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY1818VII.  INCIDENT RESPONSE
19FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
19VIII.  TESTS AND SIMULATIONS
Cybersecurity	 regulations	 and	guidelines	 typically	 require	or	suggest	regular	tests	and	
simulations	 of	incident	response	capabilities.	 For	example,	 EBA	(2017)	instructs	supervisors	
to	verify	whether	 a	supervised	 institution’s	 risk	management	 framework	 “tests	ICT	
availability	 and	continuity	 solutions,	 against	a	range	of	realistic	scenarios	 including	 cyberattacks	
and	tests	of	back-ups	for	critical	software	and	data	which:
• are	planned,	formalized	 and	documented,	 and	the	
test	results	used	to	strengthen	 the	effectiveness	 of	
the	ICT	availability	and	continuity	solutions;
• include	stakeholders	 and	functions	 within	the	
organization,	 such	as	business	line	management	
including	 business	continuity,	 incident	and	crisis	
response	 teams,	as	well	as	relevant	 external	
stakeholders	in	the	ecosystem;
• include	 management;	 Board	and	Senior	
Management	 are	appropriately	 involved	 in	…	a	
crisis management team…	 and	are	informed	 of	
test	results.”The	typical	technical	 test,	 penetration testing ,	
involves	 hiring		“white	hat”	hackers	who	attempt	
to	penetrate	 the	institution’s	 ICT	systems	using	
different	 techniques,	 from	“sniffing”	 the	network	
for	open	ports,	to	different	 forms	of	“social	
engineering”.18		Such	testing	is	required	or	suggested	
by	multiple	 regulations	 and	guidelines,	 such	as:	
CBEST	(2016),	Crisanto	 and	Prenio	(2017),	the	
United	Kingdom’s	 Department	 for	Digital,	Culture,	
Media	and	Sport	(DCMS)	 (2016),	EBA	(2017),	
FRB-OCC-FDIC	 (2016),	IOSCO	(2016),	Ireland	
(2016),	NIST 	(2017)	and	Malaysia	(2016).
Crisis	simulation	 exercises	 involving	 key	
stakeholders,	 such	as	Board	Members	 and	Senior	
Management,	 are	intended	 as	“learning-by-doing”	
exercises,	 that	is,	practicing 	information	 sharing	
and	coordination	among	decision	makers.19
18 This could involve tricking staff with emails appearing to come from their bosses with unusual requests, clicking on poi-
soned hyperlinks, or downloading attachments containing malware.
19 Major banks have been doing these exercises for years. The World Bank has delivered more than 30 crisis simulations ex -
ercises for financial sector authorities since 2008, with scenarios frequently including some and, occasionally only, cyber incidents as triggers of financial instability.FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY2020VIII.  TESTS AND SIMULATIONS
21FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
21IX.  OUTSOURCING
Financial	institutions	 increasingly	 rely	on	diverse	IT	service	providers.	 Cloud	services,	 in	
particular,	 are	evolving	 from	providing	 just	“infrastructure	 as	a	service”	(IaaS)	to	“platform	
as	a	service”	(PaaS),	and	even	to	“software	as	a	service”	(SaaS).
Outsourcing	 has	traditionally	 been	an	important	
challenge	 in	operational	 risk	management,	 and	
current	cybersecurity	 regulations	 and	guidelines	
contain	the	usual	expectations	 about	an	institution’s	
capacity	to	manage	it.	EBA	(2017),	for	example,	
expects	 an	institution	 to	have	“an	effective	
framework	 in	place	for	identifying,	 understanding	
and	measuring	 ICT	outsourcing	 risk,	and	in	
particular,	 controls	 and	a	control	environment	
in	place	for	mitigating	 material	 outsourced	 ICT	
services	 that	are	commensurate	 with	the	size,	
activities	 and	the	ICT	risk	profile	of	the	institution.”	
A	key	expectation	 is	that	the	supervisor	 assesses	
the	institution’s	 capacity	to	“review	the	ICT	risk	
management	 policies	and	the	ICT	controls and 
control environment of the service provider to 
ensure	that	they	meet	the	institution’s	 internal	risk	
management	objectives	and	risk	appetite.”
Institutions	 of	all	sizes	and	risk	profiles	need	to	
rely,	at	least	partially,	 on	proprietary	 (hence	closed-
source)	software	 applications	 developed	 by	third	
parties,	which	are	in	turn	normally	 built	on	top	of	
many	different	libraries	 developed	 by	additional	third	parties	entirely	 unknown	 to	the	bank.	
Consequently,	 it	may	not	be	particularly	 realistic	
to	expect	supervised	 institutions	 to	be	able	review	
the	ICT	controls	of	so	many	(including	 unknown)	
developers.	 However,	 “cloud	computing”	 has	freed	
the	banks,	and	many	other	organizations	 (partly	
including	 the	World	Bank),	of	owning	and	securely	
maintaining	 a	data	center.	The	largest	providers	 of	
cloud	services	in	the	US	and	other	countries	 are	
key	technology	 players	such	as	Amazon,	 Google,	
HP,	IBM,	and	Microsoft.	 It	is	unclear	whether	an	
individual	 bank,	including	 the	largest	institutions,	
could	meaningfully	 review	the	“ICT	controls	and	
control	environment”	 of	such	service	providers.	
These	are	also	typically	 outside	the	regulatory	
perimeter,	 and	frequently	 outside	the	national	
jurisdiction,	of	financial	sector	authorities.Given	the	apparently	 irreversible	 migration	 to	
the	cloud	by	most	financial	 sector	institutions,	
two	interesting	 questions	 arise.	First,	who	should	
be	in	charge	of	regulating	 and	supervising	 cloud	
providers?		 Second,	to	what	extent	does	the	reliance	
on	the	increasingly	 homogeneous	 services	of	cloud	
providers	contribute	to	systemic	risk?FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY2222IX.  OUTSOURCING
23FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
23X.  SUPERVISION
In	assessing	 the	quality	of	Board	and	Senior	Management	 oversight	 of	IT	risks,	Ireland	(2016)	
offers	a	clear	example	 of	the	inadequate	 managerial	 practices	 that	skillful	supervisors	 can	
uncover	in	the	field,	including	the	following	ones	directly	related	to	sections	IV,	 V	and	VII:
• Insufficient	 alignment	 between	 the	IT	and	
business	strategies.
• The	quality	and/or	frequency	 of	IT-related	
reporting	 to	the	Board	is	highly	variable	and,	in	
many	cases,	deficient.
• In	general,	the	board	and	Senior	Management	 are	
not	sufficiently	 informed	 about	the	operational	
risk	profile	of	the	firm,	including	 IT	and	
cybersecurity	risks.
• Inadequate	 and/or	infrequent	 testing	of	disaster	
recovery	 and	business	 continuity	 plans	and	
failure	to	inform	the	Board	of	the	outcomes	 of	
this	testing.
Although	 supervisory	 practices	 are	not	as	publicly	
available	as	the	regulatory	 texts	that	supervisors	 must	
enforce,	EBA	(2017)	offers	detailed,	probably	 quite	
representative,	 guidelines.	 Its	general	provisions,	
some	of	which	touch	on	themes	discussed	 in	this	
paper,	are	as	follows:	
• “...the	frequency,	 scope	and	intensity	 of	the	
supervisory	 review	of	an	institution,	 and	also	
the	supervisory	 expectations	 of	the	standards	
the	institution	 is	expected	 to	meet	...should	 be	
proportionate	 to	the	size,	structure	and	operational 	
environment	 of	the	institution	 as	well	as	the	nature,	
scale	and	complexity	 of	the	institution’s	 activities.”• “...the	increasing	 reliance	 on	outsourced	 ICT	
services	and	third-party	 products,	 often	in	the	
form	of	diverse	packaged	 solutions”,	 results	“in	
manifold	 dependencies	 [,]	…	potential	constraints	
and	new	concentration	risks.”
• “...	authorities	 should	use	existing	and	available	
documentation	 (for	example,	 relevant	 reports	
and	other	documents,	 meetings	 with	risk	
management,	 on-site	inspection	 findings)	 to	
inform	their	assessment.”
• “...	authorities	 may	exclude	some	of	the	ICT	risks	
included	in	the	taxonomy	 if	not	pertinent	 to	their	
assessment.”
It	follows	from	these	general	provisions	 that	the	key	
consideration	 that	sets	current	perceptions	 about	
the	challenges	 of	ICT	risk	supervision	 apart	from	
those	of	more	conventional	 supervisory	 tasks	is	
the	increasing	 reliance	on	 outsourced	 ICT	services.	
Consequently,	 the	wisdom	of	EBA’s	representative	
guidelines	 critically	depends	on	those	perceptions.20 
The	guidelines	 cover	the	following	 matters	in	detail:
• ICT	governance	 and	strategy,	including:	 general	
principles;	 development	 of	the	ICT	strategy;	
and	implementation	 of	the	ICT	strategy,	internal	
governance,	and	risk	management.
20 Can each and every financial institution, including the largest and most sophisticated ones, realistically be expected to 
“review” the ICT controls and control environment of each and every one of the developers writing the code that runs its ICT systems to ensure that no “backdoor” or malware is inserted? (Windows 10 alone currently has more than 40 million 
lines of proprietary, closed-source code) Can each and every financial institution meaningfully review the ICT controls and 
control environment of major “cloud” providers, such as Amazon, Google, HP, IBM, and Microsoft? Would an in-house data center (running millions of lines of unknown code written by unknown developers) be easier for an institution to review and for authorities to supervise?FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY2424X.  SUPERVISION• ICT	risk	exposures	 and	controls,	 including:	
general	considerations;	 identification	 of	material	
ICT	risks;	and	assessment	 of	the	controls	 to	
mitigate	material	ICT 	risks.Given	the	current	state	of	the	global	labor	market	
for	IT	specialists,	 finding	and	retaining	 technically	
qualified	staff	to	assess	an	institution’s	 ICT	strategy,	
and	its	exposures	 and	controls,	 are	daunting	 tasks	
for	most	jurisdictions,	 including	 major	ones.	This	
is	yet	another	reason	to	reflect	on	the	allocation	 of	
regulatory	 and	supervisory	 responsibilities	 among	
state	agencies,	as	discussed	in	section	II.25FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
25XI.  CONCLUDING REMARKS
The	increasing	 reliance	on	ICT	technology	 will	require	a	careful	distribution	 of	regulatory	
and	supervisory	 powers	between	 financial	 sector	authorities	 and	other	state	agencies.	
Without	a	clear	legal	framework,	 jurisdictional	 conflicts	are	inevitably	 bound	to	arise	in	
many	countries.
Due	to	the	contagion	 potential	 derived	from	the	
interconnected	 nature	of	contemporary	 financial	
infrastructure,	 traditional	 concepts	 such	as	
“proportionality”	 in	regulatory	 requirements	
and	supervisory	 attention,	 and	“risk	appetite	for	
operational	 risk,”	may	have	to	be	revised.	An	
interconnected	 system	is	as	strong	as	its	weakest	
link.	Hence,	it	may	be	necessary	 to	set	minimum	
cybersecurity	 standards	 for	all	institutions,	
independently	 of	other	dimensions	 of	their	systemic	
importance.
Comparing	 the	responsibilities	 of	the	Board	and	
Senior	Management,	 as	described	 in	sections	IV	
and	V,	with	the	detailed	questions	 that	supervisors	
following	 guidelines	 such	as	those	of	EBA	(2017)	
would	be	inclined	to	ask,	the	findings	of	Ireland	
(2016)	are	not	surprising.	 Furthermore,	 Accenture	(2015)	reveals	that	most	Board	members,	 even	
those	from	the	largest	banks	in	the	world,	would	
likely	have	trouble	offering	satisfactory	 answers.	In	
some	legal	frameworks,	 dealing	with	this	problem	
may	require	writing	substantially	 more	detailed	
regulations	 regarding	 the	responsibilities	 of	the	
Board	and	Senior	Management.
Increasing	 the	outsourcing	 of	ICT	services	is	an	
irreversible	 trend,	which	can	perhaps	decrease	 the	
ICT	risk	of	individual	 institutions.	 However,	 it	
might	also	contribute	to	heightened	systemic	risk.Although	 some	regulations	 explicitly	 require	
cybersecurity	 training	 for	the	Board,	Senior	
Management,	 and	employees,	 surprisingly	 there	
are	no	widespread	 references	 yet	to	training	
the	growing	 number	 of	digital	customers	 of	
financial	services.FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY2626XI.  CONCLUDING REMARKS
27FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION
27REFERENCES
Accenture.	2015.	 Bridging the Technology Gap in Financial Services Boardrooms.
ASIC	(Australian	 Securities	 &	Investments	 Commission).	 2015.	 Cyber Resilience: Health Check. Report 
429.	
BaFin	(Bundesanstalt	 für	Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht–	 German	Federal	Financial	 Supervisory	 Authority).	
2017.	Bankaufsichtliche Anforderungen an die IT (BAIT).	Konsultation.
BCBS	(Basel	Committee	 on	Banking	Supervision).	 2012.	 Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision.
CBEST	(California	 Basic	Educational	 Skills	Test).	2016.	 CBEST Intelligence-Led Testing, Implementation 
Guide.CPMI-IOSCO	 (Committee	 on	Payments	 and	Market	Infrastructures-	 International	 Organisation	 of	
Securities	 Commissions).	 2016.	 Guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures.	 Bank	
for	International	Settlements	and	International	Organization	of	Securities	Commissions.
Crisanto,	 Juan	Carlos	and	Jeremy	Prenio.	2017.	 Regulatory approaches to enhance banks’ cyber-security 
frameworks.	 FSI	Insights	on	Policy	Implementation	 No	2.	Financial	 Stability	Institute,	Bank	of	International	
Settlements.DCMS	(UK	Department	 for	Digital,	Culture,	Media	and	Sport).	2016.	 Cyber security regulation and 
incentives review. Dror,	Ishai.	2017).	 Cybersecurity Regulation in the Financial Sector. Key concepts in existing and proposed 
regulations.	Unpublished	manuscript.
EBA	(European	 Banking	Authority.	 2017.	 Guidelines on ICT Risk Assessment under the Supervisory Review 
and Evaluation Process (SREP) .	
EU	(European	 Union),	2016.	 Directive 2016/1148 Concerning Measures for a High Common Level of 
Security of Network and Information Systems across the Union - NIS.FinSAC	(World	Bank’s	Financial	Sector	 Advisory	Center).	2017.	Cybersecurity 
Regulations in the Financial Sector: A Digest.	 Vienna,	Austria:	The	World	Bank-FinSAC.
FRB-OCC-FDIC	 (Federal	Reserve	Board-	Office	of	the	Comptroller	 of	the	Currency-	 Federal	Deposit	
Insurance	 Corporation).	 2016.	 Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) Regarding Enhanced 
Cyber Risk Management Standards for Large and Interconnected Entities .	United	States:	Board	of	
Governors	 of	the	Federal	Reserve	System,	Office	of	the	Comptroller	 of	the	Currency,	 Federal	Deposit	
Insurance	Corporation.FINANCE, COMPETITIVENESS & INNOVATION INSIGHT  |  FINANCIAL STABILITY & INTEGRITY28REFERENCESG7	(Group	of	7).	2016.	Fundamental Elements of Cybersecurity for the Financial Sector.
Ho,	Hern	Shin.	2015.	Circular	No.	SRD	 TR	03/2015.	Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS).
IBM	(International	 Business	 Machines).	 2017.	 Security trends in the financial services sector. IBM	X-Force	
Research.	
IOSCO	(International	 Organisation	 of	Securities	 Commissions).	 2016.	 Cyber Security in Securities Markets 
– An International Perspective. Ireland,	Central	Bank	of.	2016.	 Central Bank Guidance on IT and Cyber SecurityRisks.
ISO/IEC	(International	 Organization	 for	Standardization/	 International	 Electrotechnical	 Commission)-27000.	
2016.	 Standard 27000: Information technology – Security techniques – Information security management 
systems – Overview and vocabulary.______.	27001.	2005.	 Standard 27001: Requirements on Information technology – Security techniques – 
Information security management systems.
______.	27002.	2013.	 Standard 27002: Information Technology – Security Techniques – Code of Practice 
for Information Security Controls. Second edition.Israel,	Bank	of.	2015.	Cyber Defense Management Directive.
Klimburg,	 Alexander.	2017.	The Darkening Web. The War for Cyberspace. Penguin Press: New York. 
Korea.	2016.	Regulation on Supervision of Electronic Financial Transactions.Malaysia,	Securities	Commission.	2016.	 Guidelines on Management of Cyber Risk SC-GL/2-2016.
Nelson,	Winston.	2017.	Taxonomy of ICT Risks.	Unpublished	manuscript.
NIST	(National	 Institute	of	Standards	 and	Technology).	 2017.	 Cybersecurity Workforce Framework.	 NIST	
Special	Publication	800181.	
______.	2014.	Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity .	Version	1.0.
NYSDFS	 (New	York	State	Department	 of	Financial	 Services).	 2017.	 Cybersecurity Requirements for 
Financial Services Companies. Promontory.	 2017.	 Comments to ANPR on Enhanced Cyber Risk Management Standards.	 February	 15.	
Promontory	Interfinancial	Network.
PwC	(Pricewaterhouse	Coopers).	2017.	Digital Banking Survey .
Somers,	James.	2017.	“The	Coming	Software	 Apocalypse.”	The Atlantic Magazine.	September	26.FINANCIAL SECTOR’S CYBERSECURITY: REGULATIONS AND SUPERVISION2929Symantec.	2017.	 Internet Security Threat Report .
Synoptek______.	2017.	Cybersecurity Outlook for Financial Services Organizations.
Taylor,	Charles.	2017.	Cyber Preparedness for Financial Regulators .	Unpublished	manuscript.
Verizon.	2017a.	 Data Breach Investigations Report. 	10th	Edition.	
______.2017b.	Data Breach Digest.