Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
96 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
Financial Inclusion and Poverty Alleviation in Kenya: Effects of Mobile Loan Interest Rates on the 
Financial Performance of SMEs in Urban Informal Settlements  
 
Margaret Murage1 
 
1KCA University  
1Maggiemurage@gmail.com  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------  
ABSTRACT  
The aim of this study is to assess the effect of interest rates on the financial performance of SMEs in urban informal sett lements in 
Kenya. T his study adopts the d escriptive survey design. Data were collected from 120 SMEs in the 6 wards of Mathare Sub -County. 
Data was collected using semi -structured questionnaires. It was analysed using descriptive and inferential statistics. The findings 
show that low -interest rates could influence the propensity of SMEs to apply for these loans. The ability to pay mobile loans without 
problems due to low interest rates enhanced the performance of the respondents’ businesses. This goes on to contribute to pov erty 
alleviation in urban informal settlements through enhanced access to capital; one of the goals of the world bank. This has further 
ripple effects since it can contribute to income diversification for the inhabitants of poor urban areas. The following 
recommendations were  made. The government should also reduce interest rates to lower the cost of mobile phone interests as well 
as the interest rates of other loan products. Mobile loan lenders should also ensure that their loan products are affordable for the 
urban poor.  
 
Key Words:  Interest Rates, Repayment Timelines, Financial Inclusion, Poverty Alleviation, Financial Performance,  Small and 
Medium Enterprises, Urban Informal Settlements  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
Mobile Loans have, for the last close to three decades, been taking centre  stage in financing processes. 
According to Muller (1995), mobile lending is “the ability to use your smartphone or tablet to apply for, gain approval 
on, and check the status of a loan.” With the rise and rise of mobile phones, it is not possible to apply  for loans 
ubiquitously and at lower costs.  In essence, mobile loans are based on the bank focused theory which argues that by 
adopting technologies, commercial banks can reap more benefits in serving their customers (Lyman, 2006). Similar 
findings were a lso recorded in Pakistan by Fatima and Kiran (2011) who found out that between 2006 and 2010, the 
introduction of mobile banking contributed to improvement in the financial performance of the Commercial banks. 
However, their study did not focus on the asso ciated effect of mobile loans within the mobile banking framework on 
such performance. However, the converse influence of mobile loans on the financial performance of SMEs was not 
studied by the former studies.  
In the United Kingdom, Pollard et al. (2017) posit that one of the challenges facing the financing of the firms 
studied was the high -interest rates. This was also affirmed by a study in the Libyan City of Gharian by Samawi et al. 
(2016) that shows that between 2007 and 2012; some of the major challen ges facing SMEs were poor funding, poor 
liquidity, and high -interest rates.  Samawi et al. (2016) show that the inability to access financing was a significant 
constraint to the growth of small firms in Libya. This was also attested in Rambe and Mosweunyan e (2017) in South 
Africa that shows that the inabilities to secure sustainable financing affected the financial performance of SMEs. It can 
be inferred by these findings that access to financing has significant influences on the performance of SME s. In Ghana, 
a study by Tobbin and Kuwornu (2012) shows that mobile money systems were bridging a very important financial gap 
for SMEs. In the context of challenges related to access to credit were increasingly being mitigated through mobile 
money systems.  Concurrently, old and transitional systems of saving were being replaced. This shows the promises of 
mobile loans on financing SMEs in the African continent. However, the level to which mobile loans have been applied 
in the financing of SMEs and the direc t contributions of such financing to the performance of these SMEs is largely 
unexplored.  
By the turn of the last decade, Kenya had started to largely adopt mobile lending. According to the Central Bank 
of Kenya (CBK, 2010), mobile lending was increasingly  emphasized by commercial banks as a strategic tool for 
realizing profit maximization and cost minimization.  It was playing a pivotal role in enhancing access to banking 
services such as loans for SME s. Mobile lending services such as M -shwari (Commercial  Bank of Africa); KCB -
MPESA (KCB), M -Co-op cash (cooperative bank of Kenya) , and Equitel (Equity Bank) created immense opportunities 
in which geographical barriers were eliminated; enhancing convenience for customers.   Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
97 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
Kenya Credit Bureaus show that as of  2019, 19 million Kenyans had active mobile loans. At the same time, 
most of these borrowers (40%) had loans from about 6 out of 10 mobile money lending services. Regrettably, there were 
high default rates (2%) of the borrowers, which amounted to over 380, 000 Kenyans  as posited by Credit Bureau 
Reference Kenya (CRB). This shows that there were high levels of adoption of mobile loans in the country which could 
enhance the performance of SMEs.  However, the nexus between the use of mobile loans to finance SME s and the 
associated performance effects are largely undocumented.  
Nyaga (2013) that since the launch of mobile money services in 2007, close to 50% of the population had 
adopted the service. This was attributable to affordability (due to low  interest rate s) and accessibility of the service for 
low-income earners.  The adoption of the service had positive impacts on the growth of SMEs. Though the former study 
is closely related to this current study, it does not expressly relate to the direct effect of loan s on financial performance 
among SMEs. It is also quite dated and might not reflect the current situation in which myriad mobile loan services have 
been launched.  
There has been a sharp increase in mobile phone -based lenders in Kenya in the last decade. Th ese include M -
Shwari by Safaricom, Fuliza -Safaricom, Berry, Tala, KCB M -Pesa, Timiza -Barclays, Branch, Shika, iPesa, Zenka, 
Zidisha, Okash, Jazika, Utunzi, Kopakash, HF Whizz, Saida , and Haraka (Onamu, 2020). These apps make it possible 
for individuals and  SMEs to access quick unsecured loans, sometimes up to KSH. 1,000,000. This current study sets out 
to find out the level to which the interest rates of mobile loans influence s poverty in Keny an’s urban informal settlements 
through enhanced financial perfor mance of SMEs.  
 
1.1 Statement of the Problem  
SMEs play a crucial role  in Kenya’s economy. They contribute to 18% of the GDP and employ  about 80% of 
Kenya’s population (Kithae et al., 2012). However, the cost of borrowing often discourages SMEs in urban informal 
settlements from borrowing. This has negative effects on them since financing is panacea to the growth problems of any 
firm. However, the nexus between the interest rates of mobile loa ns and the financial performance of SMEs is scantily 
studied. This study sets out to find out the level to which interest rates affects the performance of SMEs in poor urban 
neighborhoods and the overall impact on poverty alleviation in these areas. Withou t studies such as this one, it would 
be untenable to make empirically informed recommendations on ways in which mobile loan products can be utilized to 
alleviate poverty in poor urban areas. This ought not to be so in areas faced with immense growth challe nges. In this 
light,  this study sets out to bridge these literature gaps by investiga ting the effect of the interest rates of mobile loans on 
the financial performance of SMEs in urban informal settlements in Kenya with reference to Mathare Slums.  
 
1.2 Research Objectives  
The general objective of the study is to assess the effect of mobile loan interest rates on the financial 
performance of SMEs in urban informal settlements in Kenya  
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW  
 
2.1 Theoretical Framework  
This study is pegged on the resource -based theory. The Resource -Based Theory was advanced by Grant (2015). 
The theory is based on the assumption that financial resources are limited. As such organizations do not have enough 
resources – financial resources to finance their operati ons. The Resource -Based Theory of Competitive Advantage 
(RBTCA) also postulates that organizations (SMEs) in the case of this current study are often unable to identify and use 
potential resources effectively.  This leads to a lack of appreciation of exist ing resources; or at least those at their disposal 
such as mobile loans. This goes on to affect the financial performance of such firms.  
Grant (2015) classifie d resources into six categories viz. physical, human, technological, financial, reputation , 
and, organizational resources. The joint application of these resources would contribute to the overall performance of 
the firm. The Resource -Based Theory has been applied in various studies. Jarkko (2016) for example in a study in 
Finland shows that succ essful use of resources enhances a firm to access the resources it did not have. This shows that 
the resources of a firm can be a bridge to other resources.  A study by Coplin (2002) in Spain shows that having similar 
resources did not always result in sim ilar success outcomes. Success was pegged to the level to which firms were able 
to efficiently use the resources at their disposal. Aaker (1992) reiterates this the levels to which a firm decides to deploy  
its resources to enhance competitiveness will dete rmine its level of success.  
In Kenya, the RBTCA has been employed in a study titled, “Resource Configurations on Sustainable 
Competitive Advantage of Food and Beverage Firms in Kenya: A Resource -Based View of the Firm” (Mutunga, Minja, 
& Gachanja, 2014). T he study shows that resource -based views have been pivotal in business theorizing. In this case, Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
98 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
competent use of resources has had positive influences on financial performance in organi zations in the manufacturing 
theory (GOK, 2010; 2011; 2013).  The impa ct of the application of resources on the performance of organi zations has 
thus increased its application in contemporary s tudies in the last decade or so . In line with this current study, it can be 
argued that if SMEs could leverage financial resources fr om mobile loans in the context of the other resources they 
have, they can maximize their profits. This would go on to contribute to competitiveness in SMEs.  
 
2.2 Empirical Review  
Amsi et al. (2017) sought to investigate the effects of microfinance credit f actors such as credit amount, interest 
rate, collateral requirement, credit repayment , and entrepreneur orientation on SME financial performance in Kenya by 
the use of stratified and random sampling to come up with a sample size of 210 SMEs. The findings achieved after 
analysis show that a large number of SME owners have not received entrep reneurial training and that interest rates, 
collateral requirements , and repayment periods factors have had a negative impact on SME financial performance, 
especially in Kenya’s informal settlements.  
Pollard, Richter, Down, and Ram (2017) in “Financialisat ion and small firms” undertook a longitudinal 
qualitative analysis of bioscience and film and media firms in the United Kingdom (UK). The study established that one 
of the challenges facing the financing of the firms studied w as the high -interest rates of the products studied. This current 
study sets out to find out the level to which interest rates limited access to funding by SMEs in Kenya and how mobile 
loans played mitigation roles.  
Samawi, Mdanat, Yosef, and Abutayeh (2016) investigated methods for fun ding SMEs. This was based on data 
from a field study involving a sample drawn from the Trade and Development Banks as well as selected SMEs. The 
study period was between 2007 and 2012. The findings show that some of the major challenges facing SMEs were po or 
funding and poor liquidity. This was aggravated by high -interest rates. This current study investigates the level to which 
these challenges can be alleviated by low -interest rates through mobile loans in Kenya. This is pertinent since the former 
study w as neither focused on Kenya nor mobile loans.  
Mutie, Muturi, and Njeru (2019) in “Effect of equity finance on the financial performance of SMEs in Kenya” 
used quantitative and qualitative primary and secondary data. This entailed a sample of 384 responden ts drawn from 
291,449 licensed SMEs selected from 6 counties in Kenya namely: Nairobi, Mombasa, Machakos, Makueni, Kajiado, 
and Kitui Counties. The findings show that SMEs faced challenges related to choosing the best source of finance to 
enhance their per formance due to attributes such as interest rates and repayment periods. Since the former study was 
not focused on mobile loans, it is pertinent to investigate the level to which low -interest rates in mobile loans militated 
against these challenges.  
Bernar d, Sare, and Musah (2014) sought to investigate the effects of interest rates on micro, small and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) access to funds and their financing decision in Wa Municipality of Ghana by using multiple 
research method and descriptive survey w hich made it possible to use qualitative and quantitative data collection 
techniques and data analysis methods. The findings of this study show that MSMEs rely on equity financing to carry 
out their operations due to various factors such as interest rates,  which affect the choice of financing decisions in the 
study area. To achieve the purpose of providing financing to MSMEs, there is a need for lending institutions to review 
the cost of credit downwards to enable smooth repayment and to increase loan deman d for MSMEs growth, which in 
turn plays a major role in economic advancement. Though not focused on Kenya, the findings of this study can be used 
to understand the effect of interest rates on SMEs in Kenya’s informal settlements.  
Osano  and Languitone   (2016) sought to establish that there are other factors which when coupled with high -
interest rates affect SME growth. This study used simple random sampling to come up with a sample of 485 SMEs in 
Maputo city, Mozambique. Data collection was done through the face -to-face interview which made use of structured 
questionnaires. The findings of this study show that the SMEs that accessed credit did not find interest rates as a 
challenge, but the insistence on collateral and poor structural system existing in the country was a major chal lenge to 
their growth and sustainability and can be applied in the Kenyan context to better understand the factors which influence 
access to finance by SMEs in informal settlements.  
 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  
 
3.1 Research Design  
This study was based on descriptive survey design. This design is preferable since it helps explain causal 
relations based on various data sources such as questionnaires, interviews , and document analysis; all of which are 
possible to deploy in this study. The design is also able  to apply multiple methods of analysis such as correlation and 
simple as well as multiple regression analysis to test the relationship between the study variables.  Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
99 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
 
3.3 Population  
Mugenda and Mugenda (2008) point out that a population is a large group of p articipants from which a sample 
is drawn.  This study targets SMEs in the six wards of Mathare Sub -County namely: Hospital, Mabatini, Huruma, Ngei, 
Mlango Kubwa, and Kiamaiko. There are about 3500 SMEs in the Sub -County with turnovers of over Ksh.50, 000 p er 
month. A sampling frame is a list of the sampling units that are used in the selection of a sample (Bryman & Cramer, 
1994). In this study, the sampling frame was the SMEs operating in each Ward of Mathare Sub -County. These SMEs 
undertake activities in v arious sectors such as construction, tailoring and dress -making, food and hospitality activities, 
health services, general supplies, vegetable sales, and transport among others. In Each SME, the proprietor/manager w as 
targeted.  
 
3.4 Sample  
Cooper & Schind ler, (2014) points out that sampling is suitable where it’s not practical to study a whole 
population. The sample size for this study was obtained from a sampling formula by Yamane as shown below:  
𝑛=𝑁
1+𝑁(𝑒)2=97.1 
Where:  
n= the sample size  
N = the size of the population  
e= the error of 10%  
The calculation from a population of 3500 is 98.  
 
This study used the proportionate stratified sampling procedure and snowballing techniques to obtain the sample 
from each Ward in Mathare -Sub County . Therefore, the s ample of 98 respondents was chosen  proportionately from 
each Ward . This ensured that the true picture of the subject under investigation in the study areas is captured. The 
respondents were also obtained proportionately from different kinds of SMEs using the snowballing non -probabilistic 
sampling method. Participants fr om each category were asked to refer their colleagues in similar businesses to participate 
in the study. This also made it easy to recruit study participants.  
 
3.8 Data Processing and Analysis  
Data was collected using semi -structured questionnaires and da ta collection forms. This study used descriptive 
and inferential statistics (Cooper & Schindler, 2014). Descriptive statistics entailed frequency, percentages, and means. 
Inferential statistics involved correlation and regression analysis.  The findings wer e presented in Tables and Figures.  
Diagnostic tests were carried out before inferential statistics to ascertain whether the data is properly modelled by a 
normal distribution  included tests for normality, multicollinearity , and Heteroscedasticity.  
 
IV. FINDINGS  
 
4.1 Response Rate  
The study sampled 98 the proprietors/managers of SMEs. Out of these, 86 responded. The return rate was thus 
88% which was deemed sufficient for analysis.  
 
4.2 Pilot Testing  
The study tested the data collection tool for reliability  and validity before the administration of the tool. When 
all the tests were successfully done t hen the tool was administered. In this study, Cronbach alpha value d of 0.752 and 
0.811 were obtained for interest rates and financial performance respectively as presented in Table  1. Since these were 
more than 0.7, the research instrument was deemed sufficient for use in data collection.  
 
Table 1  
Reliability Test  
Item  No. of Items   Cronbach Alpha (α)  
Interest Rates  6 0.752  
Financial Performance  5 0.811  
 Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
100 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
This study utilized content validity. The respondents could easily understand and respond to the study questions. The 
tool was thus deemed adequate for use in data collection.  
 
4.3 Demographic Information of the Study Participants  
The study sought to find the gender of the respondents. The findings show that close to two -thirds of the 
respondents were female (66.3%) while males were 33.7%. This implies that bother genders were significantly 
represented in the study.  The major businesses were restaurants, sh ops, chemical sales, transport (rider/taxi), sales, 
farming, barbershop, plumbing, manufacturing, carpentry, general supplies, legal practice, cyber, mechanics shop, 
phone shops, outdoor films, stationery, and saloon/hairdressing among others. This shows t hat the respondents were 
from divergent businesses. As such, the findings obtained could adequately represent SMEs in the study area.  
The findings show that more than a third of the respondents had diplomas (36%). These were followed by close 
to a fifth (1 9.8%) who had degrees. Those who had certificates and high school qualifications followed at 15.1%. These 
findings show that the respondents had divergent education levels and could make significant contributions to the study.  
Further,  the findings show that most of the respondents (45.5%) had been in business for periods ranging 
between 2 and 5 years. These were followed by close to a third (32.6%) who had been in business for 6 to 10 years. 
These findings show that most of the respondents had been in bu siness long enough to understand the contribution of 
mobile loans to the financial performance of businesses.  
The respondents were asked to indicate the frequency of borrowing various mobile loans they had used. The 
responses were captured on a scale of 1 to 4 where 1=Often (Several times a year); 2= Always (Every Month); 3=Rarely 
(Sometimes in 2 years) and; 4 =Never (Never borrowed). Weighted means were used to indicate the average agreeability 
with the different frequencies of borrowing. The findings show  that M -Shwari and Fuliza -Safaricom were used always 
(M=2). Other popular loans were Tala and KCB M -Pesa were where used rarely or sometimes in 2 years (M=3). These 
findings show that only four mobile phones were mostly used. These were   M -Shwari, Fuliza -Safaricom, Tala, and 
KCB M -Pesa. The other mobile loans (Berry, Timiza -Barclays, Branch, Shika, iPesa, Zenka, Zidisha, Okash, Jazika, 
Utunzi, Kopakash, HF Whizz, Saida, Haraka, M -Co-op cash , and Equitel loans) were never borrowed (M=4). This was 
due to the  fact that they were hard to apply for and obtain. In some cases, borrowers were turned back based on CRB 
ratings. Furthermore, some of the respondents had never heard about some of them.  
 
4.4 Descriptive Statistics  
4.4.1 Interest Rates and the Financial Performance of SMEs  
The second objective of the study was to assess the effect of mobile loan interest rates on the financial 
performance of SMEs in urban informal settlements in Kenya.  
 
Table 2  
Interest Rates and the Financial Performance of SMEs  
 
The respondents either agreed to high or moderate extents to the statements presented to them. To begin with, 
they agreed to a high extent (WM=4) that they had a challenge getting loans from banks due to high -interest rates and 
that they preferred mobile loans because they had lower interest rates. They also agreed to a high extent (WM=4) that 
different mobile loans had different interest rates so they could choose  the one they wanted. These findings agree with 
Pollard et al. (2017) who posit that interest loans affected the performance of SMEs.  Descriptive Statistics  
Statement  Mean  Std. Dev.  
1. The interest rates  of loans affect the performance of businesses  3 1.50 
2. I have a challenge getting loans from banks due to high -interest rates  4 1.30 
3. I prefer mobile loans because they have lower interest rates  4 1.38 
4. Different mobile loans have different interest rates so I can choose the one I 
want  4 1.27 
5. Due to lower interest rates in mobile loans, I can borrow more and this enhances 
the performance of my business  3 1.32 
6. It is to service multiple loans because of lower interest rates which enhance the 
performance of my business  3 1.36 
N=86    Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
101 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
The respondents agreed to a moderate rate (WM=3) that the interest rates of loans affected the performance of 
businesses a nd that due to lower interest rates in mobile loans, they could borrow more and this enhanced the 
performance of their business. They also agreed to a moderate extent that interest rates led to the ability to service 
multiple loans because of lower interest rates which enhanced the performance of their businesses. The findings show 
that interest rates had a moderate and high influence on mobile loans which agrees with Samawi et al. (2016) who posit 
that interest rates affected funding and liquidity in businesses.  
The respondents pointed out that low -interest rates were better since one could borrow more. On their part, high -
interest rates meant that one had to pay more so there was a challenge in the business. Low -interest rates also made 
decision -making easy due to ease in financing which is the goal of most businesses. Interest rates led to easy and reliable 
cash. These findings agree with those of Kiptoo et al. (2017) who posit that interest rates a ffected the financing of SMEs.  
The respondents also pointed out that low -interest rates were better since one could borrow more. On their part, 
high-interest rates meant that one had to pay more so there was a challenge in the business. Low -interest rates also made 
decision -making easy due to ease in financing which is the goal of most businesses. Interest rates led to easy and reliable 
cash.  
 
4.4.2 Financial Performance of SMEs  
The dependent variable of the study was the financial performance of SMEs in ur ban informal settlements in 
Kenya. This section presents the findings obtained.  
 
Table 3  
Financial Performance of SMEs  
Descriptive Statistics      
Statement  Mean  Std. Dev.  
1. Since I started using mobile loans my business has been making more sales  3 1.32 
2. Since I started using mobile loans my business has been making more profits  3 1.35 
3. My business has more assets since I started using mobile loans  3 1.31 
4. My business has less debts since I started using mobile loans  3 1.38 
5. I have expanded my business to  other areas since I started using mobile loans  3 1.45 
N=86    
 
The dependent variable of the study was the financial performance of SMEs in urban informal settlements in 
Kenya. The respondents agreed to a moderate extent (WM=3) with all the statements presented to them. In this regard, 
they agreed to a moderate extent  that since they started using mobile loans, their businesses had been making more sales 
and that since they started using mobile loans; their business had been making more profits. Also, their businesses had 
moderately more assets since they started using  mobile loans. Their businesses also had fewer  debts since they started 
using mobile loans (WM=3). They had also expanded their business to other areas since they started using mobile loans. 
These findings show that the businesses started seeing positive performance since the start of using mobile loa ns. 
Financial data was collected from the businesses. The findings show that there were include increases in total 
sales from an average of Ksh. 2.4 million to 3.336 million and  Profit and loss, from Ksh. 0.6 million to 0.996 million. 
Debt value also incr eased at the same time from 0.348 million to 0.504 million. Assets (Buildings/Equipment) also 
increased from Ksh. 0.533 million to Ksh. 0.721 million as shown in Figure 1. The number of new branches remained 
at an average of 1 branch per business (Figure 2). These findings show that mobile loans among other financial sources 
led to increases in the performance of businesses. These findings agree with Denis and Rodgers (2007) who pointed out 
that increases in the size of assets and positive operating income (firm’s total assets or sales) for two consecutive years 
at the base year (time of measurement) indicated positive financial performance.  
 
4.4.2.1 Financial Performance from Financial Records  
Financial data was collected from the businesses. The findings s how that there were include increases in total 
sales from an average of Ksh. 2.4 million to 3.336 million and Profits from Ksh. 0.6 million to 0.996 million. Debt value 
also increased at the same time from 0.348 million to 0.504 million. Assets (Buildings/ Equipment) also increased from 
Ksh. 0.533 million to Ksh. 0.721 million as shown in Figure 1. The number of new branches remained at an average of 
1 branch per business (Figure 2). These findings show that mobile loans among other financial sources led to increases 
in the performance of businesses.  
  Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
102 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1  
Amount of Figures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2  
No. of New Branches  
 
4.5 Inferential Statistics  
This section presents correlation analyses.  
 
4.5.1 Pearson Correlation  
Pearson correlation analysis was carried out to test the significance of the relationships between the independent and 
dependent study variables. The findings show that there w ere significant relationships between financial performance 
in SMEs and all independent variables as  follows: loan accessibility, (r=0.924, p<0.05); Interest Rates, (r=0.879, p<0.05) 
and; repayment timelines (r=0.874, p<0.05).  
 
Table 6   
Pearson Correlation  
Correlations   
  Interest Rates  
Financial Performance  Pearson Correlation  .879** 
Sig. (2 -tailed)  .000 
N 86 
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2 -tailed).   
 
  1 1 1
00.20.40.60.811.2
2017' 2018' 2019'No. of New branches2400000
600000 3480005330002976000
852000
3720006040003336000
996000
504000 721000
05000001000000150000020000002500000300000035000004000000
Total Sales (Ksh) Profit/Loss (Ksh) Debt Value (Ksh) Assets
(Buildings/Equipment)
Value (Ksh)
2017' 2018' 2019'Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
103 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
V. CONCLUSION  
 
The findings show that low -interest rates could influence the propensity of SMEs to apply for these loans. The 
ability to pay mobile loans without problems due to low interest rates enhanced the performance of the respondents’ 
businesses. This goes on to contribute to poverty alleviation in urban informal settlements through enhanced access to 
capital; one of the goals of the world bank. This has further ripp le effects since it can contribute to income diversification 
for the inhabitants of poor urban areas.  
 
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
The study recommends as follows:  The government should also reduce interest rates to lower the cost of mobile 
phone interests as well  as the interest rates of other loan products. Mobile loan lenders should also ensure that their loan 
products are affordable for the urban poor.  
 
REFERENCES  
Aaker , D. A., ( 1992 ). The value of brand equity. Journal of Business Strategy , 13(4), 27 -32. 
Amsi , F., Ngare, P., Imo, P., & Gachie, M. (2017). Effect of Microfinance Credit on SMEs Financial Performance in 
Kenya. Journal of Emerging Trends in Economics and Management Sciences, 8 (1), 37 -47. 
APHRC . (2010). Does Free Primary Education Policy Affect Ove rage Enrolment? Evidence from Urban Kenya . 
Retrieved on December 12, 2012, from http://www.aphrc.org/download/?id=42  
Bernard, B., Sare, Y.A., & Musah, A. (2014). The Effects of Interest Rate on Micro, Small , and Medium Enterprises 
Financing Decision in Wa Municipality of Ghana. International Journal of Business, Humanities and 
Technology, 4(4) 2.  
Bitcoin Kenya. (2019). 19 Million Kenyans Have Active Mobile Loans with 40% Being Multiple Mobile Lenders . Bitcoin 
Kenya. https://bitcoinke.io/2019/03/19 -million -kenyans -active -mobile -loans -40-percent -multiple -mobile -
lenders/  
Bryman, A., & Cramer, D. (1994). Quantitative data analysis for social scientists  (Rev. ed.). Taylor & 
Frances/Routledge.  
Cooper, R. D. & Schindler, S. P. (2014). Business. Research Methods.  Boston: Irwin McGraw Hill.  
Coplin, L.C. (2002). Competitive advantages and the SMEs: the role of distinctive competenc ies as determinants of 
success, are there differences across gender, sector, and size?  Ph.D. Thesi s. Doctoral Thesis. Universitat 
Autonoma De Barcelona, Spain.  
Denis, D.K. & Rodgers, K.J. (2007). Chapter 11: Duration, Outcome, and Post -Reorganization Performance. Journal of 
Financial and Quantitative Analysis  42, 101 -118. 
Douglas, J., Douglas, A., Mut uri, D., & Ochieng, J. (2017). “An Exploratory Study of Critical Success Factors for SMEs 
in Kenya.”  University of Verona 20th International  Conference. Verona (Italy), 1 September 7 and 8, 2017.  
Fatima, R.N. &Kiran, G.H. (2011).Impact of Mobile Banking  on the Financial Performance of Commercial Banks in 
Pakistan. The Empirical Evidence Journal of Finance , 41 (1), 28 -67. 
Gall. M.D., Borg, W.R., & Gall, J.P. (2003). Educational research: An introduction  (7th ed.). White Plains, NY: 
Longman Publisher.  
Grant, R. M. (2015). The Resource -Based Theory of Competitive Advantage . Research Gate.  Accessed on October 09, 
2015, from http://www.researchgate.net/publication/228314373.  
Jarkko, R. (2016). International diversification of a small Finnish firm Case: Com pany X.  Master’s Thesis. Haaga Helia 
University, Finland.  
Kiptoo, F.J., Bogonko, J., & Wanza, L. (2017). Influence of informal financing on the financial performance of women -
owned enterprises in Kenya, a case of Nairobi County. International Journal of Sm all Business and 
Entrepreneurship Research , 5 (6), 40 -48. 
Kithae, P.P., Gakure, R.W., & Munyao, L.M. (2012). The Place of Micro and Small Enterprises in Kenya in 
Achievement of Kenya's Vision 2030. Journal of US -China Public Administration , 9 (12), 1432 -1440. 
Lyman, T. M. (2006). Effects of Banking Sectoral Factors on the financial performance of commercial banks in Kenya. 
Economic and Finance Review , 1 (5), 1 -3 
Mugenda, O. , & Mugenda, A. (2008). Social science Research: Theory and Principles . Nairobi: Appl ied Research and 
Training Services.  Vol. 1 (Iss. 1) 2021, pp. 96-104                                  Science Mundi                                http://sciencemundi.net/  
  
104 
 
Licensed Under C reative Commons Attribution (CC  BY-NC)   
Mutunga, S.L., Minja, D., & Gachanja, P. (2014). Resource Configurations on Sustainable Competitive Advantage of 
Food and Beverage Firms in Kenya: A Resource -Based View of the Firm. European Journal of Business and 
Manag ement , 6 (24), 147.  
Nyaga, K.M. (2013). The impact of mobile money services on the performance of small and medium enterprises in an 
urban town in Kenya . Master’s Thesis. KCA University.   
Onamu, A. (2020). Here’s a List of Mobile Loan Apps in Kenya and Th eir Rates. Gadgets in Africa. https://gadgets -
africa.com/2020/01/30/heres -a-list-of-loan-apps-and-their-rates -in-kenya/  
Osano , H.M., &  Languitone , H. (2016). Factors influencing access to finance by SMEs in Mozambique: case of SMEs 
in Maputo central business district. Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship , 5(13), 1.   
Pollard, J., Richter, P., Down, S., & Ram, M. (2017). Financialisation and small firms: A qualitative analysis of 
bioscience and film  and media firms. International Small Business Journal , 36 (3), 247 -264.  
Rambe, P., & Mosweunyane, L. (2017). A poverty -reduction oriented perspective to small business development in 
South Africa: A human capabilities approach. African Journal of Science , Technology, Innovation and 
Development , 9 (3), 1.  
Samawi, G.A., Mdanat, M.F., Yosef, F.A., & Abutayeh, B. (2016). Formal versus Informal Financing of SMEs in the 
Libyan Context: The Case of Gharian City. Journal of Business and Economics , 7(7), 1137 -1146 .  
Tobbin, P., & Kuwornu, J.K. (2011). Adoption of mobile money transfer technology: structural equation modeling 
approach. European Journal of Business and Management , 3(7), 59 -77. 
 