EKO INDIA: CASE STUDY   |  December 2020  1 1Eko Grows Agent Network Tenfold 
Through Open APIs
PAUL REYNOLDS AND JOEP ROEST
From 15,000 to 150,000 agents in just three years
Eko India is a fintech company founded by brothers Abhishek and Abhinav Sinha in 2007. 
Its core business model uses agents to offer customers, who pay cash over the counter 
and remittance services provided by banks and other services providers. Its target 
customers are low- and moderate-income earners in urban areas. 
When Eko launched, it planned to build its own agent network, which would have been a 
capital-intensive undertaking. However, as more players entered the market and money 
transfer services became hypercompetitive, it refocused its business model to better 
leverage its core competencies, which included (i) an excellent technology platform, (ii) 
expertise in onboarding and partnering with multiple banks, and (iii) the ability to ensure 
agent compliance with myriad regulations and bank risk management practices. 
While Eko maintained its agent channel, it also used open APIs to enable a variety of third-
party businesses to incorporate Eko services into their offering. Each third-party business 
provides services to retail shops and has local knowledge and support structures in place, 
which enable Eko to expand outside large cities into less urban and more rural areas across 
India. 
Intrigued by the Eko story, we met with Eko leadership to take a closer look at how Eko 
leveraged open APIs as a key part of its business transformation to connect its platform 
with over 300 third-party businesses. Connecting with these third parties allowed Eko to 
scale its distribution reach from 15,000 to 150,000 agents within three years and expand 
its coverage to every state in India. Currently, more than 11 percent of its agents are in 
rural India. See Figure 1.
Eko used open APIs to become a platform business, which enabled it to expand at 
considerably lower operational cost than its traditional agent business would have. 
Importantly, its new platform generated four times more revenue than its previous business 
model did. 
Eko’s open API-fuelled expansion has kicked off a virtuous cycle. The increase in the 
number of agents has made Eko’s platform more attractive to providers offering other 
services, such as online education, entertainment, and insurance. These services 
providers can use the Eko platform to reach a large pan-India population of cash-based 
customers. This, in turn, has enhanced Eko’s attractiveness to agents, because agents EKO INDIA: CASE STUDY 
December 2020 EKO GROWS AGENT NETWORK TENFOLD THROUGH OPEN API s2can offer additional services and take advantage of additional revenue opportunities. 
Consumers benefit from access to a significantly larger and more relevant agent network 
that extends into more remote areas and offers a growing range of services. 
Eko’s business model pivot
When Eko launched in 2007, it was a financial services agent network manager for leading 
Indian banks. Those banks integrated with Eko’s technology platform to support their 
agent banking businesses. Through this experience Eko realized that there was enormous 
latent demand for domestic money transfer among urban-based migrant workers who 
sent money back to their families. Eko, together with its bank partners, became one of the 
pioneers in the over-the-counter remittance business in India.
By 2015, Eko had recruited  15,000 agents, which enabled about 1 million customers to 
send money home to their families every month. However, due to the capital intensive 
nature of signing up their own agents, Eko needed to make a significant up-front 
investment to create a pan-India agent network, and it began to look for another way to 
grow quickly.
Eko’s founders, brothers Abhishek and Abhinav Sinha, reflected on the company’s  
core strengths, and they boiled them down to technology, high-quality bank integrations, 
and relationships:
• Eko’s technology was purpose built for agents to facilitate over-the-counter payments on 
behalf of customers and to support those digital payment flows into the banking system. 
A key differentiator was Eko’s user-friendly and reliable agent technology portal.FIGURE 1.  Eko Platform Services: Using open APIs to create a new business model
API
10x
more agents4x
more revenue80%
reduced cost of 
agent acquisition350%
more transaction 
volume
EKO INDIA: CASE STUDY   |  December 2020  3 2• Because Eko integrated several different banks and payment infrastructures, if one of 
the payment services connections failed, agents could be switched automatically to 
another payment channel. 
• Eko’s longstanding relationships with key banks and their strong track record of 
compliance management served to build bank trust in its agent management 
operations. With the Reserve Bank of India’s increased focus on regulatory compliance, 
other agent management businesses, especially those that were new to the market or 
those that distributed products other than financial services, found it difficult to create 
the bank relationships required to support domestic money transfers. 
To capitalize on these assets, Eko launched a two-sided platform strategy called Eko 
Platform Services (EPS) in 2015. On the  supply side , the platform aggregated services 
providers - including banks for money transfer, insurers, lenders and education providers - 
for any business that wanted access to cash-paying customers. On the  demand side , 
the platform provided access to cash-paying customers through third-party agent network 
managers. See Figure 2.
To make EPS attractive to supply-side services providers, Eko first needed to add more 
agents so that it could serve a large customer base. 
To scale the demand side, Eko identified and approached third-party businesses that 
already had or were in the process of expanding their own agent networks. These third-
party agent managers were in the business of distributing nonfinancial products through 
retail shops that already sold airtime; fast-moving consumer goods, such as household APIBank/UPI Integrations
Money Transfer
Utility Bill PaymentAgents
[Eko acquired]
Service Payment Integrations
Education, Entertainment
Gaming, Subscription TV
Traditional business
New business strategyAgents
[Third Party  
 Network Managers]SUPPLY SIDE DEMAND SIDEFIGURE 2.  Eko Platform Services: Connecting money transfers, bill payments, and other payments 
4
EKO GROWS AGENT NETWORK TENFOLD THROUGH OPEN API sproducts and food; or other physical products. The third-party businesses had commercial 
and distribution relationships with retail shop agents. Eko provided additional services that 
the third-party agent managers could offer to their agent network. The services included 
domestic money transfers, utility bill payments, and payments for emerging online services 
such as insurance, credit, entertainment, education, and gaming.
Because the larger third parties had their own tech platforms that they used as agent 
channels, Eko connected to these third parties through open APIs and widgets that it 
embedded into these third-party platforms. For smaller agent managers, which often 
did not have in-house technical expertise to connect the service APIs, Eko planned to 
leverage India’s large developer communities to support their integration. This would allow 
Eko to scale without having to take on a prohibitive operational and employee cost base. 
HOW THE PIVOT HAS PANNED OUT
Supply side
Today Eko has over 300 services providers. The chief operating officer of one of them, 
Nachiket Pantvaidya of ALTBalaji, said: “Partnering with Eko is a way to bring the offline 
consumers into the online world. With ALTBalaji now being a part of their Eko Store, we 
are expanding our reach to a whole new audience.”
One of Eko’s initial goals was to allow services providers to self-manage their integration 
through Eko’s open APIs, much like how Google enabled app developers to build and place 
their solutions on Google Playstore. However, as Eko engaged with services providers, 
it found that the providers were not experienced with the cash-to-digital payment flows 
supported by agents, and therefore, they were not able to integrate this payment type into 
their business processes. To address the typical large size of services providers and their 
unique requirements, Eko’s technology team provided dedicated onboarding support and 
extensive documentation to ensure that the services providers could easily leverage EPS to 
scale their services to cash-based customers. See Box 1 and Box 2 for examples. Eko refers 
smaller partners to external developers that have experience working with Eko’s APIs.
BOX 1.   Eko Platform Services: Online education supplier
Business overview.  
Englishbolo is an English 
learning app that uses artificial intelligence (AI). The app is 
designed to help learners improve their spoken English. It 
was launched by Schoolnet India Limited and is targeted at 
employed Indian youth who wish to improve their English 
for both personal and professional reasons. 
Why Eko?  Previously, Englishbolo’s customers were required 
to pay online through the company’s website using a debit 
card, credit card, online bank transfer, or e-wallet transfer. 
Englishbolo wanted to extend its services to those who don’t 
have access to, or trust in, digital payment mechanisms. Partnering with Eko enabled Englishbolo to use 150,000 agent 
points to accept cash payments from customers.
Eko integration experience.  Eko’s technology team 
supported integration with Englishbolo. Eko helped 
Englishbolo understand how to structure the payment 
service flow that supported the customer-to-agent cash 
payment process. The process was new to Englishbolo and 
different from the one it used for customers who make digital 
purchases online. Importantly, the process for cash payments 
was intuitive for Eko agents, which made it easy for agents to 
service customer payment requests.EKO INDIA: CASE STUDY   |  December 2020  4 5Demand side
In three years, Eko has grown the number of agents using the platform 10 fold to 150,000  
agents and has extended its reach from 10 states to all 36 states and territories in India. 
Overall transaction volumes have increased by 350 percent, with more than 70 percent 
generated through the new third-party agent manager channel. See Box 3 for a demand-
side example.
Operations
Eko supports its own agent-managed business and EPS with a total staff of 60 people, 
an increase of just 10 staff since implementing EPS. This has allowed Eko to keep its 
operational costs low. Based on its experience to date, Eko expects to continue to grow 
EPS without adding staff proportional to the growth in business.BOX 3.   Demand side: Examples of third-party agent network manager profiles 
Business overview: Rocket in Pocket has a 
network of more than 28,000 agents. Its core 
business is the distribution of airtime and 
railway tickets. It integrated with Eko for 
domestic money transfers and remittances to Nepal. 
Why Eko?  Eko provides access to several bank integrations, 
payments infrastructure, and electronic know-your-customer 
biometric gateways that facilitate money transfer. Eko 
provides the following value-added services:• Onboarding agents onto Eko’s platform in support of 
money transfer services is easy and streamlined through 
automation.
• Ongoing management of Eko’s services with agents  
is easy with agents is simplified with clear issue-
resolution processes.
Eko integration experience: Rocket in Pocket’s in-house 
development team found integration to be straightforward. 
Integration took two weeks to bring it in line with an internal 
release cycle.BOX 2.   Eko Platform Services: Online entertainment supplier
Business overview.  ALTBalaji is a 
subscription-based video-on-demand service. 
It can be accessed through several interfaces 
ranging from desktops, laptops, tablets, and 
smartphones to internet-ready television. The videos are in 
various languages and cater to regional language speakers 
across India. 
Why Eko?  ALTBalaji wanted to extend its service reach to 
the large segment of the population that does not have digital 
payment accounts or is not confident and comfortable with paying for a subscription online. Partnering with Eko enabled 
ALTBalaji to gain access to 150,000 agents that can both 
market ALTBalaji subscriptions and accept cash payments 
from customers.
Eko integration experience.  Integration was supported 
by Eko’s technology team. Eko also helped to design the 
payment-service exchange flow to make it as easy as 
possible for agents to sell subscriptions to customers. 
This process was different from the one ALTBalaji uses for 
online purchases.6
EKO GROWS AGENT NETWORK TENFOLD THROUGH OPEN API sIMPACT ON PROFITABILITY
Agent acquisition has scaled at substantially lower cost than if Eko had acquired 
agents directly.  Eko’s EPS strategy is to scale its distribution reach through third-party 
agent networks. Since implementing this strategy, Eko’s total agent reach has rapidly 
expanded by an additional 135,000 agents, including 17,000 based in rural locations. Its 
third-party agents now contribute 70 percent of its total transaction volume. Eko spends 
₹2100 ($28) on average to acquire an agent through its own agent network but just ₹360 ($5) 
to do so through third parties. This significantly reduced cost has allowed Eko to scale agent 
acquisition. See Figure 3.
Transaction volumes have scaled.  Transaction volumes have scaled as more agents 
have access to EPS services. EPS volumes are growing four times faster than those of 
Eko’s traditional business channel and contribute to significant revenue growth. 
Eko shares 50 percent of the EPS transactional wholesale revenue fee with the third-party 
agent manager, who in turn directly remunerates the agent. While Eko’s share of revenue 
is significantly lower than what it receives from the agents it directly acquires, its total profit 
has increased through the increase in number of transactions. Its gross profit margin has 
also increased because it does not have the cost of directly acquiring agents and has only 
nominal operational costs associated with supporting agents through third-party managers.
The growth in number of agents, which extends Eko’s reach across all states of 
India, has made it attractive for new services providers to integrate with EPS. This 
provides additional revenue opportunities for Eko, third-party agent managers, and 
individual agents. Eko’s extended agent network has created a single point of integration for 
services providers that want to connect to India’s large population of cash-based consumers. 
This has allowed Eko to attract new services providers, resulting in an increase in the variety of 
transactions that its agents offer beyond the core domestic money transfer product. 
THE INVESTMENT REQUIRED FOR EKO TO PIVOT
A new team.  Eko has kept its development team small by focusing on an open API 
approach. It created a separate team to deliver its EPS strategy. A team of nine in-house 
developers focus on improving the EPS platform. Eko has one staff person dedicated to 
managing third-party troubleshooting during onboarding. Smaller partners in tier 1 and tier 
2 cities are referred to one of more than 80 Eko certified external developers.1 
A new platform architecture. Because the pivot required wholesale changes to its 
platform architecture, Eko looked to Silicon Valley firms, including Android, Paypal, and 
Stripe, to understand their business models and designs.2 It took particular interest in how 
these companies enable third parties to connect to service APIs and how services providers 
then offer services through their platforms. Eko’s software development team used this 
research to re-engineer its platform’s backend architecture so that it could be used by both 
partners and Eko’s own agent-acquiring business without becoming two systems. 
1 Indian tier 1 cities are classified as having a population above 100,000. Tier 2 cities are classified as 
having a population between 50,000 and 99,999. 
2 This primarily involved internet research. EKO INDIA: CASE STUDY   |  December 2020  6 7FIGURE 3.   Increased agent coverage, lower acquisition and support costs,  
and increased transaction volume and growth
Increased Agent Coverage
Increased Transaction Volume and Growth
Wholesale Revenue SplitCoverage -  
States and Territories
Eko Staff Required 
to Support BusinessAgent Network - Eko Acquired Agent Network - Third Party Manager
No. of Agents+135,000
15,000+26
10
Lower Cost to Acquire and Support
3602,100
Agent Cost of Acquisition50
+10
Third-party agent 
channel is growing 
4x faster than Eko 
acquired agent 
channel
Channel Volume Share70%
30%50%
Eko50% 
Partner
100% Eko8
EKO GROWS AGENT NETWORK TENFOLD THROUGH OPEN API sKey lessons
To accelerate the scaling of its distribution network, Eko wanted to make it easy for any 
third-party agent manager to integrate EPS into its business operations whilst minimizing 
the need for Eko operational support. Third-party agent managers ranged from large 
distributors with more than 8,000 agents and engineering staff on hand for managing 
integrations to small local operators with 20 agents who relied on outsourced developers 
for integration with EPS. Three key lessons were learned from Eko’s open API approach:
• Create different integration approaches for different classes of consumers.
• Make it easy for third parties to integrate their systems with EPS independently through 
self-service features.
• Foster and incentivize a developer community.
Create different integration approaches for different classes of consumers.  Eko 
created three different ways that an agent manager can integrate to EPS based on its 
technology requirements. See Table 1 and Figure 4.
Make it easy for third parties to integrate their systems with EPS independently 
through self-service features. Developer self-service was key to allowing Eko to scale 
to many third-party agent managers at a low operational cost. Developers can access 
documentation and test APIs without Eko’s involvement. Developers need to engage 
with Eko only when they need a production key to go live.3 See Figure 5. Eko’s approach 
includes the following:
3 A production key allows a user to shift from the test to the production environment and go live with the services.Integration 
method Typical third-party partner profileThird-party developer  
experience Eko level of effort
White label of 
Eko’s own front 
endAgent networks that have limited technology 
capability. Small networks. Allows 
entrepreneurs to operate their own agent 
networks with minimal technology costs. No requirement for developers. 
Eko uses its own front end and 
applies simple customization: 
third party’s logo, color 
scheme, product/features.Live within 1–3 working days.
API widgets (also 
referred to as 
plugins)Agent networks that have their own user 
experience (UX)/website and want to 
access Eko payments and other services 
through a simple integration on the 
partner’s UX/website.API widgets require only a 
front-end web developer and 
no coding on the back end. 
Integration time is 1–2 days.Live within 5–7 working days.
APIs Large agent networks that have more 
sophisticated requirements and better 
technology capacity. Prefer to integrate Eko’s 
payment and other services into their own 
technology platform and service offerings.Requires back-end systems 
developer and front-end web 
developer. Integration time is 
2–7 days.Live within 15–30 working days.TABLE 1.  Integration options for third-party agent networks EKO INDIA: CASE STUDY   |  December 2020  8 9FIGURE 4.  Eko’s widgets allow partners to integrate services into their own website
Pick a Widget
• Money Transfer and other Widgets
• Complete pre-designed process
Insert into your Website
• Just copy-paste a few lines of code
• Easily debug any issues
Security
•  Validate your users before a transaction
•  End-to-end encryption of sensitive data 
from your server to our server
You are LIVE
•  Complete money transfer and other  
workflows available on your website!
• Modern fast UI, smart validations
FIGURE 5.  Partner onboarding process
Discussion for tailor-made plans
Integration
UAT sign off
Start transactingOnboard KYC documents
E-sign agreementConnect  
WidgetWidget  
on Device10
EKO GROWS AGENT NETWORK TENFOLD THROUGH OPEN API s• Third-party access to a developer portal, which includes well-organized information on 
APIs, instructional guides, and highlighted key information.4 
• Third-party access to API widgets and software development kits created by Eko’s 
in-house team across popular software development languages. This ensures quality 
and speed of integration. 
• Access to API testing through Postman, an API development environment. API testing 
allows developers to confirm expected API responses and how these will interact with 
the third-party platform. 
Foster and incentivize a developer community.  A developer with experience in 
integrating EPS APIs can onboard a third-party agent manager in as little as two days. 
This significantly accelerates Eko’s ability to scale while reducing the cost of developer 
support. This also reduces the time and cost for third parties to integrate with EPS. To 
support this, Eko has cultivated a pool of 80 developers whom it recommends to new 
agent network partners to speed up integration. 
Initially, Eko envisaged that the agent managers would have in-house developers who 
would be able to integrate to its API services. In reality, most external developers did 
not have experience in payments services flows. This made EPS integration difficult, 
time consuming, and costly for Eko partners. To address these issues, Eko began to 
recommend developers who had experience with EPS integration. As new developers 
engage with EPS, Eko continues to organically build a pool of experienced developers. 
Eko communicates any changes to these developers through blogs, which keeps ongoing 
support costs low, regardless of the size of the developer pool.
In addition, some developers became an informal acquisition channel by recommending 
Eko to their own clients who were not yet Eko partners. To encourage this, Eko has 
created a revenue-share incentive for developers that introduce and integrate new 
partners to EPS. 
Challenges and risks
EPS created competition with Eko’s agent channel.  Eko chose to maintain its agent 
business channel because the revenue it generates continues to be an important contributor 
to overall revenue. However, the number one risk for Eko with EPS was that it effectively 
created a wholesale pricing mechanism that a competing service could use to cannibalize 
Eko’s revenue from its agent business. To manage this risk, Eko ensures that its own service 
standards are strong enough to maintain its relationships. However, if EPS continues to 
outgrow Eko’s ability to acquire agents directly, Eko may need to assess whether it should 
focus on its platform business and forgo its agent business. One complicating factor is that 
in addition to losing the revenue generated by its agent business, leaving its agent business 
behind would mean forgoing first-hand knowledge of the needs and pain points of its EPS 
customers—information that contributes to the success of EPS. 
4 Eko’s developer portal is available at https://developers.eko.in/docs  (accessed on 22 September 2020).EKO INDIA: CASE STUDY   |  December 2020  10 11At risk of being copied by competitors and developers.  By publishing its APIs, 
Eko created a risk that its business model might be copied by competitors. This risk 
is enhanced because Eko’s agent management business does not require a license, 
which presents a low barrier to entry for competitors that have the capital to invest in 
the technology. However, one of Eko’s competitive advantages is its long and trusted 
relationship with key banks. The banks hold licenses for domestic money transfers, 
which Eko performs on their behalf. Banks tend to be reluctant to manage multiple new 
independent services providers. 
The strategy pivot required organizational change and commitment from 
management.  It affected the whole of Eko’s business: all staff were required to shift their 
thinking to focus on building for external partners rather than for internal consumption. It 
required enormous commitment from the management team to recruit a new team with 
a different skill set, manage their existing teams to adapt to the new direction, maintain 
Eko’s own agent-managed business, and combine it all under a single company vision. 
Co-founder and Chief Operating Officer Abhinav Sinha said: “The management team have 
constantly reinforced the company vision in weekly all-staff meetings and how the two 
business lines support each other. We started doing this at the start of launching EPS and 
we are still doing it today.”
Conclusion
India’s large demographic is diverse both culturally and in its use of cash, digital payments, 
and other financial services. Over the past 10 years, Eko has carved out a niche segment 
of end customers who earn in cash but have not yet adopted digital payments and thus 
prefer agents to facilitate transactions on their behalf. 
Eko’s success in implementing a platform strategy based on open APIs has enabled 
it to extensively scale the number of agents with minimal investment. In parallel, its 
target customer group is increasing its consumption of digital services, including online 
education, entertainment, insurance, and other services. As the digital economy grows, 
Eko’s expanding agent network has become a critical connection point for online services 
providers to accept payments from hundreds of millions of cash-earning customers. 
Growth in these services and the resulting revenues will feed the virtuous circle of agent 
profitability, attracting new agents. It will likely act as a gateway for consumers to build 
trust and adopt digital payment services themselves as their needs and confidence in 
these payments increase over time.
The authors thank Abhinav Sinha, his team at Eko, and various Eko partners for the 
interviews, data, and clarifications offered during the research and writing of this 
paper. Thanks also go to Anand Raman, Leena Datwani, Claudia McKay, Andrew 
Johnson, Xavier Faz, Peter Zetterli, Stephen Rasmussen, and Michel Hanouch for their 
input, review, and comments on earlier drafts.