THE ROLE OF DIGITAL IDENTITY IN THE 
FINANCIAL SECTOR
Agriculture Sector 
The agriculture sector remains the backbone of the Rwandan economy in terms of contributions to national gross 
domestic product (GDP) and employment and income generation for the majority of households. Agriculture contributed 
nearly one-third (32.7 percent) to national GDP in 2015, and it continues to be a critical driver of economic growth 
(4.8 percent during the 2000–16 period).  Further, it contributed an estimated 35 percent to the decline in poverty over 
the past decade (World Bank 2017b). In 2014, the sector was the largest contributor to total employment in the country 
(more than 70 percent of 5.6 million total employment) and was the fourth largest contributor to nonfarm private sector 
jobs in the economy (contributing 7.4 percent of the estimated 351,000 jobs).  
The agriculture sector has an estimated 3.65 million 
agricultural operators, and most cultivate extremely 
small plots of land. Of these agricultural operators, an 
estimated one million are women (Seasonal Agriculture 
Survey, NISR 2016). Although agricultural land plots 
are generally very small (often divided into three to four 
plots), this masks a wide range. About 30 percent of 
households cultivate less than 0.2 hectares (accounting 
for about 5 percent of total arable land), while about 25 
percent cultivate more than 0.7 hectares (accounting for 
65 percent of the national farmland).
Smartcrds
A key component of the PSTA is the Crop Intensification 
Program (CIP). In 2007, the GoR launched the Crop 
Intensification Program with the goals of increasing 
agricultural productivity of priority food crops, achieving 
food security, and increasing rural households’ income. 
The CIP had four main components: farm land use 
consolidation, access to affordable farm inputs through 
government subsidies, proximity extension services, and 
post-harvest handling and storage. The CIP’s design and 
implementation approach has evolved over the years; 
particularly relevant is that subsidy levels have fallen 
over time.  Notwithstanding the need to strengthen the 
design and implementation further, the CIP is estimated to have contributed substantially to the agricultural sector’s 
growth in general and productivity gains in the targeted 
crops.  Rwanda is among the few African countries with 
close to 10 percent public spending on agriculture. 
A major policy reform particularly relevant to agriculture 
finance has been the land tenure regularization program 
(ADB n.d.). Rwanda is one of the few African countries 
that have undertaken major land tenure regularization 
programs. During the program implementation in 2009–
13, more than 10 million parcels of land, accounting 
for 97 percent of the total land, were demarcated. The 
Rwanda Natural Resource Authority issued titles for the 
83 percent of the parcels that had claimants. Following 
these efforts, the majority of rural households report using 
their land as collateral for loans. In the fourth round of the 
Integrated Living Standards Survey (EICV4) undertaken 
during 2013/14, among rural households who reported 
having a loan in the past 12 months from a formal or 
semi-formal source, 54 percent reported having used land 
as collateral. Rwanda is among the few African countries 
with close to 10 percent public spending on agriculture. 
Rwanda is among the few African countries with close to 
10 percent public spending on agriculture.   
The draft National Agricultural Policy 2017–30 (NAP) 
identifies key priorities for further development and G20 Digital Identity Onboarding  
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized© 2018 The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW  
Washington, DC 20433  
T elephone: 202-473-1000  
Internet: www.worldbank.org  
All rights reserved.
This volume is a product of the staff and external authors of the World Bank Group. The World Bank 
Group refers to the member institutions of the World Bank Group: The World Bank (International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development); International Finance Corporation (IFC); and Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which are separate and distinct legal entities each organized under its respective 
Articles of Agreement. We encourage use for educational and non-commercial purposes.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the Directors or Executive Directors of the respective institutions of the World Bank Group or the governments 
they represent. The World Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work 
without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The World Bank encourages dissemination of its 
work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.
All queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, 
The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@
worldbank.org.
Photo Credits: ShutterstockI G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGTABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS V
GLOSSARY    VII
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS XI
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  XIII
INTRODUCTION 1
Objective   1
Background and Definitions 1
Methodology 4
THE ROLE OF DIGITAL IDENTITY IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR  7
The Importance of Identity 7
Important Characteristics of ID for the Financial System 9
Risks and Challenges in Implementing Digital ID 11
Exclusion Risks 11
Privacy and Data Protection 11
Cost and sustainability 12
APPROACHES TO INTEGRATE ID INTO THE FINANCIAL SECTOR  13
Using Existing Legal IDs 13
Private Sector Initiatives 14
Social Data for Identity Proofing 14
Blockchain and Digital ID Identity 15
TABLE OF CONTENTS IIAPPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICES 19
Account Opening 21
Customer Authentication  21
Personal Identification Number (PIN) 22
Smartcards 23
Mobile SIM Authentication 23
Biometric Based Authentication 24
Payment Systems and Services 26
Combining ID and Payment Applications 26
  Using the Digital ID Infrastructure for Authentication 26
Using the ID Credential as An ‘Address’  27
Government T o Person (G2P) Payments 28
Role in Humanitarian Assistance 28
Credit Reporting 31
Record-Keeping, Document Management and Digital Signature 32
Small Businesses 33
Insurance   34
KEY FINDINGS 37
POLICY CONSIDERATIONS 41
ANNEX 1: LEVELS OF ASSURANCE 45
ANNEX 2: THE IDENTITY LIFECYCLE 47
ANNEX 3: UNHCR ID SYSTEM 51
ANNEX 4: REFUGEE DIGITAL ID CASE STUDIES 53
ANNEX 5: COUNTRY CASE STUDIES 55
Canada   55
Mexico   57
Nigeria   59
Norway   59
Pakistan 60
Peru   61
United Kingdom 62iii
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGENDNOTES   65
LIST OF BOXES
Box 1: G20 High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion 1
Box 2: Defining Digital Identity 3
Box 3: Digital Identity and Gender Equality 5
Box 4: Historical Evolution of the Concept of Customer Due Diligence 8
Box 5: Case Studies Highlighting the Benefits of Digital ID to Governments 10
Box 6: Legal IDs: NADRA, Peru ID, Aadhaar, SPID 13
Box 7: Private Sector Initiatives: FIDO, BVN, Gov.UK Verify, BankID 15
Box 8: Case Study: India  ‘JAM Trinity’  21
Box 9: Case Study: Peru  ‘Modelo Pero’  22
Box 10: Near Field Communication (NFC) and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 23
Box 11: GSMA’s Mobile Connect 24
Box 12: Cross Border Systems 25
Box 13: Biometrics 25
Box 14: Case Study: Singapore ‘SingPass’  27
Box 15: Case Study: Pakistan ‘NADRA’  27
Box 16: Case Study: Pakistan ‘NADRA’  31
Box 17: Case Study: Norway ‘ Bank-ID’  32
Box 18: Case Study: Canada ‘BN9’  33
Box 19: Case Study: Serbia ‘UBI Digital ID’  33
Box 20: Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 34
Box 21: Case Studies: Estonia 34
Box 22: Case Study: Mexico ‘CURP’  39
Box 23: eiDAS  49
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Universal Financial Access by 2020 2
Figure 2: Document Type Needed for Account Opening 2
Figure 3: Representation of Digital and Legal IDs and the Overlaps 4
Figure 4: Acceptance of Simplified Customer Due Diligence Requirements 8TABLE OF CONTENTS IVFigure 5: Dimensions of ID System Type 9
Figure 6: Lack of Appropriate Identity Characteristics and  Its Impact on the  
      Financial System 11
Figure 7: Assessment of Authentication Robustness of Blockchain 17
Figure 8: Financial Service Stages and Phases 19
Figure 9: Benefits of Digital ID 20
Figure 10: Overview of Humanitarian Assistance 28
Figure 11: Digital Identity Lifecycle and Key Roles 47
LIST OF TABLES
T able 1: Comparisons of Different ID Systems for Refugees 29
T able 2: Comparison of ID Registration Processes 30
T able 3: Principle on Identification for Sustainable Development: T owards the Digital Age 40
T able 4: Identification When Signing on Products (Accounts, Loans and Transactions) 58G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
VACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report was written and coordinated by a diverse range of stakeholders across the World Bank Group (WBG) – with 
specific thanks to the WBG’s Identification for Development (ID4D) initiative; the Global Partnership for Financial 
Inclusion (GPFI) and G20 countries. The WBG, as an Implementing Partner for the Subgroup on Regulation and 
Standard-Setting Bodies, took leadership on this paper, with involvement from Subgroup members including CGAP 
(Consultative Group to Assist the poor), DFID (Department of International Development) and other implementing 
partners. The WBG core team was led by Harish Natarajan and consisted of team members: Sharmista Appaya (lead 
author) and Sriram Balasubramanian. Vyjayanti Desai, Seth Ayers, Julia Michal Clark, Jonathan Daniel Marskell, Emile 
De Willebois, Fredesvinda Montes and Margaret Miller (all WBG) provided inputs all through the process and Lauren 
Kaley Johnson supported on the graphics and publication. Mahesh Uttamchandani provided managerial oversight. 
Loretta Michaels (WBG), Minita Mary Varghese (WBG) and a Consult Hyperion team led by Paul Makin contributed 
to the development of the outline, early drafts and research. We are grateful for the leadership and support from the 
Argentinian G20 representative Gabriel R. Bizama and Francesca Brown (DFID) who chaired the discussions, as well 
as the GPFI committees, namely the Subgroup on Markets and Payment Systems, the Subgroup on Financial Consumer 
Protection and Financial Literacy, the Temporary Steering Committee on Forcibly Displaced Persons and the Subgroup 
on Regulations and SSB, and to the heads and team members of member countries such as Germany, Italy, India, 
Norway, Mexico, Canada, and the UK, among others. These include Rajesh Kumar Sharma (India), Monika Sethi 
(India), Hege Rottingen (Norway), Dr. José Luis Negrín (Mexico), Alexandra Rudolph (Germany), Francoise Felipe 
Dube (Canada), Joni Brennan (Canada), Tim Bouma (Canada) inter alia.
We would also like to thank the following WBG staff  and 
consultants and G20 country representatives for research 
support and peer review: Anita Mittal (ID4D), Joscha 
Albert (Germany), Ricardo Settimo (Italy), Fabio Teramo 
(Italy), Sonia Guida(Italy), Angela Caporrini (Italy), 
Edgar Cortes (Mexico), Diego Lombardo (Argentina), 
Nadezhda Prasolova(Russia), Paul Nelson (US AID), 
Timothy Lyman (CGAP), Nadine Chehadi (CGAP),  
Antonio Navarro (CGAP),  Laura Ellison (DFAT), Maria 
Do Ceu Pereira (WBG),  Matei Dohotaru (WBG), Kuntay 
Celik (WBG),  Emilie Van der Does (WBG),  Himanshu (Bill Gates Foundation) and Yannis Theodorou (GSMA). 
Lastly, we thank Aichin Lim Jones and Amy Quach for 
overall design and production services.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed 
in the paper and case studies are entirely those of the 
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of 
the World Bank Group and its affiliated organizations or 
those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the 
governments they represent.G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
VIIGLOSSARY
Attribute: A named quality or characteristic inherent in or ascribed to someone or something. In identification systems, 
common personal identity attributes include name, age, sex, place of birth, address, fingerprints, a photo, a signature, an 
identity number, date and place of registration, etc.1  
Authentication: The process of proving that a person 
is who they claim to be. Digital authentication generally 
involves a person electronically presenting one or more 
“factors” or “authenticators” to “assert” their identity—
that is, to prove that they are the same person to whom 
the identity or credential was originally issued. These 
factors can include something a person is (e.g., their 
fingerprints), knows (e.g., a password or PIN), has (e.g., 
an ID card, token, or mobile SIM card), or does (e.g., 
their handwriting, keystrokes, or gestures).2
Biometrics: Physical or behavioral attributes of an 
individual, including fingerprints, irises, facial images, 
gait, signatures, keystrokes, etc.3 
Biometric identification: Digital biometric identification 
involves comparing a template generated from a live 
biometric sample to a previously stored biometric in 
order to determine the probability that they are a match. 
One-to-one (1:1) matching is a comparison against a 
single template (e.g., one stored on an eID card) and is 
typically used for authentication and verification. One-
to-many (1:N) matching is a comparison against all or 
a subset of templates stored in a database, and can be 
used for identification (e.g., a criminal record search) 
or deduplication (i.e., ensuring that each individual 
exists only once in the database). In principle, 1:N 
deduplication allows identity providers to establish 
statistical uniqueness in a population.4 
Blockchain: A ‘blockchain’ is a particular type of data 
structure used in some distributed ledgers which stores 
and transmits data in packages called “blocks” that are 
connected to each other in a digital ‘chain’. Blockchains 
employ cryptographic and algorithmic methods to  
record and synchronize data across a network in an 
immutable manner.5 Credential: A document, object, or data structure 
that vouches for the identity of a person through some 
method of trust and authentication. Common types of 
identity credentials include—but are not limited to—ID 
cards, certificates, numbers, passwords, or SIM cards. A 
biometric identifier can also be used as a credential once 
it has been registered with the identity provider.6 
Customer Due Diligence: FATF Recommendation 10 on 
CDD is based on four pillars, requiring: 1) identification 
and verification of customers, 2) identification and 
verification of beneficial owners, 3) understanding the 
nature and purpose of transactions, 4) monitoring the 
clients and their transactions on an ongoing basis.        
Customer On-Boarding: The process of a financial 
services provider establishing a business relationship 
with a customer.
De-duplication: In the context of identification systems, 
it is a technique to identify duplicate copies of identity 
data. Biometric data—including fingerprints and iris 
scans—are commonly used to de-duplicate identities in 
order to identify false or inconsistent identity claims and 
to establish uniqueness.7
Digital identity: A set of electronically captured and 
stored attributes and/or credentials that uniquely identify 
a person.8 
Digital identification (ID) system: An identification 
system that uses digital technology throughout the 
identity lifecycle, including for data capture, validation, 
storage, and transfer; credential management; and 
identity verification and authentication.6
Distributed Ledger Technology: refers to a novel and 
fast-evolving approach to recording and sharing data GLOSSARY VIIIacross multiple data stores (or ledgers). This technology 
allows for transactions and data to be recorded, shared, 
and synchronized across a distributed network of different 
network participants.5
Foundational identification system: An identification 
system primarily created to provide general 
identification and credentials to the population for public 
administration and a wide variety of public and private 
sector transactions, services, and derivative credentials.  
Common types of foundational ID systems include civil 
registries, national IDs, universal resident ID systems, 
and population registers.9 
Functional identification system: An identification 
system created to manage the identity lifecycle for a 
particular service or transaction, such as voting, tax 
administration, social programs and transfers, financial 
services, and more. Functional identity credentials—
such as voter IDs, health and insurance records, tax ID 
numbers, ration cards, driver’s licenses, etc.—may be 
commonly accepted as proof of identity for broader 
purposes outside of their original intent, particularly 
when there is no foundational ID system.9 
Identification: The process of establishing, determining, 
or recognizing a person’s identity.7
Identification (ID) system: The databases, processes, 
technology, credentials, and legal frameworks associated 
with the capture, management, and use of personal 
identity data for a general or specific purpose.10  
Identity: A set of attributes that uniquely identify a 
person.10
Identity lifecycle: The process of registering, issuing, 
using and managing personal identities, including 
enrollment of identity data; validation through identity 
proofing and deduplication; issuing credentials; 
verification and authentication for transactions; and 
updating and/or revoking identities and credentials.6
Identifiers: Unique data used to represent a person’s 
identity and associated attributes. A name or a card 
number are examples of identifiers.11
Interoperability: The ability of databases, devices, or 
systems to talk with each other, exchanging information 
or queries. In some cases, interoperable databases or 
systems may be directly connected, allowing for the 
real-time exchange or updating of information; in others, 
databases or systems may be interoperable via a trusted 
third-party exchange layer that facilitates communication 
across disparate systems.4KYC Registry: A KYC Registry refers to a centralized 
repository of CDD records of customers in the financial 
sector. It allows inter-usability of the CDD records across 
the sector with the objective to reduce the burden of 
producing CDD documents and getting those verified 
each time the customer creates a new relationship with a 
financial entity.
Legal Entity Identifier: A 20-character, alpha-numeric 
code, to uniquely identify legally distinct entities that 
engage in financial transactions.12 The organizational 
structure of the LEI consists of a federated group of 
registrars, Local Operating Units (LOUs); a central 
operational body, the Global LEI Foundation (GLEIF); 
and a regulatory body charged with oversight of the 
LEIs, the Regulatory Oversight Committee (ROC). The 
GLEIF is a Swiss foundation inaugurated in June 2014 
and founded by the Financial Stability Board (FSB). It 
is overseen by 70 global regulators in the Regulatory 
Oversight Committee (ROC).
Legal identification (ID) system: Identification 
systems that register and identify individuals to provide 
government-recognized credentials (e.g., identifying 
numbers, cards, digital certificates, etc.) that can be used 
as proof of identity.13  
Levels of Assurance: The ability to determine, with 
some level of certainty or assurance (LOA), that a claim 
to a particular identity made by some person or entity can 
be trusted to actually be the claimant’s “true” identity. 
Each LOA is broken down into three component parts 
that are scored individually. Please refer to Annex 1
Protocol: Set of rules and formats, semantic (meaning), 
and syntactic (format), that enable information systems to 
exchange information.14 
Relying Party: An individual or organization that relies 
on another party to verify the identity of the user; the 
validity of the public key, associated algorithms and any 
relevant parameters; and the user’s possession of the 
corresponding private key.15  
Revocation: The process of permanently ending the 
binding between a certificate and the identity asserted in 
the certificate from a specified time forward.16
Self-Sovereign Identity: The concept of a lifetime 
portable digital identity, completely controlled by the 
individual, that does not depend on any central authority 
and can never be taken away.17  G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGIXUnique ID number (UIN): In the context of 
identification systems, a number that uniquely identifies 
a person—i.e., each person only has one UIN and no two 
people share the same UIN—for their lifetime. UINs are 
typically assigned after validating a person’s identity and 
statistical uniqueness through a process such as biometric 
deduplication. 
User: Individual or (system) process authorized to access 
an information system.14Verification: The process of confirming or denying 
that a claimed identity is correct by comparing the 
credentials (something you know, something you have, 
something you are) of a person requesting access with 
those previously proven and stored and associated with 
the identity being claimed.18G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
 XIABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AI Artificial Intelligence
AEBA Aadhaar Enabled Bank Accounts
API Application Programming Interface
AML Anti-Money Laundering
APB Aadhar payment bridge system
BVN  Bank Verification Number
CBN Central Bank of Nigeria
CDD Customer Due Diligence
CFT Combating the Financing of T errorism CNIC Computerized National Identity Card
CRS Credit reporting systems 
CTF Combating T errorist Financing; an alternative acronym to CFT 
DBT  Direct Benefit Transfer
DFS  Digital Financial Services
DLT Distributed Ledger T echnology
eCIB Electronic Credit Information Bureau
eIDAS  electronic Identification, Authentication and Trust Services
EU European Union
FATF  Financial Action T ask Force 
FIDO Fast Identity Online (Alliance) 
Fin T ech T echnology application to finance
FSB  Financial Stability Board
FSP Financial Service Provider
G20 Group of Twenty
G2P Government to Person
GPCR  General Principles for Credit Reporting
GSMA Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association
GPFI Global partnership for Financial  Inclusion
ICAO  International Civil Aviation Organization
ID Identity
ID4D Identity for DevelopmentACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS XIIICCR International Committee on Credit Reporting
IIN Institution Identification Number
ISO International Organization for Standardization
ITU International T elecommunications Union 
KRA Know Your Client Registration Agency
KYC  Know Your Customer
LEI Legal Entity Identifier
LOA  Levels of Assurance
MF-CIB  Microfinance Credit Information Bureau
MMO Mobile Money Operator
MNO Mobile Network Operator
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NADRA National Database and Registration Agency (Pakistan) 
NFC  Near Field Communication
NIMC National Identity Management Commission
NIRA National Identification and Registration Agency
NIST National Institute of Standards and T echnology, US Department of Commerce
NPCI National Payments Corporation of India
PASA   The Payments Association of South Africa
PIN Personal Identification Number
PoS Point of Sale
RAIS Refugee Assistance Information System
RBI Reserve Bank of India
RENIEC National Registry of Identification and Civil Status  
 (in Spanish, Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil)
Regtech T echnology as applied to regulation
RIMS  Refugee Information Management System
RFID Radio frequency identification
RSD  Refugee status determination
SCA  Strong customer authentication
SDG Sustainable Development Goals
SEBI Securities and Exchange Board of India
SIM Subscriber Identity Module
SSID Self-sovereign identity
UFA   Universal Financial Access 
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India
UIN Unique Identification number
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees   
UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near Eastxiii
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
A unique, legal identity is necessary to allow all individuals to participate fully in society and the economy. The ability 
to prove one’s identity underlies the ability to access basic services and entitlements from healthcare through to pensions 
and agriculture subsidies. This is especially true for marginalized segments of society such as women, poor rural farmers, 
refugees and also extends to MSMEs (micro, small and medium enterprises). The importance of legal identity has been 
acknowledged by the international community through agreement of target 16.9 of the Sustainable Development Goals, 
which calls for all UN member States to “provide legal identity for all, including birth registration” by 2030.
National and subnational governments play a primary 
role in the registration and recognition of a legal identity. 
Without such official recognition, the authenticity of 
an identity may lack a formal or legal basis (referred 
to as legal ID in this document). However, a number 
of developing countries have no robust official legal 
ID system that is universally available. The inability to 
credibly prove one’s identity can be a source of economic, 
political and social exclusion. In the financial sector, it 
hampers access to basic services such as bank accounts 
and loans.
According to the 2017 Global Findex Survey, the lack 
of documentation was the primary barrier to access 
to financial services cited by 26 percent of unbanked 
individuals in low income countries. Beyond extending 
legal ID in order to address these gaps, the  introduction 
of a legal, digital ID could potentially increase the 
adoption of financial services, furthering the financial 
inclusion agenda and supporting development goals. 
Digital ID lowers barriers by: a) making it easier for the 
unbanked to open a transaction account19 in conjunction 
with simplifying documentation requirements, b) 
enabling more cost-effective customer onboarding 
that can be conducted remotely and c) contributing to 
financial sector embedding by supporting the delivery of 
additional services to the individual.  
Governments are adopting electronic means of cash 
transfer to streamline processes and prevent leakage. 
Digital IDs can substantially strengthen the efficiency 
and effectiveness of the state in providing critical services 
such as Government to Person (G2P) payments and supporting the provision of humanitarian aid. A legal 
digital ID for those forcibly displaced not only provides 
them with a sense of identity but also supports efficient 
benefit distribution reducing fraud and duplication while 
allowing them to participate in the real economy. Another 
vulnerable population especially bolstered by a digital 
ID is women; while a legal ID is seen as increasingly 
essential to both men and women to drive socio-economic 
development, of the 1 billion20 people without access to 
an ID, a disproportionate number are women and girls. 
The 2017 Global Findex survey found that the poorest 
40 percent of women in low income countries are less 
at least 30 per cent less likely to have an ID than men in 
the same wealth quintiles. The absence of ID documents 
is both, an effect and the cause of gender inequalities. A 
universal ID with digital capabilities will enable women 
to open accounts at low cost and will also substantially 
reduce the cost for the financial services providers (FSP). 
Digital ID also has clear benefits for small businesses. 
This is relevant at both the level of the company directors 
and senior management as well as at the level of the 
entity, helping reduce costs and time for registration as 
well as introducing efficiencies in conducting financial 
transactions. 
This report analyzes the role that robust, inclusive and 
responsible ID systems can play in enhancing financial 
access and inclusion. With a focus on digital ID, this 
paper is intended to guide interventions at country level 
and outlines some key policy considerations. Building 
on previous work by the Global partnership for Financial 
Inclusion (GPFI) and World Bank Group, adhering to the EXECUTIVE SUMMARY XIVmandate set by the Group of 20 (G20), the report looks 
at how financial services can leverage digital ID systems 
to increase efficiency, enhance effectiveness and enable 
new ways of conducting existing business processes 
in the financial sector. The analysis is underpinned by 
the ‘G20 High-Level Principles of Digital Financial 
Inclusion’21 (HLP) and the ‘Principles on Identification 
for Sustainable Development’22 developed by the World 
Bank Group and endorsed by over 20 international 
organizations and development agencies since 2017. 
Principle 7 of the G20 HLP specifically refers to ID and 
will form the guiding principle for this report.
Three characteristics of an identification system that matter 
most for financial services are a legal basis, uniqueness 
and the ability to exist in a digital format. Digital IDs 
are important to broaden public policy, especially for 
financial inclusion and can help bring more MSMEs 
into the formal financial sector. It needs to be noted that 
there are several other implicit aspects that are essential, 
notably that the ID should be robust and secure. In many 
jurisdictions, not all IDs have all the attributes, and even 
those that possess them might not have universal coverage 
in the jurisdiction. The analysis points out, that while the 
absence of any form of legal ID impacts all access to 
basic financial services, a lack of unique ID obscures a 
reliable view of customer activity and can impact access 
to the full range of financial services, especially credit 
and insurance. Meanwhile, the lack of a unique digital 
ID increases the costs of providing financial services to 
certain segments of society, thereby impacting financial 
inclusion. Finally, for financial inclusion and inclusion 
more broadly, universal coverage of legal ID in a given 
jurisdiction is paramount. Traditionally, countries have 
two types of ID systems: foundational ID systems, which 
are typically the source of ‘legal identity documents’ 
and provide proof of legal identity in accordance with 
national law- these can include civil registries and unique 
national IDs; and functional ID systems, which cover 
population subsets and are introduced in response to a 
demand for a particular service or transaction such as 
voter registration and can, in some cases, provide proof 
of legal identity including serving as a de facto national 
ID when a national ID system does not exist.23 On the 
proviso that an identity has uniqueness and a legal basis, 
with universal coverage (either at an individual level or 
collectively across all IDs in the jurisdiction) then, there 
is potential for the government or private sector entities 
to overlay them with digital features.
Digital IDs however, come with risks which need to be 
managed and mitigated to build trust and harness the benefits of identification responsibly. Foremost among 
the risks that arise, is the issue of data privacy and the 
potential for leakage, theft or misuse of personal data and 
the risks that arise from non-regulated players outside the 
traditional financial system. It is of vital importance to 
secure the data while at rest and in transit. The appropriate 
classification of data and adherence to data governance 
rules and procedures are the main ways that this can be 
contained. Data classification and its associated rules 
ensure that the more sensitive the data, the more stringent 
the security controls and the rules regarding the access 
and sharing of the data; hence, the process of classifying 
and categorizing data is imperative to maintaining a 
robust digital ID framework. While the high initial 
infrastructure cost is a hurdle that must be crossed, the 
importance of having a robust and effectively functioning 
system instead of several suboptimal initiatives cannot 
be stressed enough. Another important challenge that 
merits consideration is the rapidly evolving nature 
of the technologies, and it is important that central 
authorities and public bodies consistently incorporate 
new technologies and business models while protecting 
the financial sector and its customers. 
Digital ID has immense potential and it is important 
that country’s financial service supervisory framework 
recognizes this. Financial sector regulations, specifically 
those related to AML/CFT, have longstanding 
requirements related to identity validation, authentication 
and retention of records, to ensure the safety and integrity 
of the financial system, based in large part on the 
Financial Action Task Force (FATF)24 recommendations. 
Furthermore, of the ten Principles on Identification for 
Sustainable Development,25 three specifically focus 
on the issue of governance, including of the regulatory 
framework.
Seven policy measures, that governments should consider 
in order to have an identity effective ID system that meets 
the needs of the financial sector, have been identified:
1. Ensure an integrated identity framework;
2. Consider the appropriateness of the regulatory 
framework to capture the challenges related to digital 
ID, and risks to its appropriate implementation; 
deliberate updates to the regulatory framework 
including the issuance of new regulations where 
necessary;
3. Establish a reliable oversight model to include 
stakeholders beyond the traditionally regulated 
financial institutions who can introduce risks to 
digital identity systems;G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGXV4. Build authentication and service delivery systems 
that protect user privacy, and provide individuals 
with the right to access rheir data and oversight 
over how their data is shared;
5. Establish clear and well-publicized procedures 
for citizen redress, including defining where the 
onus of responsibility lies in the event that errors 
emerge or that the security of a person’s identity is 
compromised;
6. Support and empower development of private 
sector led services to leverage the legal ID 
infrastructure for building out digital layers. In 
doing so, the public authorities should ensure that 
these services are safe, reliable and efficient; these 
services are interoperable; and that the market is 
competitive;
7. New approaches to ID are constantly emerging 
and public authorities should closely monitor these 
developments with a view to share knowledge and 
establish common legal frameworks at both the 
domestic and international level.
The report is divided into four broad sections; first, the 
section on the role and need for digital ID focusses on 
the importance, principles, characteristics, risks and 
challenges of digital ID in the financial sector as related to the G20 HLP and the Principles on Identification. Next, 
the paper delves into the approaches of how ID could be 
successfully integrated into the financial sector from the 
use of government issued ID to private sector initiatives 
as well as social ID proofing and the role of blockchain. 
We then move onto the applications of digital ID and the 
different authentication techniques available from the 
traditional to the more advanced. The aim of this section 
is to provide a comprehensive perspective of the several 
authentication techniques and the varied applications of 
digital ID which include payments systems and services, 
credit reporting, insurance, document management and 
digital signatures, ID for small businesses as well as the 
role of ID in humanitarian assistance. The paper seeks 
to showcase the multifaceted nature of applications for 
digital ID in the financial sector with strong emphasis 
on examples from country specific case studies. The 
last two chapters focus on the synthesis of key findings 
from public and private sector initiatives in digital ID and 
finally key policy recommendations for consideration. 
The process of showcasing the fundamentals of digital ID 
and applications in both private and public enterprises, 
with country specific case studies examples throughout, 
helps the authors identify specific policy interventions 
which can boost implementation and usage of digital ID 
and positively impact the financial sector. 1 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
INTRODUCTION
Objective
The G20 recognizes the key role of financial inclusion in supporting the move towards an Innovative, Invigorated, 
Interconnected and Inclusive World Economy.21 The World Bank Group was requested by its G20 partners under the 
2018 Argentine presidency, to produce this report as part of the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) 
forum- an inclusive platform to carry forward work on financial inclusion.
Box 1: G20 High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion
Principle 7: Facilitate Customer Identification for Digital Financial Services 
Facilitate access to digital financial services by developing or 
encouraging the development of customer identity systems, 
products and services that are accessible, affordable, and verifiable and accommodate multiple needs and risk levels 
for a risk-based approach to customer due diligence.The primary objective of this paper is to analyze the 
role of a robust, inclusive and responsible digital 
identification system in financial sector development; in 
particular, the role it plays in furthering global financial 
inclusion commitments. This paper will provide insights 
and recommendations for country-level implementation 
by policymakers in line with Principle 7 of the G20 HLP 
developed by the GPFI. 
This report is neither intended to inform nor interpret 
the work of the global financial sector standard-setting 
bodies.
Background and Definitions
The GPFI, the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) as 
well as several other multilateral forums have advocated 
and launched initiatives for furthering financial inclusion. 
Financial inclusion is one of the critical drivers of poverty 
reduction and economic growth in emerging markets 
and developing economies. Currently, an estimated 1.7 
billion adults globally do not have access to the formal 
financial economy. Virtually all these unbanked adults 
live in the developing world. Indeed, nearly half live in just seven developing economies: Bangladesh, China, 
India, Indonesia, Mexico, Nigeria, and Pakistan.26 The 
World Bank Group in partnership with public and private 
sector institutions set an ambitious target to achieve 
Universal Financial Access (UFA) for adults globally to a 
have access to a transaction account27 to store money and 
send and receive payments by 2020 as a stepping stone to 
broader financial inclusion.28
A transaction account is a foundation for financial 
inclusion because it serves as a gateway to other financial 
services including savings, insurance, and credit. One of 
the primary barriers to opening a transaction account is 
the ability to prove one’s identity.
Proof of identity is required for the financial service 
provider (FSP) to verify who the customer is. As such, 
the lack of trusted IDs remains one of the chief obstacles 
to financial inclusion across the world. The 2017 Global 
Findex data shows that in the developing world, the 
share of adults with a transaction account varies from 
about 15 percent in parts of Sub- Saharan Africa, going 
up marginally to 20 percent in Cambodia, Mauritania 
and Pakistan. Of those individuals without an account,  2 INTRODUCTION26 percent for unbanked adults in low income countries, 
and 19 per cent in developing countries cited the lack of 
documentation as the main barrier.29 30 percent reported 
that financial institutions are too far away. This has been 
to some extent mitigated by opening the market to non-
bank players; however, this will only be successful and 
reduce financial services barriers only if such non-bank 
players have lower/different identification requirements. 
Beyond access to documentation, the high cost incurred Source: UFA2020 Overview- World Bank
Figure 2: Document Type Needed for Account Opening
Source: 2017 Global Financial Inclusion & Consumer Protection (FICP) Survey , WBG. 124 jurisdictions participated in the survey100%
Government  
Issued IDAny Form  
of IDProof of  
Nationality or  
Legal Status in  
CountryProof of  
AddressProof of  
IncomeProof of  
EmploymentOther Documentation  
Requirements  
Must Be Met to  
Open an Account80%
60%
40%
20%
0%% of responding jurisdictions that require documentation type to open an account at a Commercial Bank
90
326975
44
35
22Figure 1: Universal Financial Access by 2020
Implicat ion for 
 
provid ers:
Large volume of low 
value tr ansactions
Sustainable pr ovision  
of ser vices will 
requir e a high degr ee 
of automation and  
straight- through  
processingHow  to Get There?
UNSER VED
  
 Transaction 
accountBanks
 
Mobile Network  
Oper ators
Card Companies
Postal Networks
Financial 
Cooper ativesSERVED
 
RemittancesPayments    CreditSavings
  Insurance• Have no basic bank
   account
• Have no (or restricted)
   access to financial
   services
• Rely on a cash
   economy• Have a transaction
   account
• Use broad range 
   of financial 
   servicesMicrofinance
Institutions
in validating to the appropriate degree, identity 
documents constrain FSPs in expanding access to finance 
and hence, stunts financial inclusion. When the identity 
authentication can be carried out automatically using 
technology, this reduces costs for FSPs and enables the 
use of agents, which also reduces distance.
The following graph depicts the different documentation 
requirements required for opening a transaction account 
as based on data collected from 124 separate jurisdictions. 3
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGdocumentation, for example by enabling system based 
online validation including validation at agent locations. 
Identity includes not only the original acquisition of 
identity credentials, but also the many aspects of how and 
why that identity is used and maintained. 
As the issuance of identity grows in importance for 
policymakers, regulators and the private industry, various 
reports use different terms and definitions. It is therefore 
important to clarify the terminology used in this report. 
As mentioned previously, traditionally, countries have 
two types of ID systems: foundational ID systems, 
which provide general identification covering the entire 
population these include birth certificates, identity cards, 
unique identity numbers or digital certificates,33 and 
functional ID systems, which usually cover population 
subsets. Moreover, a non-public authority issued identity, 
if recognized as valid by the government as a proof of 
identity, would be included in the definition of legal ID. 
It is important to note that under this inclusive definition, 
legal ID need not be linked with nationality or citizenship. 
The uniqueness of the ID (i.e.) the ability to relate an ID 
to a singular person (or entity) and one person receiving 
only one such ID is paramount to ensure the usefulness 
of the ID.
While this report considers identity as a whole and its role 
in financial inclusion, particular focus has been placed on 
digital ID and the emerging areas in the financial sector 
where identity systems can be leveraged to increase 
efficiency, enhance effectiveness and enable innovative 
ways of conducting existing business processes. Notably, 
digital ID is increasingly becoming central to the 
effectiveness of technology innovations like open banking 
and marketplace lending; both of which have impacts on 
financial inclusion by enabling customers to securely 
share their banking data with trusted third parties, giving 
Box 2: Defining Digital Identity32
A digital identity is a collection of electronically captured 
and stored identity attributes that uniquely describe a 
person within a given context and is used for electronic 
transactions. It provides remote assurance that the person is 
who they purport to be. A digital identification system refers 
to the systems and processes that manage the lifecycle of 
individual digital identities.
A person’s digital identity may be composed of a variety 
of attributes, including biographic data (e.g., name, age, 
gender, address) and biometric data (e.g., fingerprints, 
iris scans, hand prints) as well as other attributes that are more broadly related to what the person does or something 
someone else knows about the individual. When these data 
are collected and verified, they can be used to identify a 
person by answering the question “who are you?”. These 
attributes, along with credentials issued by the service 
provider (e.g., unique ID number, eDocument, eID, mobile 
ID) can then also be used as authentication factors to 
answer the question “are you who you claim to be?”. The 
attributes and authentication factors used in a digital identity 
may vary from one context or country to the next depending 
on the type of identity system.Many jurisdictions require customers to provide 
additional information beyond basic identification in 
order to open an account.
However, the ability to securely validate and verify a 
customer’s details against a reliable database remains 
imperative, and a large portion of those in the developing 
world lack basic IDs. The ability to prove one’s identity 
is increasingly recognized as the basis for participation in 
social, political, economic, and cultural life. Yet, the World 
Bank estimates that more than 1.1 billion individuals do 
not have any form of officially recognized ID.30 This 
problem disproportionally impacts rural residents, poor 
people, women, children, and other vulnerable groups.31 
Furthermore, poor identification systems mean that states 
have difficulty collecting taxes, targeting social programs, 
and ensuring security. Achieving inclusive development 
therefore requires a sustained effort to address the world’s 
identity gap. These goals have been recognized in the 
2030 Sustainable Development Goals (specifically SDG 
16.9) and by other multilateral bodies.
Globally, various efforts have been undertaken to address 
the inability to access the financial system, from less 
arduous requirements regarding customer identity - such 
as only requiring a functional ID such as a paper-based 
voter’s registration card or an introduction from a respected 
member of the community-, to separate categories 
of transaction accounts with lower documentation 
requirements and opening up the market to non-bank 
players to expand the pool of suppliers. However, a 
sizable portion of those in the developing world lack 
basic IDs, and the ability to securely validate and verify 
a customer’s details against a verifiable database remains 
imperative. The introduction of a unique, reliable—and 
particularly—digital ID could provide universal coverage 
while enabling more efficient processes for validating ID 4
 INTRODUCTIONrise to a new generation of tools that will help individuals 
make better decisions based on their data.
Digital ID, combined with the extensive use of mobile 
devices in the developing world, offers a transformative 
solution to this global challenge and promotes efficiency 
gains, financial savings, social inclusion and access 
to basic services and rights. However, they come with 
their own unique set of challenges especially that of data 
protection, privacy and a sustainable business model.  
These are elaborated further in the document.
Moreover, digital ID has been instrumental in playing 
a key role in reducing gender gaps in various societies, 
especially in emerging markets and developing countries. 
The following box item provides an overview of  
its benefits:Methodology
Analysis of developments in different country settings, 
current views on best practices and dialogue with key 
stakeholders have informed this report. Country specific 
case studies have contributed to the understanding of 
the application and role of ID in the financial sector.  
Interpretation of international practices, specifically the 
FATF Recommendation 10, has strongly influenced the 
policy considerations put forward. It should be noted, 
however, that case studies have been chosen to showcase 
and to compare and contrast market practices, and that 
their inclusion does not necessarily endorse them as 
examples of best practice.
This report also discusses some private sector led digital 
initiatives, including those by FIDO (Fast Identity Figure 3: Representation of Digital and Legal IDs and the Overlaps 
Source: Adapted from ID4D glossary, WBG May 2018.Functional
Nigeria BVN
Lao PDR  
Birth 
CertificatePeru Birth  
CertificatePaper-based  
Ration Card
Most University IDs
Mexican Voter ID                         e-Passport
Foundational
DigitalCivi Registration Universal  
Resident IDNational IDNon-digital  
passport
Peru eIDNIMC  
(Nigeria)
NADRA
Aadhaar
Legal5
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGThe widespread lack of official identification in developing 
countries disproportionality affects women and girls due 
to higher barriers they face for obtaining an ID. The 2017 
Global Findex 27 report indicates that women in developing 
economies remain 9 percentage points less likely than men 
to have a bank account. While lack of sufficient funds is the 
most commonly cited reason reported by more than half of 
unbanked adult women, a large proportion also cite the lack 
of documentation as another key reason. The other barriers 
include distances involved, along with the restrictions on 
the freedom to travel, opposition from family members, 
financial cost, time constraints and illiteracy combined with 
the lack of awareness. An efficient digital ID system has the 
ability to overcome the most common barriers to opening 
a bank account.
In combination with simplified CDD, digital ID enables 
women to more easily open transaction accounts and when 
combined with agent models also enables easier access 
to account services. A digital ID can also empower women 
to register to vote, claim inheritance rights, register the 
ownership of business and land and access government 
benefits and services. 
With the use of digital ID, governments can transfer G2P 
payments, intended for women, directly into their accounts. For example, in Pakistan, the use of biometric IDs is a 
precondition for accessing cash transfer programs, ensuring 
that payments to female beneficiaries are delivered directly 
to them rather than to their husbands or brothers- as 
was traditionally the case. Not only did this boost their 
social standing, it also served as trigger for greater social 
freedoms within their societies.34  
The use of these digitized G2P payments together with 
the integration with mobile platforms holds great promise 
for the achievement of financial independence for women. 
More than 80 percent of women in Kenya now have access 
to a mobile account which is being increasingly leveraged 
to reduce the gender gap.26 Through the integration of 
digital ID and mobile money (M-Pesa), substantial progress 
has been made in enabling women to gain access to social 
protection and financial saving schemes.35  
As an additional benefit, the use of a digital ID can help 
authorities better monitor gender targets via the use of 
electronic databases and the collection of transaction data 
remotely, supporting the ability to provide better oversight 
and monitoring of national targets.Box 3: Digital Identity and Gender Equality 
Online) Alliance – created by a consortium of private 
sector players to achieve interoperability between 
authentication mechanisms, Mobile Connect - a GSMA 
initiative and Digital Identification and Authentication 
Council of Canada (DIACC). The paper delves into 
the identity solutions that leverage these private sector 
initiatives and looks at the fundamental dependence on 
an individual’s ability to present a legal ID on which basis 
the digital ID is created.  
This report covers digital ID as applicable to all financial 
services provided by banks and non-banks including 
e-money services and microfinance institutions, with a 
focus on those areas most pertinent to financial inclusion. The use of digital ID in the humanitarian context and 
the operational efficiencies it provides is also studied.  
In addition, developments on the horizon such as social 
data derived identity and applications of innovative 
technologies including distributed ledger technologies in 
identity management are briefly discussed. 
This note builds on previous work by the World Bank, 
specifically the note on Technology Landscape for 
Digital Identification published by ID4D,36 which 
explores the technology linkages between unique IDs, 
the permeation of digital IDs, digital onboarding and 
customer identification in the financial sector,37 the G20 
HLP and discussions with GPFI membership.7 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
THE ROLE OF DIGITAL IDENTITY  
IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR
The Importance of Identity
In 2016, the G20 endorsed the High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion which specifically asked that 
‘Governments worldwide acknowledge the importance of identity as a fundamental necessity for daily life. For 
approximately 1.1 billion people,38 the majority of them living in Asia and Africa, the inability to prove their identity 
prevents them from accessing basic services, enjoying their full rights, and participating in the formal economy.
Evidence shows that individuals who lack official forms 
of identification are typically the most vulnerable people 
in the poorest countries. The recent Global Findex 
Report26 cites that 26 percent of unbanked adults in low 
income countries, and 19 per cent in developing countries 
without an account at a financial institution reported 
lacking the documentation needed to open one. Lack of 
ID was an even more commonly-cited barrier in countries 
like Zambia (35 percent), the Philippines (45 percent), 
and Zimbabwe (49 percent). Inclusive, robust, and 
responsible legal ID systems are needed to close this gap. 
Beyond paper-based legal ID systems, however, digital 
IDs have additional benefits, including the potential to 
provide entities with new and efficient ways to reach 
and serve their populations, especially the poorest and 
most disadvantaged. Identity systems that have universal 
coverage, have a legal basis and ensure uniqueness—
as noted previously—also play an important role in the 
improvement of government efficiency, accountability 
and transparency. Further, through online transactions 
and other e-services, digital capabilities of these systems 
reduce operational costs and the corruption and theft that 
can occur in paper-based systems, such as entitlement 
payments siphoned off from their intended recipients.39 
As countries increasingly rely on digital networks for 
delivering important public and private services, the 
ability of consumers to remotely access those services 
through digital identification becomes acutely important. Accessible, robust, and verifiable ID systems can help 
service providers carry out Customer Due Diligence 
(CDD) requirements and expand the use of financial 
services. One of the key components of financial inclusion 
strategies in many countries is to introduce a basic 
account—offered by either banks or non-bank entities—
with very stringent limits on number of transactions 
and value of transactions. The main objective behind 
introducing this type of account is to prevent identity 
theft, financial fraud, money laundering and terrorist 
financing, while at the same time enhancing access to 
transaction accounts. A digital ID enables an efficient 
means of meeting the CDD needs for a basic account 
and further it enables enforcing transaction limits and 
monitoring how many accounts a person has. 
The Reserve Bank of India has permitted the Entities 
regulated under it to accept Aadhaar identification number 
issued by the Government of India as proof of identity as 
well as address to meet the regulatory CDD requirements of 
opening accounts. Including the Jan-Dhan40 basic savings 
accounts.41 In Pakistan, the national ID cards allowed 
opening bank accounts and reliably enforcing transaction 
limits, which coupled with growth of branchless banking 
agents, contributed to an increase in financial inclusion. 
Incidentally, the agents were also leveraged to register  
all cellphone SIM cards as part of a national  
security initiative.8
 THE ROLE OF DIGITAL IDENTITY IN THE FINANCIAL SECTORThe Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 40 recommendations, 
which constitute the international standards on anti-money 
laundering and counter-terrorist financing, were first issued 
in 1990. The first version of the FATF 40 Recommendations 
included a section on ‘Customer Identification and Record 
Keeping’. The section had a limited scope that focused on 
identifying and verifying the customers and the beneficial 
owners of the legal persons and financial transactions. 
The FATF Recommendations have gone through major 
revisions in 1996, 2001*, 2003, and 2012. The limited and 
relatively static scope of customer identification in the 1990 
version was expanded during these revisions, evolving 
towards a much more comprehensive and dynamic set of 
requirements. FATF introduced the concept of “Customer 
Due Diligence” (CDD) in the 2003 Recommendations 
to define the full range of requirements that aims to 
understand, know, and monitor all natural and legal person Box 4: Historical Evolution of the Concept of Customer Due Diligence
The graph below shows that a significant amount of 
exceptions are made to CDD requirements in the 120 
different jurisdictions sampled. While all responding 
jurisdictions in the South Asia region report that FSPs—
mainly banks- have simplifications or exemptions in 
place; in the Middle-East and North Africa region, only 22 clients, their transactions, and beneficial owners. The CDD 
concept has been maintained by the current version of the 
FATF Recommendations (2012) with further refinements.
Currently, FATF Recommendation 10 on CDD is the 
most comprehensive and elaborate among the 40 
Recommendations. It is based on four pillars, requiring: 1) 
identification and verification of customers, 2) identification 
and verification of beneficial owners, 3) understanding the 
nature and purpose of transactions, 4) monitoring the clients 
and their transactions on an ongoing basis.         
The term “Know Your Customer” has been used widely by 
some government authorities and the private sector since 
the 1990s to express the broader set of requirements that 
go beyond identification and verification. However, this 
term has never been officially used or defined by the FATF 
Recommendations. There fore, the meaning attributed to 
KYC can differ based on users and national contexts.  
percent of jurisdictions indicate that similar simplifications 
exist. A digital ID can provide a unified CDD regime. 
This means that once a CDD check is conducted for a 
person linked with a digital identity, the identity and 
its corresponding check can be held on a KYC registry  
(see glossary). Later, should that individual wish to 
Figure 4: Acceptance of Simplified Customer Due Diligence Requirements
Source: 2017 Global Financial Inclusion & Consumer Protection (FICP) Survey, WBG% of Responding Jurisdictions That Have Simplifications or Exemptions to Customer Due Diligence Requirements,  
by Income and Regional Group
All High 
IncomeUpper-  
Middle  
IncomeLower-
Middle  
IncomeLow 
IncomeEurope &  
Central  
AsiaEast Asia  
& 
PacificLatin  
America &  
CaribbeanMiddle East  
& North  
AfricaSouth  
AsiaSub-Saharan  
Africa100%
80%
60%
40%
0%20%504457 56
4053 5561
2241100*In 2001, with the addition of 8 (later 9) special recommendations the mandate of the F ATF Recommendations has been expanded to counter-terrorist financing.9
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGsubscribe to a new financial product or service, they 
will not need to go through the burdensome process of 
submitting various documents to prove their identity again.  
It is important to note here that information collected 
and verified for CDD purposes can be extensive and 
a KYC registry might not have all the required or up-
to-date information highlighting the need for effective 
supervision and oversight of KYC registries and third-
party identity services by the financial sector authorities 
and FSPs to conduct their own due diligence. KYC 
registries can enforce transaction limits for individuals 
across all FSPs and this has been illustrated through the 
use of mobile money platforms in Jordon (JoMoPay) 
and Peru. This mitigating measure can provide financial 
sector authorities with a great degree of confidence in 
mitigating risks from AML/CFT measures.
Simplifying CDD however, does not do away with 
physical, in person applications and verification of an 
acceptable form of ID. Paper records will often still need 
to be maintained to provide a document trail for audits. 
Both the verification and paper records add additional 
costs to the process. Further, there is also the risk of 
fraudulent documents and the ability to evade controls 
if there is no assurance of a customer’s unique identity. 
The introduction of a digital ID solves both the issue 
of costs as well as the security and reliability concerns. Even if the verification is done in person, the digital 
process can reliably prove that validation was completed. 
Furthermore, efforts to enhance flexibility on where 
and who can open an account can be accelerated with a 
reliable digital ID system. Thus, a digital ID can empower 
financial sector regulators and public authorities to 
simplify the CDD requirements and thus removing one 
of the enduring barriers to expanding financial inclusion. 
Important Characteristics of ID  
for the Financial System
There are three main characteristics of an identification 
system/credential that matter most for financial services 
and transactions: (1) legality, (2) uniqueness and (3) 
the ability to be in a digital format, each of which has 
implications on the quality and utility of the identity 
within the financial sector. These characteristics are not 
mutually exclusive, and an ID credential can possess one 
or all of these characteristics to varying degrees.
Legal: National and local governments play the 
primary role in issuing legal identity documents—
those recognized as providing proof of legal identity 
in accordance with national law. Without such official 
recognition, the value of an identity credential may lack a 
formal or legal basis, and therefore be unreliable for CDD 
checks in the financial sector. However, as mentioned 
Figure 5: Dimensions of ID System Type
Source: ID4D Glossary: Definitions and Usage, May 2018. Dimensions of ID System Type
Purpose      Recognition          Technology              Uniqueness
FOUNDATIONAL
General/multiple purpose:
• Civi registration (CR)
• National ID (NID)
• Population register (PR)
• Universal resident ID
FUNCTIONAL
Specific/limited purpose:
• Voter register
• Tax ID number
• Social security number
• Driver’s license
• etc.LEGAL DIGITAL UNIQUE
Provides proof of legal 
identity in accordance with 
national legislation.Digital technology used 
throughout the identity 
lifecycle.Uniquely identifies the 
population—i.e., each 
person only has one identity 
and no two people share the 
same identity.+ + +THE ROLE OF DIGITAL IDENTITY IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR10
previously, sometimes an ID issued by a private entity 
can become a legal ID if the government recognizes the 
validity of it. 
Generally, jurisdictions require an individual to have 
a form of legal ID to open and operate a transaction 
account, the most basic of financial services. A lack of 
suitable legal identity restricts this access and as such 
access to the wider financial ecosystem contributing to 
financial exclusion.
Uniqueness: FSPs prefer to use an identity credential 
that has the characteristic of being ‘unique’—i.e., that no 
individual (or entity) will have the same identifier, and that 
there is only one identifier associated with one individual. 
The utility of uniqueness is significantly enhanced when 
it is also universally available. An example of a common 
ID with the ‘unique’ and ‘universal’ characteristics 
would be the Aadhaar system in India. The characteristic 
of uniqueness in an ID allows for a particular financial 
institution to have a single view of the customer in 
their internal system and also across the entirety of the 
financial ecosystem. This is also valid for legal entities 
as recognized by the G-20 adoption of the establishment 
of an LEI in June 2012, to be able to better identify 
counterparty and contagion risks, particularly those 
related to cross border exposures to over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivatives. 
Digital: When an individual’s attributes can be captured 
and stored electronically and issued on digital credentials 
that can uniquely identify a person, the identity is referred 
to as digital ID. A digital identity provides a potentially transformative solution the global challenge of inclusion 
by offering countries the ability to leapfrog the 
development of paper-based systems and rapidly establish 
robust identification infrastructure. As described, in the 
section on authentication of the technologies, extensive 
use of mobile devices in developing countries can be 
leveraged for this purpose. Moreover, digital IDs can 
have benefits beyond the financial sector, such as in 
enhancing gender equality as noted previously.
These three characteristics highlight varying levels 
of quality and sophistication, and have important 
implications on access to financial services, customer 
oversight, and the efficiency of financial service 
provision. As policymakers consider how they approach 
identification systems within their jurisdictions, it is 
useful to have a sense of the trade-offs and cost/benefit 
implications of the options being considered.
Each of these characteristics impacts the sustainability, 
affordability and reach of financial services affecting 
financial inclusion objectives. The lack of legal, unique ID 
captured consistently across institutions impedes efforts 
to gain a complete view of the customer hence limiting the 
services available to the individual. From the perspective 
of the regulators, the lack of a unique, digital ID, limits 
the ability to gauge household credit exposure. This lack 
can add inefficiencies and costs as all verifications must 
be done manually along with maintaining paper trails. It 
is important that policymakers keep these characteristics 
and the utility they offer in mind during the design phase 
of planning their own identity programs. 
Box 5: Case Studies Highlighting the Benefits of Digital ID to Governments
In 2015, Nigeria began a biometric verification pilot for all 
civil servants in an effort to get an accurate record of the 
personnel and ensure that ‘ghost’ salaries were not paid 
out. The Central Bank of Nigeria, required that all customers 
enroll with their banks to get their unique Bank Verification 
Numbers (BVN), operated by the Nigeria Inter-Bank 
Settlement System (NIBSS). In early 2016, they announced 
the removal of 24,000 (ghost) workers,42 and that number 
has since doubled – saving the tax payer equivalent of  
USD $74million. The Sistema de Identificación Nacional Tributario y Social 
(SINTyS) system in Argentina enabled individual records 
to be linked across 13 databases covering employment, 
pensions, electoral roll, social beneficiaries, as well as 
registries for the deceased, real estate and auto ownership. 
This resulted in savings of USD $187 million in reduced 
leakage and tax evasion.4311
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGRisks and Challenges in 
Implementing Digital ID
Despite the numerous benefits of an inclusive, robust, 
and responsible digital ID system, governments are 
faced with challenges, such as those mentioned below. 
To ensure that trust is maintained in the system, 
governments should consider and work to mitigate 
these risks.
Exclusion Risks
Demographics, culture and ethical considerations 
all require attention when defining a digital Identity. 
An effective digital ID is inclusive, but there might 
be certain segments of the population from whom 
collecting biometric information is difficult, inaccurate or 
impossible. 
Such populations might include vulnerable populations 
(including tribal and ethnic populations or those with 
unclear migration status) as well as those with low digital 
literacy or lack of connectivity. Infants or those affected 
by skin or eye diseases might have unformed or disfigured 
features which might make fingerprint and iris capture 
of sufficient detail and quality, problematic. Advances 
are being made using a mixture of anatomical studies, 
artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning algorithms 
to overcome these hurdles.44 Other considerations are 
religious beliefs or conflicts with one’ values against 
capturing of biometrics leading to self-exclusion. Such 
reasons need to be carefully measured when designing 
a digital ID for an entire population sample especially in 
the context of personal freedom and democratic rights.Privacy and Data Protection
A key consideration are the privacy and data protection 
issues, including ethical concerns, that are inherent in 
the collection of personal and biometric information. 
The (most likely) centralized nature of sensitive data 
storage also exacerbates the cybersecurity concerns and 
privacy risks associated with digital IDs. It is vital that 
governments set out a robust governance procedure 
including for data management systems, and that this 
be maintained and consistently updated. It will be the 
responsibility of the government to define data protection 
policies, including rules around the collection, use, 
management and disclosure of the data. Governments 
may also think about mechanisms to minimize the amount 
of personal data which is collected and how data systems 
will be maintained, especially to safeguard against data 
leakages and (cyber) attacks.
Preservation of the confidentiality and integrity of 
the data should be the primary responsibility of the 
data collector; although the data processor and others 
involved in accessing, storing and using personal data 
also have a role to play. There should be appropriate 
mechanisms to ensure that consent from individuals is 
obtained which covers the basis on which the data will 
be collected, maintained, used and disclosed.  Individuals 
should be aware of who holds and has access to their 
personal data and have an opportunity to inspect the 
data held about them and to ask for corrections for any 
errors or out of date (or incomplete) data. Regimes 
should also provide for expungement or deletion of 
specific data if the original purpose for the data collection 
has expired. Moreover, suitable independent oversight Figure 6: Lack of Appropriate Identity Characteristics and  Its Impact on the  
Financial System
Legal Unique Digital
• Financial exclusion • No clear view of customer
• Inhibits accounts to add-on 
financial services  
(i.e. credit/insurance)
• Issues of fraud • High costs for both customers  
and provider
• Low scale of access to  
financial servicesLake of Appropriate CharacteristicsTHE ROLE OF DIGITAL IDENTITY IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR12
and enforcement mechanisms should be available to 
individuals who have complaints regarding misuse or 
other non-compliance with rights guaranteed under the 
privacy and data protection regime.
The EU has recently introduced the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) to deal with this challenge 
and harmonize data privacy laws across Europe. GDPR 
requires companies that collect data on EU citizens to 
comply with strict rules on consumer data and rights 
regarding their data. The implementation of the law 
has had to address a number of contentious issues from 
data portability – the ability to transfer data across 
interoperable applications – as well as how to define data 
controllers and the associated designation of a dedicated 
Data Protection Officer.45 
Misuse of data and breaches in security can result 
in identity theft, physical harm, discrimination, and 
emotional distress to individuals causing them to lose 
trust in the system. Organizations also suffer considerably, 
causing both financial and reputational damage.
Cost and Sustainability
The infrastructure required to build a digital ID system and 
registration of the eligible population can be a costly and 
time-consuming process that is likely to require extensive 
investment in building or updating infrastructure and 
technology, buy-in from key stakeholders especially 
consumers, adequate knowledge and understanding of 
the system. It is vital that economic feasibility, and infrastructure 
constraints are adequately evaluated and that systems 
are future proofed to keep up with the changes so the 
resilience of the system is not compromised.  
Governments should:
• Design digital infrastructure appropriate for the 
context, including strategies to reach remote areas 
and ensure ‘last mile connectivity’. Off-line solutions 
can complement the absence or loss of on-line 
connectivity.46
• Develop robust procurement guidelines and 
contemplate open design standards to promote 
innovation and allow for greater flexibility, efficiency 
and functionality of the system both within and across 
borders.
• Ensure the technical capacity of government agencies, 
private sector and other stakeholders in the digital 
identity ecosystem (including end-users) to operate 
and maintain new systems and devices.
• Consider opportunities for savings and revenue 
generation for both the public and private sector that 
may offset some of the costs of implementing a robust 
digital ID system.
• Ensure that the ID system meets the needs of a wide 
variety of users, including both public and private 
entities, in order to drive demand for the system.13
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
APPROACHES TO INTEGRATE ID INTO  
THE FINANCIAL SECTOR
Using Existing Legal IDs
In many countries, as a matter of general practice, all FSPs collect a specific ID which is in generally considered reliable 
and universal.  In general, the financial sector relies on existing legal IDs, traditionally based on physical interactions 
and physical exchange of documents,- between the user and the relying party, to allow access to services (public or 
private) such as healthcare, education, financial services. With the rapid development in technology, FSPs in many 
countries have access to identification systems to help validate credentials. In the case of digital IDs, the validation and 
subsequent verification can be conducted in real-time at the time of account opening, either in-person or even remotely. 
(Please refer to Annex 2 for details of the validation and verification process)
The box below highlights examples that show the 
potential of using legal ID’s to integrate with the financial sector and the significant benefits that are accrued from 
this integration.
Box 6: Legal IDs: NADRA, Peru ID, Aadhaar, SPID
Peru ID
The National Registry of Identification and Civil Status 
(Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil, or 
RENIEC) is the premier national digital ID system in Peru. 
RENEIC has been used as a form of identification for a wide 
range of public and private services. For example, RENIEC 
serves as the core verification database for e-money 
platform called ‘Modelo Peru’ serving millions of customers 
across Peru for e-money transactions. In addition, a new 
service using RENIEC known as Billetera Movil (BiM), was 
launched in February 2016, which provides services such 
as cash in/cash out at agents, the ability to check balances, 
conduct P2P payments and top-up airtime credit.47  
Aadhaar
In the case of India, its universal digital ID named Aadhar (a 
12-digit number issued by Unique Identification Authority of 
India (UIDAI)), provides biometric verification for a variety 
of services through CDD/e-KYC authentication platforms.  
The Central KYC Records Registry (CKYCR) is envisaged as a repository of the CDD records obtained and uploaded 
by the Regulated Entities (REs) across the financial 
sector. CKYCR has been set up through an amendment 
in the relevant Prevention of Money Laundering (PML) 
Rules: specifically, those regarding the maintenance of 
records which mandate financial sector entities to upload 
the customer information onto a common database of the 
proposed registry. This database aims to facilitate inter-
usability of the CDD records across the sector(s), with one 
of the objectives to reduce the burden for both individuals 
and the RE of obtaining and verifying CDD documents 
each time a customer creates a new relationship with a  
financial entity. 48
NADRA
Pakistan’s CNIC (Computerized National Identity Card), a 
core product of NADRA (National Database and Regulation 
Authority), is the legal digital ID card for Pakistani citizens. 
CNIC provides legal ID verification services across a 
number of platforms and sectors. For example, the 14
 APPROACHES TO INTEGRATE ID INTO THE FINANCIAL SECTORPrivate Sector Initiatives
In a few countries with reliable and universal coverage 
of legal ID, banking and other industry consortiums 
have developed digital capabilities that are built on 
top of these legal IDs and leverage the value of them. 
Moreover, in the recent past, dedicated general-purpose 
digital features and solutions have been developed as an 
overlay on legal ID.  These services seek to offer an open 
and general-purpose authentication which can be used 
to avoid the need for dedicated passwords and security 
credentials. These general-purpose services are now also 
being targeted at the financial sector.  Examples of this 
include FIDO alliance and Mobile Connect and other 
services based on federated architectures that are being 
developed. In this model, a diverse set of underlying legal 
ID and information held with private sector institutions 
could be used and the individual choses which underlying 
legal ID or private sector information source is used to 
assert one’s identity in a given context.
Some examples of these initiatives are highlighted in the 
boxes next page.
Social Data for Identity Proofing
The increasing use of online social and professional 
networks, e-commerce platforms, and use of connected 
devices (IoT) that can track location and service usage 
data, generates a vast amount of data points about an 
individual. These data points can be aggregated to 
determine, with some degree of confidence, information such as: where the person lives (based on, for example, 
shipment of e-commerce purchases and taxi rides); where 
the person works (based on geolocation co-ordinates 
during typical business hours); the social life of the 
individual; professional connections (via channels such 
as LinkedIn) which can be used to also judge general 
reputation in the industry; the marketing of tailored 
products and services (such as insurance); and also the 
general demographic characteristics based on what the 
person reads, buys and listens to. It is possible to glean 
all this information without even knowing the person’s 
name, age or date of birth from any registered website or 
official database.
While potentially useful, this has several cons, such 
as breach of privacy and data protection as well as the 
exclusion of those who need services (such as insurance) 
most, by eroding the principle of risk pooling. Moreover, 
not all the above information is usually available from 
one institution. There are emerging signs of institutions 
collating and sharing information through APIs to 
potentially commercialize this along the lines of a credit 
reporting system, causing further concerns about the data 
privacy standards being adhered to.
Several firms have started to use big data as either a 
complement to traditional sources of information or 
rely solely on it to conduct identity checks before the 
provision of services. Notable examples include peer-to-
peer (P2P) lending platforms, which use captured social 
media data to assess credit worthiness of individuals who 
do not have a credit history. PTA (Pakistan Telecom Authority) and MoIT (Ministry of 
Information Technology) collaborated to introduce a SIM 
registration system called Biometric Verification Systems 
(BVS) program. The program made it mandatory for all 
cellphone owners to register each new SIM and have their 
identity biometrically verified against the NADRA digital ID 
database. As part of this process, PTA developed a SIM 
registration information system, which links a customer’s 
CNIC with several SIMs. SIMs can only be activated after 
the purchaser’s biometrics (finger impressions) have been 
verified against NADRA. In addition to the verification 
requirement, a limit was placed on each person obtaining 
SIMs, and a cap enforced. The SIM verification program 
has been a success due to the lower operations costs 
enabled by the digital ID integration.49  SPID 
The Italian Public System of Digital Identity (SPID) is the 
Italian solution developed under the EU eIDAS Regulation.  
It is a public open system allowing public and private 
entities (Identity Providers), accredited by the Agency for 
Digital Italy (AGID), to offer registration services and the 
digital ID verification for access to services for citizens  
and businesses.
The acceptance  of SPID is mandatory for the public sector 
and  is optional for private and financial sectors. SPID 
envisages different levels of authentication, consistent 
with standard ISO-IEC 29115, according to the level of 
security of the services required by the users. Launched  in  
2016, SPID reached  about 2.5 million digital identities by  
March 2018.50 Box 6: Legal IDs: NADRA, Peru ID, Aadhaar, SPID (continued)15
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGBox 7: Private Sector Initiatives: FIDO, BVN, GOV.UK Verify, BankID
Fast Identity Online (FIDO) Alliance
The FIDO Alliance is a non-profit, industry alliance 
nominally formed in July 2012 to address both the lack 
of interoperability among strong authentication devices, 
as well as the problems users face when creating and 
remembering multiple usernames and passwords. 
Headquartered in California, the members have developed 
technical specifications that define an open, scalable, 
interoperable set of mechanisms that supplant reliance on 
passwords to securely authenticate users of online services. 
The FIDO Alliance currently has over 260 members.51 
BankID
BankID is an electronic identification for Swedish citizens 
issued by a consortium of Swedish banks with an estimated 
7.5 million active users currently. First issued in 2003, 
it can be used by members of the public, authorities and 
companies. Citizens can use their BankID for identification 
as well as a means of digital signature for signing 
transactions and documents remotely. It has been adopted 
by the government, municipality, banks and companies to 
validate identity. In accordance with Swedish law as well 
as within the European Union, a signature via BankID is 
legally binding.52 
Bank Verification Number (BVN)
The Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) in conjunction with the 
Bankers Committee launched a project in 2014 to develop 
a single biometric database for all banks’ customers nationwide. The features captured include fingerprints and 
facial images providing customers with a 11-digit number. 
Customers were required to enroll with their bank to get a 
unique BVN which would then be valid across the entirety of 
the Nigerian banking sector. Each customer is only allowed 
to have one BVN and the adoption of this ID was made a 
mandatory requirement for access to all banking services.53
GOV.UK Verify
GOV.UK Verify is an identity assurance system being 
developed by the UK Government Digital Service (GDS) 
that facilitates a marketplace of trusted third parties to 
identify and authenticate users of online services. The 
system works by behaving like a platform so that those 
companies who are registered on the platform (currently 
seven54) such as the post-office and Barclaycard can ‘verify’ 
the information submitted by individuals. 
Once verified, the registered company lets the government 
know the identity of the individual and the verified individual 
can access up to 15 government services such as benefits, 
driving license, the ability to file tax returns or check your 
state pension. The GDS set a target to reach 25 million 
registered users by 2020 and wants it to become the default 
system for all those accessing public services.
Verify was first launched in 2014 but had some trouble 
gaining traction finally going live in only 2016. To register, 
a valid UK address is required and by late 2017 1.5 million 
Verify accounts had been set up.55 The system remains in its 
beta phase and is hence not open to all users.
Aggregation services and P2P lenders in some markets 
ask users to share their access credentials with various 
websites, primarily financial, and then aggregate the data 
from the user’s various financial services relationships. In 
the process of aggregating the information, predictably, 
a lot of underlying information like the address of 
the individual, phone number(s), periodic incoming 
payments (like salary and expenses), could become 
visible to the aggregation service. The use of social 
data thus aggregated is increasingly being considered 
as part of the identity validation and is used as a basis 
for decisions on creditworthiness. A few firms are 
now moving one step further to offer so-called ‘social 
identity’ verification services. This type of data could 
have potential in addressing the challenges of identity 
validation for individuals with limited traditional 
biographical footprints in official records.Despite the potential opportunities that arise in using 
social media data for identity proofing there are several 
challenges that emerge, particularly around privacy and 
consent. Under the terms of the forthcoming GDPR 
directive, user consent must be freely given in the form 
of either a statement or a clear affirmative action that 
signifies agreement to personal data being processed. 
It is highly likely that its approach will influence the 
development of data protection laws globally.56
Blockchain and Digital ID Identity
Federated authentication could potentially provide the 
solution to be able to trust unknown identities across 
organizations or even borders. This is illustrated by 
blockchain – a distributed ledger technology which is 
essentially a shared ledger between network participants 16 APPROACHES TO INTEGRATE ID INTO THE FINANCIAL SECTORand the use of ‘tokens’ as a way to incentivize participants 
for running the network in the absence of a central 
authority. This allows exchange of information among 
multiple parties in what essentially is trust-less system.
This technology is being trialed for various financial 
sector applications including funds transfers, payment 
settlement and regulatory oversight, and due to its 
decentralized and transparent nature57 also increasingly 
in identity management as well. The immutable nature 
of the ledger ensures that dispute resolution is embedded 
and enforced by computer protocol. Moreover, the 
transparency, resilience and replication at each node 
offered by the shared ledger is a useful tool for tracking 
and maintaining the integrity of the information.
It should be noted that although blockchain and distributed 
ledger technologies were not built with identity in 
mind, there are use cases identified in supporting the 
development of self-sovereign identity (SSID) – (i.e.) 
a mechanism for an individual / entity to assert its own 
identity without having to rely on any third party. This 
term (SSID) is increasingly being contested, as the basis 
for the identity is often some form of underlying legal 
ID which is first validated by the issuing authority before 
being managed by an individual / entity on their own. 
Hence, in that sense, it more of a ‘self-managed’ rather 
than ‘self-sovereign’ ID. For example, the Government 
of Dubai recently announced a plan to use blockchain 
technology to verify all information on an Emirates 
ID card. Details related to a resident would be stored 
on the card, including insurance documents, passport 
information, and health data, and by 2020 it is expected to be stored in blockchains, secured, and encrypted.58  In 
actuality, what will be stored in the distributed ledger 
is not identity itself but an identity ‘transaction’ or 
attestation of an identity. 
Some argue that blockchain could be used to empower 
an individual to have complete control over their identity 
including where, when and what parts of their identity 
they wish to share. Essentially, when a person presents 
their digital identity to a third party, they will do so by 
proving that they have control over the private key that 
corresponds to the relevant linked identity transactions 
allowing the individual to divulge only that information 
that needs to be shared with authenticating body and not 
the entirety of the digital ID. Moreover, this is possible 
without data storage. For example, if a user wanted 
to access a service that was only available to people 
who lived in a specific region, the attestation could 
provide proof that the user’s home address is within the 
required region, but does not need to provide the actual  
address itself. 
There have been recent developments on blockchain 
based digital identity and associated CDD. However, 
many of these developments are still in early stages and 
have not yet produced results at scale, making it difficult 
to evaluate their feasibility. It’s also important to note that 
despite the progress, concerns remain around the legal 
standing of blockchain-based applications, the standards 
used, and the interoperability of shared ledger systems as 
evident from the assessment in the figure below along the 
dimensions of Maturity, Ease of Adoption, Affordability, 
Performance, Security and Scalability.59  17
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGFigure 7: Assessment of Authentication Robustness of Blockchain60
Scalability
Security
PerformanceMaturity
AffordabilityAdoption
Circurvention 
ResistanceSimplicity of
 Network InfrastructureSimplicity of
 Computational
 ResourcesData 
 ScalabilityInter-
 operabilityLongevity
Resilience
Transmission 
Security
ThroughputIntegration Cultural 
Acceptance
Simplicity of 
Training
UI Simplicity
Ease of 
Learning
Time Cost 
Savings
Revenue
 Opportunities
SW
 Affordability
HW
 Affordability
Stability
Response TimeAccuracy
High           Medium         Low             N/A
Blockchain19 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN  
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Identity is integral to providing and obtaining financial services, and is needed at various transaction points when using 
financial services. The role ID plays at each of these transaction points and for different services will vary (see Figure 
6 below). These distinctions are subtle but have important implications for policymakers, regulators, service providers 
and consumers alike. Identity is also vital for ensuring the safety and integrity of the financial system.
Figure 8: Financial Service Stages and 
PhasesDuring account opening, a customer is required to 
provide credentials to establish identity so that the FSP 
can carry out CDD procedures. These credentials then 
need to be validated and allows the FSP to link and match 
information gathered from other sources of information 
such as credit bureaus to validate the information 
provided and assess the suitability of the product to the 
individual. Once complete, a transaction identifier maybe issued (for example a debit card and PIN), to be used 
for authentication in future transactions or access to  
other services. 
The information collected during account opening—for 
example, address, other contact details, and employment 
status—can change over the customer lifecycle. Hence, 
periodic re-validation is required to ensure that key data 
underpinning CDD continues to be valid. The frequency 
of this varies according to local regulatory requirements, 
which are often at least once every 3 to 5 years, 
depending on risk profile of the customer. Finally, there 
are occasional product-specific events, such as the re-
issuance of an internet banking password and returning 
mortgage documents, which require the re-validation 
of identity documents to ensure that the information 
is being provided to the rightful owner of the account 
relationship. The specifics will depend on local regulatory 
requirements and industry standards and codes. 
The subsequent sub-sections below describe the 
applications and utility of ID within specific financial 
sector services and processes associated with provision of 
services and products. The different processes described 
in Figure 6 can be broadly grouped into three:  account 
opening; ongoing authentication and customer consent; 
and back-office processes. Digital ID has applications in 
each of these three areas and are described in the sections 
below. This includes a focus on (1) account opening, (2) 
customer due diligence, (3) authentication. In addition, 
digital IDs have the potential to (4) transform payment Account  
Opening
Customer Due  
Diligence  
(CDD)
Transaction  
AuthenticationPeriodic  
Re-validationProduct-  
Specific Event20
 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESBetter
AuthenticationCustomer Due
DiligenceE-signaturesConsumer  
Consent
Easier Account  
OpeningBetter AML/CFT Controls
Identity Theft and Fraud Prevention
Better Credit ScoringG2P, G2B & G2P  
Payments
Streamlined  
T ax Collection
Reduction of  
Gender Gap
More Efficient  
Social 
ProgramsThe Ability to Leverage 
Value of Legal IDsReduction of 
Gender Gap
Increased  
Access to  
Social ProgramsRole in 
Humanitarian  
AssistanceAccess to: Credit,  
Savings, InsuranceG2P Payments Greater Transparency
Easier Tracking
Potential for Interoperability
Reduced Cost and Increased Efficiency
Integration with Mobile Platforms
Improved Document Management and Recording
Improved Customer Service
Single Customer View
Frictionless TransactionsPUBLIC AUTHORITIES RELYING PARTY INDIVIDUALSUSES BENEFITSFigure 9: Benefits of Digital ID21
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGservices  for FSPs and also government-to-person (G2P) 
and humanitarian assistance. Further, digital IDs have a 
critical impact of effectiveness of (5) credit reporting 
systems and facilitates (6) digital signatures and (7) 
insurance schemes. Finally, a strong digital ID system 
can also help (8) small business development by 
improving identification of firms and employees. The 
list is not exhaustive but is aimed at those elements of 
financial services that are most pertinent to financial 
inclusion. The role of digital ID on each of these areas 
is described below and illustrated through relevant  
case studies.
Account Opening
One of the important applications of digital ID in the 
financial sector is that of account opening. According to 
the Global Findex Survey recently released by the World 
Bank Group, 515 million adults worldwide opened an 
account at a financial institution or through a mobile 
money provider between 2014 and 2017. This means 
that 69 percent of adults now have an account, up from 
62 percent in 2014 and 51 percent in 2011. However, 
only 63 percent of adults have an account in developing 
countries, compared with 94 percent in high-income 
countries. The survey also finds that the digitization of 
government payments, which is supported by digital ID, 
could help to reduce the number of unbanked people by 
100 million globally.  
Countries such as Peru and India have already used 
digital ID to rapidly increase account opening in recent 
years. Specifically, India has pioneered the JAM (Jan Dhan Aadhar Mobile) approach has enabled more than 
80 percent of the population to have bank accounts61 
(see Box 8 below). In Peru, the digital ID system enabled 
rollout of an interoperable mobile money service and 
platform.   
Customer Authentication 
After account opening and customer due diligence, 
FSPs need the ability to authenticate customer identities 
for a variety of services and transactions. Secure, 
digital authentication mechanisms based on attributes 
and credentials established during account setup are 
necessary to ensure that only legitimate customers to 
access services and to prevent identity theft and fraud. 
Furthermore, digital ID technology can help FSPs 
implement automated methods of authentication that do 
not require the costs and manpower needs of face-to-face 
interaction. This section highlights some of common 
authentication mechanisms and draws attention to 
developments in this area.
Currently, the provision of credentials for use in 
authentication are often tied to a specific financial 
product they service, such as a user ID and password for 
online transactions and/or a payment card and PIN. There 
is however, a trend towards de-coupling authentication 
credentials from a specific financial product and making 
it available as a service on its own. One example is the 
growing use of token-based authentication to access 
one’s accounts at an institution. The general concept 
behind a token-based authentication system is simple: 
they allow users to enter their username and password 
Box 8: Case Study: India ‘JAM Trinity’ 
In India, the foundation of financial inclusion strategy has 
been based on the Jan-Dhan, Aadhaar, and Mobile (JAM) 
trinity. The JAM trinity   integrates the ID system and payment 
applications with a view to becoming more cost effective and 
efficient to open an account and for accessing them.
The Aadhaar ID system includes an electronic KYC (e-KYC) 
service to expedite the verification of a client’s identity. The 
e-KYC enables an individual with an Aadhaar number to allow 
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) to disclose 
his/her personal information to service providers who wish to 
instantly activate services such as mobile connections and 
bank accounts. 
e-KYC is paperless, consent-based, private and 
instantaneous. As a result, reliable62  CDD data is shared with the reporting entity in real time. Furthermore, as the 
KYC data is released directly to service providers only 
upon the consent of the customer, his/her privacy remains 
protected provided robust data protection measures are in 
place. So far, a total of 4.9 billion e-KYC transactions have 
been conducted through Aadhaar. 
Banks and payment network operators have embedded 
Aadhaar authentication into micro-ATMs to provide branch-
less banking anywhere in the country in a real-time, scalable 
and interoperable manner. From the FSP’s view point, it 
offers tremendous benefits in terms of near elimination of 
paperwork and the  consequential burden of keeping records 
and facilitating audit and forensics through  the electronic 
storage of information.63 22
 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESto obtain a token which allows them to fetch a specific 
resource. Users can then use this token to access the 
specific resource for a specific time period.65
There can be several approaches for authentication, 
depending on the assessment of risks associated with 
unauthorized access. As policymakers push the sector 
to expand financial services into underserved and often 
rural areas, a key consideration should be to identify 
methods that offer secure and reliable authentication for 
FSPs, while also being convenient for users. The concept 
of Levels of Assurance (LOA), for example, takes a 
graduated approach to security and matches the LOA 
needed to the specific class of service to be provided. 
While the purpose of this report is not to go into a detailed 
analysis of the LOA levels, it is important to note that 
service providers always face a cost-benefit tradeoff in 
seeking to achieve higher LOAs. Specifically, a tradeoff  
between the perceived risk of a transaction versus the cost 
of authenticating that transaction. For example, a face-to-
face manual authentication process will incur a relatively 
high cost but will likely result in lower risk and thus 
higher LOA. Conversely, a username and password type 
of authentication system will incur much lower costs to 
service providers but entails much higher risk of fraud.66  
More detail on the LOA provided in Annex 1.
Personal Identification Number (PIN)
The Personal Identification Number, or PIN, is the 
authentication technology used by almost all payment card services worldwide particularly for ATM cash 
transactions. A PIN differs from a password in that it 
is transformed into a reference value using encryption 
keys which is then stored on the authorization systems 
of the FSP while the PIN itself is transient in nature. The 
security relies in having a robust transformation process 
that provides a high degree of confidence that the PIN 
cannot be derived from the reference value. A PIN is 
intended to be remembered by the user and when used 
safely and as required by prevalent standards,67 provides 
a good degree of protection and certainty.
However, there is a commonly held view that some 
customer segments cannot use PINs reliably, due to 
illiteracy, innumeracy or lack of familiarity with the 
technology and other issues. The security of the PIN 
lies in being able to commit it to memory. However, 
low frequency of use forms a tenuous link with memory, 
since many of these customers access financial services 
infrequently, perhaps as little as once every 3 months or 
even less. Further, the infrequency of use leads people to 
write their PINs down, often on the back of the card or 
mobile phone they are using, leading to PIN compromise.
In addition, PINs can and often are easily be shared with 
others, which can presents a security risk. For example,  
national and global fears around terrorism are beginning 
to influence PIN use. The 2015 terrorist attacks in Paris 
were reported to have been financed using prepaid cards. 
This reflects a broader issue with payment cards in that 
one person, who passes the necessary CDD checks can The Peruvian Bankers’ Association (ASBANC) announced 
an initiative to develop a shared e-money platform in 2014 
called ‘Modelo Peru’. This quickly grew into a collaboration 
between the country’s financial institutions, government, 
telecommunications companies, large payers (salaries) and 
payees (billers), leading to the establishment of a dedicated 
entity in July 2015 the Peruvian Digital Payments (PDP) to 
develop and offer a new payment service. This new service 
is known as Billetera Movil (BiM), and was launched in 
February 2016, reaching around 80,000 subscribers in its 
first three months of operation.
Through the successful integration of Peru’s national 
Digital ID system (RENIEC) and payment applications via a 
mobile phone, a successful ID backed payment system was 
developed. The digital ID is linked to all accounts, enabling 
enforcement of various transaction and account balance 
limits. According to the GSMA, 95 percent of the population of Peru lives in an area with mobile broadband coverage and 
at least 70 percent of the population have a mobile phone 
connection.64 This enabled provision of services such as 
cash in / cash out at agents, balance check, P2P payments 
and airtime top-up across large sections of the population, 
whilst being able to enforce the specific transaction and 
account balance requirements across all the accounts an 
individual held.
It is expected that other services such as ATM integration, 
utility bill payments and merchant payments would be 
enabled by end-2018. Important characteristics of this 
system include: being able to sign up without a bank 
account; ability to send or receive money without the use of 
mobile data or a pre-paid plan; and withdrawal/transaction 
limits up to USD $300 a day and USD $1200 per month. If 
this payments system is scaled up, it has the capacity to 
bring more than 60 million people into the formal economy. Box 9: Case Study: Peru ‘Modelo Pero’23
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGacquire the card and top it up, whilst another person uses 
the funds. The PIN is forwarded by post or text message 
or even word of mouth making it increasingly difficult 
to track. 
Regulatory authorities in several countries have concerns 
that a PIN is not secure enough, for at least some financial 
transactions. For example, in India, online biometric 
authentication for bank transactions is becoming 
available. The diminishing reliance on solely PIN use 
for security, is further evidenced by the announcement 
that the Payments Association of South Africa (PASA), 
in partnership with Visa and MasterCard, is seeking to 
introduce biometric authentication of payment cards in 
South Africa.68
Smartcards
A Smartcard is a card that has embedded integrated circuit 
or chip.  Smartcards can be used to store attributes and 
credentials such as PINs or biometric data (see next 
section) and with the appropriate application, can enable 
interaction with recorded data. For example, a smartcard 
can be used to verify that a fingerprint sample collected by 
a connected device is the same as a template stored in the 
Smartcard. Smartcards can either be “contact” cards that 
are read when in direct physical contact with a reader, or 
“contactless” card that uses Near Field Communication 
(NFC) or radio frequency identification (RFID) technology 
(see Box 10). In general, “contact” smartcards also have 
capability of requiring a pin for identification. 
Smartcards are most commonly used for payments, public 
transport, or access to office buildings. Many countries 
also issue national ID cards and other credentials that 
use smartcards. Digital ID cards in global circulation 
are expected to increase from 1.75 billion in 2013 to 
3.3 billion in 2021. Of this, a total of 3.2 billion national 
ID smart cards will be issued by 103 countries.69 As of 
early 2017, 82 percent of all countries issuing official ID 
cards have implemented programs that depend on smart 
cards or plastic cards and biometrics. These are typically contact cards, although some including Germany’s ID 
card (Personalausweis) and Malaysia’s MyKad use 
contactless technology.
In addition to using smartcards as standard IDs, some 
emerging cases have attempted to combine identity 
and payment capabilities on one smartcard potentially 
offering great convenience to users and service  
providers alike. 
For example, the Government of Maldives, in 
collaboration with Mastercard,  has recently launched a 
biometric smartcard-based national ID called the ‘Passport 
Card’ for its citizens. The card contains 10 fingerprints 
for secure verification and a unique combination of dual-
interface chip for contactless and contact card reading. 
This card functions as the passport, driving license, and 
national ID of the cardholder, and can be used to provide 
health and e-services by the government. It also functions 
as a payment card to make payments.70  
However, like most innovative technologies, integrating 
identification and payments also introduces a layer of 
complications and risks, such as: data privacy; dilution 
of data ownership; liability between state identity 
authorities, payment service providers and banks; and 
general risk and fraud management. In addition, while 
smartcards are more secure than non-chip-based cards, 
they are only as secure as the features installed onto them 
at the time of production. Estonia, for example, had to 
re-issue 750,000 national e-ID cards because of a security 
risk found in the chips of those cards.71 
Mobile SIM Authentication
With the ubiquity of mobile phones, there is increasing 
interest in using the unique identification numbers 
associated with mobile subscriber identity modules or 
SIM cards. The algorithms contained in the SIM card 
allow for encrypted communication between the user 
and the network. For authentication, the authenticating 
body generates a random sequence of numbers that is 
sent to the user’s mobile- this is the user’s public key. 
Box 10: Near Field Communication (NFC) and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
Although distinct, NFC and RFID both employ radio signals 
to tag and track data.  Simplistically, NFC is the newer 
technology and—unlike RFID technology that is only 
passive — an NFC device can also exchange data with the 
tag, hence it can be both a reader and a tag. 
Tags are based on a number of parameters including 
the reading distance, speed and amount of data to be transferred, security and cost.  They are embedded into 
retail products to help stores keep tabs on inventory; 
automatically note the identity of a cars on a toll road and 
sometimes manage the control of luggage on some airlines. 
Tags are, also in SMART passports.24
 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESThe public key together with the user’s private key and 
authentication algorithm contained in the SIM, verifies 
the user.
The Mobile Connect solution created by mobile industry 
association GSMA (see box below) enables customers to 
create and manage a digital ID via a single log-on on their 
mobile phone. 
Countries that have adopted cryptographic SIM cards 
include Estonia, Moldova, and Finland. Norwegian 
mobile operators offer their subscribers secure mobile 
authentication through a local BankID solution to 
provide secure online user identification and user digital 
signature verification. In 2012, Bank of Mexico issued 
regulation establishing that banks in Mexico must allow 
their deposit account holders to associate their cellphone 
number to their accounts, in order to facilitate electronic 
transfers of funds across bank accounts.73  Each cellphone 
number can be associated to only one account in a given 
bank, but to multiple accounts, each from a different 
bank. Once the association is established, a customer 
can provide her cellphone number as an identifier to  
receive transfers. However, it is important to note that mobile authentication 
is more viable when used in combination with other 
authentication methods, rather than a standalone 
technique due to practical challenges such as sharing of 
mobile phones between individuals.74,75
Linked to this and a relevant point to be aware of, is that 
many countries now require that pre-paid SIM cards only 
be activated when registered with a proof of identity; 
those who lack this ID could be denied access to mobile 
communication, further exacerbating digital, social and 
financial exclusion. 
Biometric Based Authentication
Biometrics are physical and behavioral attributes of a 
person and are increasingly used as a means of proving 
one’s identity. There is increasing interest around the world 
in exploring biometrics for authentication, as a response 
to (amongst other matters) AML and CFT concerns. 
Authentication services in India and Pakistan are built 
on biometrics and Bangladesh as well as South Africa  
(as previously mentioned) is expected to follow suit.76Box 11: GSMA’s Mobile Connect
Mobile Connect is a secure universal log-in solution that 
works by matching a user to their mobile phone using a 
phone number as the identifier and the mobile phone as 
the authentication device.  It is a portfolio of mobile-based 
secure identity services driven by mobile network operators 
globally and delivered as a federated identity framework. 
It leverages the reach and inherent trust in the mobile network 
and combined with a unique PIN for more secure use cases, 
it is used to verify and grant online access where a Mobile 
Connect logo is displayed. Mobile network operators give 
users control over their own data and enable end users, 
businesses, and governments to interact and access online 
services in a convenient, private, and trusted environment.While the SIM information itself can act as a form of digital 
identity, the GSMA is focusing its  efforts on using the 
platform as an add-on element to existing ID programs, to 
provide additional authentication. Developers can access 
the ecosystem of operators who have partnered with GSMA 
for Mobile Connect and their corresponding user base.72
The GSMA is also working to align Mobile Connect with other 
identity standards and regulations, such as Gov.UK Verify in 
the UK, as well as technical standards produced by bodies 
such as (International Organization for Standardization) 
ISO, International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).25
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGWhen considering which biometric to use for 
authentication, jurisdictions should consider the accuracy 
(liability framework for false-positives and false-
negatives), universality (presence of the trait universally), 
stability (permanence over time), the ease of collection as 
well as acceptability and cost components involved.79
Although the use of biometrics is inherently costly, due 
to the cost of in-person capture and registration when an 
identity is issued along with authentication costs, there is 
significant interest from international payment schemes. 
The Payments Association of South Africa (PASA) is 
working with Mastercard and Visa to design a solution 
that is interoperable in South Africa. The specification enables a range of biometric solutions, from fingerprint 
verification to palm, voice, iris, or facial biometrics. 
However, there are concerns that the uptake of this by 
traders will be low due to the high cost of replacing point-
of-sale (PoS) devices. 
Separately, a private sector initiative led by Zwipe  
(a company providing biometric solutions) and 
Mastercard circumvents the issue of high integration 
costs to merchants by using an integrated fingerprint 
sensor within the card itself.80 The solution provides on-
card biometric authentication, hence removing the need 
for the acceptance device to have a built-in biometric 
reader. While the card is unarguably more expensive than Advances in technology are enabling digital identification 
systems to operate across borders. Individuals holding a 
valid ID from one country can use their credential to conduct 
a transaction in another country (such as filing their taxes) 
or to identify and authenticate themselves at checkpoints or 
border crossings in other countries. 
In the European Union, eIDAS (electronic Identification, 
Authentication and Trust Services) is a regulation on 
electronic identification and trust services for electronic 
transactions in the European Single Market. Under eIDAS, 
individuals can carry out secure cross-border electronic 
transactions that require them to authenticate their identity, 
such as enrolling in a university, opening a bank account 
and authorizing access to their electronic medical records.
There are three major stakeholders in the eIDAS network: 
individuals seeking access to a service or establishing their 
identity in another country, the server providing access to 
a secure application or service, and the provider of the 
services an individual is looking for.Box 12: Cross Border Systems
Once data to be authenticated are collected at the 
immigration point, depending on the IT architecture in 
use, the data are validated through a central database 
maintained on site or remotely validated if the database 
is located in a separate location. A secure information 
exchange channel is achieved using SAML (Security 
Assertion Markup Language) for single sign on, error 
handling, and communication. Endpoint security is ensured 
using TLS (Transport Layer Security) — a cryptographic 
protocol that provides communication security over a 
computer network.
The eIDAS regulation also includes rules for trust services 
providers—companies that handle electronic signatures, 
time stamps, electronic seals, and other methods for 
verifying documents—and it governs the use of trust 
services by consumers, businesses, and agencies to 
manage electronic transactions or access online services.
Biometric recognition uses an individual’s unique 
physiological and behavioral attributes to identify and 
authenticate his or her identity. The type of attribute 
collected and matched is called modality.77 
In biometrics, there are three main types of modalities: 
hard, soft and hidden. The hard or traditional modality 
includes iris scans, fingerprints or signatures; the soft -are 
related to faces, skin color, hair color or measurements and Box 13: Biometrics
to bodies, like height or weight. It also includes behavioral 
characteristics and mannerisms such as gait, keystroke 
patterns, and mouse usage; while the hidden modalities, 
also referred to as intrinsic, are based on medical data 
or X-rays.78 It is only the first two that are generally used 
in the identity system, with the former being the far more 
prevalent, while the latter is often used to understand 
patterns and trends and hence detect anomalies or 
unauthorized transactions.26
 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESa normal smartcard—and it is likely that the total cost of 
implementation would be higher than that of deploying 
a few thousands or tens of thousands of PoS devices, 
rather than millions or tens of millions of cards—such 
decisions are often based on several factors, like speed 
to market, and this could indeed be appropriate in some 
situations. Furthermore, the fingerprint matching taking 
place on the card rather than by a device that the card 
is inserted into adds an extra layer of security to the 
reference fingerprint data.
Regardless of the format and approach, the adoption 
of biometrics as the preferred means of customer 
authentication across the world is attracting lot of 
attention. Experts expect to see as many as 600 million 
devices with biometric authentication by 2021.81 By 
2020, 50 billion Internet of Things (IoT)82 devices are 
forecasted to be in use, and 500 million biometric sensors 
will be deployed for IoT by 2018.83 Indeed, IoT will be 
a major enabler for combining analytics and continuous 
assessment to generate an adequate level of assurance, in 
real time, that an individual is who he or she claims to be.
According to new regulations in some jurisdictions 
(e.g. China, the EU, Malaysia and Mexico) the 
initiation of transactions, as well as access to sensitive 
payment data, should be protected by strong customer 
authentication (SCA). The general objectives are to 
improve cybersecurity and reduce the risk of fraud. 
SCA is the result of a customer authentication process 
based on three elements: knowledge (e.g. of a customer’s 
own background information), ownership (e.g., of a 
physical token), and inherence (e.g. a customer’s unique 
biological characteristics). As regards the last of these 
elements, financial firms are experimenting with the use 
of biometrics as a technology able to reconcile a simple 
user experience with adequate security. Technological 
improvements now allow for cheap and sound solutions 
embedded by default in a customer’s smartphone (e.g. 
fingerprint, face or voice recognition). Financial firms 
can develop SCA solutions exploiting these smartphones’ 
native services (e.g., ApplePay, Mastercard Selfie Pay). 
Biometrics are also an opportunity for customers: the 
use of modalities such as fingerprint scanning and facial 
recognition will not only offer a great deal of convenience 
in general but also a new form of security and identity 
verification, which may suit some customers better than 
traditional tools.Payment Systems and Services
Digital ID is enabling re-structuring payment services 
and processes, the major developments in this regard are 
described below:
Combining ID and Payment Applications 
ID and payment applications can be combined in one form 
factor such as a mobile phone and its associated SIM card 
or even a smartcard or other chip based token. If the basic 
digital ID credentials are unique and enable individuals 
to reliably assert their identity without including other 
data attributes by default, this will spur developments to 
minimize the disclosure of data. 
However, linking a payment application to a digital ID by 
co-hosting the two applications on the same smartcard –
in the way that was done on a limited scale by NIMC and 
Mastercard in Nigeria – can potentially be problematic. 
Since Mastercard isn’t a bank, in order to function, the 
application needed to be linked to a bank account not 
under the control of Mastercard, presenting issues around 
consumer choice, data protection and simple practicality, 
beyond the challenge of having a particular commercial 
brand being tied to a national ID system. It would 
perhaps have been more straightforward to separate the 
ID application and the payments service, and develop 
financial services to be offered to NIMC registrants in a 
more established manner. 
Using the Digital ID Infrastructure for 
Authentication
Digital ID infrastructure can be used for authentication 
in place of a dedicated authentication arrangement for a 
payment instrument. 
India’s transformational journey in its digital infrastructure 
in recent years provides a best representation of this 
application. As mentioned earlier in the case study on 
account opening, India has spearheaded the financial 
inclusion exercise using the JAM platform. This serves as 
an important tool for the central authentication for a variety 
of transactions, instead of a dedicated authentication 
arrangement for a single payment instrument. This 
potentially, increases the level of assurance without 
adding a corresponding decrease in usability. A total of 
4.9 billion e-KYC transactions have been conducted via 
this platform. Banks and payment network operators 
have embedded Aadhaar authentication into micro-ATMs 27
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGto provide branch-less banking anywhere in the country 
in a real-time, scalable and interoperable manner.  
A further innovation in India, was to develop a mapping 
between the Aadhaar number and payment card/account 
number while using the fingerprint as an authentication 
mechanism. This allows an individual to pay, by simply 
providing a fingerprint at a participating merchant 
expelling the need to enter an account number or present 
a payment card. This service is called Aadhaar Pay. A 
variant of this is used for delivery of rations through 
the public delivery system and at micro-ATMs for 
withdrawing cash.
This approach of authentication has its challenges such 
as not being able to identify certain types of fingerprints 
and requiring multiple attempts to capture the biometric 
accurately enough to enable validation. In the current 
state of development, this could limit the effectiveness 
for routine transactions and those that need prompt 
authentication – for example while making a purchase in 
a high-traffic merchant. 
‘Singpass’ is a unique national digital ID which is being 
used by 3.3 million people for speedy access to an array 
of government and financial services,85,86 It is recognized 
and approved by government organizations as a formal 
credential of the individual and includes access to direct 
payment systems, insurance and tax reporting systems 
within the governmental setup. 
The unique digital ID has been used as a credential which is 
used to direct payments without having to know the account Box 14: Case Study: Singapore ‘SingPass’  
number of recipients. With the digital ‘MyInfo’ platform within 
Singpass, the need for repetitive form filling is avoided. 
Launched in 2017, MyInfo pulls personal data such as 
names and addresses from public agencies. Consent 
includes only a click of a button and online submissions 
are made to more than 17 different e-government agencies 
simultaneously. In addition, the government is working on 
a pilot project with four private banks to verify customer 
credentials online using Singapass and it is expected to be 
open to private financial players as well.87Using the ID Credential as An ‘Address’ 
The ID credential can be used in lieu of a bank account 
number to direct payments removing the need to reveal 
the recipient’s account number to the payer agencies. 
This is accomplished by maintaining a mapping between 
the credential and payment related identifiers. 
India’s Aadhar payment bridge system (APB) is an 
example of such a service. It is a unique payment system 
implemented by National Payments Corporation of India 
(NPCI), which uses Aadhaar number as a central key for 
electronically channeling the Government subsidies and 
benefits in the Aadhaar Enabled Bank Accounts (AEBA) 
of the intended beneficiaries.  The APB system is used by 
the government departments and Agencies for the direct 
transfer of benefits and subsidies under Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) scheme launched by Government of 
India.84 This is also an example of the government to 
person (G2P) benefits brought about by digital ID that 
supports efficiency and aims to remove the fraud inherent 
in the benefits system.
The CNIC has been central to the delivery of G2P payments 
in Pakistan. G2P payment schemes are organized into 
three categories: (a) social cash transfers, (b) government 
salaries and (c) government pensions. In all these 
categories, the role of CNIC has been integral in enabling 
the payments to be transferred to the customer. 
All citizens are required to register for the CNIC once they 
reach the age of 18. New CNIC’s are machine-readable 
and carry facial and fingerprint information. One of the 
important attributes of CNIC is that it ensures the personal 
presence of the beneficiary at the time of withdrawal of 
money contrary to the existing system where in most cases Box 15: Case Study: Pakistan  ‘NADRA’ 
the beneficiary themselves is not a recipient of the money.  
Moreover, the beneficiary does not require a high level of 
financial literacy to withdraw funds, requiring literacy levels 
similar to that required for  the usage of a debit card. 88 This 
supports reduction of the gender gap. In addition, the CNIC 
also makes it less complicated with simpler security tiers 
for withdrawal; i.e. In order to verify her credentials before 
making payments, a beneficiary only need present a CNIC. 89 
CNIC has helped to promote growth and digitization of 
G2P payment systems which has triggered the annual 19 
percent growth in digital transactions in 2016-17.28
 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESAnother example of account number-less transaction is as 
illustrated in the Singapore case study.
Government to Person (G2P) Payments
In many countries Government benefits and subsidies 
are now increasingly being transitioned to being paid out 
as cash transfers, i.e., paying the benefit as a monetary 
value instead of as physical goods or services. This is 
another key example where digital ID can be utilized 
to support automatic and hassle-free payouts- as well 
as to weed out payments made to fraudulent accounts. 
The same principle has been used for disaster relief and 
humanitarian relief payments made directly to transaction 
accounts as described in the next section.
An important and successful example of enabling digital 
G2P payments is in Pakistan through the NADRA 
(National Database and Registration Authority) who is 
responsible for issuing the CNIC (Computerized National 
identity card) to the citizens of Pakistan.
Importantly, mapping the ID of the individual to their 
eligibility records in the social benefit transfer systems 
enables government agencies to reliably ensure that 
only eligible individuals are receiving the transfers and 
no individual is able to avail the same services from 
different locations or different points of time using a 
different identity. This has substantial implications 
for the public financial management systems and is 
also critical for public sector employee salaries and  
pension payments.
Role in Humanitarian Assistance
The digital ID initiatives have had significant impact 
on providing humanitarian assistance especially for internally-displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees.90 This 
section provides an overview of the sources of ID and 
the challenges of implementing digital ID in this context.
Of the USD $28 billion given out in humanitarian 
assistance per year, 94 percent are in-kind transfers, while 
6 percent are cash. Of this 6 percent, a certain proportion 
are in the form of electronic transfers. Digital ID will 
help ensure that the assistance reaches the intended 
recipient. The authentication91 of a beneficiary’s identity 
is crucial to cash transfers for two primary reasons: the 
full potential and advantages of cash transfers over in-
kind assistance are only realized if disbursements can be 
made remotely and digitally and backed by appropriate 
ID and authentication systems, funds traceability is a 
key government and donor requirement to scale up cash 
transfers given the high perceived risk of fund diversion 
for financing of terrorism.
The table 1 provides an overview of the different 
sources of ID in the top ten refugee hosting countries. 
Few governments have issued a formalized national ID 
system. However, it should be noted that birth registration 
by the government and provision of a United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) ID is more 
persistent in the sample chosen.
There are a number of challenges that hamper the creation 
of a digital ID for displaced persons:
• Insufficient evidence of their identity: Refugees and 
asylum seekers may arrive in a host state without 
reliable evidence of their claimed identity, such as 
a passport, national ID or birth certificate from their 
country of origin. This may delay their registration by 
the host state or by UNHCR and could even prevent 
it entirely. In Norway, Norwegian Refugee Council 
In-Kind Transfers  
(incl. on Cards  
or Mobile)
Cash  
TransfersPhysical  
CashCash Out
Digital  
TransfersAccess & Use  
of Financial  
ServicesMajority
Minority94%
6%Figure 10: Overview of Humanitarian Assistance
Source: ‘The Role of Financial Services in Humanitarian Crises’, WBG, 2017$28 billion/yearHumanitarian  
Assistance29
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGT able 1: Comparisons of Different ID Systems for Refugees
Country (# of Refugees)Access to ID/Registration by Source
Govt Issued National 
ID SystemGovt Issued Standalone 
Refugee ID SystemBirth Registration by 
the GovtUNHCR Issued
Jordan (685,197 under UNHCR; 
 2.2 million under UNRWA) Only some Palestinian 
refugeesYes Yes Yes
Turkey (2.9 million) Yes (as a Foreigner) No Yes Yes
Pakistan (1.4 million)  No Only refugees who arrived 
before 2015No Yes 
Lebanon (1 million under UNHCR;              
463,700 under UNRWA)No Only Palestinian refugees Yes Yes*
Iran (979,435) No Yes Yes Yes
Uganda (940,835) No Yes Yes No
Ethiopia (791,631) No No Yes Yes
Germany (669,482) No Yes Yes No
DRC (451,959) No No Yes Yes
Kenya (451,099) No Yes Yes Yesestimates that 70 percent of Syrian refugees above the 
age of 14 do not have their Syrian national ID card.92
• National laws or policies preventing recognition 
of refugees: For legal or political reasons, a host 
state may not formally recognize the status of some 
refugees, preventing governments from carrying out 
registration themselves. In some cases, the government 
may consider the refugees a responsibility of the 
international community or recognize refugees but 
refuse to provide an ID for a real or perceived fear that 
this may prolong their stay.
• Lack of demand from the refugees: Refugees and 
asylum seekers may not register themselves with the 
host state, UNHCR and/or other agencies, possibly 
out of fear of extradition or even because they are 
unaware of the need to do so. Even when refugees 
register, should they fail to update their information on 
a regular basis, their ID becomes invalid (notably for 
use at third-parties).
• Inadequate capacity: Some host States may lack the 
human, financial or technical capacity to carry out 
effective and timely registration and RSD (Refugee 
status determination). In many countries, registration 
and the provision of an ID is linked with a positive 
RSD. Authorities may have a backlog of RSD 
applications that could lead to asylum seekers waiting 
weeks, months or even years for a decision. During 
this time, they may be provided with a temporary ID, such as a paper certificate, to prove that they have 
submitted a RSD application. However this temporary 
ID may not enable them to access certain services, 
such as purchase of a SIM card.  
A digital ID when rolled out effectively can mitigate the 
impact on host communities by providing an efficient 
system to help host states and humanitarian partners 
evaluate the scale and type of assistance needed. It can 
also support the realization of durable solutions such as 
voluntary repatriation, resettlement to another country, or 
integration into host communities.
UNHCR is one of the leading international agencies which 
is pioneering digital ID in many of the conflict countries, as 
part of its mandate related to refugees. UNHCR will – on 
invitation from and in collaboration with, the host state – 
step in where authorities lack the capacity, resources and/or 
willingness to carry ID registration for refugees and asylum 
seekers. In cases where the host state registers refugees 
and maintains an ID system, UNHCR may also maintain 
a parallel system for its own operational purposes, from 
which the data – under appropriate conditions – could be 
shared with the host State.  However, IDs cards issued by 
UNHCR are not always recognized as evidence of identity 
or legal status and may not be accepted by service providers 
outside of UNHCR-administered settlements. UNHCR-
issued IDs (refugee cards & asylum-seeker certificates) 
tend to be widely accepted for authentication among 
humanitarian organizations.30
 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESHost State-led UNHCR-led94Decentralized
Not Mutually Exclusive
The Government registers refugees and 
asylum seekers and issues an ID via (i) 
a standalone refugee ID system; (ii) a 
refugee category in the national ID system; 
or (iii) integration into the resident ID 
system. The government can be supported 
by UNHCR or other agencies during 
registration.With authority from the host State, 
UNHCR registers refugees and asylum 
seekers and issues an ID. The registration 
may be carried out jointly with the host 
state, but UNHCR manages the data. A refugee or asylum seeker registers 
themselves into an online system that 
stores the data in a distributed ledger 
(DLT) that does not have a central 
authority, and may be global in nature 
and not specifically targeted at refugees. 
A foundation needs to be present for 
registration, once done it removes the 
need to revert back to the original source. 
•  Dedicated refugee ID system: Pakistan, 
Jordan, Uganda, Kenya
•  Category in the national ID system: 
Tanzania, Rwanda
•  Resident ID system: India•  In parallel with the host State: Jordan, 
Thailand
•  In lieu of the host State: DRC, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, South Sudan•  Civic
•  Sovrin
•  Likely to be the most widely-recognized 
and interoperable for authentication, and 
thus facilitates the greatest access to 
services and opportunities (e.g. banking 
and CDD requirements);
•  Most useful for facilitating durable 
solutions;
•  Usually also involves RSD (except if 
a resident ID model), which is key to 
facilitating protection and identifying 
special needs.•  Accessible to anyone making a claim for 
refugee status;
•  Very efficient, especially to identify 
and address special needs of women, 
children and other vulnerable persons, 
since UNHCR has high capacity and 
extensive experience;
•  Recognized by UNHCR operations 
across different countries;
•  UNHCR allows host States to 
access data after signing a MoU with 
safeguards;
•  Trusted by resettlement destinations.•  Not necessarily linked to a jurisdiction;
•  May—in theory—provide the refugee 
with the greatest control over their 
identity data;
•  Fully digitized and hence most portable;
•  Could be an effective complement or 
add-on to host-State led or UNHCR-led 
IDs
•  Lack of sufficient capacity and burden 
on host countries;
•  High identity proofing threshold;
•  Dedicated refugee ID system may not be 
interoperable with the national ID system 
or resident ID system;
•  Resident ID does not provide proof of 
refugee status;
•  Can be revoked or invalidated by the 
host State at any time.•  May not be widely-recognized;
•  Carried out at the invitation of the host 
State and thus could be discontinued 
anytime;
•  Not sustainable as dependent on 
external financing;
•  Assuming a responsibility that should 
ideally be the host State’s remit.•  Does not address protection issues
•  As yet unproven method
•  Heavy reliance on the Internet and 
mobile devices limiting accessibility, as 
well as technical literacy and skills;
•  Lack of universal recognition 
by governments, international 
organizations, or service providers;
•  Trustworthiness based on the reliability 
of the original identity documents 
presented to assert identity;
•  Immutable nature of DLT might  mean 
that a refugee’s personal data cannot 
be removed, even when they cease 
being a refugee in most cases.
•  Global, publically-available platform has 
inherent security risks.Process Examples Advantages DisadvantagesT able 2: Comparison of ID Registration Processes9331
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGTable 2 draws comparisons on the providers of ID and the 
pros and cons associated with each.
The use of digital ID in humanitarian causes has been 
expanding over the years. In countries such as Egypt, 
India, Uganda, Syria, the impact of digital ID through the 
UNHCR systems or national ID systems have allowed 
refugees to secure aid in a more targeted and organized 
manner. In Jordan, in collaboration with UNHCR, 
World Food Programme (WFP) and IrisGuard, has 
allowed 76,000 Syrian refugees to purchase food from 
camp supermarkets and withdraw subsidies from iris 
authentication enabled ATMs, replacing cash, vouchers or 
e-cards.95 The use of WFP’s biometric-based identity and 
beneficiary management system – SCOPE – for refugees 
in Kenya enabled WFP to realize monthly savings of 
$1.5m by removing duplicate and ghost records.96 
The use of digital IDs in the humanitarian context 
has demonstrated its potential for efficiency, de-
duplication and fraud assessment. However, although 
the advantages may outweigh the drawbacks, important 
questions and challenges must still be addressed 
regarding implementing organizations, data ownership 
and security, and the ability to implement a solution 
during the early stages of a crisis within the legal and 
infrastructure requirements of such solutions.Credit Reporting
Credit reporting systems (CRS) store data about 
consumers’ repayment behavior of their financial 
obligations, reliably linking all records collected from 
different institutions to the relevant consumer and 
building up a profile of the customer. When it comes 
to credit products, lenders use risk management and 
underwriting procedures that traditionally supplement 
their credit appraisal process with data pulled from this 
credit reporting system. 
The General Principles for Credit Reporting (GPCR) 
issued in 201197 by the International Committee on Credit 
Reporting (ICCR) recognize the need for data included 
in the CRS to be unambiguously linked to the customer 
(‘data subject’). The ICCR also recognize that effective 
credit reporting for disadvantaged individuals remain 
a challenge. An effective credit reporting, they say, are 
reliable mechanisms for identifying individuals and firms 
as well as for linking them unequivocally with their 
financial obligations.
There is a need to be able to uniquely identify the 
individual or legal entity and use that unique identifier 
to organize all the records in the database. This seamless 
integration or linking of a unique ID with the credit 
reporting systems is exhibited in the Pakistan case study.
Box 16: Case Study: Pakistan  ‘NADRA’ 
The Electronic Credit Information Bureau (eCIB)98 has 
facilitated linkage between a persons CNIC (computerized 
unique national identity card) to their credit information 
based on conducting NADRA online verification and 
authentication process. The eCIB has two types of credit 
reports which are the consumer and corporate credit 
reports respectively. 
In the consumer credit report, individuals are mapped to 
their CNIC for their consumer credit and default history 
over the last 12 months. On the corporate credit reports, 
each corporate entity (listed and unlisted) is mapped to 
a unique borrower code derived from the CNIC system. 
Member financial institutions are required to report all 
their financial obligations under a unique borrower code 
assigned to each entity. The corporate credit information 
report contains details of outstanding liabilities (fund and 
non- fund based), position of overdues, details of litigation, 
write-offs, recoveries and rescheduling and restructuring- 
providing a financial map of the entity.In addition to the eCIB, (which is a more traditional credit 
reporting on banked customers), Microfinance Credit 
Information Bureau (MF-CIB)’s microfinance institutions 
can access the eCIB data. The country’s banks have 
access to this data and can assess consumer credit status, 
based on prior consent, for financial and credit reporting 
purposes. The common link between these organizations 
(credit reporting systems, banks, microfinance institutions) 
is that the CNIC provides the unique identity for every 
individual in terms of their credit histories. 
In addition, the Pakistan Credit Bureau Act of 2015 states 
“credit bureaus would be legally empowered to collect and 
be answerable for trustworthiness of credit information 
about debtors of banks, financial institutions, non-banking 
financial institutions (NBFIs), non-financial companies, 
leasing companies, and microfinance institutions.” 
The law also provides access into bill payment history  
(e.g. from utility companies) when it comes to establishing 
a credit score.9932
 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESThe lack of a unique ID in a credit reporting system could 
lead to inaccuracies and create serious problems to the 
integrity of the database such as duplication or the inability 
to match an individual to a credit score due to differently 
spelled names or addresses. This fundamentally impacts 
the effectiveness of credit reporting systems. 
The credit reporting systems have developed various 
approaches to link records with different variations 
of a name or address to a particular individual. These 
however, are challenging in context of the financially 
excluded where an individual is new to the financial 
system and address details are not structured or do not 
have a dedicated address (for example using the address 
of another person - ‘care of’). A related point to note is 
that the architecture of ID systems and credit reporting 
systems can vary. In contexts where these systems 
develop in parallel or where credit reporting systems 
precede the development of ID systems, it is important 
to compel the recording of the ID details of customers 
in the credit reporting system. In particular, where there 
is a unique ID, this can greatly enhance the reliability of 
the matching process within credit reporting systems. A 
digital ID system will further enable the credit reporting 
system to correlate details between the two systems.
As FSPs become more sophisticated, data other than 
traditionally collected credit reports and scores could 
potentially inform lending decisions or the provision of 
investment services. An example is the use of social data 
for evaluating credit worthiness and to provide a credit 
rating in China (please refer to the section on social data 
within authentication techniques). Linking such data 
also requires some form of mapping between existing 
identifiers used in the credit reporting systems and the 
ones used in other non-financial systems.Credit bureaus also provide fraud prevention services due 
to the vast amounts of data on consumers from different 
data providers they collect. They can detect errors and 
signs of potential fraud including identity theft through 
monitoring techniques based on data reporting patterns.  
Record-Keeping, Document 
Management And Digital Signature
Once the required ID validation and verification checks 
have been completed, FSPs need to preserve the records 
of the validation conducted, as required under the 
jurisdictional regulations. This involves maintenance of 
a significant amount of paper records. The use of a digital 
environment supplemented with a digital ID allows for a 
more efficient method to record, store and retrieve - by 
both the FSP and external parties such as auditors and 
regulators- these validations.
Consumer protection regulations in the financial sector 
rightly require express consent from customers to 
provide them with a service or change the terms and 
conditions of a current service. Complying with this 
requirement has often required physical interaction with 
the customer- which can be time-consuming, expensive 
and not always feasible. Digital signatures have been 
a solution to these concerns, however it has been a 
slow and expensive process to extend the service to 
non-corporate customers. In addition, it involves risks 
regarding consumer protection and consent which need 
to be addressed adequately. 
Digital IDs however, can offer simpler and more cost-
effective means to provision digital signatures, in an easy 
to use user interface. They have opened up opportunities 
for supporting remote account opening as is depicted in 
the Norway BankID framework. 
Box 17: Case Study: Norway  ‘BankID’
In 2004, through a collaboration between the Norwegian 
government and a group of cooperative banks, BankID 
was created as a unique digital ID primarily for financial 
transactions.100 More than 7.5 million Norwegians  
(75 percent of the adult population) now use BankID to 
prove their identity and complete transactions online. 
Access to internet banking and the digital signing of financial 
documents are services most commonly used by customers. 
The system is simple to use, requiring users to enter their 
personal identification number, their chosen personal password and a one-time password (OTP) from their 
physical code token. An electronic signature using BankID 
is just as binding as a handwritten signature on paper. By 
the end of 2014, the long-awaited Java-free BankID 2.0 
project was complete and implemented by most banks. 
Also, more than 600,000 Norwegians now use Mobile 
Bank ID,101 which uses the same secure technology but 
generates and stores the security elements on a mobile 
phone’s SIM card instead of a physical token.33
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGAccess to digital signature infrastructure and allowing 
customers to authenticate themselves digitally enables 
financial institutions to interact remotely with customers, 
exchange agreements as well as terms and conditions and 
other confidential documents digitally. This can bring 
about significant cost savings for both individuals and 
the FSP by reducing the cost of paper based processing, 
transmission and associated staff time; enabling faster turn-
around times and automation with the internal systems 
of a FSP. Digital IDs can help businesses streamline 
onboarding of new customers and allow legally-binding 
contracts to be signed online. For example, Netherlands-
based Rabobank has partnered with Norwegian digital 
ID provider Signicat to offer their customers a range of 
services like online login, identity, signature and data 
archiving services under the banner of Rabo eBusiness.
Customer consent is gaining more prominence given 
the strong focus on digitization being a core component 
of fintech developments, notably to provide consent for 
collecting data from external sources and also the ability 
to initiate transactions on behalf of the customer.
Small Businesses
While this report focuses on identity verification for 
individuals, it is as important for MSMEs to establish the 
identities of staff and directors authorized to setup, operate 
and instruct changes for the business. Obtaining business 
bank accounts or payment services often requires formal 
business registration documentation, which can be costly 
and cumbersome to obtain. Without such formal business 
identification, FSPs find it difficult if not impossible to provide appropriate financial services to businesses and the 
businesses in turn continue to operate in cash, with no recourse 
to a line of credit due to a limited credit history and continue 
to be caught in a vicious cycle. A pertinent example that 
deals with the challenges of small and medium businesses is 
Canada’s Digital ID for businesses as showcased in Box 18.
Some other relevant country examples include: Aadhaar 
in India is being used to assert and confirm the identity of 
participants in transactions, from opening a bank account, 
fund transfers, to trading in securities, and the ownership 
of businesses (through the Udyog Aadhaar registration 
process for MSMEs, where an Aadhaar number is 
associated with a company registration).102
Bangladesh103 is following a similar path. For larger 
businesses, they are recording the digital IDs of the 
board of directors and management team, which when 
combined with information on transaction patterns, could 
have implications for validating beneficial ownership 
of the business.104 Broader monitoring of this nature is 
likely to significantly ease the task of the regulatory and 
enforcement authorities, though it is also likely to raise 
demands for the appropriate tools to trace the changing 
ownership of assets and funds, which could potentially be 
a significant opportunity for the developers of ‘regtech’ 
services. Other examples can be found in the ‘GPFI 
report on alternative data transforming SME’ s’105 besides 
the Serbia example Box 19.
Where the ownership of an asset is with a company, 
rather than a private individual, then such controls are 
limited to the availability of a corporate digital identity. 
The issuance and usage of corporate digital identities 
Box 18: Case Study: Canada ‘BN9’ 
A 9 digit BN (BN9) number, administered by the Canadian 
revenue agency, is used to identify businesses at the 
national level. While the role of BN number is multifold, it has 
helped to substantially reduce the amount of time required to get registered and moreover is more cost effective than 
traditional registration processes. The initiative has adopted 
more than 100 program areas across Canada to enable 
registration and business approvals.
Serbia106 has a unique 12 digit UBI digital ID which is  
mandatory for all businessmen as a form of identification 
within the country. One of the key objectives of the ID 
was to reduce the number of days required to set-up a  
business and improve the ease of business ranking. A  
robust unique ID which was connected to all government Box 19: Case Study: Serbia  ‘UBI Digital ID’
divisions enabled Serbia to reduce time to register a  
business from 52 weeks to 5 weeks and then to 1-3 days. 
There was a significant improvement on risk based tax 
compliance due to accurate data, less administrative  
burden on entrepreneurs and overall improvement in 
business functioning. 34
34 APPLICATIONS OF IDENTITY IN FINANCIAL SERVICESis well established, particularly in the financial sector, 
though there have been issues around recognition and 
acceptance by regulatory authorities. An issue that was 
recently addressed in Singapore, when the government 
introduced the ‘CorpPass’- improving the ease of doing 
business for corporates and the government.
A corporate digital identity is only useful if it can be 
reliably and securely asserted, which requires access 
by a ‘natural person’, who must assert and authenticate 
his/her own identity attributes, before being allowed to 
access and assert the corporate identity and associate it 
with a transaction. One example of this is Nigeria, where 
the Bank Verification Number (BVN) of a Director or an 
authorized signatory of the company must be provided. 
Insurance
A unique digital ID is an important asset in the insurance 
industry as well. A vital facet of this is the ability to 
provide digital consent- which comes into play in a 
number of service offerings. A digital ID offers the ability 
to establish remote ownership of an asset; for example, it can link a driver’s license to a unique ID establishing a 
unique link that has implications for insurance.
For uses such as universal health care coverage which 
require large scale and integration, the importance of 
valid authentication and accurate records are being 
considered by governments globally. The ability of 
digital ID systems to aggregate data and provide valid 
authentication and maintain accurate records is extremely 
important and is more relevant in countries which are 
scaling up for universal health coverage. In Thailand,107 
for example, the national population registry serves as the 
baseline list of beneficiaries for the universal healthcare 
scheme, allowing for rapid coverage and eliminating the 
need for a duplicative enrollment campaign. 
Importantly, health financing and insurance schemes also 
need complete and accurate records on service usage and 
data on system performance to correctly bill patients and 
care providers and to inform budgeting and management 
decisions. In a country like Republic of Korea, where 
more than 97 percent of the population are part of a single 
insurance scheme, this becomes all the more relevant.  
 
Box 21: Case Studies: Estonia
In Estonia,105 the linkage between the country’s health 
information system and population register— underpinned 
by its unique eID and integration layer—has enabled every 
child to be automatically listed as a beneficiary in the health 
insurance fund from birth (World Bank 2015).105 Furthermore, 
Estonia’s e-Services infrastructure allows patients and 
providers to instantly check insurance coverage online using 
their national eID.
Furthermore, the EHIF (compulsory national insurance 
program) uses the eID to facilitate e-Services related to 
insurance and benefits coverage, such as allowing patients and doctors to conveniently check insurance information 
through online digital ID authentication. In addition, the 
EHIF also relies on the integration layer to update its 
health insurance registry of beneficiaries. The registry is 
updated daily with information on new births, deaths, and 
other changes. Newborns that enter the register through 
birth registration are linked to their mothers’ eIDs and 
automatically entered as new beneficiaries. All children 
are thus guaranteed coverage from birth, regardless 
of their parents’ work status or social contributions.  Box 20: Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) 
A LEI is a unique code made up of a series of letters and 
numbers that can be requested by a legal entity. It was 
adopted by the G20 in 2012 and is intended for parties of 
primarily cross-border financial transactions with a global 
governance framework to represent the public interest 
and is related in the main to over the counter (OTC) 
derivative  products. While there is no prohibition for 
legal entities in other sectors to request an LEI, there is a substantial cost attached and needs to be renewed on 
an annual basis.  LEIs also record group structures – i.e. 
a subsidiary -parent relationship.  Although LEI is intended 
to track counterparties of OTC derivatives, these could be 
used in other sectors. For example, LEI could be used to 
ease the efforts of supervisors and regulated entities when 
identifying legal entities in compliance with CDD and similar 
regulatory requirements.35
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGKorea’s NHI (National Health Insurance) system makes 
extensive use of administrative information sharing with 
the CRVS system (the registration system) to identify 
eligible beneficiaries and determine and collect insurance 
premiums. For example, determinations of health 
insurance premiums rely on the national ID number to 
verify subscriber’s personal income, tax, and pension 
information.  After birth, parents register their newborns 
at a local office, and the infant receives a unique number 
(referred to as RR) which is entered into the CRVS 
system. Parents must then apply for NHI coverage of 
the newborn within 14 days, including the infant’s RR 
number and the parent’s ID numbers.Besides the direct benefits to the insurance industry, the 
implication on insurance through the ownership of an asset 
via a digital ID is significant. For example, when a driver’s 
license is linked to a digital ID (as in countries like India, 
Peru, Estonia etc.), there is an indirect link to the insurance 
bought by that the concerned person (e.g. car insurance). 
Digital consent, mentioned earlier in the digital signatures 
sub-section, plays an important role in linking various 
services through the digital ID ecosystem. It is crucial that 
the digital consent infrastructure is secure for the digital ID 
to be successful in insurance-based applications.   37 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
KEY FINDINGS 
Our review and analysis of ID requirements and its role in facilitating customer identification have led us to the following 
key findings.
place, to ensure that eligible individuals are not denied 
service due to the lack of a new ID. Likewise, there 
needs to be exception handling mechanisms to deal 
with situations where the digital ID system might be 
down or if someone cannot authenticate themselves for 
reasons beyond their control (e.g. worn fingerprints).
• It is important to carry out single robust identity 
proofing for each individual as part of the registration 
exercise, and rely on it repeatedly and across sectors, 
rather than do it inadequately many times over. 
Registration and the issuance of a digital identity 
is an expensive process. Investment in a high quality 
national foundational biometric digital identity service 
will derive the most benefit for the cost.
• National authorities must give careful consideration to 
charging fees and determining the pricing of identity 
verification services. While there is a natural desire to 
ensure that legal identity agencies are self-financing, 
this can serve as a disincentive financial and other 
service providers to link to these systems beyond the 
on-boarding process, resulting in duplicated systems 
and additional costs.
Digital Identity Can Be A Critical Enabler 
for Financial Inclusion
It is clear that where a national identity platform or 
service functions well, the financial sector is an active 
adopter of identity services. However, in cases where ID 
systems are non-digital (traditional plastic or paper card), 
even though useful, it does not allow for the full scale of 
benefits to be realized. This is particularly important for 
reaching previously underserved populations who may 
have trouble accessing or using existing identity systems. Digital IDs Are Important to Public Policy  
and Service Delivery and Require Significant 
Support and Investment
A nation-wide digital identity system is critically 
important to support public policy programs and should 
be a key priority of policymakers, especially in the 
financial sector. In designing such systems authorities 
should consider the following:
• Any such digital ID system must not be limited to citizens, 
but it should be aimed at registering all residents (as well 
as citizens abroad). This can be problematic, however, if 
registration is based on documents that are only available 
to citizens or if non-citizens are required to prove legal 
status, which can be a challenge in some countries with 
porous borders, irregular migrants, displacement, and/or 
stateless populations.  
• Excluding non-citizen residents can have implications 
that make it more expensive for banks to service non-
citizens and could lead to their financial exclusion. 
This is particularly relevant to vulnerable populations 
like refugees and temporary work migrants.
• The use of a digital identity system for verification 
and/or authentication must be made available to 
all authorized service providers, from health and 
education through to the financial sector. The digital 
ID information should also be linked to the reference 
systems relied on by the financial sector like credit 
reporting systems, tax systems, business registries and 
other forms of legal ID.
• There are however political sensitivities around 
mandating the use of such a service for the receipt of 
social benefits and for financial services generally. This 
suggests that transitional arrangements must be put in 
38
 KEY FINDINGSThe availability of a reliable, digitally authenticated 
identity system can strongly support financial inclusion 
initiatives in several ways:
• Digital IDs, especially those linked with biometrics, 
should make it easier for the unbanked to obtain 
financial accounts by simplifying the documentation 
requirements required at account opening. A digital ID 
is also easier and safer to replace if lost or stolen as 
credentials can be centrally verified and updated.
• Digital IDs can help financial institutions comply 
with the customer identification and verification 
components of CDD. It also provides more cost-
effective ways of onboarding new customers, which 
could potentially be conducted by agents. Agents 
can use digital ID authentication to reliably record 
customer’s identity and proof of validation which 
can be verified and used to feed the information from 
the digital ID system for the required CDD checks. 
When coupled with simplified CDD norms for basic 
transaction accounts, a significant portion of the 
customer onboarding process can be completed at 
the agent end itself, without the customer having to 
present themselves physically at the service provider 
offices or for a personnel of the service provider to 
travel to and meet the customer in person. However, 
this is dependent to a large extent on the agents 
having biometric compatible technology linked to the  
main registry.
• The development of an identity infrastructure, and the 
potential of basic transaction accounts linked to that 
infrastructure, are a necessary element of financial 
inclusion. However this alone is not sufficient. Digital 
IDs can contribute to financial sector deepening by 
supporting the adoption and delivery or more complex 
services, such as credit and insurance with minimal 
additional verification. The ability of digital ID databases 
to support the creation of credit histories for previously 
unserved customers will help service providers to 
extend credit and better monitor customer behavior and 
liabilities across multiple service providers.
Digital IDs Help Financial Service Providers 
Streamline Their Business Operations
Digital IDs help service providers streamline many of 
their business processes, from customer registration 
and transaction monitoring to credit risk assessment, 
compliance and reporting. Importantly for financial 
inclusion, such streamlining reduces the overall costs of 
providing service which should in turn help lower fees.Digital IDs Can Help Bring More MSMEs 
Into the Formal Financial Sector
Many of the unbanked are small entrepreneurs who face 
the same financial exclusion challenges for their businesses 
as do individuals, namely, valid identity documentation. 
Digital IDs not only help these individuals access 
personal financial services, but also help them validate 
and register their businesses which in turn gains them 
access to business services such as credit, working capital 
and payment services. Digital ID for individuals has 
implications for larger businesses, as well, by connecting 
the digital ID of the board members, management team 
and authorized signatories to the ID of the businesses.
Digital IDs Can Support the Establishment 
of KYC Registries
The use of a digital ID system to build a centralized KYC 
registry increases CDD onboarding and verification 
efficiency for both the customer and FSP. For example, 
India has a centralized repository of capital market 
investor’s CDD records, known as the Know Your 
Client Registration Agency (KRA). Aadhaar is one of 
the documents that can be submitted as proof of identity 
before the investor’s details are uploaded to the KRA. The 
uploaded information is then made accessible to all capital 
market intermediaries registered with the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India (SEBI). The main purpose of 
a KRA was to eliminate duplication of CDD efforts that 
a customer must undergo while dealing with multiple 
market intermediaries like Mutual Funds, Private Equity 
Funds, Brokers, and Depository Participants. There is 
now an effort in India to expand this effort to the whole 
of the financial sector. Similar initiatives are proposed in 
several countries – for example Russia and Mexico.
There May Be Gains from Decoupling 
Identity Authentication from  
Other Functions
Digital identity systems, specifically those that provide 
online verification of identity credentials to third parties, 
allow identification, authentication and authorization 
capabilities to be combined, which can simplify 
operations for service providers, but can also inject 
privacy concerns around having so much valuable data in 
one place. Balancing the tradeoffs between convenience 
and privacy is an ongoing concern in the financial services 
space, and one for which there are no defined answers as 
yet. From the perspective of the government, uncoupling 
the provision of foundational identification from the 39
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGresponsibility for conducting a separate authentication by 
an FSP has the potential to support the relatively rapid 
roll out of basic digital identity credentials, with a 
wide uptake but based on low assurance identity data. 
The quality of the digital identity can be enhanced over 
time, in part simply through a history of ownership and 
use or by incorporating additional data points. 
The Private Sector Can Build Digital Identity 
Layers Onto a Legal Identity System
Private sector solutions built on top of the legal identity 
credential or system can greatly enhance authentication 
processes without jeopardizing the foundational identity 
role of the government system. Programs such as Gov. 
UK Verify108 and Canada’s Digital Authentication and 
Identification Council of Canada (DIACC)109 provide 
solutions and frameworks that offer users and service 
providers authentication services without having 
to revert back to the original source of the identity. 
Services like the GSMA’s Mobile Connect,110 which 
adds an additional layer of security via the SIM card, can 
augment authentication efforts and strengthen security. 
And the FIDO Alliance’s111 work on identification 
protocols enable its member companies to produce 
products and services that adhere to common standards 
and technologies around authentication, again without 
necessarily having to establish direct linkages to official 
identity databases. These also illustrate the potential and 
the ability to integrate such initiatives with a government 
provided ID. Using FIDO alliance in combination with 
a one time validation using Government ID could be an example of such a collaboration, another example is 
Canada’s Mobile Connect. It should be noted however 
that all these services rely on the individual’s ability to 
present a foundational or functional ID to complete the 
initial registration in the process.
Other private sector initiatives like BankID in Sweden112 
and Norway113 are examples of a secure solution to 
verify and authenticate an individual’s identity that other 
service providers, including government, can utilize. 
Multiple service providers, including those outside the 
financial sector, use this solution to successfully identify 
a beneficiary/ customer without having to burden both 
parties with multiple document submissions or requests.  
The Principles on Identification for 
Sustainable Development
As policymakers pay increasing attention to upgrading or 
establishing ID systems, they are realizing that the issue 
of identity is a complex, multi-faceted topic that is being 
asked to meet many varying national and social needs. 
Furthermore, as these needs evolve over time, the design 
of digital ID systems needs to be future-proofed114 to 
reduce potential (and costly) failure or weaknesses in its 
functionality, as well as to facilitate interoperability with 
existing and new hardware and software technology. 
With that in mind, the common Principles fundamental 
to maximizing the benefits of identification systems for 
sustainable development were developed facilitated 
by the World Bank Group and the Center for Global 
Development.Box 22: Mexico ‘CURP’
The Clave Única de Registro Nacional de Población (CURP) 
is a key uniquely associated to each individual in the 
country, including non-citizens. It is issued by the National 
Population Registry (RENAPO). State-level Civil Registries 
provide RENAPO with birth-related information needed to 
generate each individual’s CURP. However, one individual 
can have more than one CURP issued by the system. Birth 
certificates and the CURP serve as foundational IDs that 
enable individuals to obtain functional IDs that are used 
to vote and to access social security programs and public 
health care services.
Low-income individuals may lack the standard documents 
to satisfy KYC and AML/CFT requirements to open an 
account or to obtain a loan. In order to address this concern, risk-tiered accounts were created in 2009 with related tiered 
CDD requirements. Regardless of the ID presented to open 
an account or to obtain a loan, financial institutions need 
to validate that the information they collect, including the 
CURP individuals report, match RENAPO’s records. This 
helps to reduce fraud. 
Additionally, in 2017, regulatory adjustments to the 
identification process were introduced. These included 
requiring financial institutions to collect and verify biometrics 
for opening higher-risk accounts and for obtaining loans, or 
for performing high-value transactions at bank branches. 
These regulatory adjustments aid to reduce identity theft 
and further mitigate fraud. KEY FINDINGS 40The management of personal identity can be seen as part 
of a continuum or lifecycle that includes five fundamental 
stages: (a) Registration, including enrollment and identity 
proofing, (b) Issuance of documents or credentials,  (c) Identity authentication & verification for service delivery 
or financial transactions, (d) Authorization and (e) Identity 
management. Please refer to Annex 2 for a description of the 
various steps in the identity lifecycle.
Inclusion: 
Universal coverage 
and accessibilityEnsuring universal coverage for individuals from birth to death, free from discrimination.
Removing barriers to access and usage and disparities in the availability of information  
and   technology.
Design: 
Robust, Secure, 
Responsible and 
SustainableEstablishing a robust-unique, secure, and accurate-identity.
Creating a platform that is interoperable and responsive to the needs of various users.
Using open standards and ensuring vendor and technology neutrality.
Protecting user privacy and control through system design.
Planning for financial and operational sustainability without compromising accessibility .
Governance: 
Building Trust by 
Protecting Privacy 
and User RightsSafeguarding data privacy, security, and user rights through a comprehensive legal and regulatory 
framework.
Establishing clear institutional mandates and accountability.
Enforcing legal and trust frameworks through independent oversight and adjudication of grievances.T able 3: Principle on Identification for Sustainable Development: T owards the Digital Age11541 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
 41
POLICY CONSIDERATIONS
Based on current experiences and the lessons learned from both national identity programs and private sector initiatives, 
the following policy considerations are presented as a basis for national policymakers, especially in the financial sector.  
The field of digital identity is rapidly evolving, so it is imperative that central authorities and public bodies consistently 
incorporate new technologies and business models while protecting the financial sector and its customers.
Ensure an Integrated Identity Framework
A legal or foundational identity system is critical to 
reliably assign an identity recognized across Government 
and the private sector. It forms the legal basis for 
identity validation for critical services and critically, 
governments should update existing privacy frameworks 
in the context of planned and potential future uses 
of digital ID services. In the financial sector once the 
identity validation is done, the subsequent interactions of 
the customer with the financial service provider can use 
other approaches for authentication and authorization in 
the process of service delivery.
Policymakers should:
• Design digital infrastructure appropriate for the 
context, including strategies to reach remote areas 
and ensure ‘last mile connectivity’. Off-line solutions 
can complement the absence or loss of on-line 
connectivity.116
• Develop robust procurement guidelines and should 
contemplate open design standards to promote 
innovation and allow for greater flexibility, efficiency and 
functionality of the system both within and across borders.
• Ensure the technical capacity of government agencies, 
private sector and other stakeholders in the digital 
identity ecosystem (including end-users) to operate 
and maintain new systems and devices.A biometric-based legal identity system can potentially 
support both compliance with authentication services 
and AML/CFT customer identification and verification 
requirements, upon which the service provider can further 
develop authentication and authorization processes. 
However, wide-spread use of legal identity infrastructure 
for multiple phases of financial services provision 
(e.g., onboarding and authorizing access to established 
accounts) has implications at several levels, including the 
cost of replacing existing infrastructure established for 
these processes; the pricing of these services; a liability 
framework for false-positives and false-negatives for 
biometric credentials; and the impossibility of replacing 
authentication credentials in a centralized legal identity 
database if there is a compromise of biometric information.
There therefore needs to be careful consideration 
of these and other potential issues relating to using 
national foundational identity infrastructure for on-
going transactional authentication and authorization. 
This includes whether to reserve the use of the national 
foundational identity infrastructure for providing proof 
of verified legal identity for customer identification/
verification at on-boarding or if other well-established 
reliable, efficient and safe processes exist for 
authentication/authorization functions.42 POLICY CONSIDERATIONSConsider the Appropriateness of the 
Regulatory Framework to Capture the 
Challenges Related to Digital ID, and  
Risks to Its Appropriate Implementation; 
Deliberation on Updates to the Regulatory 
Framework Including the Issuance of New 
Regulations Where Necessary
The introduction of digital identity services can enable 
faster, more cost-effective means of meeting identity 
validation, authentication and authorization requirements, 
as well as improve monitoring and oversight for both 
service providers and regulators. In some cases, however, 
regulations need to be introduced or updated to reflect 
the capabilities and risks of such new technologies. 
Of the ten Principles on Identification for Sustainable 
Development,117 three specifically focus on the issue of 
governance, including the regulatory framework.
Financial services sector regulations have longstanding 
requirements related to identity validation, authentication 
and retention of records, to ensure the safety and integrity 
of the financial system, based primarily on the FATF 
recommendations. It is important that each country’s 
financial services regulatory framework recognizes 
the potential of digital identity services to support both 
trustworthy identification/verification for AML/CFT 
compliance and financial inclusion. The regulatory 
framework should recognise that requirements for the use 
of digital identity services in the financial sector, including 
for account opening, are risk-based and reflect both the 
potential benefits of digital identity technologies and 
the risks associated with a particular customer, financial 
services, or whether the account opening and customer 
identification/verification is remote or in-person.  Among 
other things, the regulatory framework should authorize 
remote digital identification/verification and account 
opening at certain risk levels and levels of trustworthiness 
provided by the identity service, particularly for financial 
inclusion purposes where other risk mitigants, such as 
tiered account or transaction thresholds, are available.  
Any such regulatory reform must be done in a way that is 
aligned with FATF recommendations.
The specific areas which may need to be addressed in 
a regulatory framework include, but are not limited to, 
whether or not:
• digital identity validation using digital means 
constitutes completion of identity verification under 
prevailing AML/CFT requirements;
• legal certainty and equivalence between digital 
signatures and physical signatures;• the private sector managed third party authentication 
services are recognized as legally equivalent to a bank 
doing identity identification and verification itself and 
if so, where regulatory liability lies with respect to any 
failures regarding customer identification/verification 
and authentication/access processes;
• when there is universal coverage of a particular identity 
credential all bank customers should be required to 
provide that. Preferably this identity credential should 
have the characteristics of being legal, unique and digital;
• consumer interests are protected when new digital 
ID services are made mainstream, in particular 
ensuring that no segment of customers are placed at a 
disadvantage; and
• privacy considerations in the financial sector are 
protected when using third party services and 
alternative sources of data.
Establish a Reliable Oversight Model to  
Include Stakeholders Beyond the Traditionally 
Regulated Financial Institutions Who Can 
Introduce Risks to Digital Identity Systems
Financial institutions are subject to often rigorous 
supervision and must adhere to a number to measures 
as dictated by governments. This is due to the 
significant financial stability and consumer protection 
implications they have. This policy recommendation 
aims to specifically highlight that oversight needs to be 
maintained not only financial sector players but others 
within the ecosystem that contribute, collect, store or 
disseminate information related to digital ID.
Oversight frameworks need to consider risks of 
• data security and no compromise on protection of 
privacy;
• robustness of the underlying technology, systems and 
processes used for digital ID;
• ensuring that the technology and business model 
is updated in keeping with the rapidly changing 
landscape; and
• ensuring effective governance arrangements for the 
use of digital ID infrastructure in the financial sector, 
particularly as it applies to non-regulated entities.
Many of these aspects may be covered in a general legal 
and regulatory framework for digital IDs, though there 
might be a need for some specific regulations related to 
their use for the financial sector. The prevailing FATF 
recommendations, in particular, Recommendation 10 
and 17 relating to CDD and ‘reliance on third parties,’ 43
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGrespectively have a bearing on outsourced identity services 
and the ability to perform parts of the CDD process. But it 
also makes clear that where such reliance is permitted, the 
ultimate responsibility for CDD measures remain with the 
financial institution relying on the third party.
Build Authentication and Service Delivery 
Systems That Protect User Privacy, and 
Provide Individuals with the Right to 
Access Their Data and Oversight Over 
How Their Data Is Shared
The adoption of Privacy by Design approach to ID systems 
could be considered: This process envisages building 
privacy into all stages of the design and architecture of 
information systems, business processes, and networked 
infrastructure. The focus is on taking a proactive, 
preventive approach to the protection of privacy and the 
avoidance of privacy harms. The concept rests on the 
following seven principles: 1. Proactive, not reactive; 
preventive, not remedial 2. Privacy as the default setting 
3. Privacy embedded into design 4. Full functionality—
positive-sum, not zero-sum 5. End-to-end security—full 
life-cycle protection 6. Visibility and transparency—keep 
it open 7. Respect for user privacy—keep it user-centric.  
This approach together with data minimization could 
mitigate privacy concerns.  Even if the ID system stores 
a considerable amount of data items, the systems should 
enable users to verify and validate identity accessing the 
minimum possible data items.  
Further, ID systems should be vested with security 
measures to protect the data. Given the nature of the 
data stored in the systems, the security should follow 
a tridimensional approach (logical, physical and 
organizational) and should include not only the system 
where the data is stored but also the network enabling 
its access, the back-up systems and any others linked to 
the personal data of the individual including those third 
parties that perform any task related to the personal data 
included in the ID system.
Establish Clear and Well-publicized 
Procedures for Citizen Redress Including 
Where the Onus of Responsibility lies, 
in the Case of Errors or in the Event That 
the Security of a Person’s Identity is 
Compromised
To maintain the integrity of the system and ensure that 
there is trust in the system policymakers should consider 
the need for resolution and regulatory redress systems. 
There is a suggestion that if policy makers see themselves as having a democratic responsibility to build an identity 
infrastructure that allows users to control their identity 
information- aiming towards a self-managed identity- 
it will promote accountability and trust. The identity 
infrastructure should be built in such a way as to allow 
audits enabling records for local redress if needed. There 
is arguably an ombudsman role for accountable officials 
to play in verifying that individual data, if shared without 
consent, receives proper treatment and is safeguarded 
from subsequent misuse by downstream actors.118
Support and Empower Development of 
Private SectorLed Services to Leverage 
the Legal ID Infrastructure for Building Out  
Digital Layers. In Doing So, the Public 
Authorities Should Ensure That These  
Services Are Safe, Reliable and Efficient;  
These Services Are Interoperable; and  
That the Market Is Competitive
National legal identity infrastructures can provide the 
fundamental platform on which the private sector can 
build solutions to meet the needs of the financial sector 
and beyond. Authorizing private sector providers to 
leverage the national digital identity platform could 
potentially provide better digital identity products and 
services and faster roll out than the state alone can 
achieve.  Two of the Principles on Identification, in fact, 
specifically call for creating interoperable platforms using 
open standards for this very reason. However, enabling an 
effective private sector role imposes requirements on the 
identity platform, particularly in relation to requirements 
establishing interoperability, open-source access, such as 
through areas of open interfaces, and requirements for 
sustainable charging models.  
Countries with existing established foundational systems, 
but with some weaknesses could potentially exploit 
private sector led services to address the gaps, instead 
of building additional new infrastructures. For example, 
a country with a well-functioning, reliable and efficient 
paper based legal ID system with universal coverage 
could leverage private sector services under a ‘broker’ 
model to offer digital ID services. These private sector 
players conduct authentications based on the original 
legal ID, which various private sector players are already 
doing as part of their ongoing activities. 
Even countries with comprehensive government led 
digital ID systems can allow third parties including the 
private sector to build out additional services that rely 
on the state’s digital ID. In some countries, there is a 
noticeable effort by Government agencies responsible for 44
 POLICY CONSIDERATIONSthe ID systems to develop ancillary services. For example, 
in India, services such as e-Sign and Digital Locker 
(DigiLocker) both rely on Aadhaar to offer additional 
services such as electronic signature and an on-line 
document storage service respectively. If unsuited to their 
needs, FSPs may aim to conduct their own authentication 
for transactions after initial account opening. This 
illustrates the need to carefully balance the role of the 
Government agency to provide the foundational services 
in a sustainable manner on the one hand and the impact 
of cost structure of using ID by the FSPs and other uses. 
There are opportunities for private sector to develop 
solutions on top of the foundational services. This 
removes the operational burden of operating ancillary 
services from the government agencies.  
A conglomeration of global entities, private and public 
entities, have collaborated into international alliances to 
foster legal ID infrastructure among other services. An 
example is the FIDO alliance. The alliance hopes to provide 
a myriad of benefits to customers including stronger 
account/transaction security, improved user experience, 
improved return of investment on authentication and 
reduction in fraud services. It also aims to enhance 
leveraging legal ID infrastructure in the ecosystem.New Approaches to ID Are Constantly 
Emerging and Public Authorities Should 
Closely Monitor These Developments With 
a View to Share Knowledge and Establish 
Common Legal Frameworks at Both the 
Domestic and International Level
There are a number of emerging technologies and new 
combinations of existing technologies that have the 
potential to leapfrog the need for a unique national identity 
platform, digital or traditional. These methods include using 
distributed ledger technologies and social data. However, 
these are currently in very early stages of development and 
do not represent a viable alternative for a comprehensive 
build out of a foundational legal ID infrastructure.
As with any innovation the capabilities can dramatically 
increase and hence authorities need to closely monitor 
developments, use prevalent best practices and think in 
terms of open interfaces and modular approaches in the 
build out of legal ID platforms.45 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
ANNEX 1: LEVELS OF  ASSURANCE119
Identity Assurance Level (IAL)
• IAL1 – Self-asserted; no requirement to link the 
applicant to a specific real-life identity.
• IAL2 – Evidence supports the real-world existence 
of the claimed identity; either remote or physically-
present identity proofing.
• IAL3 – Physical presence is required for identity 
proofing. Identifying attributes must be verified by an 
authorized and trained representative.
Authentication Assurance Level (AAL)
• AAL1 – Provides some assurance that the claimant 
controls the authenticator; requires at least single-
factor authentication.
• AAL2 – Provides high confidence that the claimant 
controls authenticators; two different authentication 
factors are required; approved cryptographic 
techniques are required.• AAL3  –  Provides very high confidence that the 
claimant controls the authenticator; authentication 
based on proof of possession of a key through a 
cryptographic protocol; requires a ‘hard’ cryptographic 
authenticator.
Federation Assurance Level (FAL)
• FAL1 – Allows for the subscriber to enable the RP to 
receive a bearer assertion.
• FAL2 – Adds the requirement that the assertion be 
encrypted such that the RP is the only party that can 
decrypt it.
• FAL3 – Requires the subscriber to present proof of 
possession of a cryptographic key referenced in the 
assertion in addition to the assertion artifact itself.47 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
Figure 11: Digital Identity Lifecycle and Key Roles120ANNEX 2: THE IDENTITY LIFECYCLE
Registration (Identity Proofing)
The registration process involves an applicant providing 
evidence of his or her identity to the issuing authority. The 
identity credential here can take a variety of forms and 
its acceptance will be based on the specific regulations 
within the jurisdiction. The accuracy and reliability of 
each credential can vary based on variables such as the 
information recorded and the validation it was subject to. 
Ideally, a digital identification system should be integrated 
with civil registration, which is the official recording of 
births, deaths, and other vital events including marriages, 
divorces and annulments.121 If an individual reliably identifies himself or herself, the 
authority can assert that identity with a certain level of 
assurance. In developing countries, and in cases like 
those of displaced persons or refugees (discussed in 
more detail later in the document), it is not uncommon 
for applicants to lack fundamental documents (birth 
certificate, passport, utility bill, driving license). In such 
situations, identification systems may use an individual122 
who is tasked with verifying the applicant’s identity 
and address. Once verification is completed, biometric 
registration and de-duplication will bind the applicant to 
his or her identity claim, which will then be used during 
subsequent identity interactions. 1. Registration (Identity Proofing)
Resolution Validation VerificationVetting/Risk
Assessment5. Identity Management4. Authorization3. Identity Authentication2. Issuance (Credential Management)Verification (1:1)Maintenance
RevocationIdentity MaintenanceAttributeMinimizationIdentity LifecycleRisk AssessmentRole
Management Eligibility
(access
policy)Issuance48
 ANNEX 2: THE IDENTITY LIFECYCLEOnce individuals have an identification document, the 
process of registration may start with Resolution,123 
the process of uniquely distinguishing an individual in 
a given population or context. The applicant presents 
biographic information, or documents such as birth 
certificates, marriage certificates, and social security 
documents, as well as photographs which are then 
validated and augmented by the registration authority as 
needed. A growing trend in recent years has been to use 
biometrics to ensure that an identity is unique.
The next step is Validation, where the authority determines 
the authenticity, validity, and accuracy of the identity 
information the applicant has provided, and relates it to 
a living person. An ID with a digital characteristic could 
be provisioned digitally through a digital certificate or a 
smart card, it could also be provisioned in paper form, 
but with associated service infrastructure built around it 
to enable a digital authentication approach. When the ID 
validation process can be done digitally and the proof of 
validation recorded digitally, there can be a true seamless 
process for ID validation.
This is followed by Verification, the establishing of a 
link between a claimed identity and the real-life subject 
presenting the evidence. The final step is Vetting/Risk 
Assessment, assessing the user’s profile against a watch-
list or a risk-based model.
In advanced economies, information needed for 
registration is typically universally available. In other 
countries, even if such identity credentials are available, 
they might not be universal or easily obtained. Members 
of marginalized groups such as the poor, the elderly, 
women, and infants have a higher propensity of not being 
captured. Some individuals may have poor biometric 
features (like poor fingerprint ridge structure) that make 
accurate enrolment difficult. Moreover, there are issues 
of the affordability and accessibility of the hardware and 
software used for registration.
When considering the implementation of an ID system, 
policymakers should ensure that the scope of the process 
must be clearly defined, including the population whose 
data will be collected, the attributes that will be collected, 
and the corresponding performance of the registration 
system. For instance, will registration be for residents 
of that country only, or for visitors as well? Will the 
information required for registration include name, 
birth details, or fingerprints? What are the accuracy and confidence levels of the registration process? Clearly 
defining the scope of the population whose data will be 
collected and the attributes that will be collected will 
mitigate any future issues related to privacy and consent. 
Issuance (Credential Management)
Issuance is the process of creating and distributing virtual 
or physical credentials like e-passports, digital ID cards 
and driver’s licenses and a unique identifier (with central 
biometric authentication), such as the Aadhaar system in 
India. The other steps are Maintenance (the retrieval, 
update, and deletion of credentials) and Revocation   
(the removal of the privileges assigned to credentials).
In some countries, primary legal identity credentials 
also imply citizenship rights, in the sense that it legally 
accords proof of residency or nationality. Examples of 
this include Pakistan’s NADRA CNIC card and Peru’s 
DNI card. There are also examples of countries where 
primary legal identity systems do not accord citizenship 
rights (e.g., Aadhaar in India).
Interoperability of these credentials for authentication 
is becoming increasingly important for intra-country 
and inter-country service delivery, as can be seen in 
the European Union (EU), East African Community 
(EAC), and West Africa regions. In the EU, for example, 
electronic identification (eID) and electronic Trust 
Services (eTS) provide the interoperability framework 
for secure cross-border electronic transactions of the 
Digital Single Market under the electronic Identification, 
Authentication and Trust Services (eIDAS)124 (see key 
terms and definitions) regulation.
Identity Authentication
Authentication is the process of verifying an identity 
claim against the registered identity information. Such 
information could be a personal identification number 
(PIN), a password, biometric data such as a fingerprint, 
a photo—or a combination of these. Challenges in this 
phase include how to reduce processing time, improve 
accuracy of matching for authentication, ensure a 
seamless experience for applicants, mitigate challenges 
with network connectivity, counter fraudulent behavior, 
and find affordable hardware and software solutions. 
An important criterion around authentication in financial 
services is a concept known as a ‘Level of Assurance’, or 
LOA. A Level of Assurance, as defined by the by ISO/IEC 49
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING29115 Standard,126 describes the degree of confidence in 
the processes leading up to and including authentication. 
NIST describes varying levels of assurance127 (LOA) 
which have further been broken down into its component 
parts of identity proofing, authentication and the ability 
to communicate authentication and attribute information. 
Please see Annex 1 for the levels of assurance  
by component.
It should be noted that different LOAs might be required as 
based on why the ID is being authenticated. For example, 
for the financial sector the additional registrations and 
validations required might require that a higher LOA is 
achieved to allow access. It provides assurance that the 
entity claiming a particular identity is the entity to which 
that identity was assigned. 
Authorization
Authorization takes place after an individual’s claim of 
identity is authenticated and access rights of a ‘relying 
party’ are defined. These rights of a ‘relying party’ needs to 
be associated with the identity aligned to the relationship 
between the individual and the relying party independent 
of the identity provider (eg: National Identification 
Authority). Authorization typically takes place after 
an individual’s claim of identity is authenticated and 
defines access rights (or grants) that a Relying Party has 
associated with the identity aligned to the relationship 
between the individual and the Relying Party (e.g., 
a financial institution)—independent of the Identity Provider (e.g., the National Identification Authority). In 
more advanced authorization schemes the access rights 
are granted in a dynamic fashion.
Identity Management and Maintenance
Identity management or maintenance is the ongoing 
process of retrieving, updating, and deleting identity 
attributes or data fields and policies governing users’ 
access to information and services. Identity retrieval 
involves fetching a user’s identity attributes from the 
specific database in which it is contained. Security 
policies should be used to enforce access privileges to 
ensure that only authorized individuals can access, alter, 
or delete identity information, and to ensure that the 
actions are audited and cannot be repudiated. 
Credentials may be deactivated, revoked, or made dormant 
as a result of certain events, and identity information may 
be updated or deleted. Identity Management challenges 
include how to make system maintenance cost-effective, 
use data analysis to improve the system’s performance 
(including its efficiency), ensure that databases are 
updated to reflect major life events (such as birth and 
death), and maintain privacy and security controls.128
While the specific terminology can vary across different 
organizations and reports, the fundamental processes are 
important to understand as they apply to different aspects 
of financial service provision and how identity is used at 
each step along the way.Box 23: eiDAS
There has been rapid progress across the world in adoption 
of statutory legal measures to give legal certainty and 
equivalence to digital signatures and physical signatures. 
Regulation (EU) N°910/2014125 eIDAS is an EU regulation 
on electronic identification and trust services for electronic 
transactions in the internal market that was adopted in July 
2014. It is a set of standards for electronic identification and 
trust services for electronic transactions in the European 
Single Market and is an example of providing explicit legal 
basis for identity services. It seeks to establish a single 
legal framework for recognizing electronic signatures and 
identities throughout the EU.The Directive does not make digital identity (eID) mandatory, 
but does aim to greatly increase the mutual recognition of 
eID between countries, in order to facilitate cross-border 
business as well as international administrative tasks for 
citizens. To this end it aims to ensure that both people 
and businesses can use their own national electronic 
identification schemes (eIDs) to access public services in 
those other EU countries where eIDs are available, and 
creates a new EU market for ‘electronic Trust Services’ 
(eTS) – namely electronic signatures, electronic seals, 
time stamps, electronic delivery services and website 
authentication – by ensuring that they will work across 
borders and have the same legal status as traditional paper 
based processes.51 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
ANNEX 3: UNHCR ID SYSTEM
When UNHCR maintains a registration and ID system in a country, this will typically involve issuing refugees and 
asylum seekers with ID cards and other credentials, such as family or individual certificates, certifying their status and 
their eligibility to receive certain goods and services. UNHCR seeks to keep entitlement documents (e.g. ration cards) 
and its refugee ID cards separate in order to distinguish itself from other agencies providing assistance. 
UNHCR’s registration and case management software 
(proGres) was introduced in 2003. ProGres was initially 
designed provide and manage identification services 
on a national or sub-national basis. Cloud storage for 
proGres was introduced in 2015. In addition, the Refugee 
Assistance Information System (RAIS) was established 
in 2009.129 RAIS is an Inter-Agency tool for tracking 
assistance, referrals, and assessment information. It 
enables UNHCR and partners to share assistance records, 
cross-check beneficiaries lists, and host different types 
of data. RAIS is synchronized with proGres, from 
which refugee data from all UNHCR field offices is 
updated daily. A data sharing agreement with UNHCR 
is a prerequisite for accessing RAIS. RAIS assists in 
enabling reach, creating better coordination mechanisms 
(since many other organizations are doing the same 
relief work in similar geographical areas) and ensuring 
better protection of beneficiaries’ personal data. Since 
June 2014, 150,000 home visits have been recorded on 
RAIS, and there are over 7 million assistance records 
corresponding to 1.5 million beneficiaries.130
Also in 2015, following successful pilots in Malawi and 
Thailand, UNHCR introduced its Biometric Identity 
Management System (BIMS) through which country 
operations can capture fingerprints, irises and facial photo 
during registration. UNHCR today maintains a central 
and searchable database of unique records for all refugees 
and asylum seekers registered through BIMS around the world (4.4 million across 48 country operations as 
of February 2018), which allows persons of concern 
to re-establish or continuously their identity as they 
travel across borders and encounter different UNHCR  
country operations.
UNHCR follows standardized registration processes 
across all its country operations. These processes were 
designed with recognition that refugees and asylum 
seekers may not have official identity documents that 
would enable the verification of their identity claim or 
that could support an initial needs assessment. Each 
refugee registered with UNHCR is provided with a 
unique registration record and is issued with an ID 
confirming their asylum seeker status. Once refugee status 
is confirmed, UNHCR may issue a second, updated ID. 
These UNHCR-issued IDs may be the only that refugees 
will have access to.
If certain conditions for refugee data protection and 
identity management are met, UNHCR may give access 
to the relevant portion of its database to the host state. The 
data may then be integrated with the host State’s national 
ID or standalone refugee ID system. Such data sharing 
arrangements can save host states the time and cost 
associated with repeated data collection and registration 
and facilitate the provision of government-issued identity 
documents to refugees and asylum seekers. These are 
often more widely accepted and allow for greater access 
to host country services and opportunities.53 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
ANNEX 4: REFUGEE DIGITAL ID  
CASE STUDIES
Uganda – A Standalone Refugee 
Registration and ID System
Uganda hosts over 1 million refugees who live in 
settlements and in and around the community, primarily 
from South Sudan and DRC. Uganda is a party to the 
1951 Refugee Convention and is widely-recognized as 
one of the most generous host States for refugees in the 
world. The Government provides freedom of movement, 
access to services and allocates plots of land for shelter 
and agricultural production. 
In terms of RSD and registration, UNHCR and the 
Government’s Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) 
carried this out jointly, leveraging UNHCR’s proGres 
software, until 2014 when the OPM introduced its own 
system, the Refugee Information Management System 
(RIMS). RIMS is a web-based platform that includes 
registration, biometric capture, case management and 
card production modules. Although RIMS captures two 
fingerprints, it does not operate a biometric deduplication 
or authentication and is not linked or interoperable with 
the national ID system- maintained by the National 
Identification and Registration Agency (NIRA) and 
covers all nationals and foreign residents. NIRA provides 
civil registration services to refugees and asylum seekers. 
Since assuming responsibility for refugee registration, 
the Government is in the process of registering131 over 
1 million refugees with RIMS. The refugee ID card and 
certificates that are issued is widely-recognized and 
allows access to all services that a non-national is entitled 
to. In 2017, when the Government made it mandatory for 
all SIM cards to be linked to a national ID number, the refugee ID number was accepted. Likewise, the refugee 
ID card is accepted to open a bank account. The refugee 
ID card enables refugees to access a range of special 
entitlements for refugees, including discounted education 
and healthcare. While there have been some challenges 
with the implementation of RIMS, Uganda’s progressive 
policy and practices with regards to providing IDs to 
refugees and asylum seekers, and ensuring that these IDs 
are widely-recognized should be applauded.
Lebanon, Jordan & Egypt
These countries use extensively the RAIS system 
(articulated in the previous Annex) to monitor and 
coordinate humanitarian aid. Today, UNHCR and WFP 
(World Food Program) provide both direct assistance to 
beneficiaries as well as managing other NGOs operating 
as direct/indirect system users. 
The largest implementation is in Lebanon, where 
more than one million refugees now use either WFP’s 
smartcard to buy goods at participating retailers, and/or 
UNHCR-backed ATM cards to withdraw money instead 
of receiving physical goods. However, there is currently 
no clear legal and regulatory framework for e-money 
transactions.
In Egypt, WFP has adopted the store card of the 
supermarket Carrefour as a delivery mechanism. In 
Jordan, branches of Cairo Amman Bank, refugees are 
able to withdraw their cash entitlement from UNHCR by 
placing their eye against an IrisGuard scanner – no card 
required. The success of this program has encouraged 
WFP to pilot use of iris recognition technology to allow 
refugees to purchase food in participating supermarkets.55 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
ANNEX 5: COUNTRY CASE STUDIES 
(adapted from country submissions)
Canada
Introduction
Digital ID and financial inclusion has progressed through 
a variety of Digital ID programs based on a national 
framework that had evolved over the years. In 2014, 
the Digital ID & Authentication Council of Canada 
was launched as a public-private effort, and in 2016, 
the Pan-Canadian Trust Framework (PCTF) Overview 
was published enabling the public and private sector 
to work collaboratively to safeguard digital identities 
by standardizing processes and procedures. In 2017, as 
part of the Pan-Canadian Trust Framework Components, 
the DIACC (The Digital ID & Authentication Council 
of Canada)  and IMSC ( Identity Management Steering 
Committee) collaborated to develop conformance 
standards criteria for trust framework components. 
Based on the national framework, a set of Digital ID 
programs were created as pilot projects. These include 
British Columbians (B.C) ‘Service cards’ which is used 
for connecting provincial services and Alberta’s ‘My 
Alberta Digital ID program which is used for digital 
identity purposes in the state of Alberta. In the latter half 
of 2018, SecureKey’s‘Verified.me’ will be launched to 
provide secure and privacy respecting authentication 
and attribute validations across Canada. In addition, 
the Government of Canada’s own cyber authentication 
solution and immigration frameworks mapping trust 
frameworks has been developed to assist users of these 
Digital ID’s. There is an attempt being made to unify 
all the pilot projects into a unified Canadian Digital ID 
ecosystem and this would enable greater integration of 
the various Digital ID projects that have been created. Applications
B.C. Services Card
The B.C. Services Card is a security-enhanced photo ID 
developed by three provincial government organizations 
— the Ministry of Technology, Innovation, and Citizens’ 
Services (MTIC), the Ministry of Health, and the 
Insurance Corporation of British Columbia (ICBC). 
It replaces the aging CareCard (an unique ID card 
used for health care services), can be combined into a 
single card with a driver’s license, and, like many new 
credit cards, is a ‘chip card’ — meaning it is embedded 
with an encrypted chip that can connect to secure and 
inexpensive chip card readers. These card readers can be 
set up at government service counters and also connected 
to a personal computer at home. This chip and the  
digital identity management system open up the  
possibility of reliable and secure online access to more  
government services.
My Alberta Digital ID
The My Alberta Digital ID program provides an Alberta 
resident with a personal online identity that securely 
accesses multiple Government of Alberta online products 
and services. My Alberta Digital ID uniquely identifies 
an individual online, much like a driver’s license or 
identity card works in person-to-person interactions. 
The Government of Alberta ensures that sufficient 
information is obtained to properly identify an individual 
to differentiate from others that have the same or similar 
names. This ensures the correct services are provided to 
the correct person.56
 ANNEX 5: COUNTRY CASE STUDIESGovernment of Canada Cyber Authentication 
Solution 
The Government of Canada Cyber Authentication 
Solution provides end-users. A mandatory cyber 
authentication service that enables Canadians and the 
general public to securely sign-on to Government of 
Canada online services. The solution is a standards-based, 
anonymous user sign-in solution, available through 
GCKey, a government-branded service, and a ‘Credential 
Broker Service’132 that enables users to authenticate with 
their online banking credential. 
Verified.me
In the latter half of 2018, SecureKey’s Verified.me, a 
competitive and interoperable ecosystem for financial 
inclusion, is expected  to launch. Verified.me leverages 
capabilities of Canada’s financial institutions and 
participating provinces to provide secure and privacy 
respecting authentication and attribute validation. 
Furthermore Canada’s payments network, Interac 
indicates their intent to launch an interoperable digital 
identity service in the near future. The Interac model will 
issue and leverage a secured record of identity with a 
tokenized credential. 
Immigration Services
There is work underway between countries US, Canada 
and the UK to map their respective trust frameworks, 
and develop a cross-border mutual recognition process. 
This also extends to other services including security and 
transparency mechanisms for the Digital ID setup.
India
The Indian government has undertaken reforms to 
increase financial inclusion through the JAM Trinity, 
an enabling ecosystem integrating Unique Digital IDs 
(Aadhaar), Bank Accounts (Jan Dhan) and Mobile 
through various cost effective digital payments systems 
such as United Payment Interface (UPI), Bharat Interface 
for Money (BHIM), and Aadhaar Enabled Payment 
Systems (AEPS). 
’Aadhaar‘, a free 12-digit number issued by the Indian 
government to all residents of India, was issued by the 
UIDAI (Unique Identification Authority of India) with 
the objective of being (a) robust enough to eliminate 
duplicate and fake identities and (b) able to be verified 
and authenticated in a simple cost-effective way. 
The technology uses demographic information (i.e. 
name, address, date of birth, gender, telephone number 
and email address) along with biometric data collected through the use of fingerprint scanners, iris scanners, and 
cameras – for face recognition, allowing for instantaneous 
identity authentication. So far, almost 1.20 billion 
Aadhaar Numbers have been generated, 339 million 
Aadhaar have been linked with bank accounts, and 
over 1.7 billion authentications have been done through 
Aadhaar in last 3 years. Total digital transactions have 
reached 17.57 billion in FY 2017-18, which is nearly  
70 percent more than the digital transactions in FY 2016-
17 (10.76 billion).133
Applications
Integration of Digital ID with e-KYC  
(Electronic KYC) Service
Digital onboarding through JAM is fast, reduces 
transaction costs for the customer and facilitates a near 
instant opening of account. The Aadhaar system has been 
integrated with an electronic KYC (e-KYC) service to 
expedite the verification of a client’s identity. The e-KYC 
enables an individual with an Aadhaar number to allow 
UIDAI to disclose his/her personal information to service 
providers who wish to instantly activate services such 
as mobile connections, bank accounts, etc. The e-KYC 
is paperless, consent-based and private, non-repudiable 
and instantaneous. As a result, accurate and reliable CDD 
data is shared with the reporting entity in real time. As 
the CDD data is released directly to service providers 
only upon the consent of the customer, his/her privacy 
remains protected. So far, a total of 4.9 billion e-KYC 
transactions have been done through Aadhaar. Banks 
and payment network operators have embedded Aadhaar 
authentication into micro-ATMs to provide branch-less 
banking anywhere in the country in a real-time, scalable 
and interoperable manner. 
Seamless Integration with Other Financial Services
The Central KYC Records Registry (CKYCR) is 
envisaged as a repository of the KYC records obtained 
by the Regulated Entities (REs) across the financial 
sector. This database enables inter-usability of the KYC 
records with a goal of reducing KYC documents and its 
subsequent verification processes for a new financial 
entity.134 
Mobile Payments
One of the building blocks of the payments ecosystem 
in India, Unified Payments Interface (UPI) powers 
multiple bank accounts into a single mobile application 
(of any participating bank), merging several banking 
features, seamless fund routing and merchant 
payments under one umbrella. Based on UPI, the 57
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGGovernment of India has introduced Bharat Interface 
for Money (BHIM) application which allows users 
to directly perform payment transfers to other users 
or merchants with an easy to use interface. BHIM has 
been downloaded 23.8 million times since its launch 
in December 2016. Till 31st January 2018, the number 
of transactions on BHIM-UPI platform (BHIM and 
BHIM UPI family Apps) has reached USD 1.12 Billion  
(by Value) and 580 Million (By V olume).
Facilitating Government-to-Person Transfers
The introduction of Aadhaar Enabled Payment System 
(AEPS) has facilitated disbursements of entitlements 
(like wages under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme, Social Security Pension, 
Old Age Pension etc) of Central or State Government 
bodies using Aadhaar based authentication. During 
FY 2017-18, a total of around 1.62 billion transactions 
amounting to INR 1612.05 billion have been carried out 
through the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) scheme. 
Mexico
Introduction
Recent regulatory adjustments in Mexico are contributing 
to address important challenges to financial inclusion 
such as limited availability of points of access to financial 
services, lack of required documents, lack of trust in 
the financial system. These regulatory adjustments 
have exploited the country’s existing identification 
infrastructure to ease the onboarding and identification 
process for the provision of financial services and 
improve fraud detection.
In Mexico, when individuals are born, they are registered 
in State Civil Registries, and the National Population 
Registry (RENAPO, for its acronym in Spanish) generates 
a unique key135 (CURP) which serves as a foundational ID 
used for essential functions such as voting, social security 
programs, and public healthcare services. Although this 
information is digitized, it lacks biometric information. 
As part of the registration process to perform such 
activities, several government agencies offer functional 
IDs based on the above mentioned foundational IDs, 
which are legal, unique, mostly digital, and biometric.136 
The most commonly used is the Voting Card, available 
to Mexicans 18 years old and above, which requires a 
birth certificate, proof of address, and a picture ID.137 INE 
(Insituto National Electoral—the agency for conducting 
elections) contacts RENAPO to get individuals’ CURP, 
adds it to its database. It then collects applicants’ biometric 
information, such as fingerprints and picture, and issues the V oting Card.138 By mid-2017 (biometric registration 
started in 2001), the electoral registry had data on about 
95 percent of the voting-age population.
Low-income individuals may lack all the standard 
required documents to satisfy CDD and AML/CFT 
requirements to open an account or to obtain a loan. In 
order to address this concern, a proportional regulatory 
approach for deposits accounts was developed. Risk-
tiered accounts were created in 2009 and were divided 
into four levels in 2011. Higher-level accounts allow 
higher levels of monthly deposits and higher balances,139 
more access devices, and more operations that are 
available.140 In turn, these prescribe increasing opening 
requirements. Level 1 accounts are anonymous and need 
no documentation or interview to be opened. Level 2 
accounts require applicants to provide personal data141 
and show a valid ID.142 The opening process for level 
2 accounts may be carried out face-to-face at a bank 
branch, face-to-face through an agent authorized by the 
bank, or remotely, through a digital device.143 Relative 
to level 2 accounts, level 3 and level 4 accounts require 
additional data144 and, for level 4 accounts, photocopies 
of some documents.145
Applications 
Worried about fraud and identity theft, some banks have 
begun collecting biometric information. In 2017, with 
the goal of curbing identity theft by taking advantage of 
technology, regulatory adjustments to the identification 
process undertaken by banks were introduced.146 These 
consider two moments when clients must be identified: 
when signing on products (see Table 1), and when 
performing transactions at a bank’s branch (see Table 
2).147 In both cases, the main innovation is to require 
financial institutions to collect and verify biometrics in 
some cases (without the need to store them), improving 
access by using remote channels,148 and enhancing 
security. Regardless of the ID presented, the institution 
needs to validate that the information they collect, 
including the CURP, matches RENAPO’s records.
Instead of verifying identity with INE, banks may create a 
database with their customers’ fingerprints and use these 
to identify them in the future. To do so, banks previously 
need to register the fingerprints of all their employees and 
their managers and, when registering the fingerprints of 
each customer, they need to validate the client’s identity 
with INE (fingerprint matching).
The regulatory adjustments expand onboarding access, 
since some higher-level accounts and some loans can now 
be obtained remotely. The adjustments reduce the risk 58
 ANNEX 5: COUNTRY CASE STUDIESthat a fake customer’s ID is accepted, preventing fraud, 
since institutions are required to verify that the provided 
data is consistent with RENAPO’s registries and that the 
V oting Card’s underlying data matches INE’s.153 The risk 
of identity theft is also reduced, because when individuals 
present V oting Cards as a means of identification, it is 
checked that their biometric information matches INE’s 
records. Mitigating fraud and identity theft risks has 
the potential to enhance population’s trust in financial 
institutions and lower provision costs, thereby increasing 
demand and supply of financial services.
Despite these benefits, there are important areas of 
opportunity. First, biometric verification is not carried out 
when individuals present IDs other than the V oting Card 
at bank branches. Extending biometric identification 
mechanisms to other functional IDs has the potential 
to further curb identity theft and fraud. Moreover, if biometric data were linked to the foundational IDs, it 
would be possible to substitute current ID requirements 
linked to functional IDs and, more importantly, 
individuals lacking functional IDs would be able to apply 
for financial products. 
A related challenge concerns the collection of the 
underlying biometric information. Currently, some public 
and private institutions, including banks, are engaged in 
gathering different types of biometric information. In 
August 2018, when the discussed regulatory changes 
become effective, all financial institutions will be forced 
to verify biometric information. In doing so, they may 
wish to store it. One possible course of action is to 
integrate biometric information collected and stored by 
public and private institutions into a centralized database, 
and that this database is used to validate individuals’ 
identity and to grant them with a recognized digital ID.T able 4: Identification When Signing on Products (Accounts, Loans and Transactions)  
Signing on Method
Face-to-Face Remote
Level 1
No biometrics.Not allowed.
Level 2No biometrics.  
No video-call interview. 
CURP verified against 
RENAPO’s records.
Level 3
Biometrics ( fingerprint) are verified with INE’s registries only when the 
ID presented is the Voting Card.149
CURP verified against RENAPO’s records.Biometrics ( face-
recognition) are verified 
through video call. 
The only accepted ID is 
the Voting Card.Level 4
0 – 60,000 UDIS
60,000 UDIS or 
moreNot allowed.
<1,500 UDIS No biometrics, a valid picture is required. Not allowed. 
1,500 – 2,800 
UDISBiometrics ( fingerprint) are verified with INE when the ID presented is 
the Voting Card.151 If clients present a debit/credit card that includes a 
chip and enter their Personal Identification Number152 and any valid ID, 
there is no need to verify biometrics.Not allowed. 
>2,800 UDISBiometrics (fingerprint) are verified with INE when the ID presented is the 
Voting Card. If clients do not present their Voting Card, they can show 
other 2 IDs and banks need to verify that their underlying data matches. 
The bank’s branch manager needs to authorize the transaction.Not allowed. Transactions (Cash withdrawals 
&Transfers150)Loans Accounts59
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGNigeria 
Introduction
The cornerstone of the digital identification initiative 
in Nigeria, a country with a population of nearly 187 
million people,154 is the National Identity Management 
Commission (NIMS), the parent organization of the 
National Identification Number (NIN): The NIN is a set 
of numbers assigned to an individual upon successful 
enrolment. Every citizen or legal resident above the age 
of 16 is eligible to enroll for the National Identification 
Number (NIN). Enrolment consists of the recording of 
an individual’s demographic data and capture of ten (10) 
fingerprints, head-to-shoulder facial picture and a digital 
signature, which are all used to cross-check existing data 
in the National Identity Database to confirm that there 
is no previous entry of the same data. Uses of the NIN 
number include obtaining a National e-ID (electronic 
ID) card, obtaining a passport, opening personal bank 
accounts, obtaining a driver’s license, obtaining a 
Permanent V oters’ Card, participating in the National 
Health Insurance Scheme and paying taxes. 
Applications
National e-ID Card
The biometric general multi-purpose e-ID card can be 
used to authenticate an individual’s identity across several 
public and private services. The card was developed 
in liaison with MasterCard, with Prepaid MasterCard 
functionality included in the e-ID. The primary ID number 
and infrastructure used for the national e-ID card is the 
NIN. Following the launch of the NIN registration in 2014, 
about 15 percent of the adult population (14,491,000) has 
been registered for a NIN; however, only 3-4 percent of 
the population has been issued an e-ID card. Challenges 
pertaining to lack of enrollment include lack of rural 
identification centers and an inequitable regulatory system. 
BVN: The BVN (Bank Verification Number) service, 
operated by the Nigeria Inter-Bank Settlement System 
(NIBSS), provides a unique identifier for each citizen that 
allows them to be identified, authenticated, and linked to 
existing accounts and financial products by any Nigerian 
bank. Besides serving as the national ID authenticator,155 
the NIN platform provides foundationalsupport enabling 
the development of BVN numbers across Nigeria. The 
stated objective of BVN is to provide a uniform industrially 
accepted unique identity for bank customers, enabling 
customer identification and transaction authentication 
without the use of cards, using only biometric features 
and PIN.Harmonization & Integration Using NIN
There are initiatives to integrate the NIN,  e-ID and BVN 
to achieve the harmonization objective and facilitate 
e-government and public-sector applications. The NIN 
presents the core infrastructure and framework upon 
which harmonization would operate, as most common 
factor to all stakeholders in the harmonization platform 
is the requirement of a ‘proven identity’. The NIN 
infrastructure serves as the platform in which identity 
management sub-systems and applications as components 
are coordinated.
The NIMS, which is designed to provide a unique identity 
for all individuals as well as a national identity database 
and authentication/verification infrastructure, will be 
central to the harmonization process. In the future, there 
could be a universal ID (like SSN in the USA) integration 
which could facilitate opportunities for data exchange 
and efficiencies by re-using existing data in each system.
Regulatory and Legal Framework
Data Protection
Nigeria has no comprehensive data protection law and 
no independent data protection authority. Two separate 
Bills have been pending since 2008 and 2010. In 2013, 
The National Information Technology Development 
Agency Draft Guidelines on Data Protection, known 
as “the Guidelines”. Additionally, while there has been 
integration of the NIN with other services including 
transit, immigration, and police, there appears to be 
insufficient separation between services to ensure privacy.
Norway
Introduction
Digital ID in Norway is based on the National Population 
Register’s identification system, managed by the 
Norwegian Tax Administration. All Norwegian residents 
are issued with a personal identification number which 
becomes their personal identifier for life.  This personal 
identification number can be linked to e-ID to provide 
individuals with access to numerous digital services such 
as online banking and public services. 
In 2004, the BankID solution was developed through 
cooperation by Norwegian banks. The BankID solution 
fulfills the highest level of security requirements and 
can be used for accessing both private and public sector 
services. eID was established through private and 
public sector cooperation; eID solutions used within the 
Norwegian public sector are mainly supplied by private 
developers. These privately developed eID solutions 60
 ANNEX 5: COUNTRY CASE STUDIESare integrated within the public sectors’ ID-portal  
(ID-porten), and the use of such solutions has been secured 
through a national public procurement agreement. 
Applications
The Norwegian ID-portal
In 2017, the Norwegian ID-portal was used more than 
11,415 million times and provided access to more than 
1500 public services. The portal can be used by anyone 
with a national identifier issued by the Norwegian Tax 
Administration, including citizens, foreign residents and 
persons working temporarily in Norway. 
The ID-portal can be used by central, regional and local 
government agencies to provide access to public services 
online. It simplifies public agencies’ use of eID by 
providing technical solutions and a common procurement 
agreement. It provides a single sign-on universe which 
simplifies the development of digital services that span 
different agencies and sectors. In terms of security, the 
ID-portal protects and prevents the user’s public service 
log-in history from being transferred to private eID 
developers. Only the ID-portal and user know which 
public service a user has chosen to access.
The ID-portal supports public services from all sectors, 
including health, inland revenue, government to business, 
education and municipal sectors. Since the portal supports 
the recognition of eID at the highest level of security, 
access to all services can be provided and protected.
eID in the Financial Sector
BankID, supported by eID, is used on average by each 
Norwegian 160 times per year and scores well (80-
90 percent) when it comes to user satisfaction, user-
friendliness, safety and ease of use among its 3.8 million 
users. BankID provides access to a large range of services 
relating to the financial sector. Access to internet banking 
and the digital signing of financial documents are 
services most commonly used by customers. A customer 
can open a new bank account online without having to 
go to the bank in person or provide paper documentation. 
BankID supports Norwegian anti-money laundering 
regulation and is an important tool for the digitisation of 
the Norwegian banking sector. 
Public Sector eID Solutions
In addition to the ID-portal, other eID alliances operate 
within the Norwegian public sector. Feide is an eID 
solution used by the Norwegian education sector. This 
eID solution provides access to educational resources that 
require a lower level of security than those protected by the ID-portal. The Feide solution allows access to services 
across primary and secondary schools, as well as higher 
education institutions. Within the health sector, an eID 
solution provided by private developers is used by health 
personnel for authentication and authorization purposes. 
Pakistan 
Introduction
NADRA (National Database and Regulation Authority) 
is one of the earliest developing country ID agencies 
to use biometrics to ensure unique ID numbers for its 
citizens. With estimated coverage of the adult population 
at 207 million people,156 almost 99 percent, the National 
ID Card has become the dominant form of identification 
for most transactions. NADRA has worked closely with 
the Benazir Income Support Program (BISP) 157 to ensure 
robust identification of the beneficiaries of the country’s 
largest cash transfer program and has implemented 
an e-payments system linked to this robust form  
of identification. 
The Computerized National Identity Card (CNIC), a 
unique 13-digit number applicable to every Pakistani 
citizen above 13 years of age, is the core product of 
NADRA.158 The CNIC, with its enhanced security 
features, is specifically used for opening accounts and 
receiving remittances, in different government programs 
such as voting and social welfare and in the private sector 
for verification purpose.
While digital ID services have become widespread, there 
is concern about  the ID services offered, specifically 
for the private sector. While the account opening costs 
are estimated to vary from PKR 15 to PKR 45,159 the 
transaction based costs are estimated to range from Rs 
2 to Rs 6 per transaction depending on the number of 
total transaction. These are subsidized for government 
entities with large discreet discounts. While the concept 
of ‘value pricing’ is known in the private sector, the lack 
of transparency and fairness in pricing across the public 
and private sectors remains an issue.
Applications
Branchless Banking
Digital ID has played an integral role in the growth of 
branchless banking by enabling banks to offer specialized 
types of accounts that can be accessed through mobile 
phones using mobile technologies for initiating Person-
to-Person (P2P) remittances, bill payments and payments 
for retail purchases, as well as cash withdrawal and 
cash deposit through mobile banking agents.160 A total 61
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGof 8 banks, including micro-finance banks, offer mobile 
money accounts and collectively operate 402,710 agents 
(as of January 2018161). NADRAs can also be used to open 
level 0 accounts, accounts with the lowest transaction 
limits, through validation of basic biometric information 
linked to a CNIC through branchless banking systems.162
SIM Verification 
Based on NADRA’s Digital ID, the PTA (Pakistan 
Telecom Authority) and MoIT (Ministry of Information 
Technology) collaborated to introduce a SIM registration 
system called Biometric Verification Systems (BVS) 
program, which made it mandatory for all cell phone 
owners to register each new SIM and have their identity 
biometrically verified against the NADRA database 
before activation of SIMs.163 The customer’s CNIC is 
linked with several SIMs (up to 5),164 and a limit placed 
on each person obtaining SIMs.  An important factor that 
has led to the success of the BVS rollout is the extensive 
and dense agent network throughout the country, which 
was originally developed for the branchless banking 
system.165 The unique ‘Over the counter’ (OTC) 
methodology allowed agents to connect with customers 
at low cost.166 
Accelerating G2P Payments 
The CNIC has been central to promoting the growth 
and digitization of G2P payments, organized into three   
categories: (a) social cash transfers, (b) government 
salaries and (c) government pensions. One of the important 
attributes of CNIC is that it ensures personal presence 
of the beneficiary at the time of withdrawal of money 
contrary to the existing system where the beneficiary 
himself/herself is not self- recipient of money in majority 
of cases. The beneficiary does not require high level of 
financial literacy for withdrawal of money as required for 
usage of debit card, and the CNIC simplifies security tiers 
of withdrawal.167,168 
Credit Reporting Systems Development
In the credit information space, the Electronic Credit 
Information Bureau (eCIB)169 has facilitated each CNIC 
having credit information linked using the NADRA online 
verification and authentication process. For corporate 
credit reports, each corporate entity (listed and unlisted) 
is mapped to a unique borrower code derived from the 
CNIC system, and financial institutions are required 
to report all financial obligations under this unique 
borrower code. In addition to the ECIB, more traditional 
credit reporting on banked customers, Microfinance 
Credit Information Bureau (MF-CIB)’s microfinance institutions can access the ECIB data. The common link 
between all credit reporting systems, banks, and MFIs is 
the CNIC.
NADRA E-Sahulat and International Remittances 
E-Sahulat, launched in 2008 as part of NADRA’s electronic 
commerce platform drive in 2005170 is a CNIC enabled 
low-cost e-services collection and disbursement platform 
consisting of over 12 thousand active franchisees and a 
switch connecting with telecoms and banks processing an 
average of 7.5 million transactions a month. All the three 
stages of the E-Sahulat process (site survey, verification 
and enrollment) involves mapping with the CNIC Digital 
ID system. The E-Sahulat interface plays a significant 
role in expanding domestic and international remittances, 
especially due to its more than 8000 plus touch points 
serving low socioeconomic status customers.171
Regulatory and Legal Framework
Legal Measures to Enable Data Protection 
Pakistan has no independent data protection authority 
or data protection law, although a draft Electronic Data 
Protection Act was introduced in parliament in 2005 
focusing on personal and sensitive data. There has been 
a sustained effort by policymakers and social think tanks 
to enact a new law, and it is expected that new legislation 
will be passed soon.172 
Branchless Banking Regulations Incorporating  
Digital ID
‘Branchless banking’ regulations which were introduced 
in 2007 and updated in 2016173 and are applicable to all 
banks including Islamic and microfinance banks, lay out 
regulations for the technology architecture of the CNIC/
NADRA Digital ID ecosystem and minimum standards 
for data and network security along with consumer 
protection and risk management. There is an emphasis on 
risk based CDD processes. In addition, a risk management 
program to FIs shall put in place risk based information/
data security requirements as well as channels like mobile 
phones, SMS, USSD, mobile applications (3G or 4G) etc.
Peru
Introduction
The National Registry of Identification and Civil Status 
(Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil, or 
RENIEC in Spanish) is the premier national ID system 
in Peru, a country with a population that is in excess of 
31 million174 with the fifth largest economy in GDP.175 
The RENIEC is an autonomous constitutional body of 62
 ANNEX 5: COUNTRY CASE STUDIESthe State of Peru that is charged with maintaining records 
of major events such as births, marriages, divorces and 
deaths in the country in addition to information regarding 
voter eligibility and registration along with the issuance 
of the national identity card. 
The national identity card comes in two types: the 
traditional non-smart DNI (Documento Nacional de 
Identidad card), and the relatively new smartcard-based 
electronic ID (DNIe) with biometric identification. To 
date, 99.9 percent of citizens have DNI and there are 
plans to aggressively scale up the DNIe in the years 
ahead RENIEC has a budget of US $130 million, and it 
is estimated that about 45 percent of this comes through 
revenues generated through fees generated through the ID 
program. Currently the DNIe card is a standard contact 
smart card, and citizens must pay US$10 for it. Banks, 
mobile operators and other service providers/relying 
parties pay a transaction fee for online verification to 
RENIEC – between  US$0.30 and US$1 depending on 
the service requested. 
Applications
Mobile Connect 
The RENIEC Digital ID serves as the foundation for 
enabling authentication in the Mobile Connect platform, 
the customer authentication mechanism for the mobile 
environment including access to websites and apps. The 
international telecom trade body GSMA launched Mobile 
Connect in Peru with Movistar, who went live with the 
service in June 2016. Movistar is reported176 to have a 
54 percent share of the telecom market; estimated at 
around 8.5 million subscribers. Mobile Connect’s service 
is currently being absorbed by the participating mobile 
operator (Movistar), with the support of the GSMA. It is 
expected that this will change once usage of the service 
becomes more commonplace.
Modelo Peru (e-money Platform), PDP & BIM 
The Peruvian Bankers’ Association (ASBANC) 
announced an initiative to develop and offer a shared 
e-money platform in 2014 with RENEIC Digital ID as 
its core database. Named Modelo Peru, the initiative 
quickly grew into a collaboration between the country’s 
government, financial institutions, telecommunications 
companies, large payers (salaries) and payees (billers) 
as part of Peruvian Digital Payments (PDP). PDP is co-
owned by the Association of Banks of Peru (ASBANC) 
as well as many of its member banks and electronic 
money issuers and developed the shared infrastructure 
for the mobile money service.177Known as Billetera Movil (BiM), the new service, 
which provides services such as cash in/cash out at agent 
points, balance check, P2P payments, and airtime top-
up, was launched in February 2016, and reached around 
80,000 subscribers in its first three months of operation. 
According to the GSMA,178 95 percent of the population 
of Peru lives in an area with mobile broadband coverage, 
and around 70 percent of the population has a mobile 
phone connection.
Some key challenges of Modelo Peru include expanding 
the potential of the agent network and mobile money 
in inaccessible areas. Issues of training and knowledge 
transfer can be reduced through hybrid and technological 
approaches. Reaching remote rural communities through 
mobile networks is a challenge which cannot always 
be left to mobile operators; government investment 
may play a critical role in expansion in areas with  
difficult geography. 
Regulatory Protection
Peru has both comprehensive data protection legislation179 
and an independent data protection authority.180 Under 
this legislation:
• Personal data includes any information on an 
individual which identifies or makes him identifiable 
through means that may be reasonably used.
• Sensitive data includes biometric data, data concerning 
the racial and ethnic origin, political, religion, 
philosophical or moral opinions or convictions, 
personal habits, union membership and information 
related to health or sexual life.
The inclusion of biometric data in ’sensitive data‘ has 
implications for ID systems by requiring consent given 
through a handwritten signature, digital signature or other 
authentication mechanism that guarantees unequivocal 
consent by the owner.181 It is unclear how these restrictions 
would apply to biometrics delivered via a mobile device 
such as Apple’s TouchID.
United Kingdom
Introduction
The UK national eID scheme, GOV .UK Verify, has been 
live since May 2016 and currently has over 2.2 million 
users with a verified identity. There are currently 17 public 
sector services that are utilizing these identities to allow 
citizens to access digital services ranging from taxation 
and pension transactions to benefits, driver licensing, 
and redundancy claims. The program is currently being 63
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDINGexpanded to various health and social services as well as 
the private sector.
GOV .UK Verify is a federated identity system managed by 
the UK Government Cabinet Office. The trust framework 
within which providers and services operate follows 
rules defined by the UK Government such as its well 
known identity proofing, verification and authentication 
standards,182 all of which are openly available. Identity 
proofing, verification and authentication are all provided 
by a group of commercial organisations certified to 
operate against UK standards and subject to commercial 
contracts derived from a Cabinet Office procurement 
framework for identity assurance. Currently 7 providers 
are certified to operate under this framework and provide 
identity accounts to citizens. 
Applications
Interoperability with the Private Sector 
The UK government is engaging with the financial sector, 
where changes to legislation and disruptive technologies 
are driving the need to better understand the identity of 
online users, to expand digital ID. The government is 
currently removing commercial and policy barriers to 
interoperabilitywhere they exist whilst continuing to 
publish standards for digital identity that support the 
needs of users and services alike. International Interoperability 
The UK government views international interoperability 
of eID as a key driver for the growth of digital 
economies around the world. The key is to provide 
interoperability frameworks to enable the recognition 
and reuse of identity from multiple trusted sources based 
on international standards. To ensure interoperability 
and trust frameworks, the UK has engaged (at various 
levels) with international organisations such as the UN 
(UNCITRAL), the World Bank, and the European Union, 
where these frameworks are being considered. 
Trusted Attribute Services
Trusted Attribute Services provide data about individuals 
or entities (Attributes) where a link can be established 
between the identity and the data at some level of 
assurance, Attribute data combined with verified identity 
satisfies many of the needs of digital services and citizens 
accessing services by providing much needed trust when 
determining eligibility, and also enables the creation of 
efficient digital services. GOV .UK Verify currently only 
utilises attribute data to satisfy the need for identity 
matching at a relying party. In this case, attributes 
are provided as part of an identity assertion from the 
Identity Provider as MDS (Minimum Data Set). The UK 
government intends to widen this capability enabling 
verified identity to release further attribute provision. 65 G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING
ENDNOTES
1. Adapted from NIST (2013a)
2. Adapted from OWI (2017), NIST (2013a),  
World Bank 2016.
3. Adapted from NIST (2013b)
4. Adapted from World Bank (2018a)
5. Adapted from Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) 
and Blockchain, Fintech Note 1, WBG 2018.
6. Adapted from World Bank (2016, 2018b)
7. Adapted from World Bank (2018b)
8. Adapted from World Bank (2018b), EC (2017), IDB 
(2013)
9. Adapted from World Bank (2018a, 2018b), Gelb & 
Clark (2013)].
10. World Bank (2017, 2018b)
11. NIST Glossary: Identifiers
12. As defined by ISO 17442 here: https://www.leiroc.
org/
13. World Bank 2017 (Pending HLAC/UN discussions)
14. Richard Kissel (May 2013). Glossary of Key 
Information Security Terms. NIST Retrieved from: 
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2013/NIST.
IR.7298r2.pdf
15. NIST Glossary: Relying Party
16. NIST Glossary: Revocation
17. Sovrin: A Protocol and Token for Self-Sovereign 
Identity and Decentralized Trust
18. NIST Glossary: Verification19. Transaction account refers to any type of account 
maintained with a bank or licensed non-banking 
entity that enables making and receiving payments 
and saving balances – (i.e.) serve as a store of value. 
References to account in this document should be 
read as transaction account.
20. World Bank (2017). Identification for Development.
21. G20 High-Level Principles for Digital Financial 
Inclusion
22. Principles on Identification for Sustainable 
Development
23. http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/  
205641443451046211/ID4D-
IntegrationAproachStudyComplete.pdf
24. http://www.fatf-gafi.org/
25. Ten Principles on Identification for Sustainable 
development
26. 2017 Global FinDex Report
27. A transaction account is defined as a basic bank 
account with a financial institution which allows 
for the efficient transfer of funds by the account 
holder to third parties as well as receiving electronic 
payments into this account.
28. UFA2020 Overview: Universal Financial Access by 
2020
29. http://globalfindex.worldbank.org/
30. World Bank (2017). Identification for Development.
31. Digital Identity: Towards Shared Principles for 
Public and Private Sector Cooperation 
32. Digital Identity: Towards Shared Principles for 
Public and Private Sector Cooperation
66
 ENDNOTES33. UN-WB working paper: DISCUSSION PAPER: 
Working Definition of Proof of Legal Identity, May 
2018
34. ‘Are Biometric ID Systems Good for Women?’, 
Alan Gleb, 2016
35. Digital Financial Inclusion: Emerging Policy 
Approaches
36. ID4D is a multi-sectoral and cross-practice initiative 
that unites teams from around the WBG. To enable 
access to services and rights the initiative supports 
progress towards identification systems using 21st 
century solutions.
37. Landscape Technology for Digital Identification
38. World Bank ID4D Dataset, 2017
39. Digital Identity: Towards Shared Principles for 
Public and Private Sector Cooperation
40. Jan Dhan Yojana (JDY) scheme, was launched by 
the Indian government in August 2014, with the 
goal to ensure that every household in the country 
has an account. Everyone with a JDY account is 
eligible for a RuPay debit card, accident insurance 
of Rs.100,000 (~USD $150) and life insurance 
coverage of Rs.30,000 (~USD $45) and is eligible for 
an overdraft facility upon satisfactory performance 
of the account.
41. http://www.pmjdy.gov.in/home
42. News Article: Nigeria announces removal of 23,846 
ghost workers from government payroll
43. Public sector savings & revenue from identification 
systems: Opportunities & Constraints’, WBG ID4D 
report, 2018
44. http://www.intellectualventures.com/news/press-
releases/global-good-fund-and-element-inc.-to-
develop-biometric-identification-techn
45. GDPR Regulation
46. Digital Identity: Towards Shared Principles for 
Public and Private Sector Cooperation
47. https://cfi-blog.org/2016/02/17/bim-the-first-fully-
interoperable-mobile-money-platform-now-live-in-
peru/
48. Excerpt provided by the G20 representatives from 
the Government of India as a case study (attached in 
the annexures) 
49. Consult Hyperion Pakistan Note’, 2017
50. Numbers supplied by country51. https://fidoalliance.org/
52. https://www.bankid.com/en/om-bankid/detta-ar-
bankid
53. Regulatory Framework for Bank Verification 
Number (BVN)
54. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
introducing-govuk-verify/introducing-govuk-verify
55. http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-politics-41642044
56. Graham Greenleaf, “Global Tables of Data 
Privacy Laws and Bills (4rd Ed, January 2015),” 
SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, NY: Social 
Science Research Network, January 30, 2015),  
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2603502; Graham 
Greenleaf, “Global Data Privacy Laws 2015: 109 
Countries, with European Laws Now a Minority,” 
SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, NY: Social 
Science Research Network, January 30, 2015), 
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2603529.
57. It should be noted there that transparent is used to 
indicated that the records are public, however, the 
algorithms behind it are most often opaque.
58. Tobias Young (14 March 2017). Blockchain 
technology cuts through the hurdles to simplify 
everyone’s lives. 
59. Technology Landscape for Digital Identification
60. Technology Landscape for Digital Identification
61. ‘Global Findex Survey 2018’, WBG, 2018, (http://
globalfindex.worldbank.org/) 
62. Providers are legally permitted to “rely” on an 
Aadhaar check to discharge their ID and ID 
verification obligations
63. Adapted from the case study provided by India 
membership.
64. Closing the coverage gap: Digital Inclusion in Latin 
America, 2015, GSMA
65. http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/Europe/events/foaf-
galway/papers/fp/token_based_authentication/
66. For further reading on LOAs, see: http://securekey.
com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/ECONOMICS-
OF-IDENTITY .pdf
67. One critical element of the standards are that the 
PIN is encrypted from the time it is entered to the 
time it is transformed into the reference value of 
verification. The full standards are available at 
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/67
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING68.  http://www.fin24.com/Tech/Companies/fingerprint-
authentication-coming-to-sa-bank-cards-
20160726?isapp=true
69.  The Global National eID Industry Report: 2017 
Edition by Acuity Market Intelligence.
70. Mastercard (26 October 2017). Mastercard and Bank 
of Maldives Introduce Passport Card in Partnership 
with Maldives Immigration. 
71.  https://www.zdnet.com/article/estonias-id-card-
scrisis-how-e-states-poster-child-got-into-and-out-
of-trouble/
72.  Introducing Mobile Connect – the new standard in 
digital authentication. 
73.  Circular 3/2012, article 17 
74.  Technology Landscape for Digital Identification
75.  World Bank (2016). Digital Identity: Towards shared 
principles for public and private sector cooperation
7 6 . https://www.techdirt.com/articles/  
20161011/10075735774/bangladesh-brings-
nationwide-digital-identity-cards-linking-
biometrics-to-mobile-phone-numbers.shtml
77.  Technology Landscape for Digital Identification
78.  Soft and Hard Biometrics for the Authentication of 
Remote People in Front and Side Views: Ghalleb A, 
Amara N
79.  As above
80.  https://newsroom.mastercard.com/press-releases/
mastercard-zwipe-announce-launch-worlds-first-
biometric-contactless-payment-card-integrated-
fingerprint-sensor/
81.  Smith, S. (29 November 2016). V oice and Facial 
Recognition to Be Used in Over 600 Million Mobile 
Devices by 2021. 
82.  refers to billions of physical devices around the world 
that are now connected to the internet, collecting and 
sharing data
83.  Badugu, N. (17 May 2017). Biometrics in Internet of 
Things (IoT) Security. IoT ONE.
84. ‘NPCI FAQ on Aadhar Payment Bridge System’ 
(APB),2017, (https://www.ucobank.com/pdf/faq-
apb.pdf)
85. Singpass,2018, Government of Singapore  
(https://www.singpass.gov.sg/spauth/login/
loginpage?URL=%2F&TAM_OP=login) 86. ‘It’s important no one gets left behind’, The 
Guardian, 2017, (https://www.theguardian.com/
public-leaders-network/2017/may/02/singapore-
government-data-strategy-jacqueline-poh) 
87. ‘MyInfo access extended to local businesses’,  
Nov 2017 (http://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/
myinfo-access-extended-to-local-businesses) 
88. BISP’s innovation in G2P payment systems’, BISP, 
Government of Pakistan, 2018
89. https://www.nadra.gov.pk/about-us/
90. Financial Inclusion of forcibly displaced Persons 
(GPFI)
*These cards were issued initially by UNHCR 
but Government of Lebanon told UNHCR to stop 
registering refugees from 2015 onwards. 
91. ‘The Role of Financial Services in Humanitarian Crisis’, 
WBG, Nov 2017, (http://documents.worldbank.
org/curated/en/687701493270597254/The-role-of-
financial-services-in-humanitarian-crises) 
92. Norwegian Refugee Council (2017). Syrian refugees’ 
right to legal identity: implications for return. https://
www.nrc.no/globalassets/pdf/briefing-notes/icla/
final-syrian-refugees-civil-documentation-briefing-
note-21-12-2016.pdf
93. ‘Approaches to Providing Identification to Refugees 
and Asylum Seekers’, WBG ID4D Working Paper, 
2018-9
94.  Other humanitarian agencies, such as WFP and 
NGOs, may also register refugees and asylum 
seekers, as beneficiaries of the assistance they 
provide.
95. ‘Iris scan helps Syrian refugees in Jordan receive UN 
supplies in ‘blink of eye’, UN news, 2016 (https://
news.un.org/en/story/2016/10/542032-iris-scan-
helps-syrian-refugees-jordan-receive-un-supplies-
blink-eye) 
96.  https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/
documents/communications/wfp287655.pdf 
97. ‘General Principles of Credit Reporting’, 2011, 
Financial Stability Board, (http://www.fsb.
org/2011/09/cos_110907/) 
98. ‘ECIB Website’, State Bank of Pakistan  
(http://www.sbp.org.pk/ecib/index.htm )
99. WBG Digital ID note on Pakistan 201768
 ENDNOTES100.  Bank-ID website, 2018,  (https://www.bankid.no/
en/about-us/) 
101. ‘Changing ID trends power banking in Norway’, 
2015, (https://www.computerweekly.com/news/  
4500244960/Changing-IT-trends-power-banking-
in-Norway) 
102.  ‘UID Aadhar’  http://udyogaadhaar.gov.in/UA/
UAMRegistration.aspx
103. ‘Bangladesh brings nationwide digital identity 
cards linking biometrics’ https://www.techdirt.
com/articles/20161011/10075735774/bangladesh-
brings-nationwide-digital-identity-cards-linking-
biometrics-to-mobile-phone-numbers.shtml
1 0 4 .   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Good_
Practices_for_Financial_CP.pdf
105. ‘GPFI report on alternative data transforming 
SME’s’, GPFI, 2017, (https://www.gpfi.org/
publications/gpfi-report-alternative-data-
transforming-sme-finance) 
106.  ‘Digital ID for businesses’, WBG Report, 2017 
107.  The Role of Digital Identification for Healthcare: 
The Emerging Use Cases’, Case Studies, 2018
108.  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
introducing-govuk-verify/introducing-govuk-
verify
109. http://diacc.ca
110. https://www.gsma.com/identity/mobile-connect
111. https://fidoalliance.org/
112. https://www.bankid.com/en/
113. https://www.bankid.no/en/about-us/
114. Def: to design a framework so that it can still be 
used in the future, even when technology changes.
115. Principles on Identification for sustainable 
development: toward the Digital Age
116. Digital Identity: Towards Shared Principles for 
Public and Private Sector Cooperation
1 17. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/213581486378184357/Principles-on-
identification-for-sustainable-development-toward-
the-digital-age
118. At a Crossroads: PersonHood and digital identity 
in the information society. OECD working paper, 
2008.
119. https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63-3.html120. Dig and Text below Adapted from the World 
Bank Report: Technology Landscape for Digital 
Identification 2018
121. United Nations Department of Social and Economic 
Affairs (2014). Principles and Recommendations 
for a Vital Statistics System, Revision 3. Retrieved 
from: https://unstats.un.org/unsd/demographic/
standmeth/principles/M19Rev3en.pdf
122. Aadhaarcard.net.in (07 November 2016). Apply for 
Aadhaar Card without any Documents. Retrieved 
from: https://uidai.gov.in/component/fsf/?view-
faq&catid=36
123. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
U.S. Department of Commerce (June 2017). 
Digital Identity Guidelines: Enrollment and 
Identity Proofing. Retrieved from NIST:  
https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63a.html 
124. European Commission (25 February 2015).  
Trust Services and eID. Retrieved from European 
Commission: https://ec.europa.eu/ digital-single-
market/en/policies/trust-services-and-eidentification 
125. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri
=uriserv:OJ.L_.2014.257.01.0073.01.ENG
126. https://www.iso.org/standard/45138.html
127. https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63-3.html
128. Technology Landscape for Digital Identification
129. https://reliefweb.int/report/jordan/rais-jordan-
mission-assistance-coordination-bulk-upload-
trainer-trainer-guide 
130. https://reliefweb.int/report/jordan/rais-jordan-
mission-assistance-coordination-bulk-upload-
trainer-trainer-guide
131. ‘Uganda launches major refugee verification 
operation’, UNCR, 2018 (http://www.unhcr.org/
en-us/news/latest/2018/3/5a9959444/uganda-
launches-major-refugee-verification-operation.
html)
132. ‘Credential Broker Service’, 2018, Government of 
Canada
133. ‘India: Case Study on Digital ID’, G20 Digital ID 
Onboarding paper, Government of India, 2018
134. More details can be obtained in Box 7 in the main 
text of ‘G20 Digital ID Onboarding Paper’
135. It is composed by a codification derived from an 
individual’s name, gender, place and date of birth, 
plus a random number. 69
G20 DIGITAL IDENTITY ONBOARDING136. These functional IDs include V oting Card, Passport, 
Certificate of Higher Education Studies (college and 
graduate degrees), Military Service Card, Consular 
ID (offered by Mexican Consulates as a mean of 
identification), Senior Citizen’s ID, IDs issued by 
Mexican Social Security Agencies (which mainly 
provide health care services), driver’s license and 
taxpayer identification number.
137. Individuals without a picture ID need to present two 
witnesses with valid V oting Cards. Accepted IDs 
are those currently valid which include a picture of 
the individual. Such IDs may be not be linked to 
foundational IDs and thus be more easily falsified.
138. Currently, INE has 100 percent of the 2 index 
fingerprints and 80 percent of the 10 fingerprints 
of individuals in the electoral registry. INE started 
collecting only 2 index fingerprints. It now collects 
all 10 when individuals obtain their V oting Card, 
and when they renew it or replace it.
139. Level 1-3 accounts’ maximum monthly deposits are, 
respectively, 750, 3,000, and 10,000 “UDIS” (1 UDI 
= 0.33 USD). Level 4 accounts have no maximum 
monthly deposits. Level 1 accounts’ maximum 
balance is 1,000 UDIS.
140. Level 1 accounts cannot be set up for electronic 
banking. Levels 2-4 accounts may use electronic 
banking including through mobile devices. 
141. Full name, date of birth and address, at a bank or by 
authorized agent. If the account is opened remotely, 
the data to register are: full name, gender, place and 
date of birth, address, CURP, and cellphone number 
if the account has a linked cellphone.
142. The ID needs to include a picture and signature. No 
photocopies are collected.
143. If the process is carried out face-to-face, the data 
is collected through an interview. If it is carried 
out remotely, the corresponding individual’s 
information needs to be verified against RENAPO’s 
records.
144. Country of birth, nationality, occupation, taxpayer 
ID number, telephone number, e-mail and serial 
number of the electronic signature (if the client  
has it).
145. Level 3 accounts require the client showing a valid 
ID with picture and signature. Level 4 accounts 
require photocopies of a valid ID with picture and 
signature, CURP, and proof of address.146. Since 2008, Mexican regulation has foreseen that 
banks may use biometric data to identify their 
clients when performing some transactions through 
banking agents and through electronic banking. 
Banks were then allowed to use identification 
mechanisms such as PINs, passwords, tokens or the 
use of debit or credit cards with a chip. In addition, 
biometric information from the V oting Card did not 
need to be verified with INE.
147. The main regulatory changes are included in articles 
51 Bis to 51 Bis 12 and Annex 71 of the “Circular 
Única de Bancos”.
148. Only levels 3 and 4 accounts (level 4 with 
maximum monthly deposits of 30,000 UDIs) and 
loans under 60,000 UDIs can be obtained remotely 
through a video-call interview, in which biometric 
information is collected.
149.  If the client does not have a V oting Card, she can show 
her passport and any of the IDs that allow complying 
with AML rules and the bank needs to verify that the 
data is consistent across these two. These IDs include 
consular registration card, professional identification 
card, the national military service record, the military 
ID, the National Institute of Senior Citizens’ ID, the 
Mexican Social Security Institute’s ID, driving license, 
and any ID issued by a Federal, State or Municipal 
Authority. If INE cannot issue V oting Cards, due to 
restrictions derived from the electoral calendar, the 
client has to show any 2 of the above-mentioned IDs, 
and the operation requires authorization from the 
bank’s branch manager.
150. Money transfers to other accounts owned by 
the client in the same bank are exempted from 
identification actions.
151. If the client does not have a V oting Card, she can 
show 2 IDs that allow to comply with AML Rules 
and the bank has to verify that the underlying 
data across these matches. These include the IDs 
mentioned above and passport.
152. The bank must validate a client’s identity with INE 
(fingerprint match) when the client is given her card 
and when the client sets the Personal Identification 
Number for the first time.
153. In the case of immigration documents showed by 
foreigners and passports, banks have to identify 
their security elements.
154. United Nations, World Population Prospects (2016) 
https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/DataQuery/70
 ENDNOTES155. ‘BVN Biometric’, https://www.firstbanknigeria.
com/biometric/, 2017
156.  Pakistan Population Census, 2017 (http://www.
pbs.gov.pk/content/population-census) 
157.  ‘5.2 million families receive a monthly transfer of 
USD15 through BISP’ World Bank Group ID4D 2 
Pager, December 2015 
158.  ‘National Identity Card’, NADRA, 2017, https://
www.nadra.gov.pk/identity/identity-CNIC/
159.  Rs 15= 0.129 USD and Rs 45= 0.389 USD as 
per XE conversions (Conversion rate: 1 USD = 
115.601 PKR)
160. ‘Technical Note: Payment systems aspects of 
financial inclusion’, Pakistan, 2014   
161.  ‘State Bank of Pakistan agents numbers”, December 
2017, (https://propakistani.pk/2017/12/05/number-
branchless-banking-agents-crosses-400000-
pakistan/) 
162.  ‘State Bank of Pakistan removes barriers to 
branchless banking’,CGAP, July 2011
163. ‘Biometric Verification Services’, PTA. 2017, 
(https://www.pta.gov.pk/en/biometric-verification) 
164.  The biometric linking process is not done for post-
paid accounts but these comprise less than 1% of 
the market (which is almost entirely pre-paid) and 
other checks are done to prevent fraud and other 
issues with corporate accounts
165.  For example, agents are located so close together 
that it takes a median of 5 minutes to reach the 
nearest agent serving the same provider, with 
Telenor providing one of the broadest reaching 
networks of over 200K points of service, selling 
airtime for its GSM business, unlike bank branches, 
which had limited geographical reach.
166. ‘Agent Network Accelerator—Pakistan Country 
Report’, Helix Institute of Digital Finance, 2014167. BISP’s innovation in G2P payment systems’, BISP, 
Government of Pakistan, 2018
168. ‘BISP’s innovation in G2P payment systems’, 
BISP, Government of Pakistan, 2018
169. ‘ECIB Website’, State Bank of Pakistan (http://
www.sbp.org.pk/ecib/index.htm )
170. ‘NADRA E-Sahulat’, Government of Pakistan, 2018 
(https://e-sahulat.nadra.gov.pk/) 
171. ‘HBL Express and NADRA launch branchless 
banking services’, January 2015, (https://goo.
gl/3Nhdv7) 
172. ‘Data Protection Law in Pakistan: Policy 
Recommendations by DRF’, Digital Rights 
Foundation, October 2017 (https://goo.gl/KaR4st)
173. ‘State Bank of Pakistan Branchless Banking 
Regulations’, June 2016, (http://www.sbp.org.pk/
bprd/2016/C9-Annx-A.pdf) 
174.  https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/
Population/
175.  https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-
world-factbook/geos/pe.html
176.  https://www.budde.com.au/Research/Peru-
Telecoms-Mobile-Broadband-and-Digital-Media-
Statistics-and-Analyses
177.  https://cfi-blog.org/2016/02/17/bim-the-first-fully-
interoperable-mobile-money-platform-now-live-
in-peru/
178.  “Connected Society: Digital inclusion in Latin 
America and the Caribbean”, GSMA, 2016
179.  Data Protection law (Ley N° 29733)
180.  National Authority for Personal Data Protection
181.  Article 14 of Law 29733
182.  https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/
identity-assurance-enabling-trusted-transactionsC