MARCH  2020 
DISCLAIMER: The authors' views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Agency  for 
International Development or the United States Government.  GIG WORK ON DIGITAL PLATFORMS 
Case Study 2: Online Support Tools and Forums for 
AMT Crowdworkers  
Learning, Evaluation and Research Activity II (LER II)  
 
 
PETER KAPUSCINSKI / WORLD BANK   
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
This document was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development, 
Democracy, Human Rights and Governance Center under the Learning, Evaluation and Research 
Activity II (LER II) contract: GS10F0218U/7200AA18M00017.  
 
Prepared by:  
Tandem Research 
343 Coimavaddo Quitla  
Aldona, Bardez 403508  
Goa, India  
 
The Cloudburst Group  
8400 Corporate Drive, Suite 550  
Landover, MD 20785- 2238 
Tel: 301- 918-4400   CONTENTS  
1. INTRODUCTION  1 
DEFINITIONS 2 
2. RESEARC H QUERY  3 
3. METHOD AND LIMITATIONS  6 
3.1 RESPONDENTS’ PROFILES  7 
4. FINDINGS  8 
4.1 TURKER EXPERIENCES  OF WORK  8 
4.2 USAGE NEEDS AND PATTERNS  9 
4.3 MORE INFORMATION, BETTER HITS, AND A FEW FRIENDS  10 
4.4 SMALL AND LOCAL IS PREFERABLE  11 
4.5 THE CROWD MAY NOT WORK FOR EVERYONE  13 
5. CONCLUSION  15 
REFERENCES  17 
  
1     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  1. INTRODUCTION  
The size of the online work market was estimated at about US$4.4 billion in 2016,1 growing at a rate of 
25.5 percent annually.2 Microwork or crowdwork platforms such as Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), 
Crowdflower, and Clickworker employ a large number of online workers —a 2016 study estimates 40 
million registered workers, of which 10 percent are “active users,” meaning they complete at least one 
task a month.3 
Online work may enable new opportunities for flexible and remote work. However, recent studies on online work, particularly microwork, have highlighted some of the risks for workers, from low wages and unstable earnings to the alienation of workers and loss of opportunities for collective bargaining.
4 
The absence of grievance redressal mechanisms, combined with the lack of formal social protection mechanisms further amplifies  the precarity of online work.
5 
Online outsourcing through microwork platforms is driven by demand from medium - and large -scale 
enterprises located predominantly in developed countries, with many workers catering to this demand 
located in developing count ries.6 Because of the over -supply of labor, online platforms may initiate a 
race to the bottom with wages on the platforms spiraling downwards.7 Online gig work has been 
recommended as a viable alternative for creating economic opportunities, especially in low -income 
countries.8 However, contextualizing this recommendation with the ground realities reveals strenuous 
working schedules and job insecurity among workers who perform crowdwork on a full- time basis.9 
 
1 Graham,  M., Hjorth, I., & Lehdonvirta,  V. (2017).  Digital labour  and development:  impacts  of global  digital labour  
platforms  and the gig economy  on worker livelihoods.  Transfer:  European  Review  of Labour and Research , 
23(2),  135-162.  
2 Kassi,  O., & Lehdonvirta,  V. (2016).  Building  the online  labour index:  a tool for policy and research.  
3 Kuek, S. C., Paradi -Guilfor d, C., Fayomi,  T., Imaizumi, S., Ipeirotis, P., Pina, P., & Singh,  M. (2015).  The global 
opportunity  in online  outsourcing.  
4 Graham,  M., Lehdonvirta,  V., Wood,  A., Barnard,  H., & Hjorth,  I. (2018).  Could Online  Gig Work  Drive  
Development  in Lower- income  Countries?.  The Future  of Work  in the Global South , 8-11. 
Wood,  A., Graham,  M., Lehdonvirta,  V., Barnard,  H., & Hjorth,  I. (2016). Virtual  production  networks:  Fixing 
commodification  and disembeddedness.  
Graham,  M., Hjorth,  I., & Lehdonvirta,  V. (2017).  Digital labour  and development:  impacts  of global  digital  labour  
platforms  and the gig economy  on worker livelihoods.  Transfer:  European  Review  of Labour and Research , 
23(2),  135-162.  
5 Berg, J., Furrer,  M., Harmon,  E., Rani, U., & Silberman, S. (2018).  Digital labour  platforms  and the future  of work.  
Towards  Decent  Work  in the Online  World.  Rapport  de l’OIT.  
6 Kuek, S. C., Paradi -Guilford, C., Fayomi,  T., Imaizumi, S., Ipeirotis, P., Pina, P., & Singh,  M. (2015).  The global 
opportunity  in online  outsourcing.  
7 Graham,  M., Lehdonvirta,  V., Wood,  A., Barnard,  H., Hjorth, I., & Simon,  D. P. (2017).  The risks and rewards  of 
online  gig work at the global  margins.  Oxford:  Oxford Internet  Institute.  
8 Kuek, S. C., Paradi -Guilford, C., Fayomi,  T., Imaizum i, S., Ipeirotis, P., Pina, P., & Singh,  M. (2015).  The global 
opportunity  in online  outsourcing.  
9 Graham,  M., Lehdonvirta,  V., Wood,  A., Barnard,  H., & Hjorth,  I. (2018).  Could Online  Gig Work  Drive  
Development  in Lower- income  Countries?.  The Future  of Work in the Global South , 8-11.  
2     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  Crowdworkers in developing c ountries are often professionals with high educational qualifications. For 
example, 20 percent of Indian crowdworkers have a postgraduate degree.10 Highly educated workers 
performing low -skilled work indicates under -utilization of skilled labor in developi ng countries.11  
 
10 Berg, J., Furrer,  M., Harmon,  E., Rani, U., & Silberman, S. (2018).  Digital labour  platforms  and the future  of work.  
Towards  Decent  Work  in the Online  World.  Rapport  de l’OIT.  
11 Ibid. DEFINITIONS 
DIGITAL LABOR  is defined as “paid and unpaid work within the digital economy” (Bukht & Heeks, 
2017).  
ONLINE LABOR  is defined as work done in online labor markets “that bring together buyers and 
sellers of intangible knowledge and service work” (Lehdonvirta et al., 2014).  
CROWDWORK  is defined as “engaging a geographically distributed workforce to complete complex 
tasks on demand and at scale” (Kittur et al., 2013). 
MICROWORK is defined as “small tasks performed on crowdwork platforms” (Morris et al., 2017).   
3     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  2. RESEARCH QUERY  
In a bid to understand the changing contours of the platform economy and promote interventions that 
support worker agency and rights, this study examines the role of online information -sharing tools and 
social media forums. Do supporting organizations meant to help workers, such as information -sharing 
platforms, successfully facilitate workers’ understanding of their rights and improve their ability to organize? Are social media tools effective in improving worker a ccess to information and promoting 
worker agency?  
This study examines online tools and social media forums for workers, or “Turkers,” on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). AMT is one of the oldest and longest- running online microwork marketplaces, 
owned and o perated by Amazon under Amazon Web Services. Workers are spread out geographically, 
but most are from the United States (75 percent) and India (18 percent).
12 Employers or “requesters” 
can post Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs) on the platform, usually tasks  a computer is unable to do that 
require human intelligence, such as identifying images, data entry, subtitling, transcribing text, or answering survey questions, etc. Workers can then select from a list of such tasks to complete in 
exchange for a reward s et by the requester, which is awarded after approval. Requesters can set the 
validity of a HIT, the duration it should take a worker to complete the task, and the number of 
responses required. Since the number of responses is capped, workers must accept a HIT quickly. Once 
a worker accepts a HIT, it goes onto their queue. Workers can then address queued HITs within the 
time frames set by the requester.  
The application programming interface (API) endpoints assign unique identifiers to workers on the 
platfor m that requesters can use to review the work and communicate with workers in a limited 
capacity. However, AMT actively discourages workers from using real names and personal identifiers, 
and requesters from asking workers for their contact details. Workers  receive no information about 
requesters from AMT, only details of the task they must perform. Platforms like AMT witness a large 
volume of activity and produce millions of ghost workers, largely due to the “paradox of automation’s 
last mile,” which Gray and Suri observe as the never- ending need for human interference in developing 
automated machines.
13 
Turkers on AMT use a combination of tools and online fora to band together to work against what 
Gray and Suri term as the “algorithmic cruelty” in online cr owdwork.14 Forums like Reddit, 
TurkerNation Slack workspace, and MTurk Crowd, and tools such as Turkopticon and TurkerView, 
allow workers to share reviews and resources. These forums also function as discussion boards for 
workers to congregate and converse  in the everyday and organize campaigns for collective action. For 
example, Dynamo, a platform created by researchers at Stanford University, helps AMT workers 
collectivize.  
 
12 Berg, J., Furrer,  M., Harmon,  E., Rani, U., & Silberman, S. (2018).  Digital labour  platforms  and the future  of work.  
Towards  Decent  Work  in the Online  World.  Rapport  de l’OIT.  
13 Gray,  M. L., & Suri, S. (2019).  Ghost  work: How to stop Silicon Valley  from building a new global underclass.  Eamon  
Dolan  Books.  
14 Ibid.  
4     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  For the purposes of this study, we looked at two online tools, Turkopticon and Tur kerNation, selected 
because of their popularity among workers and their widespread usage. They also appear in guides and 
tutorial material to help workers improve their working efficiency and earnings on AMT. We also 
examined social media platforms such as  Facebook, WhatsApp, Telegram, and YouTube. The aim of the 
study is to investigate variant types of platforms that exist and question their usefulness for online 
workers. The choice of platforms was based on an initial survey of the literature, as well as from 
consultation with USAID and The Cloudburst Group, which suggested that these are the most 
commonly used platforms by AMT workers. However, as we found in our study, while they are the 
most used in aggregate, this aggregate is based on usage by America n workers. Indian workers tend not 
to find them as useful, and instead rely on other more commonly used social media platforms. A brief 
description of these platforms is as follows:  
TURKOPTICON  
Turkopticon is a website and browser extension which enables workers to review requesters and HITs 
posted on the AMT platform. The browser extension integrates directly into the workflow of the 
platform and displays requester ratings on four parameters: level of comm unication, generosity, fairness, 
and promptness. Reviews are documented on the website and Turkers can check these reviews before 
accepting a HIT. The tool seeks to help workers ascertain the reputation of requesters and avoid 
unethical requesters through collaborative information sharing with other workers on the platform. The 
website also serves as a forum where Turkers can discuss various aspects of AMT work. The forum is 
moderated by its creators, researchers from the University of California San Diego (UCSD), who ensure 
the integrity and quality of reviews. Turkopticon is one the most popularly recommended add -ons 
among Turkers.  
TURKERNATION  
TurkerNation is a discussion forum that aims to help Turkers access better quality work opportunities 
on the platform. It attempts to bridge the gap between Turkers and requesters by allowing both to post 
alerts about high quality tasks in the forum. Turker Kristy Milland played a key role in setting up 
TurkerNation and has been a community manager on the forum since  2005. Initially a web forum and a 
chat space, TurkerNation (now operating on Slack, a messaging app for workplaces) enables Turkers to 
share information about reliable or well- paying HITs on the forum. The conversations on the forum are 
segregated into va rious channels: “Daily HIT Threads” where HITs are posted and reviewed regularly by 
workers; “quals” where qualification HITs are posted; and a separate channel where requesters can post 
about issues that they face and connect with workers directly. Worker s engage in casual banter about 
working on the platform on the “General” channel. Conversations on both Slack and Reddit are strictly moderated by five or six Reddit users.  
SOCIAL MEDIA GROUPS (FACEBOOK, WHATSAPP, TELEGRAM)  
Besides specialized platforms su ch as Turkopticon and TurkerNation, social media platforms such as 
Facebook, Telegram, and WhatsApp also serve as high -activity sites for Turkers to initiate and join 
virtual networks. Although our study initially focused on Turkopticon and TurkerNation, e arly 
interviews with Indian Turkers revealed that these platforms did not cater to their needs but served the needs of Turkers in the U.S. better. Instead, most Indian Turkers used and preferred social media 
groups. Each of these social media platforms als o gives rise to a characteristically different kind of  
5     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  interaction among workers. For instance, while WhatsApp and Telegram groups typically involve smaller 
groups and are more personal and local, Facebook groups facilitate virtual associations among worke rs 
who are both geographically disparate and proximately located.15 Conversations revolve around “good 
HITs” and “bad requesters,” along with sharing other resources or work opportunities, similar to other online forums.  
  
 
15 Yin, M., Gray,  M. L., Suri, S., & Vaughan,  J. W. (2016,  April). The communication  network  within  the crowd.  In 
Proceedings  of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web (pp. 1293-1303).  International  World 
Wide  Web Conferences  Steering  Committee.   
6     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  3. METHOD AND LIMITATIONS  
For this study, we recruited respondents through a two -stage sampling process. In the first stage, we 
administered a baseline survey as a HIT via AMT, with an upper limit of 40 respondents limited to 
workers located in developing countries. Forty was chosen as a suitable limit, as the objective was to 
reach 12 to 15 workers in total. The questions in the survey consisted of location, educational 
qualifications, duration of work on the platform, use of AMT for primary or supplementary income, and 
frequency of use o f the two forums mentioned above. We were only focused on those respondents 
from developing countries, which in this case turned out to be all from India. We received 40 responses 
from India and shortlisted 13 workers, taking a cross -section across educational qualifications, work 
experience on the platform, and frequency of use of Turkopticon and TurkerNation, for a semi -
structured interview. We conducted five semi -structured in- depth interviews (three via phone, one via 
Google Hangout and one via Google C hat). Of the five in -depth interviews, two workers from the 
baseline pool were interviewed and three workers were recruited through snowball sampling. These interviews were conducted over telephone. The eight other shortlisted respondents from our baseline  
survey did not respond to a request for an interview. We then also administered our interview 
questions through a survey form as a HIT via AMT to the baseline survey respondents, based on the 
assumption that workers were reluctant to engage off the platfo rm. This strategy provided nine 
responses, but a few responses were sparse on detail. From this, we conducted an additional four phone 
interviews, increasing the total number of respondents to nine. We also looked at workers’ activity on 
public social medi a groups on Facebook, Telegram, and YouTube. Respondents provided information 
about WhatsApp group conversations.
16 
We reached out to the moderators of TurkerNation, of which Kristy Milland (the founder of the forum) refused to participate in the study. Wh ile no formal reason was given for not participating, we heard 
from other scholars working on the subject that this could be because workers who use these platforms 
have increasingly begun to vent their frustration with AMT to the moderators even though th ey have 
little capacity to bring about direct change within AMT. We interviewed one of the other moderators of 
the TurkerNation Slack workspace. We also reached out to Lilly Irani, one of the creators of 
Turkopticon. Her comments have been supplemented wit h existing research on Turkopticon available in 
the public domain. To understand the labor market conditions in India and existing research on 
community fora and assistive tools for Turkers, we conducted interviews with noted experts Mary Gray, 
Mark Graham , and Jacki O'Neill.  
Critiques of crowdwork platforms such as AMT point out the invisibility of workers on the platform,
17 
making it very difficult to contact workers due to the heavy intermediation. This was experienced first-hand in recruiting respondent s for the study, making it nearly impossible to reach workers outside the 
bounds of the platform. Snowball sampling could not be used initially because of the lack of response 
from workers from the baseline pool. Their apprehension could be attributed to m istrust, as many 
 
16 Doing  in-person  interviews  was not feasible,  as the population  of workers  is geographically  spread across  the 
country and therefore  not reachable  in our five- to seven -day fieldwork  interval.  The short  time available  
also made  it difficult to establish  relationships  of trust with workers,  and to explain  the purpose  of the 
study.  Snowballing  as a strategy  can result  in a less diverse  sample,  but we had to use this as a method 
because  of the difficulties  in accessing  workers.  
17 Irani, L. C., & Silberman, M. (2013,  April). Turkopticon:  Interrupting  worker invisibility  in amazon  mechanical  
turk. In Proceedings  of the SIGCHI conference on human factors  in computing systems (pp. 611-620). ACM.   
7     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  workers inquired about our relationship with AMT during the interviews. The short time frame for 
conducting the study further limited opportunities to gain workers’ trust and enter their communication 
networks to gather more detailed infor mation.  
3.1 RESPONDENTS’ PROFILES 
All the responses received for the baselines and shortlisted candidates were from workers located in India. The candidates we shortlisted had a minimum educational attainment of a high school degree and 
maximum of a postgr aduate degree. We received more male respondents than female, with 30 male 
respondents and 10 female respondents. The majority of workers in the sample reported using AMT as 
their main income source. Most respondents who were working full -time on AMT repor ted using it as 
their primary source of income, but not as the sole source of income for their household. Most 
respondents were graduates and had full -time work experience, which they either quit or continued to 
work on along with part- time work on AMT. However, six out of nine interviewees cited AMT as their 
first work experience. Turkers joined the platform based on recommendations from personal 
connections, online searches, and through offline advertisements for online work.  
Workers who left full -time jo bs to work on AMT mentioned a dislike for hierarchical setups in 
traditional work environments and a preference for flexible work environments. Two of the nine 
respondents specified that their motivation to join AMT on a full- time basis was due to a health  
condition or a disability. Most of the part- time workers use AMT because it offers a good source of 
supplementary income. Motivations to join AMT also included aspirations for higher incomes over time. 
   
8     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  4. FINDINGS 
4.1 TURKER EXPERIENCES OF W ORK  
Confirming the findings in some of the emerging literature on Turkers in developing nations, Indian 
Turkers are generally satisfied with their earnings, owing to a favorable exchange rate. However, the 
availability of work fluctuates greatly, preventing ma ny workers from generating stable earnings. One of 
the Turkers commented:  
“This is highly irregular work. I target around $10 for a day. We can earn $50 one day and the 
next day earnings might be half a dollar only. We never know what's going to happen 
tomorrow.”  
Indian workers face further constraints because of poor internet connectivity, and in some cases, fluency 
in English. Jacki O’Neill, for example, documents cases of Indian Turkers working out of internet cafes; 
this often means that worke rs help each other in completing tasks. Workers with weak English skills 
often rely on a friend or use an acquaintance to help translate tasks in exchange for sharing a proportion 
of earnings. These constraints often mean that the Turkers who do well on AMT are high- skilled 
workers with some financial means, often computer scientists, which affords them the luxury of internet 
connectivity and English education.18 Many of these high -skilled workers turn to online work because of 
the unavailability of job opp ortunities that meet their skill level; moreover, online microwork is often 
associated with “knowledge work,” which is culturally more acceptable than manual work, even if the latter pays better or provides a more predictable income.  
As most requesters ar e based in the U.S., more work is available at night in India, causing Turkers to 
make drastic alterations to their schedules. They work between 25 to 80 hours in a week in sync with 
U.S. clocks. Time management is a major issue, particularly for workers w ho also have other jobs. A 
respondent who has a full -time job in a multinational corporation observed that:  
“Most work comes around 9 p.m. as the requests are from the U.S., and I work for about four 
hours. But if the work comes later at night, I have to stay up even longer to do it. This disrupts 
my next day of office work.”  
Working at night also results in solitary working hours —many Turkers say they have some form of 
entertainment (e.g., TV, Netflix, etc.) to keep them company. Alienation and loneliness  among 
crowdworkers has also been well -documented in the literature.
19 Delays in payment and unfair 
rejections by requesters are common and frequent concerns. This is amplified by the unresponsiveness 
of AMT and the absence of any grievance redressal mecha nisms. These concerns are common for Indian 
 
18 Martin,  D., O’Neill,  J., Gupta,  N., & Hanrahan, B. V. (2016).  Turking  in a global  labour  market.  Computer  
Supported  Cooperative  Work  (CSCW) , 25(1), 39-77. 
19 Wood,  A., Graham,  M., Lehdonvirta,  V., Barnard,  H., & Hjorth,  I. (2016).  Virtual  production  networks:  Fixing 
commodification  and disembeddedness.  
Graham,  M., Hjorth,  I., & Lehdonvirta,  V. (2017).  Digital  labour  and development:  impacts  of global  digital  labour  
platforms  and the gig economy  on worker livelihoods.  Transfer:  Europ ean Review  of Labour and Research , 
23(2),  135-162.  
  
9     |     CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  and American workers alike, as borne out by our interviews and existing literature, and spurred the 
creation of online tools and forums like Turkopticon and TurkerNation.20 TurkerNation is a good 
example of how w orkers came together, despite the fragmentation of labor on online forums, to try to 
collectively address their concerns.  
4.2 USAGE N EEDS AND PATTERNS 
Workers reported joining several AMT worker forums that they found through quick internet searches when they first started working on AMT. Respondents reported being fairly familiar with Turkopticon, 
which they use to avoid rejections, read requester reviews, and share their experiences on AMT. When 
questioned about the criteria for accepting work on AMT, workers prioritized requesters who were 
least likely to reject their work, even over the remuneration offered for a certain task. For workers, a 
rejected task means time wasted that could have been spent more productively elsewhere, as well as 
the possibil ity of not being able to access future opportunities because of poor ratings. On the other 
hand, TurkerNation usage was close to zero in our sample —only one respondent mentioned having 
used it in the past, and most others said they had never heard of it. T his was surprising given the 
popularity of the platform among the broader Turker community. The TurkerNation moderator told us 
that the shift to Slack and Reddit led to many members leaving the forum.  
When workers were prodded further about supporting pla tforms and information -sharing forums they 
used, all respondents reported being a member of at least one social media group, either on Facebook, 
WhatsApp, or Telegram, in which they are active on a regular basis. Our respondents most commonly 
used groups d esigned exclusively for Indian Turkers (and named as such, e.g., Indian Turkers) on 
WhatsApp. Workers who have been on AMT for eight to ten years were outliers, as they mentioned not finding tools like Turkopticon and similar support forums valuable, but t hey also reported being 
fairly active on WhatsApp groups, providing mentorship and guidance to other members.  
Turkers ’ modes of access varied by platform. Many respondents found out about Turkopticon through 
these social media groups and tutorial videos on YouTube. Workers find Facebook groups through 
Google searches and offline acquaintances who also work on the platforms. Workers discover 
WhatsApp groups through online references or virtual meetings when doing a HIT.  
Conversations on social media groups  generally revolve around working on AMT, with workers sharing 
HITs and discussing new developments related to AMT (e.g., the introduction of Hyperwallet as a new 
payment mode). Respondents also mentioned discussing other opportunities for online work, with 
experienced workers sharing links to other websites that they use for working from home. 
Conversations are sometimes about work, life hacks, new tools, or how to manage time.  
WhatsApp groups are often saturated with repeated HITs due to their small size and common sources 
of information. Almost all respondents observed that activity in WhatsApp groups has also decreased 
due to a decline in the amount of work on AMT.  
 
20 Irani, L. C., & Silberman, M. (2013,  April). Turkopticon:  Interrupting  worker invisibility  in amazon  mechanical  
turk. In Proceedings  of the SIGCHI conference on human factors  in computing systems (pp. 611-620).  ACM.   
10     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  4.3 MORE INFORMATION, BETTER HITS, AND A FEW FRIENDS 
Online tools and social media forums  help workers address information asymmetries on AMT and 
access better work. Turkopticon functions as a “basic information system” for Turkers, who use it to 
identify and avoid requesters who have a bad reputation on the platform, whether for unfair reject ion, 
bad communication, or unfair compensation. Some workers referred to Turkopticon as an “eye -
opener” and a “bridge” between workers and requesters.  
The difficulties of finding and retaining good HITs (by adding them to their queues) are also mitigated by 
these tools. One of the respondents told us about a script called PandaCrazy:  
“There is a script called PandaCrazy that I use a lot. It helps us catch the HIT. Since each HIT 
has a particular ID, we take that and paste it on PandaCrazy which does the ca tching for us. 
Catching means getting hold of the HIT, adding it to your queue. Once it's there, the requester 
can be contacted.”  
Reviews and discussions on these spaces also enable workers to identify better jobs faster, thereby 
reducing the time spent lo oking for work. In this way, social media groups and online forums reduce 
some of the unpaid labor that goes into looking for work. This is a major issue for workers —some said 
looking for work can take up nearly half their time on the platform. The “crowd,” in this sense, mediates 
the availability of work, distributing individuals’ labor that goes into finding work.21 
In addition, these groups and communities provide a space to connect to other workers and tackle 
alienation while working. As observed by ano ther respondent who is a full -time worker on AMT:  
“I felt the need to have a place where I can interact with other workers, not initially but after 
having worked on the platform for a while. I decided to join these groups for safety and 
communication purpo ses and also for awareness about any changes that may be happening on 
MTurk.”  
This sentiment corresponds with the finding in some of the emerging literature on collaboration among 
micro -workers. Jacki O’Neill and Mary Gray, for example, point to the high degree of engagement and 
collaboration among micro workers in India. In some cases, workers use these forums to inform each 
other about good HITs they are unable to take on themselves; this builds their social capital among their 
community of peers. G ood jobs go quite quickly, and many are offered at night; workers pass good jobs 
on to one another. In other cases, online engagement has also enabled offline friendships —Turkers in 
Hyderabad, for example, have regular meetups at a local cafe. Some Turkers  conduct training sessions 
on Skype, which are then shared through social media channels.22 This literature points to how some 
Turkers may collaborate with other family members, friends, and colleagues, old and new, to manage 
work together. However, these associations are typically geographically spread out—Turkers have 
online company, but physically they typically work alone, late at night, and geographically spread out. As 
 
21 Gray,  M. L., Suri, S., Ali, S. S., & Kulkarni,  D. (2016,  February).  The crowd  is a collaborative  network.  In 
Proceedings  of the 19th ACM conference on computer -supported  cooperative  work & social computing (pp. 134-
147). ACM.  
22 Ibid; interviews  with experts   
11     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  will be noted later in this report, such collaboration need not reflect the experie nce of all Turkers, and 
some continue to work in isolation.  
These fora thus fill in for functions which are not fulfilled by AMT but are important for working on the 
platform. They facilitate information flows, rebalance some power hierarchies between req uesters and 
workers, and enable the sharing of experiences. Mary Gray also suggests that the sense of community 
forged through the tools and forums was especially important for Indian workers compared with 
American workers.23 This is because Indian workers had been scammed previously by recruitment 
agencies or employers, and thus preferred relying on word -of-mouth references from friends and 
colleagues; moreover, the importance of community for Indian workers is further accentuated by the unavailability or inadequacy of formal complaint mechanisms.  
4.4 SMALL AND LOCAL IS P REFERABLE 
Web forums like TurkerNation, MTurk Crowd, and Facebook groups were used much less frequently 
by respondents compared to WhatsApp or Telegram groups . Turkopticon, TurkerNation, and MTurk 
Crowd are seen as being mostly for American workers —the HITs shared on these forums were largely 
targeted at Turkers based in the U.S., and Indian workers were disallowed from accepting these HITs by 
requesters. Reque sters can set a preferred location, and some of the higher -paying HITs can only be 
accessed by workers in the U.S. Mary Gray also pointed out that xenophobia and racism were common 
on many of these platforms, deterring participation from Indian workers.24 Some forums also explicitly 
ban Indian workers, and moderators claim this is mostly because of excessive spam posting by Indian 
workers. Barriers to access due to negative stereotypes and language fluency often lead to 
underrepresentation of Indian workers  in transnational worker forums.25 In many of the “global” 
forums, culturally specific references and American slang are common. In contrast, the familiarity with the language of conversation and embeddedness within communication subcultures in Facebook or  
WhatsApp groups makes it easier for workers to participate.  
Earlier studies on Indian Turkers document the widespread use of Facebook groups.
26 In contrast, all 
the workers we spoke with preferred WhatsApp and Telegram. This could be because of the growi ng 
popularity of WhatsApp as a platform in India. In addition, WhatsApp groups are seen as being smaller, 
more private, local, or communal spaces. The preference for smaller and more localized groups, usually 
nationality -based, has been observed in other d eveloping countries as well.27 
 
23 Gray,  M. L., & Suri, S. (2019).  Ghost  work:  How to stop Silicon  Valley  from building  a new global  underclass . 
Eamon  Dolan  Books.  
24 Yin, M., Gray,  M. L., Suri, S., & Vaughan,  J. W. (2016,  April). The communication  network  within  the crowd.  In 
Proceedings  of the 25th International  Conference  on World Wide  Web (pp. 1293-1303).  International  
World Wide  Web Conferences  Steering  Committee.  
25 Milland, K. (2019).  The unsupported  Crowd:  Exclusion  of Indian  workers  in Amazon  Mechanical  Turk 
communities. 
26 Gupta,  N., Martin,  D., Hanrahan,  B. V., & O'Neill,  J. (2014, November).  Turk-life in India.  In Proceedings  of the 
18th International Conference  on Supporting  Group  Work  (pp. 1-11). ACM.  
27 Wood,  A. J., Lehdonvirta,  V., & Graham,  M. (2018).  Work ers of the Internet  unite?  Online  freelancer 
organisation  among  remote  gig economy workers  in six Asian  and African  countries.  New Technology,  
Work  and Employment,  33(2), 95-112.  
12     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  Parallels exist between web forums and discussion forums for workers across nationalities and social 
media groups consisting of workers who are co- located. Functionally similar, both facilitate information 
sharing and help im prove access to work, but the geographical proximity of workers translates into 
stronger relevance and hence better associations through localized groups.  
Aside from familiarity and relevance, mistrust is another reason for the preference for smaller grou ps. 
Several Turkers noted concerns around freeriding in larger groups. This mistrust is amplified by the 
reduced availability of work on AMT. Some workers also expressed mistrust of authenticity and 
credibility of ratings on more popular forums such as Turkopticon. One worker said, for example, 
“Some reviews might be selfishly created so others don't work on it, who can vouch for them?” 
Workers were also worried about their accounts getting suspended if they used a more visible and well -
known tool like Turk opticon.  
The fewer the members, the easier it is to build trust. Geographical and occupational familiarity helps in reaffirming this trust. Smaller groups form a circle of trust for workers, wherein they get relevant 
information and provide any that they m ight have. These associations may be as large as spanning the 
geographical breadth of a country or as small as consisting of two family members of the same 
household working on AMT. The classification of groups based on workers’ nationalities suggests the 
importance of familiarity, trust, and kinship, as workers also join these groups through personal 
acquaintances and advertisements. Mentorship and guidance provided by experienced workers and the 
resources shared by them are automatically verified within this circle of trust. As stated by one of our 
respondents in reference to the WhatsApp group he was a part of,  
“The WhatsApp group has three to four admins but they only moderate if there is talk about 
something other than MTurk. But otherwise we trust each  other, we don’t think anyone will lie 
on the WhatsApp group. We found each other on MTurk, so everyone is a known worker there 
for sure. I mean why would anyone lie there? On Turkopticon, people from outside AMT, non-
workers, can also come. But why would anyone participate? They can, but I don’t know why 
they would.”  
The preference for WhatsApp groups over online tools might also reflect a prior familiarity with the 
platform. WhatsApp is a widely used messaging device in India;
28 in the U.S., in contrast, there is a 
longer history of using online messaging boards and tools. This might also explain why Indian workers do 
not use TurkerNation, particularly with its shift to Slack. One of the respondents mentioned having 
tried various forums but preferred using  WhatsApp groups for daily communication, saying:  
“I tried TurkerNation and other forums, but they were not user -friendly. Their interface wasn’t 
as smooth as Facebook or WhatsApp. I am not used to other types of forums.”  
Furthermore, the “always on” logic  of working on AMT is supported by the 24/7 active WhatsApp and 
Telegram groups, allowing workers to complete a task as it is shared on the groups. One female worker 
informed us:  
 
28 O'Neill,  J., Toyama,  K., Chen,  J., Tate, B., & Siddique,  A. (2016,  June).  The increasing  sophistication  of mobile  
media  sharing  in lower- middle -class  Bangalore.  In Proceedings  of the Eighth  International  Conference on 
Information and Communication Technologies  and Development  (p. 17). ACM.   
13     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  “WhatsApp stays on all day and most of the workers on the group are online the whole day. So 
I get direct messages from them.”  
This might also signal a network effect,29 where people are more likely to use social communication 
tools most used by their peers or professional circles because the benefits increase with the rising 
numbe r of users on the platform. 
4.5 THE CROWD M AY NOT WORK FOR EVERYONE  
Some of the workers we spoke with had very low levels of engagement on these forums and little interaction with other workers. They used these forums to primarily access, and occasionally share, basic information, but no stronger bonds of solidarity were e xperienced, nor were these interactions 
seen as an opportunity for bargaining.  
Many workers mistrust AMT, and this spills over to mistrust for online communities as well; they would 
rather just concentrate on the work and improve the quality of their outp ut. With a drop in the 
availability of HITs, some are even worried about losing their HITs to other Turkers. Collaboration in a competitive marketplace is seen as an unhelpful strategy. Because of the declining amount of work, many 
Turkers we spoke with re ported accepting HITs even if the requester was rated poorly.  
“Now that the availability of work is so low, just getting a HIT is a big deal, so we usually just 
accept it. We don't think much even if the requester rating is low. We generally feel like it's  
worth the risk…If the number of reviews is less, then it's worth the risk.”  
It may also take time for people to build trust in online communities. This was true of AMT —a few 
Turkers noted how online work has a reputation of being a scam, and they were thus skeptical of joining 
AMT in the beginning. This association might extend to perceptions of online communities as well.  
Offline similarities and affinities may also play a role in how online communities are formed and used. 
Many of the examples of workers collaborating on platforms are based on the experiences of Turkers in 
Banga lore, Chennai, and Hyderabad, all cities with large business process outsourcing (BPO) and 
information technology (IT) sectors, of which many are Turkers or otherwise engaged in online work. In 
many ways, it is seen as a continuation of the knowledge work they are already doing. In contrast, some 
of the workers we spoke with who reported little connection within online Turker communities lived in 
less densely populated Turker areas and had less occupational affinity of identity. For example, one of 
the wome n we spoke with lived in a small town in Gujarat, with both her and her father working on the 
platform in different shifts.  
The choice of platform available to workers and its rules, implicit or explicit, can shape the level of engagement among workers. In  some social media groups, moderators are strict about the type of 
issues that can be discussed—some Turkers mentioned that non -AMT conversations are actively 
suppressed. This could discourage the building of broader solidarities among workers. A female worker with a Bachelor of Commerce who is a full- time worker on AMT told us:  
 
29 Tufekci  discusses  this in the contex t of social  movements  birthed  on social  media . 
Tufekci,  Z. (2017).  Twitter  and tear gas: The power  and fragility  of networked protest.  Yale University  Press.   
14     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  “Conversation not related to AMT is not permitted on the group. But they also didn’t allow us to 
share other avenues of online work. I had to put forward this point and argue against this rule 
because sharing such opportunities is helpful for all as most workers in the group work from 
home.”  
This contrasts with online forums and discussion boards (e.g., MTurk Forum, TurkerNation, etc.), which 
facilitate and encourage everyday convers ation among workers, as mentioned by the TurkerNation 
moderator we spoke to. 
Our conversations with workers highlighted the variations in their experiences on the platforms as well 
as the forums —not all users are active members of the community or establis h solidarities beyond basic 
information sharing. Being an active member of these social media communication channels requires 
workers to make investments of their own emotional labor.30 People have differing inclinations, 
aptitudes, and capacities to engag e in such labor, and it can become a new source of stress. As Zeynep 
Tufekci and Matthew E. Brashears point out, “some people do not take as readily to accepting digitally mediated sociality as others.” Referring to such preferences as “cyberasociality,” they find that such 
people “are less likely to use platforms for digitally mediated social interaction to broaden their social 
networks or to forge new social ties online while they are equally likely to use digital channels for 
utilitarian purposes.”
31 
  
 
30 Raval,  N., & Dourish,  P. (2016,  February).  Standing  out from the crowd:  Emotional  labor,  body labor, and 
temporal  labor in ridesharing.  In Proceedings  of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer -Supported  Cooperative  
Work  & Social Computing (pp. 97-107). ACM.  
31 Tufekci,  Z., & Brashears,  M. E. (2014).  Are we all equally  at home  socializing  online?  Cyberasociality  and evidence  
for an unequal  distribution  of disdain  for digitally -mediated  sociality.  Information,  Communication & Society , 
17(4),  486-502.   
15     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  5. CONCLUSION  
Online tools, forums, and social media groups play an important role in improving Turkers’ access to 
information, identifying good HITs and requesters, reducing time spent searching for HITs, enabling 
workers to exchange quality work opportuni ties, and retaining them to continue working on AMT. 
Further, virtual communities can help create new solidarities among geographically dispersed workers. 
Smaller and localized groups are more successful at overcoming barriers to trust and in mitigating th e 
alienating effect of work on crowdwork platforms by making conversations more relevant and relatable by creating a familiar environment. While concrete examples of increases in bargaining power and 
momentum for collective action do not appear prima facie , Skype training sessions for new Turkers and 
guidance from experienced workers on WhatsApp groups are examples of collaborative activities that 
benefit workers.  
To what extent, however, do such information flows or new solidarities enable access to better  work 
and improve worker rights and bargaining capacities? In some cases, as the examples in this report have noted, workers access better HITs and save time looking for good work. However, broader market 
conditions ultimately shape access to work and the efficacy of online tools in finding work. Numerous 
Turkers in India noted that as the amount of work on AMT has reduced, usage of these platforms has 
also decreased, in some cases, because people are reluctant to share the leads they find regarding good HITs.  
It is thus important to recognize the limited capacity of these platforms. While they do ease the workers’ experiences and workers have used these platforms to form new collaborative networks, they 
can ultimately only do so much. Workers are themselves quite aware of the limitations of these tools. 
“Accountability should come from MTurk itself, not from the forums. Because if they can't force the 
requesters to behave, who actually can?” remarked one of our respondents.  
In this case, the unresponsiveness of  AMT further worsens the situation and arguably even prevents 
these tools from realizing their full potential. Yet, it is imaginable that a responsive online microwork 
platform or other digital work platform would enable workers to come together and make d emands on 
the platform that improve working conditions. There is one such example on AMT which demonstrates 
this potential: led by TurkerNation moderators, a campaign was launched in which Turkers came 
together to draft a letter to Jeff Bezos, the CEO of A mazon, about the deplorable working conditions 
on AMT, which resulted in the introduction of bank transfers as a mode of payment for Indian 
workers.
32 Expert interviews also corroborate this argument —in different circumstances, with possibly 
different plat forms, civil society organizations can play a role in enabling workers to come together. One 
example cited in the interviews was using a chatbot to collect grievances of drivers on ride -hailing apps 
and then working with local taxi driver unions to help wo rkers negotiate their rights.33 
Three concluding caveats are in order. First, interventions aimed at increasing workers’ well -being are 
also political because they seek to shift the balance of power between stakeholders. These politics and 
 
32 Milland, K. (2019).  The unsupported  Crowd:  Exclusion  of Indian  workers  in Amazon  Mechanical  Turk 
communities . 
33 McGregor,  M., Bidwell,  N. J., Sarangapani,  V., Appavoo,  J., & O'Neill,  J. (2019,  April).  Talking  about  Chat at Work  
in the Global  South:  An Ethnographic  Study  of Chat Use in India and Kenya.  In Proceedings  of the 2019 
CHI Conference  on Human Factors  in Computing  Systems  (p. 233). ACM.   
16     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  their effects mu st be recognized. Lilly Irani, founder of Turkopticon, reflects on this, highlighting how 
public depictions of Turkopticon depicted the designers who had made it as “creative innovators” and 
the AMT workers as “dopes in the system…without agency or capacity to change their situation.” 
Further, public media’s depiction of these tools promotes the image of AMT work as “simple, menial, 
repetitive, or low -skill.” Such depictions reinforced “the design savior complex” and even ended up 
marginalizing the agency a nd adaptive efforts of Turkers themselves.34 The politics of such interventions 
are further bound up with emotional labor investments of the moderators or initiators themselves, 
some of whom report high rates of fatigue, burnout, and frustration.  
Second, one must not assume that the collaborative crowd is a sufficient safety net for all workers. 
Strides towards mitigating alienation and facilitating social protection have been made by way of virtual 
forums and online groups, but that does not discount the necessity for protecting the outliers and the 
lone workers who are still invisible in the crowd. Participating in the crowd requires significant 
investments of emotional labor by workers, which may not be possible or desirable for all workers. The 
differen tial capacities to invest and participate in online forums suggest that research should take care to 
not homogenize the crowd. The same goes for platform moderators —while not covered directly in this 
report, the unpaid labor of these forum and platform org anizers must be taken into consideration when 
considering the longevity and sustainability of such forums in enabling worker agency and rights.  
The third and final caveat is that even though there are numerous stories of successful collaboration and 
engag ement, these are often stories of individual success and must not be confused with structural 
remedies and interventions for improving worker conditions. In many ways, the individual stories of 
adaptation and resilience in the face of exploitation may enab le or legitimize the prolonging of the 
exploitative structures in the first place. Equating individual efforts with structural changes to support 
crowdworkers and improve work experience on the platform not only puts undue pressure on the 
individuals behin d such projects, but also de -emphasizes the structural changes that are necessary to 
discipline the platform economy.  
  
 
34 Irani, L. C., & Silberman, M. (2016,  May).  Stories  we tell about  labor:  Turkopticon  and the trouble  with design.  In 
Proceedings  of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors  in computing systems (pp. 4573-4586).  ACM.   
17     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  REFERENCES  
Berg, J., Furrer, M., Harmon, E., Rani, U., & Silberman, S. (2018). Digital labour platforms and the future 
of work. Towards Decent Work in the Online World. Rapport de l’OIT.  
Graham, M., Hjorth, I., & Lehdonvirta, V. (2017). Digital labour and development: impacts of global 
digital labour platforms and the gig economy on worker livelihoods. Transfer: European Review of 
Labour and Research, 23 (2), 135 -162. 
Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., Wood, A., Barnard, H., & Hjorth, I. (2018). Could Online Gig Work Drive 
Development in Lower -income Countries?. The Future of Work in the Global South, 8 -11. 
Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., W ood, A., Barnard, H., Hjorth, I., & Simon, D. P. (2017). The risks and 
rewards of online gig work at the global margins.  Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute.  
Gray, M. L., & Suri, S. (2019). Ghost work: How to stop Silicon Valley from building a new global underclass.  
Eamon Dolan Books.  
Gray, M. L., Suri, S., Ali, S. S., & Kulkarni, D. (2016, February). The crowd is a collaborative network. In 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on computer- supported cooperative work & social computing  
(pp. 134- 147). ACM.  
Gupta, N., Martin, D., Hanrahan, B. V., & O'Neill, J. (2014, November). Turk -life in India. In Proceedings 
of the 18th International Conference on Supporting Group Work  (pp. 1 -11). ACM. 
Irani, L. C., & Silberman, M. (2013, April). Turk opticon: Interrupting worker invisibility in amazon 
mechanical turk. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 
611-620). ACM.  
Irani, L. C., & Silberman, M. (2016, May). Stories we tell about labor: Turkopticon and t he trouble with 
design. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 4573-
4586). ACM.  
Kassi, O., & Lehdonvirta, V. (2016). Building the online labour index: a tool for policy and research.  
Kuek, S. C., Paradi -Guilfor d, C., Fayomi, T., Imaizumi, S., Ipeirotis, P., Pina, P., & Singh, M. (2015). The 
global opportunity in online outsourcing.  
Martin, D., O’Neill, J., Gupta, N., & Hanrahan, B. V. (2016). Turking in a global labour market. Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work  (CSCW) , 25(1), 39 -77. 
McGregor, M., Bidwell, N. J., Sarangapani, V., Appavoo, J., & O'Neill, J. (2019, April). Talking about Chat 
at Work in the Global South: An Ethnographic Study of Chat Use in India and Kenya. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conferenc e on Human Factors in Computing Systems (p. 233). ACM.  
Milland, K. (2019). The unsupported Crowd: Exclusion of Indian workers in Amazon Mechanical Turk 
communities.  
O'Neill, J., Toyama, K., Chen, J., Tate, B., & Siddique, A. (2016, June). The increasing sophistication of 
mobile media sharing in lower -middle -class Bangalore. In Proceedings of the Eighth International 
Conference on Information and Communication Technolo gies and Development  (p. 17). ACM.   
18     |      CASE STUDY 2: ONLINE SUPPORT TOOLS AND FORUMS FOR AMT CROWDWORKERS   USAID.GOV  Raval, N., & Dourish, P. (2016, February). Standing out from the crowd: Emotional labor, body labor, 
and temporal labor in ridesharing. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer -
Supported Cooperative Work & So cial Computing  (pp. 97- 107). ACM.  
Tufekci, Z. (2017). Twitter and tear gas: The power and fragility of networked protest. Yale University Press.  
Tufekci, Z., & Brashears, M. E. (2014). Are we all equally at home socializing online? Cyberasociality and 
evidence for an unequal distribution of disdain for digitally -mediated sociality. Information, 
Communication & Society , 17(4), 486 -502. 
Wood, A. J., Lehdonvirta, V., & Graham, M. (2018). Workers of the Internet unite? Online freelancer 
organisation among rem ote gig economy workers in six Asian and African countries. New 
Technology, Work and Employment , 33(2), 95 -112. 
Wood, A., Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., Barnard, H., & Hjorth, I. (2016). Virtual production networks: Fixing 
commodification and disembeddedne ss. 
Yin, M., Gray, M. L., Suri, S., & Vaughan, J. W. (2016, April). The communication network within the 
crowd. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web  (pp. 1293- 1303). 
International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.  