Working Paper 522 
December 2019Identifying and Verifying Customers:  
When are KYC Requirements Likely 
to Become Constraints on Financial 
Inclusion?
Abstract
Onerous KYC documentation requirements are widely recognized as a potential constraint to full 
financial inclusion. However, it is sometimes difficult to judge the extent to which this constraint is a 
serious or binding one, relative to the many other factors that can limit access to finance or demand 
for financial services. The paper considers this question, distinguishing between different types of  
documentation and different financial market segments according to their KYC requirements. Using 
data from several sources it then looks at cross-country patterns which provide some suggestive 
evidence on the conditions under which particular requirements are more or less likely to pose 
serious constraints. It concludes with policy suggestions, including on the use of  technology to help 
ease the burden of  documentary requirements while still maintaining financial integrity.  
www.cgdev.orgAlan Gelb and Diego Castrillon
Keywords: documentation, identification, financial inclusion, KYC
JEL: G210, G230, G280, L510, O160, O310, O500Center for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Washington, DC  20036
202.416.4000
(f) 202.416.4050
www.cgdev.orgThe Center for Global Development works to reduce global poverty 
and improve lives through innovative economic research that drives 
better policy and practice by the world’s top decision makers. Use and 
dissemination of  this Working Paper is encouraged; however, reproduced 
copies may not be used for commercial purposes. Further usage is 
permitted under the terms of  the Creative Commons License.
The views expressed in CGD Working Papers are those of  the authors and 
should not be attributed to the board of  directors, funders of  the Center 
for Global Development, or the authors’ respective organizations.Identifying and Verifying Customers:  
When are KYC Requirements Likely to Become Constraints on 
Financial Inclusion?
Alan Gelb
Center for Global Development
Diego Castrillon
Center for Global Development
We gratefully acknowledge very helpful comments from Mike Pisa, Liliana 
Rojas-Suarez, Albert van der Linden, Masiiwa Rusare and an anonymous 
referee. We also thank the GSMA for permission to use graphics from 
their studies.
The Center for Global Development is grateful for contributions from the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in support of  this work. 
Alan Gelb and Diego Castrillon, 2019. “Identifying and Verifying Customers: When 
are KYC Requirements Likely to Become Constraints on Financial Inclusion?” CGD 
Working Paper 522. Washington, DC: Center for Global Development. https://www.
cgdev.org/publication/identifying-and-verifying-customers-when-are-kyc-requirements-
likely-become-constraintsContents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  1 
2. Documentation Requirements and Market Segments  ................................ .........................  3 
2.1 ID and ID+  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  3 
2.2 Market Segments: Bank Accounts, Restricted Accounts and Mobile Money  .............  5 
3. A Look at the Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  10 
3.1 Some C ross-Country Relationships ................................ ................................ ...............  14 
3.2 Distinguishing between Requirements ................................ ................................ ..........  17 
3.3 The Picture for Mobile Money  ................................ ................................ ......................  21 
4. Conclusion and Policy Suggestions ................................ ................................ ......................  23 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 27 
Annex 1. Findex Data for Some Countries  ................................ ................................ .............  30 
Annex 2. Documentation Required at Commercia l Banks and Financial Inclusion  ...........  31 
 
 
 
  1 1. Introduction  
Onerous  KYC documentation requirements are widely recognized as a potential constraint 
to full financial inclusion. The latest F index  survey reports that , globally, some  20 percent of 
adults without a bank account report lack of necessary documentation as a factor. Which 
specific documentary requirements pose a serious problem in a particular settin g and 
whether they constitute THE binding constraint on financial inclusion -- out of many 
potential constraints -- is more difficult to assess. This paper considers how to approach this 
question with cross -country analysis and what this offers to inform s pecific country contexts. 
It also proposes measures to use new technology to ease documentary requirements, 
consistent with maintaining controls to ensure financial integrity.  
As for any goods or services market, the observed quantity of products (in this  case, 
financial services) is determined by the intersection of demand and supply schedules. People 
will have high demand for financial accounts if they are seen to offer useful services. 
Interoperability, for example, boosts the value of the payment servi ces offered by accounts, 
since clients can transact across different payments service providers. The supply of financial 
services will be affected by a wide range of regulatory and infrastructural factors, as well as 
the tax regime. A constraint can operat e on the demand side of the market – shifting the 
demand curve inwards so that less is wanted at the same service price -- or on the supply 
side – shifting the supply curve backwards as less service is offered -- or on both.  
Demanding documentation and ve rification requirements imposed by regulators boost a 
bank’s costs of onboarding clients and maintaining accounts. They can represent a supply -
side constraint, shifting the curve backwards, especially for small customers. Higher costs 
mean higher charges t o customers, less investment in reaching out to new customers and 
fewer accounts. The effects will be larger if there is no ready way for potential customers to 
provide the necessary documentation; in such cases, banks in some countries, such as 
Nigeria, h ave been forced to develop and maintain their own ID systems, a more costly 
proposition than relying on a pre -existing government ID. Costs will also be higher if the 
financial service providers are required to also verify credentials without having the 
infrastructure needed to do so easily. However, requirements to provide costly or difficult -
to-obtain documentation can also act directly on the demand side, discouraging potential 
customers from applying for accounts.  The constraints are therefore potential ly on both 
sides of the market.  
Section 2 first considers the landscape from the documentation side. Common requirements 
can include basic evidence of identity, or ID – either a card or a number – as well as a range 
of other documentation, such as proof o f address or occupation, that provide additional 
information on the individual. We term these attributes ID+. From the constraints 
perspective , ID and ID+ can be look different depending, for example, on the coverage and 
capabilities of the ID system and t he degree of formalization of the economy . Another 
important consideration is the infrastructure available to verify documents. This can differ a 
great deal between countries. Some  have electronic mechanisms to verify ID cards , or 
individuals using biometr ics; have no such facilities; Especially for rural or poorly connected 
areas, verification requirements could therefore pose a serious supply side constraint.  2 The section then considers financial access in terms of three financial market segments. The 
first consists of regular commercial banks and similar accounts which are subject to “full” 
KYC requirements. The second involves the simplified or restricted accounts which some 
countries have introduced in response to concerns that excessive documentation 
requirements constitute a barrier to financial inclusion. These countries operate “tiered 
KYC”, with less demanding requirements for small accounts limited by balance and 
transaction size. The third segment is mobile money issued by non -bank providers (such  as 
Mobile Network Operators or MNOs), under a different, and usually and less demanding, 
KYC regime for both SIMs and mobile money relative to commercial bank accounts. This 2 
x 3 framework 1 can be used, together with country characteristics, to help pro vide a 
perspective on the likely impact of KYC requirements on financial inclusion. Of course, not 
all three market segments need be present in every country.  
Section 3 then looks at some cross -country patterns using a number of indicators. The 
objective is to better understand the prevalence of certain practices, such as requiring ID+ 
for bank accounts , including in some countries with high degrees of informality, and also the 
relationship between measures of ID prevalence and financial inclusio n. This does not 
definitively reveal cases of binding constraints but is at least suggestive in flagging cases for 
more detailed assessment.  
Section 4 concludes, with suggestions for using technology more effectively to ease the 
potential KYC constraint on financial inclusion.  
Before proceeding further, it is essential to flag the difference between the de jure  
requirements of regulators and the de fact o behavior of financial service providers. It is 
usual to think of constraints as reflecting public policies that can be changed by legislation or 
regulation. But some apparent constraints can reflect behaviors of market participants that 
may derive from t heir interpretation of regulatory intent or may reflect completely different 
considerations. In the present context, this applies to the practices of banking institutions 
that may require more documentation to open accounts than the minimum prescribed by 
national regulators. 2  
How to interpret such a gap, if observed, in terms of binding constraints? If the reason 
seems to be a pattern of regulatory communications or behavior that encourages severe risk 
aversion on the part of financial institutions, the i mplication is clear; this is a de facto  
regulatory constraint that would need to be lifted by changing the actions and 
 
1 The 2x3 framework brings together the two types of documentary requirements and the three 
potential financial market segments.   
2 De Koker and Symington (2011) survey banks in South Africa to understand why many choose to 
follow conservative compliance be havior. The reasons include regulatory uncertainty, corporate 
culture, inexperienced compliance officers, and concern over possible liability arising from fraudulent 
accounts or transactions. They also note that customer due diligence processes are not onl y designed 
to serve AML/CFT purposes but to gather data to help serve customer needs and to target marketing 
efforts. Institutions may gather information that will assist with credit -scoring even if the service does 
not immediately include a credit product .  3 communications strategy of the regulators.  But there could also be other reasons for the 
excessive requirements. For example, the banks m ight be using documentary requirements 
to screen out low -income customers that they prefer not to service, perhaps because they do 
not fit their desired customer profile or because of other factors that raise the costs of 
dealing with them and make opening  accounts for such customers unprofitable.   
2. Documentation Requirements and Market Segments  
2.1 ID and ID+  
Documentary requirements for KYC  purposes can usefully be divided into two groups. The 
first comprises basic identifying information or “ID”, usual ly in the form of a National ID 
card or similar credential. The second group, which we can term “ID+”, includes a 
potentially wide range of supplementary evidence, such as proof of address, proof of 
employment or income, proof of nationality, or evidence o f other attributes. According to 
World Bank (2009) , the most commonly required document is an identity (ID) card, 3 yet 
commercial banks (and similar financial institutions) often ask for several further documents.  
Cons idering first ID, the requirement to provide it can be onerous, especially for the poorest 
and most deprived groups of people who are least likely to be registered. But in many 
countries, this problem will apply to relatively few people. As estimated by th e World Bank 
Identification for Development Dataset (ID4D Global Dataset) ,4 some 1 billion people are 
likely to lack identification, either birth certificates or, for adults, a national ID or voter 
registration card. Half of these will be children under t he age of 16 whose births have not 
been registered, and many of the remaining ones will be concentrated in a relatively few 
countries.   
Another important consideration is the infrastructure available to verify ID cards and other 
documents. This can differ a great deal between countries. Several countries, including Peru 
and Kenya, for example, have well -developed electronic mechanisms to verify ID cards (and 
in Peru also the capability to authenticate individuals biometrically against the registry’s 
databas e), while India’s biometric Aadhaar system is able to provide full e -KYC, with 
essential customer details sourced directly from the central registry rather than provided as 
paper documents . In some cases, verification is provided free as a public service ( Kenya); in 
others (Peru, Pakistan), banks are required to pay for verification services. Charges vary but 
are commonly in the range of US$0.25 for a card verification and considerably higher for a 
biometric customer verification  (ID4D, 2019) .5 However,  many countries have no such 
 
3 The definition of identity card varies by country. To see the full list of IDs included in the Findex 
survey by country, visit the Global Findex web page   
4 See https://id4d.worldbank.org/global -dataset   
5 For a summary of verification requirements, capacity and charges in a number of countries see 
ID4D (2019) . 4 facilities  for easy verification, which is likely to be more difficult and costly in the absence of 
an electronic infrastructure.   
Turning to ID+, the first question must be: why are such documents required? While they 
have become  commonplace in the context of AML/CFT regulations to prevent money -
laundering and the financing of terrorism, there is no formal assertion of the need for proofs 
of address, employment , or other ID+ in the pronouncements of the Financial Action Task 
Force  (FATF), the global body responsible for regulatory standards in the area. The answer 
seems to lie in history: such assorted documentary evidence was used to validate claims of 
identity through “triangulation”  across several documents , especially before th e advent of 
rigorous and robust national ID card systems, often based on biometrics.  
Ferreira et al. (2018)  explain that in response to the issue of money laundering, The US 
Banking Secrecy Act of 1970 required financia l institutions to ascertain the identity of 
customers by obtaining the name, date of birth and physical address of the prospective 
client. At the time, proof of address was a useful way to prove identity, because in the 
absence of electronic databases, cus tomer profiles were stored via tin -stamp address -o-graph 
systems. As such, it was a relatively robust, unique identifier because the address was literally 
cast in metal. Also, in the absence of interoperable digital databases, it was the only way of 
cross verifying an identity because people’s addresses were kept across multiple, independent 
institutions. People without multiple independent relationships were not considered valuable 
enough to have a bank account.  
Especially in countries with high levels of  informality, potential clients often cannot provide 
such documentation. Ferreira et al.  (2018)  analyze survey data for Nigeria, Tanzania and 
Uganda. Considering an ID only, this was held by 47, 74 and 69 percent of resp ondents in 
respective countries but when including both ID and proof of address, the numbers fell to 
only 39, 11 and 12 percent.  As they note, with the advent of technology (especially the 
personal printer) and the expansion of formal financial services in to new frontiers, the value 
of proof of address as a unique identifier has decreased significantly. It is possible to edit or 
change paper documents, create fake documents or use the valid documents of another 
person and assume their identity. In contrast,  cards issued by ID systems normally embody a 
range of security features and are increasingly backed up by biometric identification and 
authentication.  
Moreover, in an age of increased labor mobility, people do not necessarily stay in the same 
place for e xtended periods. Thus, a document that supposedly proves where someone lives 
is merely one of many identifiers, and a relatively weak one; apart from habit and false 
perception of its robustness, there is no clear reason why proof of address is being relie d on 
as an identifier. This is not to say that such information might not be useful for commercial 
purposes – a good address may tell a good deal about the likely income of a new customer 
and some ID+ is probably needed for lending. But there is a differen ce between asking 
customers to provide an address for certain services and requiring specified standard 
documents, such as utility bills, to “prove” it to open an account.   5 2.2 Market Segments: Bank Accounts, Restricted Accounts and Mobile 
Money  
Recognizin g the possible impact of KYC requirements in driving many people towards 
informal financial markets, FATF (2012)  encouraged countries to adopt a risk -based, or 
tiered, KYC approach to ensuring the integrity of financial institutions. According to this 
approach, requirements should be simplified for customers and for accounts considered to 
pose little risk. With regu lar bank accounts the first segment of the financial market, 
simplified or restricted accounts thus constitute a second segment from a KYC perspective.  
The third segment is provided by mobile money, issued under KYC requirements that may 
differ from those for regular bank accounts.  
Tiered KYC: A Work in Progress . Tiered KYC has generally been taken to apply to 
smaller -value accounts, limited in terms of maximum balances, transfers and services. But 
there have not been explicit prescriptions on how small su ch accounts need to be, how the 
risk-based assessments are to be done and exactly what requirements should be for such 
low-risk accounts. Judgment on these issues is left to country regulators. Each country has 
had to interpret FATF guidance in the light o f its own circumstances. As an example, in 
2011 Mexico approved a four -tiered regime for opening deposit accounts at credit 
institutions. As levels advanced, transaction limits increased, and simplification processes 
were reduced. Table 1  summarizes the fe atures of Mexican bank accounts as of 2011 
(Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion, 2011) .  
However, within countries, banks and other financial institutions have ultimate 
accountability for knowing their customers. This th ree-stage assignment of accountability to 
the lowest level (from FATF to country regulators to financial institutions) -- means that 
there can be considerable room for uncertainty and that  providers will not necessarily act on 
suggestions to minimize requi rements for fear of a regulatory backlash. And, taking Mexico  
as an example , it is notable that an address is required even for the second lowest tier of 
basic accounts.  
  6 Table 1 . Features of Banking Accounts in Mexico (2011)  
(Transactional limit in paren thesis)  
  Level 1  
(280 USD)  Level 2 6 
(1,114 USD)  Level 3  
(3,715)  Traditional 
Bank 
Account  
Customer file  No ID 
needed  Basic customer 
information 7 Complete customer 
information  Complete 
customer 
information  
Customer 
documentation  Not 
applicable  No need to keep a hard copy  Required to 
keep hard 
copy 
Face to face 
process  No No (bank could 
decide for a face 
procedure)  Yes Yes 
Point of access  Bank branch/banking 
agent/Internet/  
Mobile phone/Third -party call 
center  Bank branch/banking 
agent  Bank 
branch  
Source: Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion  
Progress in applying risk -based KYC was reported by FATF  (2017) , which reviewed country 
practices based on risk assessments in more than 20 countries. Among the findings it noted 
that there was often limited dialogue between the financial intelligence unit and the 
governmental department that specializes on promotion of financial inclusion. In many 
countries, the AML/CFT regulatory framework still did not recognize the risk -based 
approach or offer the possibility of simplified KYC. It found that, in general, the country 
regulators were reluctant to develop innovative s implified KYC  measures out of concern 
that an AML/CFT country assessment would not condone their risk -based approach. The 
report also noted that similar concerns often applied to the banks, especially when there was 
not adequate guidance from the country r egulatory authorities. Compliance officers from 
financial institutions remained risk averse even after the national risk assessment had been 
carried out. The report also confirmed that – from the perspective of the FATF – stringent 
KYC requirements were st ill among the most important impediments to financial inclusion 
in some countries. This alone, warrants taking seriously the proposition that they could be a 
serious, and perhaps even a binding, constraint.  
Examples of such requirements noted by the FATF report included to verify the address, 
document the purpose of a transaction, or provide a Tax ID number or a secondary ID 
document regardless of the amount and risk level of the transactions. Especially for low 
income customers, the report noted that requ irement for the “proof of address” could be 
more challenging than the proof of identity. Finally, the report noted that KYC  practices for 
 
6 There is a one -time traditional period to verify customers’ identifications (18 months). In this period, 
the transactional limit is 560 USD.  
7 Name, date, and place of birth, gender and address.  7 financial inclusion products in traditional financial institutions and mobile network operators 
(MNOs) were often diff erent, either due to inconsistent provisions that affected the two 
types of institutions, or to delay in the implementation of AML/CFT supervision 
arrangements for MNOs, and that this created an uneven playing field.  According to this 
picture, the risk -based approach to KYC is still a work in progress. Successive tiers of risk -
aversion between the three levels – the FATF, the national regulators and the financial 
institutions themselves – appears to be slowing the application of measures to facilitate 
finan cial inclusion.  
This is not the case in all countries. As previously noted, India has revised its banking law to 
ease restrictions on the opening of small accounts and lower the cost of KYC through using 
the Aadhaar ID system as the sole and adequate cred ential and permitting e -KYC as a way to 
eliminate the costs of verifying documents. 8 One Ministry of Finance official estimated that 
moving from paper -based KYC to e -KYC in India  reduced  the average  cost of verifying  
customers  from  roughly  $15 to $.0.50 , and that Indian banks that had made the shift had 
lessened the time spent on verifying customers from  more  than five days to seconds .9 
Some 340 million accounts have been opened, boosting India’s 2017 rate of financial 
inclusion to 80 percent and substantially closing the gender gap in inclusion. 10 But, even 
though many other countries have taken steps to upgrade their identity management 
systems, FATF (2017)  notes that most have not taken advantage of this to relax other 
documentary requirements. 11  
Further, the FATF study notes that regulation and practice can be different. Even if 
regulators have approved tiered KYC arrangements there is no guarantee th at banks will 
follow suit, especially to attract small customers who they see as offering little prospects of 
profitable business. 12 This raises the question of whether regulators should encourage 
MNOs and other non -bank entities to create a nother channel for financial inclusion that is 
more attuned to the economics of serving low -income clients.  
Mobile Money: A Powerful Segment in Few Countries. Mobile money has played a 
major role in financial inclusion in some countries (in the sense of enrolling custom ers who 
 
8 Under e -KYC a customer applying to open an account gives permission for the bank to secure her 
data directly from the central registry rather than from the customer. This populates the required 
forms automatically, saving time, document management and verification costs.   
9 See Pisa and Woodsome (2019) . 
10 The estimate of pre e -KYC customer verification cost is comparable to the $10 cost for the 
Philippines, offered by an official at a conference in Mexico in October 2019. Like India before 
Aadhaar, the Philippines does not have a centralized ID system.   
11 More countries have initiated national ID programs since 2000 than ever had them before.  Most 
use digital technology, including biometrics (Gelb and Metz (2018) ). 
12 As an example of traditional bank attitudes to acquirin g poor customers see CGAP (2011)  for 
Colombia. The banks were reluctant to open accounts for this group to deliver government transfers. 
They did not see them as their target clientele, or as a viable market for profit -making services. Similar 
attitudes of established financial institutions to poor customers has been documented for Mexico, 
including discriminatory practices based on perceived ethnicity (Martínez Gutiérrez, 2018) . 8 do not have bank accounts) but the number of such countries is limited. Most  of the leading 
cases, in the sense of additionality rather than the number of accounts, are in Africa  (see Box 
1).  
A full explanation for this picture is a topic somewhat  outside our ambit. One important 
determinant appears to be whether non -bank financial service providers (FSPs), such as 
MNOs, are authorized to open mobile money accounts for customers in their own right, 
with the fiduciary requirement that a counterpart to customers’ balances be held in a trust 
account with a bank, along the lines of the M -Pesa model developed in Kenya. 13 In many 
cases “deposit -taking” activities are restricted to commercial banks; there may still be active 
competition to provide mobile p ayments services using various customer interfaces and 
providers but there is no additionality in terms of financial inclusion. Naturally, banks have 
generally been reluctant to see the emergence of a new class of competitors, so have typically 
lobbied aga inst autonomous mobile money accounts.  
The relationship between the banks and their regulators is, therefore, a key issue. One way of 
explaining this relationship is by the phenomenon of regulatory capture. Suarez (2016) , 
proposes that the more closely banks  are regulated, the more likely it is that they will form 
close relationships with the regulators due to constant interaction, and that this regulatory 
capture leads the regulators to identify with the interests of the banks.  This may or may not 
undermine the quality and rigor of regulation, but in any event it is less likely that the 
regulators will permit MNOs or other entities to open mobile money accounts without these 
being, at the same time, subject to the full  range of regulation as bank accounts. To  operate 
on their own account, MNOs would then have to register as banks, something that they will 
be loath to do because of the higher regulatory costs that they would incur. These would 
make their business model unviable, as it involves making huge numbe rs of small 
transactions across a very large customer base.  
In support of this hypothesis, Suarez  (2016)  compares Mexico and Kenya. When 
telecommunication firms asked the Mexican regulatory agencies for permission to offer 
mobile banking services, they were opposed by a banking industry dominated by foreign 
banks and highly regulated due to international deb t crisis and privatization processes (Haber 
& Mussachio, 2013) . Mobile money customers therefore were required to hold bank 
accounts, robbing the potential mobile money industry of its dynamism. In contrast, she 
argues that the relationship between Kenyan banks and regulators was not similarly close . 
That t his enabled the Central Bank to  take a permissive, learning, approach towards mobile 
money which expanded rapidly (see also N’dungu (2019) ). Even though the banks opposed 
M-Pesa they were not able to interfere with its launch.  
 
13 In some cou ntries, mobile money is issued by other non -bank providers; bKash in Bangladesh, for 
example, is a subsidiary of BRAC bank.  9 Further insights into the dynamic between banks and regulators in Ghana and Tanzania is 
provided by CGAP (2018) ; in both cases mobil e money exploded only when non -banks 
were permitted to issue it.  
The mobile money  segment represents a second possible avenue for increasing financial 
inclusion outside the “regular” KYC requirements because KYC requirements for SIMs and 
mobile money acco unts are, in general, less demanding than those for full bank accounts. 
SIM registration, as GSMA (2018)  notes, is required by more than 140 countries and the 
details differ across jurisdictions. While registration polic ies require MNOs to capture 
customer information and recognized identification credentials, only a few of them (11%) 
enable MNOs to validate identification (whether paper -based or biometric) against the ID 
registry ( Figure 1 ). For the rest, MNOs are requir ed to copy or keep a record of credentials 
(85%) or to share the information with government agencies on demand (4%). Even these 
modest requirements could discourage registration by forcing agents to obtain camera -
enabled phones , or in areas of low connect ivity.  
Figure 1 . SIM Registrations Requirements  
Source: GSMA (2018)  
Nevertheless, KYC requirements  are only one among multiple factors, including other 
regulation, market structure and digital infrastructure, that determine whether a country has a 
dynami c mobile money segment. 14 This suggests that, while they cannot be overlooked as a 
possible influence on the dynamism of the segment, a search for binding constraints to the 
spread of mobile money would need to consider several other critical factors, including the 
 
14 There may be additional dimensions, such as differential access to the national payments switch, 
that discriminate against mobile money providers.  There are also questions of market structure and 
coverage – whether non -bank providers will find it profitable to incur the substantial investments 
needed to roll out their systems in countries where the banking system already has a fairly  wide 
presence.   
10 basic question of whether non -banks are permitted to offer payments services and have 
access to financial infrastructure, such as the national payments switch, that help them to 
deliver value to customers.   
 
3. A Look at the Data  
The latest Global Findex Survey 2017 provides a useful picture of the barriers to financial 
inclusion as perceived by those who do not have a bank account. The first three  columns of 
Table 2  show constraints to inclusion relating to the pricing, location and documentation 
requirements of the banks. These can perhaps be considered as supply -side barriers, 
although, as discussed above, documenta ry requirements can also be seen as a direct 
constraint to demand. The last three columns show factors that can be more reasonably 
interpreted as relating to demand.  Box 1 . Mobile money’s contributions to financial inclusion  
 
The figure shows the top 20 co untries by proportion of overall financial inclusion which is due exclusively 
to mobile money accounts (that is, users who do not also have a bank account). As of 2017, the mobile 
money story is dominated by Africa —the only non -African country to make it i nto the top 20 is Paraguay.  
Mobile money is even more dominant in Somalia, both relative to its banking system and in terms of 
absolute coverage.  
Proportion of financial inclusion attributable to mobile money
 
Measured as (any account coverage – financial account coverage) / any account coverage)  
Source Findex 2017.  
 
 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%GhanaLesothoKenyaMalawiParaguaySierra LeoneGuineaNigerLiberiaCongo, Dem. Rep.GabonUgandaBurkina FasoMadagascarMaliZimbabweSenegalTanzaniaChadCote d'Ivoire
Have a financial account (%) Have a mobile money account only (%)11 In every region, a substantial proportion of unbanked adults cite lack of documentation a s a 
barrier, on average around 20 percent. 15 However, this number is likely to understate the 
overall impact: the question is not only whether potential customers have documents, it is 
also the cost and difficulty of acquiring them and, for the financial institutions, the costs 
associated with accep ting, validating and recording them, as well as subsequent storage, 
management and updating. 16 This cost disincentive to opening new bank accounts, especially 
for poor customers,  will be reflected in higher fees and charges and less favorable conditions 
of service. As shown in Table 2 , costs emerge as a major barrier to inclusion, particularly in 
Latin America. 17  
Findex data therefore confirms the proposition that documentation requirements act as one 
out of several barriers. Extensive and costly ID+ requi rements are likely to discourage 
financial institutions from reaching out to develop services and access points for low -income 
customers. In addition, they send a powerful signal to the banking system about the desirable 
characteristics of their client bas e. They are therefore likely to reinforce well -documented 
biases in this area, against poor people and possibly customers of particular ethnicities who 
historically have been among the more isolated and less well documented groups (CGAP, 
2011) (Martínez Gu tiérrez, 2018).  
Table 2 . Reasons for not having an Account  
 percentage of people who do not have a financial account who say it is because…  
Region  too far 
away  too 
expensive  lack 
documentation  lack 
trust lack of 
money  family 
member 
already 
has one  no need 
for 
financial 
services  
East Asia and Pacific*  24% 20% 17% 9% 66% 32% 31% 
Europe and Central Asia*  15% 32% 15% 31% 51% 34% 54% 
Latin America and the 
Caribbean*  27% 53% 25% 31% 59% 32% 35% 
Middle East and North 
Africa*  9% 20% 12% 12% 73% 12% 32% 
South Asia  22% 25% 20% 18% 58% 35% 31% 
Sub-Saharan Africa*  28% 30% 27% 16% 76% 12% 18% 
 
* (excluding high income)  
Source: Findex Survey 2017  
 
15 The surprising degree of correlation between the percentages citing documentation and location 
constraints at regional level is not paralleled by the country -level observations.  
16 These costs can be high, see for example Elliehausen (1998) , PWC (2003) , Sathye (2008) , Veris 
Consulting  (2013) , Financial Times (2015) , KPMG (2015)  (also cited in our previous CGD study of 
the risk -based approach: Gelb (2016)).  
17 In the 2017 FICP survey, out of 124 jurisdictions 58 percent indicated that there were no 
regulations limiting bank fees  and charges.  12 For more detailed data on documentation requirements we turn to the Global Financial 
Inclusion and Consumer Protection survey (FICP) (2017) . This provides the most 
comprehensive source of information on documentary requirements at country level for 
banking and similar institutions ( Figure 2).18 For commercial bank accounts, almost all of 
the 134 responding jurisdictions required a national ID  with some requiring, or accepting, 
some other form of ID. In addition, 75 percent required proof of address, 69 percent proof 
of nationality and many others proof of income or employment . Overall, half of the 
jurisdictions reported some form of simplified  customer due diligence, with fewer in the 
Middle East (22 percent) and Sub -Saharan Africa (41 percent) and more in South Asia (100 
percent).  
Figure 2. Documentation Requirements for Account Opening at Commercial Banks  
(Percent  of responding jurisdictions  that require documentation type to open an account at a Commercial Bank)  
 
Source:  Global FICP Survey  2017  
Overall, 82 of these countries also report in the 2017 Findex survey. Excluding high -income 
countries leaves 51 low and middle -income countries that are represented in both surveys. 
Table 3  shows the distribution of the countries by region, and the type of  documentary 
requirements for opening a standard deposit account. In 12 countries, commercial banks ask 
solely for some type of identification (ID) 19 while the rest (70) ask for various types of ID+ 
such as address or statements of income or employment. Ex cluding high income countries, 
 
18 These include commercial banks, financial cooperatives, and other deposit -taking institution 
(ODTI).  The survey asked each country’s regulators to submit one consolidated response.   
19Armenia, Austria, Canada, China, Iran, Islamic Rep., Isra el, Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Lithuania, 
Norway, Peru, Slovak Republic. If we consider also the proof of nationality as part of ID+, the 
sample would reduce to 8 countries (excludes Kyrgyz Republic, Armenia, Peru and Israel).  90%
32%69%75%
44%
35%
22%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Government
issued IDAny ID Nationality or
legal statusProof of
addressProof of income  Proof of
employmentOther13 the picture is similar; all but 5 of the 51 countries report that they require some type of ID+ 
to open an account. The following analysis will focus on these 51 countries.  
Table 3 . Countries in Findex Requiring ID+ Document ation  
  
All Countries  Non -High -Income 
Countries 20 
 Do they require ID+ 
documentation?  Do they require ID+ 
documentation?  
Region  No Yes No Yes 
East Asia & Pacific  1 10 1 5 
Europe & Central Asia  6  23 2  8 
Latin America & Caribbean  1 15 1 12 
Middle East & North Africa  3 6 1 5 
North America  1 0 0 0 
South Asia  0  5 0  5 
Sub-Saharan Africa  0 11 0 11 
Total  12 70 5 46 
Source: Global FICP Survey and Findex  
Turning to simplification or tiered KYC, out of the sample of 51 countries, almost half allow 
simplifications/exceptions ( Table 4 ). Most of these are upper -middle income countries 
from Latin America and the Caribbean.  
Table 4 . Countries allowing simplifications/exceptions for KYC 21 
Region  Low-income  
countries  Lower -middle 
income  
countries  Upper -middle 
income  
countries  Total  
East Asia & Pacific  0 2 1 3 
Europe & Central Asia  0 2 4 5 
Latin America & Caribbean  0 2 7 9 
Middle East & North Africa  0 1 0 1 
North America  0 0 0 0 
South Asia  1 3 0 5  
Sub-Saharan Africa  1 1 2 4 
Total  2 11 14 27 
Source: Global FICP Survey and Findex   
While the most common way to simplify KYC  requirements is to adopt some form of tiered 
KYC process where requirements and information are relaxed subject to limits on the 
 
20 This involves low, lower -midd le, and upper -middle income countries according to The World 
Bank’s group division   
21 If a country answered “Yes” to the question “Are th ere simplifications or exceptions to the 
documentation requirements for certain types of applicants (e.g. low income) or deposit account 
products (e.g. small -value, low -risk transactions or basic accounts)?” according to the Global FICP 
Survey.  14 balances and transactions for each type of account (GSMA, 2019) , this is not the only way to 
simplify KYC requirements. As noted by the Global FICP Survey, some commercial banks 
have moved towards non -face-to-face customer due diligence and enabling electronic 
banking via the Internet. Nevertheless, supervisors expect that banks should take into 
consideration the different risks posed by new technology and design identification 
procedures with due regard to such risks (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2001) . 
Another possibility not listed in the survey includes re liance on third parties to conduct 
customer due diligence.  
3.1 Some Cross -Country Relationships  
Documentation Dominance . How serious is the documentation constraint in Findex 2017 
relative to the other two “supply -side” constraints of distance and cost?  In Figure 3 , 
“Documentation Dominance” is defined as (the percentage of excluded people citing 
documentation as a constraint) divided by (the average of those citing cost and distance to 
bank branches as constraints).  A score of more than one therefore signi fies that 
documentation may be a more serious constraint than the other two supply -side factors. 
Combining this with the level of bank inclusion offers a window into the question.   
This analysis highlights Myanmar, Malawi and Cambodia among others, as a cl uster of 
countries that might face an important documentation constraint ( Annex 1  shows 2014 and 
2017 Findex data for some of the countries identified  in the figure).  While documentary 
requirements are seen as more problematic than other supply -side constr aints in Mauritius, 
its high level of financial inclusion suggests that they are not a serious problem in its 
relatively formalized economy. Madagascar offers an interesting counterpoint  – poor, 
dispersed and with very low levels of financial inclusion, do cumentation is not seen as more 
of an obstacle than the other two constraints . Indeed, requirements will be seen to be 
modest as shown in Figure 4.  
  15 Figure 3. Dominance of Documentation Constraint and Financial Inclusion  
 
Source: Global FICP Survey and Findex  
Number of Documents . We next consider the relationship between the number of 
different documents required at commercial banks and the level of account ownership in 
financial institutions (banks), as reported in the 2017 Findex survey. The se numbers do not 
include mobile money accounts, where we have no comparable data on KYC  requirements. 
Figure 4  shows the scatter for the 51 countries with account ownership for people in the 
bottom 40 percent of the income distribution ( Annex 2 provides t he same scatter for all 
Findex respondents). The first, striking, observation is how many countries with low levels 
of financial inclusion require multiple documents. 22 Even with inclusion rates below 40 
percent, many countries require 4, 5 or more differe nt documents. The negative correlation 
between the number of documents required and the level of inclusion (at -.30) provides at 
least some support to the proposition that countries with higher numbers of documentary 
requirements tend to have lower rates o f bank financial inclusion.  
 
22 For this analysis, every documentation a bank requires has the same weight (is as important as the 
rest).  
16 Figure 4 . Documentation Required at Commercial Banks and Financial Inclusion in 
the Poorest 40% of the Population  
 
Source: Global FICP Survey and Findex  
Considering outliers, in some countries such as Mauritius or Malaysia, account ownership is 
high even though commercial banks ask for multiple documents. This confirms that high 
documentation requirements need not necessarily be a binding constraint. Both countries 
have well -documented populations and effective ID s ystems, with Malaysia’s MYCAD 
incorporating numerous credentials in addition to being an ID. Documentary requirements 
might not be the most binding constraint in Madagascar either, where, as previously noted, 
low levels of account ownership could reflect m ultiple factors, including remoteness and 
extreme poverty. However, Paraguay, the Philippines and Botswana require more documents 
than the average and have low rates of bank account ownership. Documentary requirements 
in commercial banks might be a constra int in these cases.  
We also distinguish countries reporting simplified KYC  requirements for commercial banks, 
which are labeled in red. While there is not a very clear relationship, some of the countries at 
the low end of the financial inclusion measure do  not appear to have adopted simplified 
KYC. Mauritius and Indonesia do offer simplified KYC; this is then possibly another factor 
facilitating inclusion.  
17 3.2 Distinguishing between Requirement s 
Since the difficulty of obtaining each document will be count ry dependent , it is not obvious 
that every proof of ID or ID+ required by commercial banks  will have the same impact 
across countries . If a document acts as a binding constraint for a certain jurisdiction, the 
severity of this constraint might reflect part icular features that make it more difficult or 
costly for people to acquire it.  
We therefore associate each requirement with a specific country characteristic, as 
summarized in Table 5 . A requirement for government -issued ID is reasonably assessed 
against  the coverage of the ID system. Proof of address, income or employment is 
reasonably judged against the criterion of informality. Not all the countries in the sample 
have the information for all the indicators, which further limits the number of countries.   
Table 5 . Document required to open a deposit account and socioeconomic  indicators  
Documents  Possible Indicator  
Government issued ID (A)  
National Identity Card Ownership  Any ID (B)  
Nationality or legal status (C ) 
Proof of address (D)  Employment outside the formal sector 
or Informality Rate  Proof of income (E)  
Proof of employment (F)  
 
Sources: Identity card ownership Findex 2017; Informality rate ILO  
  18 Identification Documents . Figure 5  associates the proportion of respondents that have an 
account in a financial institution with the proportion of the population with national identity 
cards as reported by Findex 2017, for countries that report that an ID card is needed to open 
a deposit a ccount.  With the exception of two countries the rest of the sample have quite 
high ID coverage 23 so that the number of people who respond negatively to the question of 
whether they hold a national ID is generally far smaller than the number who do not have  a 
bank account. Most countries are far above the 45 -degree line, along which the percentages 
of those with an ID and account would be similar. This confirms that requiring an ID card 
might exclude certain groups but on its own is not likely to be the main  or binding constraint 
for most people .  
Figure 5 . ID card ownership and financial inclusion in countries where an ID card is 
required  
 
Source: Global FICP Survey and Findex  
 
23 Considering the two outliers, at the time of the survey Malawi had no National ID system but has 
since rolled one out; some 36 percent of those wit hout a bank account cited lack of documentation as 
a barrier.  In contrast, although Findex shows low National ID coverage in Armenia, only 8 percent of 
those without a bank account cite documentation as a barrier.  
19 Proof of Address . Proof  of address has been identified as perhaps even a more sev ere 
challenge than proof of income for poor people  (FATF, 2017) ; it certainly is a more 
pervasive requirement.  Proof of address is more likely to be a problem in countries that are 
highly informalized, where many people live “o ff the grid” and where there is a large 
migratory population. For three groups of countries, Figure 6  shows the distribution (mean, 
interquartile range and range) of the percentages of respondents owning a bank account, 
overall and among the poorest 40 per cent.  
i. Proof of address is not required.  
Examples within this group are Iran, China or Pakistan  
ii. Proof of address is required but the country has provisions for simplified KYC.  
Examples within this group are Afghanistan, Mauritius, Indonesia  
iii. Proof of addre ss is required and there is no simplified KYC . 
Examples within this group are Botswana, Egypt, or Lesotho  
While there is a wide  spread, countries that require proof of physical address but do not 
offer any type of simplified KYC have lower rates of bank ac count ownership, on average , 
than countries in the other two groups. The picture is similar when only the poorest 40 
percent of the population is considered. This provides some empirical support to the 
proposition that requiring proof of address can be a binding constraint in some si tuations  
Figure 6 . Proof of address and financial inclusion  
  
Source: Global FICP Survey and Findex  
We do not know how many countries require proof of address for mobile money accounts, 
but some apparently do. According to AFI (2019) , “the physical proof of address remains an 
entrenched KYC requirement for institutions when onboarding: the persistence of this 
requirement is particularly harmful when requested by financial institutions to open non -
traditional digital acc ounts.”  However, many do not: as an example, the same report notes 
20 that the Council for Financial Activities Control (CFAC) in Brazil does not explicitly require 
proof of address from MNO providers of financial services.  
Proof of Income or Employment . Figure 7  relates the proportion of respondents owning 
a bank account to the proportion of the population working outside the formal sector 24 for 
countries where banks require proofs of income or employment. Several countries with very 
high rates of informalit y require proof of income or employment to open a bank account; 
this could then be a binding constraint in such countries. As expected, t here is also a clear 
negative correlation (-0.7) between the variables. 25 
Figure 7 . Informality and financial inclusion  in countries requiring proof of income 
or employment  
 
Source: Global FICP Survey , Findex  and ILO  
 
24 Defined as the number of people in info rmal employment outside the formal sector divided by total 
employment. For more information visit: https://www.ilo.org/ilostat -
files/Documents/description_IFL_EN.pdf   
25 Ther e is also a negative correlation in countries not requiring proof of income and employment.  A 
test of whether the effect is stronger in countries that do require proofs of income and employment 
finds the expected negative sign, but the coefficient is not s ignificant, possibly due to the limited 
number of observations.   
21 3.3 The Picture for Mobile Money 26 
The lack of a cross -country dataset on the documentary requirements for mobile money 
accounts limits our ability to carry out a similar analysis for this form of financial inclusion. 
However, we know that , in general , KYC requirements for SIMs and mobile money are less 
demanding than those for for full bank accounts. Further research would be needed to 
completely unders tand how mobile money and KYC requirements relate to each other.  
One powerful relationship, shown by GSMA (2019) , is that between mobile penetration (as 
measured by the estimated number of unique subscribers) and the coverage of the ID system 
across African countries ( Figure 8 ). While there can be several factors behind this 
relationship, it does suggest that lack of ID could be a factor constraining mobile coverage in 
some cases. However, SIM coverage is generally highe r than mobile money coverage, in 
most cases by a substantial margin. This suggests that other constraints may be relevant, 
including, as previously discussed, the basic question of whether non -banks are permitted to 
offer mobile money services.  
  
 
26 For this section, mobile subscription and mobile penetration are considered as different definitions. 
The latter represents the number of registered populations, while the former is the num ber of SIM 
cards (one person may carry more than one SIM card).  22 Figure 8 . Identification coverage and mobile penetration across African countries 
where mobile SIM registration is mandatory  
 
Source: GSMA (2019)  
 
 
 
 
 
23 4. Conclusion and Policy Suggestions  
This paper has tried to approach the problem of determining when documentat ion 
requirements might be a critical or a  binding constraint to financial inclusion. It distinguishes 
two main categories of requirements:  evidence of identity (termed ID) and evidence of a 
range of other attributes, such as address and employment (termed ID+).  It also 
distinguishes three financial market segments:  regular bank accounts; restricted bank 
accounts issued under less restrictive tiered KYC requirements, and mobile money.  While 
the use of various indices and metrics cannot def initively determine how serious 
documentation requirements might be in a particular country, they can at least offer some 
suggestive guidance as well as a framework to help analysis of the question.   
From the Findex  Survey, the Global FICP S urvey , and the findings of FATF (2017) , it is 
clear that documentary KYC requirements  can represent a quite serious constraint  for many 
people . Requirements often go beyond an ID to include proofs of address, legal status, 
income or em ployment . Such ID+ may be a more serious problem than ID, depending on 
the country conditions.  The likelihood that a typical person, or a typical poor person, will 
have such documentation will be country -dependent, but our analysis confirms that full 
docum entation requirements may be serious constraints in many countries, especially those 
characterized by high rates of informality. Some countries with high levels of informality and 
low levels of financial inclusion require multiple documents to open a bank account. This is 
itself is of concern, and perhaps more striking than the modest correlations between high 
documentary requirements and low financial inclusion. Obtaining proofs of address or 
income may be especially difficult for people at the low end of the income spectrum. One 
example, suggested by several indicators, is the case of the Philippines (Box 2) .  
Bringing together the characteristics of countries and their regulatory requirements, as we 
have sought to do in this paper, therefore provides a fi rst approach towards understanding 
when documentary requirements are likely to pose a binding constraint to financial inclusion 
for many people.  
Any country assessment would need to also understand whether steps had been taken to 
mitigate the problem  by enabling two additional market segments for financial services . One 
approach has been to permit restricted accounts with tiered, risk -based, KYC in line with the 
recommendations of FATF (2012) , but this is still a work in  progress. It seems that banks 
still tend to demand a range of documentation to open accounts, perhaps because of a risk -
averse interpretation of regulation and perhaps for other reasons related to their business 
model.  
A second option has been to license  MNOs or other non -bank entities to offer mobile 
money accounts with less stringent KYC  requirements than for bank accounts. Mobile 
phone ownership has grown rapidly in many countries together with the estimated number 
of unique SIM holders, mobile money h as taken off in a big way in only a limited number of 
countries.  The reasons probably go beyond documentation requirements, to include 
permission for MNOs or other non-banks to provide financial services to their customers 
without requiring them to become licensed as banks .  24  
Looking to th e future, there seem to be four approaches to ease the problem.   
• Reinforce risk -based KYC.  From our sample, around 50  percent  of countries 
offer some form of simplification, and our analysis suggests that this might have a 
favorable impact o n financial inclusion.  However, it does not seem that, as now 
applied and interpreted, risk -based KYC is fully applied, an adverse result for FATF 
because of the greater risk of harmful transactions on the unregulated financial 
markets.  As argued by Pisa and  Woodsome (2019), FATF should require assessors 
to encourage the use of simplified due diligence measures unless there is good 
reason not to and should explicitly justify cases where risks are too high or 
regulatory capacity too low to do so. Perhaps each year FATF should offer a public 
commendation to country regulators who have applied risk -based KYC in an 
effective way. This would help to balance out the perception that stricter is always 
better, and also create a body of case practice. Building on studi es like de Koker and 
Symington (2011), more research is also needed to understand actual bank behavior 
and the motivation behind it.  
• Draw on the evolving experience with mobile money to create recommended 
regulatory practices to unleash the power of compe tition at the base of the 
financial pyramid.  This could be an extension of the risk -based approach already 
endorsed by FATF. FATF could play a powerful role in encouraging regulators to 
take advantage of risk -based KYC  by licensing non -banks to offer a ran ge of 
services, subject, of course, to appropriate prudential requirements (trust accounts  
held with banks ) and supervision.  Box 2 . The Philippines  
Findex 2017 estimates f inancial inclusion in the Philippines at only 34%. Some 45% of adults who 
do not posses s a bank  account cite lack of documentation as a reason ; with a Findex 
Documentation Dominance score of 0.96, documentation is about as much as much of a barrier as 
distance or cost.  Commercial banks are required to ask for ID and for extensive ID+. The country 
does not yet have a widely held national ID, yet, according to the National Bas eline Survey on 
Financial Inclusion  (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 2015) , some form of ID is required for some 
94% of the transactions surveyed. ID+ includes up to six pieces of evidence (Figure 4), a 
formidable requirement in a  country with considerable informality. Estimates f rom the Asian 
Development Bank indicate  that KYC processes can cost between 5 to 10 USD per person (2018)  
and that verifying someone’s credentials can take up to 2 to 4 weeks  (2017) .  
Fortunately, policymakers are encouraging the implementation of a National ID Strategy (PhilSys) . 
According to the same ADB study, benefits are substantial: “comparing the cost and benefits, there are 
significant net benefits – with a net present value (NPV) of US$517 million – that should encourage financial 
institutions to adopt the digital national ID as a priority ”. Stronger ID could also enable regulators to 
streamline ID+ requirements.  25 Take advantage of new technology in two ways to further ease KYC  documentary 
requirements while still maintaining AML/CFT controls :  
• To simplify KYC, shift from weak identifiers like proof of address to more 
robust ID -based identification in the many countries that are implementing 
such systems.  This follows the observation of FATF 2017 that many countries 
have not exploited the impr ovements in their ID systems, including through the use 
of digital biometrics, to ease up on other requirements.  India offers an outstanding 
example with the use of Aadhaar to provide e -KYC; Peru offers another case of a 
country that does not require docum entation beyond that provided by its ID system 
(Box 3) .  
 
 
• Shift from customer documentation requirements to the analysis of 
transactional data.  With financial accounts linked to u nique ID numbers, digital 
technology enables an integrated view of clients across all of their accounts, and 
real-time monitoring of all financial flows, including through the use of AI to spot 
suspicious patterns of activity. New digital technology offers  the potential to 
combine biometrics with behavioral characteristics. This will provide much stronger Box 3 . Peru  
According to the Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil (RENIEC) 
(2018) , almost every Peruvian possess es an ID (99.2%); Findex estimate s 98 
percent  do. Per the FICP Survey, commercial banks require a government issued 
ID to open an account but no ID+. Peru also has effective online means to verify 
the ID card with RENIEC and to authenticate biometrically, if required.  For 
banks, these ser vices have costs, but they are relatively modest.  
Still, according to Findex, only 43% of Peruvian adults possess a bank account in a 
financial institution. While 29% of those without an account cited a 
documentation constraint, this was far below the per centage who cited cost (59 
percent) and less than those who cited distance (31 percent) resulting in a 
Documentation Dominance score of only 0.63.   Mobile money services are not yet 
highly used by the Peruvian population, but account openings “can be purel y 
electronic, and IDs can be checked subsequently to the account being opened” 
(World Bank, 2014)   
On face value, identification requirements are therefore not likely to be a binding 
constraint in Peru. A demand -side assessmen t by the Superintendence of Banking, 
Insurance and Private Pension Fund Administrators of Peru (SBS)  (2017)  finds 
that it is mentioned as a major constraint by only 4% of respondents, while the 
perspective of usage and/or awareness was cited by more than 30%.  The question 
then arises of how to interpret the 29% estimate of Findex; this could reflect lack 
of awa reness, or the practice of banks rather than regulatory requirements. Further 
research would be needed to resolve these differences.  
 26 KYC than in a world where identification occurs intermittently.  By using customer 
data, verification of identity can occur continuously. 27 Individual bank s are already 
monitoring flows actively, using receipts and payments data to create a picture of 
their customers with a view to tailoring lending and other services to their needs. 
Regulators would of course need to ensure transparency and data protection in the 
process, as well as maintaining privacy and commercial confidentiality. Nevertheless, 
in the vast majority of cases it should be possible to flag patterns of suspicious 
transactions without violating the confidentiality of clients.  
  
 
27 Cooper, Rusare, van der Linden and Ferreira (2018)  27 References  
Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI). (2019). KYC Innovations, Financial Inclusion and 
Integrity in Selected AFI Member Countries. Kuala Lumpur: AFI.  
Asian Development Bank. (2017). Accelerating Financial Inclusion in South -East Asia with 
Digital Finance. M anila: Asian Development Bank.  
Asian Development Bank. (2018). Financial Inclusion Framework Strengthening - Digital 
National Identification for Financial Inclusion: Final Report. Manila: Asian 
Development Bank.  
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. (2015). National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion. Manila: 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. (2001). Customer due diligence for banks. Basel: 
Bank for International Settlements.  
CGAP. (2011). CGAP G2P Research Project: Colo mbia Country Report. Washington DC: 
CGAP.  
Cooper, B., Rusare, M., van der Linden, A., and Ferreira, M. (2018). Biometrics and financial 
inclusion: A roadmap for implementing biometric identity systems in sub -Saharan 
Africa.  CENFRI, Belville, South Africa.  March. https://cenfri.org/wp -
content/uploads/2018/03/Biometrics -and-financial -inclusion_Cenfri -FSDA_March -
2018 -2.pdf  
De Koker, L. and Symington, J. (2011).  Conservative compliance Behaviour:  Drivers of 
conservative compliance responses in the South African financial services industry.  
Finmark Tr ust, August.  https://cenfri.org/wp -
content/uploads/2011/12/Conservative -compliance -behaviour_FinMark -
Trust_August -2011.pdf  
Demirgüç -Kunt, A., Klapper, L., Singer, D., Ansar, S., & Hess, J. (2018). The Global Findex 
Datab ase 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution. Washington 
DC: World Bank.  
Elliehausen, G. (1998). The cost of banking regulation: A review of the evidence. Federal 
Reserve Bulletin, 84(4): 252 -253. 
FATF. (2012). International Standards  on Combating Money Laundering and the Financing 
of Terrorism & Proliferation: The FATF Recommendations. Paris: FATF.  
FATF. (2013). Methodology for Assessing Compliance with the FATF Recommendations 
and the Effectiveness of AML/CFT System. Paris: FATF.  
FATF. (2017). FATF Guidance: Anti -Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Measures 
and Financial Inclusion, with a supplement on Customer Due Diligence. Paris: FATF.  
Ferreira, M., van der Linden, A., & Cooper, B. (2018, December 4). Proof of Address must 
fall. Retrieved from CENFRI: https://cenfri.org/blog/proof -of-address -must -fall/ 
Financial Times. (2015, April 17). HSBC Wrestles with Soaring Costs of Compliance. 
Retrieved from Financial Times: www.ft.com/cms/s/0/0e3f0760 -1bef-11e4-9666 - 
Gelb, A. (2016). Balancing Financial Integrity with Financial Inclusion: The Risk -Based 
Approach to “Know Your Customer” CGD Policy Paper 74. Washington DC: Center 
for Global Development.  
Gelb, A., & Metz, A.  (2018). Identification Revolution: Can Digital ID be Harnessed for 
Development? Washington DC: Center for Global Development.  28 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion. (2011). Mexico’s engagement with the standard 
setting bodies and the implications for  financial inclusion. Bangkok: Alliance for 
Financial Inclusion (AFI).  
GSMA. (2018). Access to Mobile Services and Proof -of-Identity: Global policy trends, 
dependencies and risks. London: GSM Association.  
GSMA. (2019). Access to Mobile Services and Proof o f Identity 2019: Assessing the impact 
on digital and financial inclusion. London: GSM Association . 
GSMA. (2019). Overcoming the Know Your Customer hurdle: Innovative solutions for the 
mobile money sector. London: GSM Association.  
Haber, S., & Mussachio, A.  (2013). These are the good old days: foreign entry and the 
Mexican banking system. National Bureau of Economic Research.  
Hardy, D. (2006). Regulatory Capture in Banking. Washington , DC: International Monetary 
Fund.  
Identification for Development (ID4D). (2019). Identity Authentication and Verification 
Fees: Overview of Current Practices. Washington , DC: World Bank Group.  
KPMG. (2015, April 17). Global Anti -Money Laundering Survey. Retrieved from KPMG: 
http://www.kpmg.com/KY/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/PublishingIm
ages/global -anti-money -laundering -survey -v3.pdf  
Martínez Gutiérrez, A. L . (2018). ¿Quién tiene acceso al crédito en México? Discriminación 
por color de piel en el mercado crediticio mexicano. Tesis doctoral. Centro de 
Investigación y Docencia Económicas.  
Mattern, M., & McKay, C. (2018, June). Building Inclusive Payment Ecosyst ems in Tanzania 
and Ghana. Retrieved from CGAP: 
https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/building -inclusive -payment -ecosystems -
tanzania -and-ghana  
Ndung'u, N. (2019). Digital Technology and State Capacity in Kenya. Washington, DC: 
CGD Policy Paper 154.  
Pisa, M., & Woodsome, J. (2019, February 7). Overcoming the “Know Your Customer” 
Hurdle with E -KYC. Retrieved from Center for Global Development : 
https://www.cgdev.org/blog/overcoming -know -your-customer -hurdle -e-kyc 
PWC. (2003). Anti -money Laundering Current Customer Review Cost Benefit Analysis. 
London: The Fina ncial Services Authority.  
Registro Nacional de Identificación y Estado Civil. (2018). Correspondence with RENIEC. 
Lima: RENIEC.  
Sathye, M. (2008). Estimating the cost of compliance of AML /CTF for financial institutions 
in Australia. Journal of Financial Cr ime, 15(4): 347 -363. 
Suárez, S. (2016). Poor people's money: The politics of mobile money in Mexico and Kenya. 
Telecommunications Policy , 945 -955. 
Superintendencia de Banca, Seguros y AFP. (2017). Encuesta Nacional de Demanda de 
Servicios Financieros y Nivel de Cultura Financiera en el Perú. Lima: SBS.  
Veris Consulting. (2013). The Global Cost of Anti -Money -Laundering Compliance. 
Washington, DC: Veri s Consulting.  
World Bank. (2009). Banking the Poor: Measuring Banking Access in 54 Economies. 
Washington DC: World Bank.  29 World Bank. (2014). The Potential of New Delivery and Business Models for Financial 
Inclusion in Peru. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Worl d Bank. (2017). Global Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection Survey: 2017 
Report. Washington , DC: World Bank.  
 
  30 Annex  1. Findex Data for Some Countries  
  
  2014 2017 
Country  Account  
(% age 
15+)  Financial 
institution 
account (% 
age 15+)  Mobile 
money 
account 
(% age 
15+)  Account  
(% age 
15+)  Financial 
institution 
account (% 
age 15+)  Mobile 
money 
account 
(% age 
15+)  
Azerbaijan  29% 29%   29% 29%   
Botswana  52% 49% 21% 51% 45% 24% 
Egypt, Arab Rep. 14% 14% 1% 33% 32% 2% 
Haiti  19% 17% 4% 33% 28% 14% 
Cambodia  22% 13% 13% 22% 18% 6% 
Lesotho   n.d. n.d.  n.d.  46% 33% 28% 
Myanmar  23% 23% 0% 26% 26% 1% 
Mauritania  23% 20% 6% 21% 19% 4% 
Mauritius  82% 82% 1% 90% 89% 6% 
Malawi  18% 16% 4% 34% 23% 20% 
Nigeria  44% 44% 2% 40% 39% 6% 
  
  31 Annex  2. Documentation Required at Commercial Banks and 
Financial Inclusion  
 
 
 
