NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
IMPROVING LAST-MILE SERVICE DELIVERY USING PHONE-BASED MONITORING
Karthik Muralidharan
Paul Niehaus
Sandip Sukhtankar
Jeffrey Weaver
Working Paper 25298
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25298
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2018, Revised July 2019
We are grateful to officials in the Government of Telangana, especially Mr. K Ramakrishna Rao 
and Mr. C Parthasarathi. This paper would not have been possible without the efforts and inputs 
of the J-PAL South Asia/UCSD project team in the Payments and Governance Research 
Program, including  Kartik Srivastava, Avantika Prabhakar, Frances Lu, Vishnu Padmanabhan, 
Surya Banda, Mayank Sharma, and Burak Eskici. We also thank Michael Callen, Gordon Dahl, 
Markus Goldstein, Abhijeet  Singh, Adam Solimon and several seminar participants for helpful 
comments. Finally, we thank the Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund (SIEF) at the World Bank 
(especially Alaka Holla), and the Bill  and Melinda Gates Foundation (especially Dan Radcliffe) 
for the financial support that made this study  possible. The views expressed herein are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic 
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been 
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies 
official  NBER publications.
© 2018 by Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, Sandip Sukhtankar, and Jeffrey Weaver. All 
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without 
explicit permission  provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.Improving Last-Mile Service Delivery using Phone-Based Monitoring  
Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, Sandip Sukhtankar, and Jeffrey Weaver  
NBER Working Paper No. 25298
November 2018, Revised July 2019
JEL No. C93,D73,H53,O33
ABSTRACT
Improving “last-mile” public-service delivery is a recurring challenge in developing countries. Could
the widespread adoption of mobile phones provide a scalable, cost-effective means for improvement?
We use a large-scale experiment to evaluate the impact of phone-based monitoring on a program that
transferred nearly a billion dollars to 5.7 million Indian farmers. In randomly-selected jurisdictions,
officials were informed that program implementation would be measured via calls with beneficiaries.
This led to a 7.6% reduction in the number of farmers who did not receive their transfers. The program
was highly cost-effective, costing 3.6 cents for each additional dollar delivered.
Karthik Muralidharan
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu
Paul Niehaus
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
pniehaus@ucsd.eduSandip Sukhtankar
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904 
srs8yk@virginia.edu
Jeffrey Weaver
University of Southern California, 
Departmen t of Economi cs
3620 South Vermont Ave. 
Kaprielian (KAP) Hall, 300  
Los Angeles, CA 90089
jeffrey.b.weaver@gmail.com
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at 
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/29421 Introduction
The low quality of public service delivery in developing countries adversely aﬀects the lives of
billions of people (World Bank, 2003). As a result, testing ways to improve “last mile” service
delivery has been a recurrent theme in recent research, from incentivizing employees to show
up to work (Duﬂo et al., 2012) to ensuring that beneﬁciaries receive money they are entitled to
(Muralidharan et al., 2016). One major challenge is that, like any organization, a government
can only manage its personnel to the extent that it can measure their performance (Bloom
and Van Reenen, 2007). Yet measuring service delivery is diﬃcult, especially when front-line
work takes place in many remote and dispersed communities.
Existing mechanisms for measuring and monitoring last-mile service delivery are limited
in diﬀerent ways. Internal reporting by the lower layers of bureaucracy is often distorted,
as individuals exaggerate their own performance or overstate problems with initiatives they
want to undercut.1Mechanisms through which citizens can report problems in service deliv-
ery, such as grievance redressal phone numbers, yield non-representative data and are often
heavily underutilized, perhaps because beneﬁciaries do not think they will help.2Finally, pe-
riodic surveys such as the Living Standards Measurement Surveys or India’s National Sample
Survey yield independent and representative data, but are typically too small, infrequent,
and delayed in their release to be of use for management purposes.
In this paper, we test whether governments can improve last-mile service delivery using a
simple approach to measuring whether people get what they are due: calling and asking. This
approach leverages the rapid increase in mobile phone penetration in low-income countries,
from 1 mobile subscription per 100 people in 2002 to 62 in 2017 (World Bank, 2018). Phone
calls bypass bureaucrats to obtain information directly from beneﬁciaries, without the cost
and delay associated with ﬁeld surveys. Managers can use phone-based monitoring data to
track and incentivize worker performance in close to real-time.
We examine whether phone-based measurement can in fact improve service delivery in
the context of a high-stakes government initiative in India. Beginning in May 2018, the
government of Telangana state (GoTS) attempted to distribute $0.9B, or around 3.5% of the
state’s annual budget, as lump-sum payments to farmers. Responsibility for implementing
the scheme rested primarily with Mandal (sub-district) Agricultural Oﬃcers (MAOs), who
managed the distribution of physical checks to the 5.7 million farmers in the state. An
1As an example of the former, Singh (2019) ﬁnds evidence of substantial over-reporting of primary student
learning levels in oﬃcial data compared to an independent retest of the same students.
2For example, only 8,292 complaints were registered between 2012 and 2016 regarding the Public Distri-
bution System in India (Department of Food and Public Distribution, 2018), despite the fact that it serves
hundreds of millions of people and has an all-India leakage rate of 32% (Dreze and Khera, 2015).
1important goal of the program was to reduce the debt taken on by farmers to ﬁnance the
upfront costs of cultivation. The government therefore made it a priority to deliver transfers
to farmers before the onset of the monsoon rains to facilitate timely agricultural investments,
such as purchasing seeds and fertilizer, and hiring workers to prepare their ﬁelds.
Working with the government, we implemented an experimental, at-scale test of phone-
based performance measurement. We randomly assigned around a quarter of the 498 MAOs
in the state to a treatment condition, in which they were told that a call center would
call at least 100 of the farmers for whom they were responsible, collect information on
implementation outcomes (including whether and when farmers received their checks, and
corruption during the process), and produce reports visible to them and their supervisors.
These details were communicated to treated MAOs by the state Commissioner of Agriculture
personally via a video conference. This communication was then reinforced with a formal
letter to treatment MAOs. The government contracted a call center that surveyed 22,565
farmers within two weeks. The data from these calls were used to create reports on MAOs’
absolute and relative performance.
To evaluate the impact of the announcement of phone-based monitoring to MAOs, we use
farmer-level administrative bank records of whether and when these checks were encashed
as a reliable measure of MAO performance. This high-quality administrative data on the
entire universe of 5.7 million potential program beneﬁciaries allows us to precisely estimate
the impact of the phone-based monitoring treatment on the entire population - including
beneﬁciaries with and without cell phones. It also provides the opportunity to test the
reliability of phone data as compared to administrative data. Thus, the data from the phone
calls were used to implement the intervention (creating MAO reports), while administrative
data were used to evaluate the intervention. Taken together, the design and data allow us
to “experiment at scale”.3
We ﬁnd that phone-based monitoring signiﬁcantly improved the likelihood of farmers ever
receiving their transfer, as well as receiving it “on-time”, meaning prior to the arrival of the
monsoon on June 8th, 2018. On-time delivery of transfers was 3.3% higher in treatment
areas (2.3 percentage points higher on a base of 69% in control areas). The likelihood of
checks ever being delivered was 1.5% higher (1.3 percentage points higher on a base of
83% in control areas). Expressed diﬀerently, the intervention led to a 7.6% reduction in
the number of beneﬁciaries who did not receive their beneﬁts. These eﬀects correspond
3Speciﬁcally, the study meets all three aspects of “experimentation at scale” identiﬁed in Muralidharan
and Niehaus (2017). The treatment is randomized across all 5.7 million land-owning farm households in a
state of 35 million people (and outcomes are observed for all of them); the intervention was implemented
by government at scale, with 1.3 million farmers in treated areas; and the unit of randomization was large
enough for treatment eﬀects to be inclusive of spillovers.
2to a $3.9 million increase in transfers that were delivered on-time, a $1 million increase in
amount ever delivered, and 17,058 additional farmers encashing their checks.4If phone-
based monitoring had been extended to the entire state over both agricultural seasons, our
estimates suggest that $33.1 million more would have been delivered on time, an additional
$8.6 million would ultimately have been delivered, and around an additional 145,000 farmers
would have received their payments.
The incidence of the intervention was mildly progressive, although the transfer program
itself was regressive (since check sizes were proportional to landholdings). For farmers in
the bottom quartile of landholdings, there was a 2.2 percentage point (3.3%) increase in
check encashment rate, around twice the overall eﬀect. We do not ﬁnd evidence that MAOs
skewed their eﬀorts towards farmers with phones. Although the phone-based monitoring
system only assessed MAO performance by calling the approximately 60% of farmers with
listed cell phone numbers, we cannot reject that the measured improvements in performance
are the same across beneﬁciaries with and without phones.
Next, we estimate that phone-based measurement was highly cost-eﬀective. Costing the
intervention at the price paid to the call-center vendor, we estimate that the incremental
cost per additional dollar of beneﬁts ever delivered to beneﬁciaries was 3.6 cents. Turning
to on-time delivery, the cost per dollar of beneﬁts delivered on time was less than one cent.
These costs per additional dollar delivered are lower than the administrative costs of almost
any anti-poverty program for which such data is available (see Section 4.3). In addition,
we also calculate the economic returns to phone-based monitoring. To do this, we deﬁne
beneﬁts as the diﬀerence between the estimated return on capital held by farmers rather
than the government. Even under relatively conservative assumptions, we estimate a beneﬁt
of four times the cost.
Finally, we compare the phone and administrative data to assess the quality of the data
obtained from the phone calls.5We ﬁnd that the match rate between phone and adminis-
trative data is high (88.6%). Comparing measures of MAO performance using both phone
and administrative data, our results suggest that the phone-based data is reliable enough to
identify which MAOs should be pushed for more eﬀort, but perhaps not reliable enough for
more serious personnel actions without data over multiple cycles.
Turning to mechanisms, monitoring systems of the kind we study could aﬀect outcomes
4Among larger landowners, the treatment eﬀect is larger for “on-time” delivery than “ever delivered” .
Since they received larger transfers, the impact on on-time delivery relative to ever delivered is bigger for
value of funds than for fraction of checks.
5In this particular case, we were fortunate to have high-quality administrative data on outcomes. However,
in other cases, the data from the phone calls may be the only source of data available, which makes it policy-
relevant to compare phone and administrative data.
3through two main channels. First, it could alter incentives. While there was no formal way
in which the measurement was linked to future beneﬁts such as advantageous postings (Khan
et al., 2019), the visibility of their performance to senior oﬃcials, and the potential for such
use of the data could itself provide incentives for eﬀort. Second, it could provide MAOs
with information to do their jobs better. For instance, they could use the information in the
reports to reallocate their eﬀort towards underperforming areas.
Our results are best explained by the incentive mechanism. Because the check distribu-
tion was implemented quickly, MAOs and their supervisors received performance reports
only after nearly 95% of all checks that would be delivered had been delivered. At that
point, it was too late for the information contained in the reports to aﬀect MAO behavior.
Consistent with this, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant treatment eﬀects shortly after the announcement of
the monitoring (reﬂecting the incentive eﬀect), but no change in the treatment-control gap
after performance reports were issued. In this sense, we view the results as a lower bound
on the long-term potential eﬀects of the approach when it would also be possible to use
information from the reports for oﬃcials to do their jobs better.
This paper complements recent work testing more specialized approaches for using technol-
ogy to improve governance such as monitoring worker attendance with time clocks (Banerjee
et al., 2010; Dhaliwal and Hanna, 2017) or with custom smart-phone applications (Callen
et al., 2018). Relative to these specialized approaches, measurement by phone has the ad-
vantages of (i) low ﬁxed and variable costs and time to deploy, as call center services are
typically cheap and available quickly, (ii) the ﬂexibility to scale across an unusually wide
number range of places, programs and outcomes, and (iii) scope to adapt quickly as chal-
lenges and circumstances on the ground change. We also complement recent work by Aker
and Ksoll (2018), who test a phone-based monitoring pilot implemented by an NGO in an
adult education program in 134 villages in Niger and ﬁnd learning gains.
Empirical evidence on service delivery in developing countries suggests that increased
top-down administrative monitoring can be an eﬀective tool for improving last-mile service
delivery (Olken, 2007; Muralidharan et al., 2017). However, a practical barrier to the broader
use of top-down monitoring has been the challenge of obtaining credible high-frequency data
on last-mile service delivery at a suﬃciently spatially disaggregated level to hold appropriate
oﬃcials accountable. Our results suggest that calling and surveying representative samples
of beneﬁciaries, who increasingly have access to a phone, may provide a promising solution.6
Speciﬁcally, using outbound call centers for measuring the quality of last-mile service
6While prior studies of monitoring have looked at impacts on reducing corruption or provider absence,
we focus on improving bureaucratic eﬀort and service delivery quality. The value of doing so is seen for
instance in the results from Bandiera et al. (2009) who show that ineﬃciencies may be a much larger source
of welfare loss in government than corruption per se.
4delivery can expand state capacity for measurement on several policy-relevant margins in-
cluding scale, cost, and speed. First, the intervention was successfully implemented by the
government at a scale aﬀecting nearly 6 million households.7Second, the cost per phone
survey is substantially lower than the cost of a ﬁeld survey, which allowed for a much larger
sample size within a ﬁxed budget. This made it possible to generate credible estimates of
program performance at a lower-level unit of governance than would typically be possible,
and improve the accountability of oﬃcials who are closer to the last-mile of service delivery.
Third, the intervention was both simple to set up (taking one month from agreement to
implementation) and quickly generated usable data on MAO performance, within two weeks
of starting to make the phone calls.8
Of course, this new measurement technology should only be expected to deliver improved
governance when there is also political interest in doing so (as was true in this case). Thus,
our results should be interpreted as demonstrating the value of expanding the feasible set of
measurement for governments. Historically, innovations in measurement technologies have
been a foundation for improved productivity in several settings by enabling better coordina-
tion, contracting, and management (Landes, 1983; Baker and Hubbard, 2004; Duﬂo et al.,
2012). High-frequency and low-cost measurement of last-mile service delivery using phone-
based monitoring could similarly enable productivity improvements in the delivery of public
services.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the setting and nature of
the phone-based monitoring intervention. Section 3 describes the research design and data.
Section 4 presents the results and a cost-eﬀectiveness analysis. Section 5 concludes.
2 Setting and intervention
Telangana is India’s newest state, created in 2014 from Andhra Pradesh. It has a population
of 35 million, with around 60% living in rural areas, and is relatively well-oﬀ, with per capita
income 53% higher than the all-India average as of 2016-2017 (Government of Telangana,
2016). It has maintained the same administrative infrastructure as when it was part of
Andhra Pradesh, including many of the same bureaucrats and the same capital city. As a
7Testing at scale under government implementation is especially important for policy given recent evidence
that interventions implemented by governments have systematically smaller eﬀects than those implemented
by academics or NGO’s (Vivalt, 2019).
8The results of this study were presented to GoTS within 2.5 months after the intervention began, thereby
providing a counterexample to the critique that the costs and duration of randomized controlled trials limit
their usefulness for policy (Kapur, 2018). In general, measuring outcomes with administrative or phone-
based data can sharply reduce the time and ﬁnancial cost for researchers to rigorously evaluate reforms to
improve governance (Duﬂo, 2017).
5result, it is thought to be relatively well-administered; Andhra Pradesh ranked 3rd out of 19
major states in the most recent Government Performance Index (Mundle et al., 2016).
2.1 The Rythu Bandhu scheme
The Government of Telangana (GoTS) introduced the “Rythu Bandhu Scheme” (meaning
“Friend of the Farmer”, hereafter abbreviated as RBS) in May of 2018 to provide capital
for the purchase of agricultural inputs prior to the main agricultural season. The RBS was
hailed by economists as a more eﬃcient response to widespread farmer economic distress
than common alternatives such as raising crop procurement prices or waiving farmers’ loans
(Subramanian, 2018). It authorized payments of Rs. 4,000 ($55) per acre to every farmer
registered as a landholder in each of the two yearly agricultural seasons.9A farmer who
owned half an acre of land, for example, would receive one payment of Rs. 2,000 prior to
thekharif cycle (monsoon/fall) and another payment of Rs. 2,000 prior to the rabi season
(winter/spring). The mean check amount was Rs. 8,817, while the median was Rs. 5,280
(see ﬁgure A.1 for the full distribution of check amounts).
In total, the expected outlay for RBS was approximately $0.9B per cropping season or
$1.8B annually – equivalent to 7% of the annual state budget and 1.6% of the GDP of Telan-
gana (PRS Legislative Research, 2018). As a fraction of GDP, this is more than three times
as large as two of the most well-known cash transfer programs – Progresa in Mexico (0.4%
of GDP, D´ avila L´ arraga (2016)) and Bolsa Familia in Brazil (0.5% of GDP, Gazola Hellman
(2015)). The RBS has also contributed to a broader trend in India towards such large cash
transfer programs for farmers, where there are now similar programs at the national level
($11B annually) and in two other Indian states (Odisha and Andhra Pradesh, worth $1.9B
annually in each state) (Outlook India, 2019; Business Standard, 2019; LiveMint, 2019).
GoTS had never previously attempted this type of cash transfer program, so even aside
from the unprecedented size of the transfer, ﬁguring out implementation was non-trivial.
Since GoTS did not have bank account information for landholders, they could not transfer
money into the farmer’s bank accounts. They instead elected to distribute physical checks
to each farmer in the form of “order checks” associated with a particular bank. Farmers
could go to any branch of the bank listed on the “order check” and exchange it for cash,
whether or not they held an account with that bank (conditional on providing oﬃcial ID
matching the name on the check). The government allocated all the mandals in the state
among 8 banks, assigning all farmers in a given mandal to the same bank. The Department
of Revenue managed the printing of checks (including conﬁrming eligibility of beneﬁciaries),
9The government’s land registry was updated and digitized in late 2017 and early 2018 to reﬂect the
identity of current landholders.
6which occurred in April and May, after which the checks were transferred to the Department
of Agriculture for distribution.
The government had originally intended to distribute checks in April and May so that
farmers had enough time to apply them towards agricultural investments prior to the onset
of the monsoon in June. Typical investments include purchasing seeds and fertilizer, and
hiring workers to prepare their ﬁelds. It is optimal for farmers to plant soon after the
monsoon rains arrive; if they wait, seeds fail to beneﬁt from the rain that has already fallen
and yields are lower.10However, due to delays in implementation, the check distribution
process did not begin until May 8, creating additional pressure for speedy delivery.11
The Department of Agriculture managed the distribution of checks, with Mandal Agri-
cultural Oﬃcers (MAOs) responsible for distribution in their respective mandals. In most
cases, a MAO was responsible for one mandal, though due to vacant MAO positions, there
were a few cases in which a single MAO oversaw implementation across multiple mandals
(498 MAOs covered 548 mandals). An average mandal contains roughly 60,000 individuals
living in 20 villages, of whom around 10,000 are landholders receiving checks.
The MAOs scheduled one meeting in each village. During those meetings, the MAOs
supervised teams of government employees who veriﬁed the identities of landowners residing
in that village and distributed their checks to them. The ﬁrst village meetings were held
on May 8. Each mandal then had 1-2 village meetings per day, with meetings every day
of the week except Sunday, until all villages had been served. There was only one meeting
per village, so if a landholder did not get their check then, they had to pick it up at the
mandal Department of Agriculture oﬃces. To do so, however, they needed signed approval
from both the MAO and another bureaucrat in the revenue department, which could be a
substantial barrier if for example one or both were absent.
Implementing RBS well was a major priority for the government given the sum disbursed,
the number of recipients (5.7 million), the high media proﬁle of the scheme, the fact that
the government had never before done anything comparable, and upcoming elections. An-
ticipated risks included (i) non-issue of checks, (ii) non-delivery of checks, (iii) late delivery
of checks, which would force farmers to reduce investment or borrow at high rates to ﬁnance
time-sensitive agricultural inputs, and (iv) corruption during the distribution process (e.g.
bribe demands).
10Gin´ e et al. (2007) measure expenditure patterns of farmers in the Mahbubnagar district of Telangana
and ﬁnd that 37.4% of all expenditures for a season occur prior to the arrival of the monsoon. This includes
30-40% of all spending on bullock, manual, and tractor labor, 90.1% of all spending on manure, and 59.4%
of spending on irrigation. Additional fertilizer is typically purchased and applied later in the season.
11The two main delays were in the printing of checks and ensuring that bank branches held suﬃcient cash
to permit encashment of nearly a billion dollars in checks over a short period of time.
72.2 Phone-based monitoring intervention
The state government had previously collected phone numbers for farmers as part of land
record digitization. Overall, 3.5 million (61%) of the 5.7 million entries in the registry
listed a contact number. GoTS contracted a call center to collect data from beneﬁciaries
between 29 May and 15 June.12The call center attempted to reach a random sample of
46,007 farmers representative of those with listed phone numbers in the GoTS administrative
records. A sample of 150 farmers per treatment mandal and 50 per control manda was
randomly selected, stratiﬁed by quintile of the mandal-speciﬁc land size distribution to reduce
variability across mandals due to sampling.13
The call center placed calls to the mobile phone numbers of sampled farmers. If a call
did not connect, the call center would attempt to reach that number up to ﬁve more times
over the following two days before giving up. If connected, the call center operator veriﬁed
the respondent’s identity and identiﬁed themselves as conducting a survey on behalf of the
Government of Telangana to understand the respondent’s experience with the Rythu Bandhu
Scheme. Calls collected information on whether, where, and when the farmer received their
check, whether and when they encashed it, any problems receiving or encashing the check
(including time costs and bribes), how they used the funds, suggestions for future rounds
of RBS, and overall satisfaction with RBS. Sampled farmers were surveyed once, and the
average completed survey lasted four minutes. The call center successfully completed calls
with 22,565 (49%) of the sampled farmers, began but did not complete surveys with another
24%, had 10% decline to participate, and could not reach the remaining 17% for other reasons
(e.g. phone number was no longer valid).14The response rate did not diﬀer across treatment
and control mandals (46.3% in control, 46.9% in treatment; p= 0.37).
Prior to the distribution of checks and calls to beneﬁciaries, the Telangana Department of
Agriculture informed treatment MAOs that their mandals had been selected by lottery to
take part in a pilot of the phone-based monitoring system. During a special video conference
with the treatment MAOs (on 2 May 2018), the state Commissioner of Agriculture explained
the initiative and the data that would be collected. He informed them that reports from the
phone call data would be provided to them and their supervisors, including a performance
rating for their mandal. The MAOs were told which outcomes the report would cover, but not
the speciﬁc formula for calculating ratings. On 10 May 2018, the Department of Agriculture
sent treatment MAOs a follow-up letter containing the same information. To reduce the risk
12The intervention was designed by the research team, but implemented by GoTS.
13Data from control mandals was not used to prepare reports or shared with the Department of Agriculture,
but only for evaluating the eﬀects of the intervention. See the pre-analysis plan for further details.
14The vendor also piloted automated calls (IVR), but these had a high error rate in capturing responses,
and were therefore discontinued.
8of spillovers, treatment MAOs were explicitly told the identity of other treatment MAOs in
their district and that no other MAOs in their districts were part of the pilot.
Reports based on the phone data were issued to treatment MAOs and to their supervisors
between 9 and 13 July. The reports listed ﬁve metrics: the proportion of farmers who
reported receiving their check, receiving it before 20 May (a measure of speed of delivery),
successfully encashing it at the bank, being asked for a bribe, and being satisﬁed with the
program overall. They rated performance on these metrics for the mandal in question relative
to other mandals within the same district, and relative to the state overall. They also showed
a simple, color-coded categorical rating (“Poor,” “Fair,” “Good,” or “Excellent”) based on
absolute performance, motivated in part by the ﬁnding of Callen et al. (2018) that “ﬂagging”
of high or low performers can make performance data more accessible. A redacted example
report is in Appendix B. Table 1 provides the full timeline of the Rythu Bandhu Scheme and
phone-based monitoring intervention.
The treatment included in principle both a monitoring component (which potentially
altered incentives) and an information component (which could help MAOs do their job
better). In practice, and because of the program’s compressed time frame, the information
provided by the reports came too late for MAOs to use it to improve their performance. The
program aimed to distribute all checks between early May and mid-June, whereas reports
were issued in early July (by when 95% of checks ever issued had already been issued). Our
estimates thus reﬂect the impact of MAOs knowing they were being monitored, but do not
capture the potential additional beneﬁts of having timely information from the calls to do
their jobs better.
The Department of Agriculture did not inform control MAOs about the existence of the
pilot. If asked, it said that the initiative might be extended to their areas in the future,
but not during the current season. While the call center collected phone data from control
mandals, it did not generate reports using these data or inform control MAOs of their
existence. Of course, the interpretation of reduced-form intent-to-treat eﬀects depends on
treatment and control MAOs’ beliefs, which we discuss later.
MAOs and their staﬀ could potentially react to monitoring in several ways. They could
improve processes to ensure that checks were distributed to all eligible beneﬁciaries. They
could work harder to ﬁnd recipients – both before the village meetings by publicizing them
more thoroughly, during the meetings by extending the meeting length, or after them by
following up with those who did not attend. They could also demand fewer bribes.15
15MAOs were only responsible for check distribution. A diﬀerent government department (Revenue)
printed checks before our intervention, after verifying farmer eligibility, and banks independently checked
farmer identity before cashing the checks. Improvements in the delivery of beneﬁts are thus unlikely to have
come at the cost of lower scrutiny of eligibility requirements.
9Yet, one might also reasonably expect phone-based monitoring to have limited eﬀects
in this setting, as government scrutiny of RBS implementation was already high: MAOs
digitally recorded whether checks were distributed, and banks recorded check encashment
in order to claim reimbursement. The availability of high-quality administrative data on
outcomes makes the RBS an unusually low-cost setting in which to measure eﬀects of phone-
based monitoring, but it could also lead to the eﬀects being lower than in other settings where
phone data are the only performance information available. Our estimates should thus be
interpreted as the eﬀects of adding an incremental, independent source of monitoring, and
making this salient to implementing oﬃcials.
3 Research methods
Our design and methods follow a registered pre-analysis plan.16
3.1 Experimental design
The study population consists of nearly all households eligible to receive RBS, i.e. all land-
holding households in Telangana. We excluded one largely urban district (Hyderabad) as
it had very few program beneﬁciaries, leaving 30 remaining districts. Since we randomized
across nearly the universe of mandals in the state (outside Hyderabad), the study sample is
representative of the rural population of the state.
Within these districts, we randomly assigned treatment at the level of the MAO, since
some MAOs oversee multiple mandals. We randomly selected approximately 25% of MAOs
for treatment, yielding a total of 122 treatment MAOs and 376 control MAOs. This corre-
sponded to 131 treatment and 417 control mandals. We stratiﬁed randomization within each
district on an indicator for whether an MAO oversees multiple mandals, the only MAO-level
covariate available to us at the time of randomization (further details of the randomization
algorithm are in the pre-analysis plan). Figure 1 shows the geographical distribution of
treatment and control mandals.
Table 2 reports means and balance tests across treatment and control groups, grouping
covariates into three broad categories: 1) characteristics of Rythu Bandhu beneﬁciaries; 2)
general characteristics of the mandal (e.g. demographics, wealth); and 3) characteristics of
the mandal that may be related to implementation of Rythu Bandhu. For the characteristics
of Rythu Bandhu beneﬁciaries, the unit of observation is at the individual farmer level, while
16Seehttps://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2942.
10for the other two categories, the unit of observation is the mandal. We regress the variable
of interest on treatment status and randomization strata ﬁxed eﬀects.
The ﬁrst category takes farmer-level characteristics from the landholder registry, which
was updated in late 2017, shortly before the implementation of Rythu Bandhu (e.g. percent
of farmers with mobile phone numbers in the land registry, and thus who could be called for
the intervention). In the second category, we use mandal-level data from the 2011 census.17
Since income levels may have shifted since 2011, we also check for and reject diﬀerences across
treatment and control in total rainfall between 2013 and 2017 (Government of Telangana,
2019), as rainfall is an important determinant of income in these areas. For the third category,
in addition to 2011 census characteristics, such as access to roads, mobile phones, or banking
services,18we also test balance on the two MAO characteristics available to us, where age
proxies for the experience of the MAO. Overall, across the 25 tests, only one demographic
measure (Scheduled Tribe population share) is signiﬁcant at the 10% level, approximately
what would be expected by chance.19
3.2 Data
We primarily use administrative data, including (i) the register of all agricultural landholders
in the state, including names, village, acres held, and a contact phone number; (ii) a farmer-
level record of check distribution maintained by the MAOs;20and (iii) farmer-level bank
records of check encashment. Our analysis focuses on encashment, as getting the money is
the ultimate outcome of interest to policy-makers. Bank reports of encashment were recorded
in real-time and were the basis for reimbursement from the government; manipulating them
would constitute serious fraud and could jeopardize a bank’s operating license. We ﬁnd
that they closely match encashment as reported by the surveyed farmers, with agreement in
88.6% of cases.
We focus on check encashment status at two dates. The ﬁrst (8 June) captures on-time
17Some mandal boundaries shifted after the creation of the state of Telangana. To match present-day
mandals to 2011 census data, we take the GPS location of 2011 census villages and towns, as well as present-
day mandal boundaries. The 2011 census characteristics of mandals are created from 2011 census data for
those village and towns that fall within their boundaries.
18While there has been an expansion of banking services across India since 2011, the 2011 levels are
still informative, as the relative level of banking services across space has remained fairly static: there is a
correlation of 0.98 between the number of banks per district in Telangana in 2011 and 2018 (Reserve Bank of
India, 2018). Furthermore, although Telangana is technically a new state, it retained the same infrastructure,
bureaucracy, and even capital city as it had prior to the bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh.
19As a robustness check, we have run all the main regressions with scheduled tribe population share
included as a control, and it does not aﬀect the results.
20We treat the records of check distribution maintained by the MAOs with caution as there are a number
of problems with this data. See the Appendix C for further description of the issues with the MAO data.
11delivery. This was exactly a month after the start of distribution, and is the date on which the
monsoon arrived in Telangana in 2018 according to the Indian Meteorological Department
(New Indian Express, 2018). Most planting activities begin with the arrival of the monsoon,
and the government’s goal was to ensure that farmers had funds in place at the start of
planting to buy seeds and hire labor. This was a high priority for GoTS since a key goal of
the program was to break the cycle of farmer debt, which was widely believed to be a driver
of farmer suicides. The second (26 September) captures if the checks were ever encashed.
This is after the last date (15 August) on which the checks were valid for encashment and
thus should well approximate the ﬁnal distribution of checks.21
We also use data from phone calls conducted by the call center as a secondary data source.
These data were collected over the phone from 22,565 program beneﬁciaries as described
above. This source of data provides a picture of encashment up until the phone survey
was completed (June 15th), but not after that. The administrative data, which covers all
encashments through September 26th, is more reliable in determining whether and when
checks were encashed, but the phone data contains information on additional outcomes of
interest, such as corruption.
Finally, we use data from a short phone survey of MAOs. We surveyed 88 of 122 treatment
MAOs and a sample of 54 control MAOs.22Surveys covered their awareness of the pilot
and beliefs about their treatment status. We were concerned that surveying control MAOs
might aﬀect their behavior (Hawthorne eﬀects), so only conducted these surveys with a small
sample of control MAOs after the distribution was mostly complete.23
3.3 Estimation
We report intent-to-treat estimates, comparing mean outcomes in treatment and control
areas. We discuss MAO beliefs and their implications for interpretation in our cost-beneﬁt
analysis below. We thus estimate
yivmsd =α+βTmsd+δsd+γXivmsd +/epsilon1ivmsd (1)
21Checks were printed in four tranches, on 19 April, 1 May, 10 May and 15 May, and were valid for three
months from the date of printing. It was possible to get checks reprinted, but by 26 September, encashment
activity had largely ceased.
22We attempted surveys with all of the treatment MAOs (72% response rate) and a random sample of 2
control MAOs per district (60% response rate).
23On the survey date, 84% of checks that would ever be encashed had already been encashed. Table A.1
tests for and rejects the presence of Hawthorne eﬀects, as control MAOs randomly selected for the survey
(or actually surveyed among the set who were selected) do not have any higher or lower rates of completed
encashment than other control MAOs.
12whereyis an outcome, Tan indicator for assignment to treatment, and Xa vector of
pre-speciﬁed covariates (in practice, only one variable, the size of landholdings). Indices
denote individual iin villagevin mandalmin stratum sin districtd. Treatment is strictly
exogenous conditional on the randomization stratum ﬁxed eﬀects δsd. We cluster standard
errors at the level of treatment assignment (the MAO) and conduct randomization inference
as a robustness check. When using call center data, we reweight estimates by the inverse
probability of being sampled.
4 Results
4.1 Eﬀects on overall program performance
Overall, RBS implementation was imperfect but still fairly successful compared to many
other similar programs. 4.03 million farmers (69% of target) encashed their checks before
monsoon onset on June 8 (Table 3: Column 2). After 5 months, 4.8 million farmers, 83% of
the total, had encashed their checks (Column 4). It appears that corruption was not a major
issue, with only 2% of farmers reached by phone reporting that they had to pay a bribe to
obtain their checks.24The median farmer had a lag of only 6 days between receiving a check
and successfully encashing it at the bank.
Despite high-quality program implementation to begin with, phone-based monitoring led
to further improvements. Treatment increased the probability of “on-time” check encashment
(deﬁned as prior to the arrival of the monsoon on June 8th) by 2.3 percentage points, a 3.3%
increase on a base rate of 69% (p = 0.004, Table 3). The probability that farmers ever
encashed a check also increased by 1.3 percentage points, a 1.5% increase on a base rate of
83% (p = 0.054).25Given the relatively high-quality implementation in the control group,
an alternative way of quantifying the impact of the program is that it reduced the fraction
of farmers not receiving their checks on time by 7.4% (2.3 percentage points on a base of
31%) and ever receiving their checks by 7.6% (1.3 percentage points on a base of 17%).
These are non-trivial rates of improvement - especially given the “light touch” nature of the
intervention and its low cost.
24We also ﬁnd slightly higher reported encashment rates (75.5%) in our phone call data than in the
corresponding administrative records (73.6%), suggesting that oﬃcials did not collude with banks to encash
beneﬁciary’s checks without their knowledge.
25For completeness, we also report eﬀects on check distribution in Appendix C, based on MAO records of
whether each check was distributed and the date of distribution. We treat these data with caution as they
were uploaded by MAOs with substantial lags, causing date of distribution to be mismeasured, and were not
subject to penalties for misreporting like those banks faced. See Appendix C for further description of the
issues with the MAO data. That said, the results are broadly consistent with those for encashment.
13Multiplied by the large number of aﬀected farmers (1.31 million), this translates into
30,179 additional farmers encashing their checks prior to the monsoon in treatment areas, or
more than one additional farmer per phone call completed by the call center. Furthermore,
an additional 17,058 farmers ever encashed their transfers as a result of the treatment. If
the program had been extended to the entire state, our estimates suggest that an additional
72,958 farmers would have received the transfer to which they were entitled during this
agricultural cycle (and double that amount annually). These gains highlight the policy
impact of programs like phone-based monitoring that can be feasibly implemented at large
scale, where even modest rate improvements translate into meaningful absolute gains.
As seen in Table 4, conditional on ever encashing, the treatment lowered the mean number
of days that passed before recipients encashed their checks by three-fourths of a day ( p=
0.051). Figure 2 summarizes the main eﬀects visually. The top panel plots the proportion of
checks encashed by date in the treatment and control groups separately, while the bottom
panel plots regression estimates of the treatment eﬀect by date. The gap between treatment
and control peaks at 2.8 percentage points (5.2%) on 25 May ( p= 0.008) and then narrows,
asymptoting to 1.3 percentage points by the end of September.
The larger gap between treatment and control at the end of May is likely a better estimate
of the eﬀect of phone-based monitoring on bureaucratic eﬀort because MAOs had the greatest
ability to aﬀect check delivery outcomes during the meetings in each village, nearly all of
which occurred in May. After that, households who did not get their checks had to visit
government oﬃces to pick them up. Thus, the shrinking gap over time reﬂects a natural
catch-up in which control households who had not received their checks in village meetings
had to exert costly eﬀort to get their checks.
Data from the call center only capture the experiences of a small and non-representative
sample of the farmers (0.4%), but sheds light on the process changes underlying these gains.
Consistent with the largest gap between treatment and control being at the end of May,
respondents in treated areas were more likely to receive their checks during village meetings
(p= 0.09) (Table A.2). Since this was far less costly than the alternative (traveling to mandal
headquarters and going through an additional layer of bureaucracy to get their check), this
is another channel through which the treatment improved beneﬁciary outcomes. We ﬁnd
no treatment eﬀects on either the likelihood that phone call respondents were asked to pay
a bribe or on their overall satisfaction with the scheme (columns (2) and (3)). This is not
surprising given that baseline rates of corruption were extremely low (2% of respondents),
and satisfaction with the Rythu Bandhu Scheme was high (93% of respondents).
Recall that there are two channels through which phone-based monitoring may aﬀect
beneﬁciary outcomes: an incentive channel, where MAOs exert more eﬀort when they know
14they are being monitored, and an information channel, where they use the information
provided by the report to reallocate eﬀort more optimally. Given that reports were issued
after nearly all encashment had occurred (July 5-9), it seemed a priori unlikely that it would
aﬀect outcomes through information eﬀects. As shown in Figure 2, the treatment eﬀects are
concentrated during May and June, well before the phone-based monitoring reports were
shared. There is also no evidence of a diﬀerential change in encashment rates following the
distribution of the reports themselves.26Overall, the timing of the eﬀects implies that they
were driven by treated MAOs’ knowledge that they were being monitored and anticipation
of future reports being made available to their superiors rather than by the information in
the reports themselves.
One concern is that these estimates may be biased due to spillovers across mandals. Knowl-
edge of the intervention may reallocate the attention of those who supervise MAOs towards
treatment mandals and away from control mandals, if supervisors do not wish to have their
subordinates who are being monitored look bad. We directly test for this possibility by
taking advantage of random variation in treatment intensity within bureaucratic units. Dis-
tricts in Telangana are divided into “revenue divisions” (up to 5 per district), and then into
mandals (4 to 15 per revenue division). Although roughly the same fraction of mandals were
treated in each district, we did not stratify the randomization at the revenue division level.
As a result, there is random variation in the fraction of MAOs within each revenue division
that are treated. If there were diversion of revenue division supervisor-level attention, we
should expect worse performance among control MAOs with more treated MAOs in their
revenue division, as these control MAOs would get less attention paid to them. We ﬁnd no
evidence of this (Table A.4).
A second concern is that we are picking up a mechanical eﬀect of the phone calls themselves
rather than the impact on oﬃcials. Since receiving a call may have prompted respondents to
pick up their checks, the treatment eﬀect may be a result of more individuals in treatment
mandals receiving phone calls. Any such eﬀect would necessarily be too small to fully explain
our results, as calls only reached 0.82% of treatment farmers and 0.27% of control farmers, a
diﬀerence that is smaller than the observed treatment eﬀect.27Since farmers were randomly
selected for phone calls, we directly test for this concern and ﬁnd that farmers who were
randomly selected for calls are not more likely to encash their checks or pick up their checks
more quickly (Table A.5). This is likely because most calls occurred post-encashment. We
also conﬁrm that the results are unchanged when we drop the individuals who were called
in both treatment and control groups from the administrative data sample (Table A.6).
26In hazard models, an indicator for post 9 July is not a signiﬁcant predictor of encashment (table A.3).
27Calls were attempted with approximately 150 farmers per treatment and 50 per control mandal.
154.2 Distributional consequences
The baseline allocation of beneﬁts under RBS was regressive, as check size was proportional
to registered landholdings. A wealthier farmer who owned 10 acres of land, for example,
would have received a check for Rs 40,000 ($570), while a poorer farmer who owned only half
an acre would have received a check for only Rs. 2,000 ($30). This pattern was exacerbated
by diﬀerences in distribution and encashment rates. As of 26 September, 89% of farmers
in the top quartile of the landholding distribution (holding more than 3.1 acres of land)
had encashed their checks, declining monotonically to 68% of farmers in the bottom quartile
(holding fewer than 0.4 acres). This could reﬂect diﬀerences in the eﬀort made by government
oﬃcials, or diﬀerences in farmers’ motivation and ability to collect and encash their checks.
For example, a farmer at the ﬁfth percentile of the land size distribution (0.09 acres of land)
would receive a check worth just Rs. 370 ($6), possibly less than the time and money costs
of encashment.
We ﬁnd that the eﬀect of announcing phone-based monitoring to MAOs on on-time deliv-
ery was signiﬁcant and nearly identical across farmers of diﬀerent landholding sizes. Figure
3 plots the distribution of treatment eﬀects by quartile of landholding, and the middle panel
of Table 3 reports the corresponding estimates. However, by the end of September, some
suggestive distributional eﬀects begin to emerge. The treatment eﬀect on encashment con-
tinued to be statistically signiﬁcant for farmers in the lower three quartiles of landholdings,
but not for farmers in the top quartile.28
Our interpretation is that the treatment initially improved delivery of the transfer among
all types of farmers. Among the set of wealthier farmers, the control group eventually caught
up with their treatment counterparts as they used their resources and better networks to
ensure that they got their transfers. It may also be more likely to be worth it for them to
put in time and eﬀort to track down the checks (since the amounts were larger). Among
the set of poorer farmers, the control group did not catch up, and treatment eﬀects remain
signiﬁcant over time. Wealthier farmers still beneﬁted from the treatment, which sped up
the process and lessened their cost of accessing the transfer (Table 4), but the gains along the
margin of ever getting the transfer (which may matter more for the poor) are concentrated
among the poor.
A further distributional concern about measurement by phone is that it could skew MAO
eﬀort towards those who own phones or have phone numbers. MAOs had access to the land
registry, so could see which farmers had numbers listed and thus would be able to provide
information to the call center. However, we ﬁnd signiﬁcant positive impacts on on-time
28We reject equality of treatment eﬀects between the top and bottom quartiles (p = 0.051), but do not
reject a joint test of equality across all four quartiles ( p= 0.13).
16encashment for both those with and without phones, and cannot reject that these eﬀects
are the same (Table 3: Bottom panel). The diﬀerence in ever-encashed between those with
and without phones is also not statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.68), but time to encashment
seems to have improved more for the group without a phone ( p= .05). Thus, despite
MAO performance being measured only in the population with mobile phones, the resulting
increase in MAO eﬀort appears to have led to improvement in program performance for all
beneﬁciaries.29
4.3 Tallying costs and beneﬁts
We next examine cost-eﬀectiveness of the intervention at delivering money to farmers, and its
overall welfare consequences. We cost the intervention at Rs. 2.5 million ($36,000), the price
GoTS paid the call-center vendor pro-rated by the proportion of calls made to treatment
areas. This is a conservative estimate, as the government paid a premium to complete the
procurement process quickly, and conversations with the vendor indicate that the call center
could be operated for roughly half this cost. On the other hand, this ﬁgure does not include
the relatively small sunk costs of time spent by government employees or members of the
research team designing the intervention (e.g. sampling protocols).30
At this cost we estimate that phone-based monitoring was a highly cost-eﬀective means of
delivering cash transfers. The estimated impact on money ultimately delivered to farmers
was Rs. 69 million, or roughly $1 million, and on money delivered on time was $3.9 million.31
Since the funds for the program were already earmarked, the relevant benchmark for cost-
eﬀectiveness of an intervention seeking to improve program implementation (like the one
we study) is the administrative cost of delivering anti-poverty programs. The cost per
incremental dollar delivered was 3.6 cents, which compares favorably to the administrative
costs of NGOs such as GiveDirectly (11.6 cents per dollar delivered, GiveDirectly (2019)) and
29As seen in the dependent variable mean among the control group in the table, overall encashment rates
were higher for those with phones (90%) than those without (72%). This reﬂects in part the higher level
of wealth among individuals with listed phone numbers, as controlling for landsize shrinks this gap. The
remainder of the gap is likely explained by unobserved higher levels of ability among this group, as well as
the fact that even in the absence of the treatment, if a farmer had a phone number listed, then they could
be contacted and encouraged to pick up their check.
30We also do not cost incremental MAO eﬀort, which is likely to be small or at least below the wage
premium enjoyed by public employees (Finan et al., 2017). As a conservative and rough estimate, if we
assumed the increased cost of eﬀort to MAOs amounted to 15% of MAO monthly salary, the cost of eﬀort
would amount to a total of approximately $9,000 among the 132 treatment MAOs, which does not noticeably
change the cost-beneﬁt calculations. Similarly, the total cost of analyzing the data and sending the reports
was minor at less than $2,000.
31The treatment eﬀects on amount ever delivered and amount delivered on time were Rs. 54 ($0.77) and
Rs. 203 ($2.9) per farmer respectively, and so multiplied by the 1.3 million farmers in the treated mandals,
this gives the estimates $1 million and $3.9 million.
17well-implemented government cash transfer programs such as Progresa in Mexico (estimated
administrative costs of 8.9 cents for every dollar delivered, Coady (2000)).32Focusing on the
government’s objective of getting transfers to farmers on time, the cost per dollar delivered
on time was less than one cent.
To estimate an economic cost-beneﬁt ratio we must price the value of putting capital in
the hands of farmers during the planting season as opposed to leaving it on the government’s
books. In this framework, higher rates of distribution and faster distribution create social
beneﬁts by increasing the amount of capital earning the higher rate of return among farmers.
We assume that prior to receiving the transfer, farmers ﬁnance the purchase of inputs at a
raterf, either by borrowing or by substituting capital from alternative uses. Capital held
by the government earns a lower return rg.
Time runs from the start of the program (t = 0) to the date Ton which farmers’ invest-
ments pay oﬀ and debt is repaid. The total value of a unit of capital held by the government
until timetand then by the farmer from time tuntilTis thus
v(t) =ergterf(T−t)(2)
Given a distribution Fof check encashment dates, total social value is
W(F) =/integraldisplay
v(t)dF (t) (3)
Faster and broader distribution of transfers shifts F(as seen in Figure 2), increasing the
amount of capital earning the higher rate rf. We calculate W(F) for both treatment and
control groups using administrative records and conduct hypothesis testing using random-
ization inference.
We value capital on the government’s books at the rate it earns on deposits ( rg= 5% annu-
ally),33and capital held by farmers at the going rate for short-term farm loans ( rf= 25%).34
We conservatively assume that investments are realized and debt is repaid immediately at
harvest, so Tequals 4 months; in practice, farmers’ may continue to earn higher returns on
capital that has been transferred to them, so this is a conservative assumption.
32Those are both examples of highly cost-eﬀective interventions, but many other programs are much less
cost-eﬀective. For example, Cald´ es et al. (2006) estimates administrative costs of between 6.8 to 16.1%
and 21.2 to 24.5% for two poverty alleviation programs similar to Progresa. In locations with high rates
of corruption, the implied costs of social protection schemes are even higher (Olken, 2006; Niehaus and
Sukhtankar, 2013).
33In principle, the government could use funds for other productive investments. In practice funds appro-
priated for the program would not be reallocated till the next ﬁscal year and would only earn interest.
34This is the rate charged by registered micro-ﬁnance organizations who are subject to a regulated interest-
rate cap; informal moneylenders typically charge much higher rates.
18Using these estimates, phone-based monitoring generated Rs. 10.6M ($140,000) in ben-
eﬁts, or roughly four times its cost. We reject the null of no beneﬁt ( p= 0.04) using ran-
domization inference. This result is reasonably robust to variation in Tandδ. Atδ= 20%,
beneﬁts exceed costs for any Tlonger than 26 days, while at T= 4 months beneﬁts exceed
costs for any δ∈[5%,25%] (Figure 4). Even under conservative parameter assumptions, the
intervention was cost-eﬀective.
These calculations may also be conservative in the sense that they reﬂect intent-to-treat
estimates, while awareness in the treatment group was incomplete. Among treatment MAOs
we surveyed, 90% had heard of the intervention, but only 28% were sure that the initiative
had rolled out in their area; 28% were unsure and 35% thought it had not. This may partly
reﬂect strategic misrepresentation, such as if MAOs believed they could excuse poor results
by feigning ignorance. In the control group, 52% of MAOs had heard about the intervention,
but only 4% believed themselves treated, with another 8% unsure. While the control group
was relatively “uncontaminated” by misperceptions of being treated, treatment eﬀects may
have been even larger if awareness of phone-based monitoring were universal in the treatment
group. Overall, these beneﬁt-cost estimates suggest that phone-based monitoring can cheaply
be applied to large-ticket programs at scale and create substantial economic value.
4.4 Comparing call center with administrative records
One concern with phone-based monitoring is whether this type of data provides an accurate
picture of bureaucratic performance. Although the fact that MAOs responded to phone-
based monitoring implies that they believed it would at least partially reﬂect their true
performance, this incentive could become stronger or weaker in the longer run as they learn
more about the accuracy of phone-based monitoring. Further, the ability of senior oﬃcials
to take meaningful follow-up action based on phone-based data will depend crucially on its
reliability and accuracy. In most cases, it would be diﬃcult to assess how accurately phone-
based data measures performance without an independent data source to compare it to. In
this case, we can take advantage of the existence of administrative data and examine the
accuracy of phone data by comparing measured MAO performance in phone call data to the
administrative data.
As a ﬁrst pass, we check whether phone call and administrative data agree on whether a
given check was encashed, which they do in 88.6% of cases.35However, to see if the data
can be reasonably used for personnel management, the key metric of interest is whether
aggregated phone and administrative data agree on performance at the MAO level. We
35To calculate the rate of agreement, we take the encashment status reported over the phone and check
whether it matches the administrative record of whether the check was encashed by that date.
19calculate how often phone and administrative data rank the relative performance of a pair
(m,m/prime) of MAOs within a district the same way. For example, suppose the call center rates
MAO A as 3rd and MAO B as 4th best. If the administrative data rates them as 2nd and 3rd
best respectively, then since both sources ordered MAO A as performing better, we consider
the sources to be in agreement. On the other hand, if the administrative data rated them as
3rd and 2nd best respectively, then we would not consider them to be in agreement: MAO A
is ranked better than MAO B by the call center, but not by the administrative data. These
rankings disagree in 31% of cases. However, 22% can be explained by sampling variation,
with a relatively low true rate of disagreement between the two data sources of 9% (see
notes to Table A.7 for details on calculation). Another way of assessing the accuracy of the
phone-based data is to compare their level of agreement on the worst MAOs. For the 20%
of MAOs who were ranked as the worst performers in the phone data, 47% are also among
the worst 20% of MAOs in the administrative data, while 80% are in the bottom 50%.
Overall, these results suggest that managers can reasonably use phone data to help decide
which oﬃcials to push for more eﬀort or acknowledge for good performance. However, the
reliability of phone-based data may not be high enough to justify using them to determine
more serious administrative actions (e.g. suspensions or promotions) without data over
multiple cycles and years as well as decision-theoretic modeling of the costs and beneﬁts of
various follow up actions under diﬀerent levels of precision of measurement.36
5 Conclusion
We ﬁnd evidence that the cheap, simple, and ﬂexible approach of monitoring beneﬁciary
experiences using outbound phone calls can be a cost-eﬀective tool for improving last-mile
service delivery. Further, unlike smaller-scale studies of interventions to improve monitoring
of bureaucrats, our results suggest that phone-based monitoring can be rapidly deployed at
the scale of an entire state of 35 million people. Beyond the case studied here, a unique
feature of phone-based monitoring is its potential to be scaled across an unusually wide
range of locations, programs and outcomes. In general, phone-based monitoring can provide
a rich picture of service delivery, as it can collect information on any outcome that can be
observed by beneﬁciaries and described verbally.
While the approach we studied here is itself adaptable to other settings and programs, this
does not mean that its eﬀects will be the same. It would therefore be useful to test phone-
36Creating protocols for the optimal use of sample-based performance measures for high-stakes personnel
action is a complex topic. The relevant issues are well illustrated by the literature on using estimates of
teacher value-added for teacher retention and tenure decisions (Chetty et al., 2014; Koedel et al., 2015;
Rothstein, 2017).
20based monitoring in other settings. For instance, it may perform better for outcomes that
beneﬁciaries experience more directly (e.g. check distribution) than indirectly (e.g. public
good maintenance). It would also be useful to test this approach in a setting where the
scope for improvement is greater than in the RBS, which was relatively well-implemented.
In general, Telangana is a relatively well-administered state, which may mean that the eﬀects
are larger than other areas, as the bureaucracy is more responsive. But it may also mean that
the eﬀects would be larger if phone-based monitoring were implemented in other locations
where there is more margin for improvement.
Similarly, it would be valuable to examine how eﬀects evolve over time in settings where
bureaucrats perform similar functions repeatedly. As with all monitoring technologies, the
oﬃcials being monitored would learn about the consequences of performing at diﬀerent levels
and might develop new strategies – both productive and counterproductive – to inﬂuence
their ratings. But over time, phone-based monitoring could also inform oﬃcials in real-time
on what locations are most in need of their targeted intervention, as well as motivating them
to increase eﬀort. It could provide inputs for improving personnel management, which has
been identiﬁed as the most important component of organizational management quality, and
is systematically worse for public organizations (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2010). It could be
tuned in many ways to improve performance, evolving statistical protocols for diﬀerent types
of follow-up action reﬂecting the cost of diﬀerent kinds of Type I and Type II errors. Optimal
monitoring protocols would take into account the need for whistleblower protection in small
samples (Chassang and i Miquel, 2018) and the motivations of the respondents answering
the phone (Fiorin, 2018). One could even consider making the results publicly available,
trading oﬀ the costs and beneﬁts of transparency.
Overall, phone-based measurement of beneﬁciary experiences opens up a broad set of
possibilities for improving the quality of service delivery in developing countries. There
is much exciting future research to be done in improving the design of such measurement
systems, developing protocols for the optimal follow-up actions based on such measurement,
and studying the impact of doing so. Social scientists can play an important role in improving
the quality of governance by doing such work (Duﬂo, 2017).
21References
Aker, Jenny C. and Christopher Ksoll , “Call Me Educated: Evidence from a Mobile
Monitoring Experiment in Niger,” Center for Global Development Working Paper 406 ,
2018.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard , “Contractibility and Asset Ownership:
On-Board Computers and Governance in U.S. Trucking,” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 2004, 119(4), 1443–1479.
Bandiera, Oriana, Andrea Prat, and Tommaso Valletti, “Active and passive waste in
government spending: evidence from a policy experiment,” American Economic Review,
2009, 99(4), 1278–1308.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Esther Duﬂo, and Rachel Glennerster, “Putting a Band-Aid
on a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in the Indian Public Health Care System,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 2010, 6(2-3), 487–500.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen , “Measuring and Explaining Management Prac-
tices Across Firms and Countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2007,
122(4), 1351–1408.
and , “Why Do Management Practices Diﬀer across Firms and Countries?,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24(1), 203–224.
Business Standard, “Odisha allocates additional Rs 3,234 crore for Kalia scheme,” June
2019.
Cald´ es, Nat` alia, David Coady, and John A Maluccio , “The cost of poverty alleviation
transfer programs: a comparative analysis of three programs in Latin America,” World
development, 2006, 34(5), 818–837.
Callen, Michael, Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, Muhammad Yasir Khan, and Ar-
man Rezaee, “Data and Policy Decisions: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan,” Stan-
ford Institute of Economic Policy Research (SIEPR) Working Paper No. 1022 , 2018.
Chassang, Sylvain and Gerard Padr´ o i Miquel , “Crime, Intimidation, and Whistle-
blowing: A Theory of Inference from Unveriﬁable Reports,” Review of Economic Studies ,
2018.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, and Jonah E Rockoﬀ , “Measuring the impacts of
teachers I: Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates,” American Economic Review,
2014, 104(9), 2593–2632.
Coady, David P , “The Application Of Social Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis To The Evaluation Of
Progresa,” Technical Report, IFPRI Report 2000.
Department of Food and Public Distribution , “Grievance Analysis and Systemic Re-
22forms Recommendations 2017,” Technical Report, Department of Administrative Refoms
and Public Grievances 2018.
Dhaliwal, Iqbal and Rema Hanna , “The devil is in the details: The successes and
limitations of bureaucratic reform in India,” Journal of Development Economics , 2017,
124, 1–21.
Dreze, Jean and Reetika Khera , “Understanding leakages in the public distribution
system,” Economic & Political Weekly , 2015, 50(7), 39–42.
Duﬂo, Esther , “Richard T. Ely Lecture: The Economist as Plumber,” American Economic
Review, 2017, 107(5), 1–26.
, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan , “Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to Come
to School,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102(4), 1241–1278.
Finan, Frederico, Benjamin A Olken, and Rohini Pande , “The Personnel Economics
of the Developing State,” Handbook of Economic Field Experiments , 2017, 2, 467–514.
Fiorin, Stefano, “Reporting Peers’ Misbehavior: Experimental Evidence from
Afghanistan,” UCSD Working Paper , 2018.
Gin´ e, Xavier, Robert M Townsend, and James Vickery , “Rational expectations? Ev-
idence from planting decisions in semi-arid India,” Manuscript. World Bank, Washington,
DC, 2007.
GiveDirectly , “Our Financials,” 2019.
Government of Telangana , “Telangana Socio Economic Outlook 2017,” Planning Depart-
ment, Government of Telangana, 2016.
Hellman, Aline Gazola , “How Does Bolsa Familia Work?: Best Practices in the Imple-
mentation of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs in Latin America and the Caribbean,”
Technical Report, Inter-American Development Bank 2015.
Kapur, Devesh, “Dissecting India-related studies in US,” The Hindu, July 2018.
Khan, Adnan Q, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Benjamin A Olken , “Making moves matter:
Experimental evidence on incentivizing bureaucrats through performance-based postings,”
American Economic Review, 2019, 109(1), 237–70.
Koedel, Cory, Kata Mihaly, and Jonah E Rockoﬀ , “Value-added modeling: A review,”
Economics of Education Review , 2015, 47, 180–195.
Landes, David S., Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World ,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1983.
L´ arraga, Laura G D´ avila , “How does Prospera work?: Best practices in the implementa-
tion of conditional cash transfer programs in Latin America and the Caribbean,” Technical
Report, Inter-American Development Bank 2016.
LiveMint , “Jagan Reddy announces ‘Rythu Bharosa’ input subsidy scheme for Andhra
23farmers,” June 2019.
Mundle, Sudipto, Samik Chowdhury, and Satadru Sikdar , “Governance Performance
of Indian States 2001-02 and 2011-12,” National Institute of Public Finance and Policy
Working Paper 16/164 , 2016.
Muralidharan, Karthik and Paul Niehaus, “Experimentation at Scale,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31(4), 103–124.
, Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, and Aakash Mohpal , “The ﬁscal cost of weak governance:
Evidence from teacher absence in India,” Journal of Public Economics , 2017, 145, 116–135.
, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar , “Building State Capacity: Evidence from
Biometric Smartcards in India,” American Economic Review , October 2016, 106(10),
2895–2929.
New Indian Express , “Monsoon ﬁnally arrives in Telangana, but June to get sub-
dued rain,” http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/telangana/2018/jun/09/monsoon-
ﬁnally-arrives-in-telangana-but-june-to-get-subdued-rain-1825711.html 2018.
Niehaus, Paul and Sandip Sukhtankar , “Corruption Dynamics: The Golden Goose
Eﬀect,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5(4), 230–69.
Olken, Benjamin A , “Corruption and the costs of redistribution: Micro evidence from
Indonesia,” Journal of public economics, 2006, 90(4-5), 853–870.
Olken, Benjamin A. , “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy , April 2007, 115(2), 200–249.
Outlook India , “Budget 2019,” February 2019.
PRS Legislative Research, “Telangana Budget Analysis 2017-18,” Technical Report, PRS
2018.
Rothstein, Jesse, “Measuring the impacts of teachers: comment,” American Economic
Review, 2017, 107(6), 1656–84.
Singh, Abhijeet , “The Myths of Oﬃcial Measurement: Auditing and Improving Education
Data in Developing Countries,” Working Paper , 2019.
Subramanian, Arvind, “QUBI can wipe oﬀ farmers’ tears,” The Hindu Business Line ,
July 2018.
Vivalt, Eva, “How Much Can We Generalize from Impact Evaluations?,” Journal of the
European Economics Association, 2019.
World Bank ,World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People
2003.
, “Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people).,” https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/IT.CEL.SETS.P2?end=2017&locations=XM&name_desc=true&start=1998
2018. Accessed: 2018-09-26.
24Figure 1: Study areas with treatment and control mandals
Control
Treatment
This map shows the geographical distribution of treatment and control mandals (sub-districts) across the
entire state. Dark black lines indicate district boundaries, whereas gray lines are mandal boundaries. Ran-
domization was stratiﬁed by district, and occurred at the mandal agricultural oﬃcer level. Mandals in white
were not included in the randomization and study. This typically occurred because the mandal is urban,
such as those around Hyderabad, or did not have an MAO assigned to it, so it was not possible to implement
the treatment. Note that since there are 10 cases where a treatment MAO oversees multiple geographically
contiguous mandals, there is slightly more geographical clustering of treatment mandals than would occur
due to chance.
25Figure 2: Treatment eﬀect, by date
0 .2 .4 .6 .8% of Checks Encashed
01 May 01 Jun 01 Jul 01 Aug
 Treatment mandals
Control mandals-.02 0 .02 .04 .06Treatment Effect (βTreatment )
01 May 01 Jun 01 Jul 01 Aug
Date of EncashmentCoefficient
95% Confidence interval
The two graphs in this ﬁgure report (a). the cumulative rate of encashment in treatment and control
mandals by day, and (b). the coeﬃcient of treatment eﬀect on the cumulative rate of encashment over
the period of check distribution in our data. The coeﬃcient in the bottom graph are estimated through
regressions with ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata level and standard errors clustered at the MAO
level. Less than 1% of checks were encashed after August 4 or before 10 May, so the axis is restricted to
those time periods.
26Figure 3: Treatment Eﬀect Over Time, by Landsize Quartile
-.02 0 .02 .04 .06Treatment Effect (βTreatment )
01 May 01 Jun 01 Jul 01 Aug
Date of EncashmentLand size Quartile 1
-.02 0 .02 .04 .06Treatment Effect (βTreatment )
01 May 01 Jun 01 Jul 01 Aug
Date of EncashmentLand size Quartile 2-.02 0 .02 .04 .06Treatment Effect (βTreatment )
01 May 01 Jun 01 Jul 01 Aug
Date of EncashmentLand size Quartile 3
-.02 0 .02 .04 .06Treatment Effect (βTreatment )
01 May 01 Jun 01 Jul 01 Aug
Date of EncashmentLand size Quartile 4
Coefficient
CI Upper/CI Lower
The graphs in this ﬁgure report the coeﬃcient of treatment eﬀect on the cumulative rate of encashment over
the period of check distribution, across the four landsize quartiles, as well as the 95% conﬁdence interval.
The ﬁrst graph is among the quartile of farmers with the smallest farms, while the fourth is for the quartile
of farmers with the largest farms. The coeﬃcient in the bottom graph are estimated through regressions
with ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata level and standard errors clustered at the MAO level. Less
than 1% of checks were encashed after August 4 or before 10 May, so the axis is restricted to those time
periods.
27Figure 4: Sensitivity of cost-eﬀectiveness estimates
Sensitivity of cost-eﬀectiveness estimates tested with respect to the total time period of consideration ( T)
and the diﬀerential rate of return ( δ, i.e.rf−rg). The interest earned by the government (r g) is 5% annually,
and the short-term annual interest rate for farmers ( rf) varies from 10% to 30% annually. The preferred
speciﬁcation for these parameters is T= 120 days and δ= 20%.
28Table 1: Timeline of Project
Date(s) Activities
September to
December 2017Land records in Telangana are updated and digitized
February 28, 2018 Rythu Bandhu Scheme is announced
April 1 First meeting between JPAL research team and Government of
Telangana
April to May 2018 Rythu Bandhu checks printed and distributed to MAOs
May 2 Treatment MAOs informed of intervention (via video-conference)
May 8 Check distribution begins
May 23 At this point, 50% of all checks have been distributed and
encashed (60.2% of all checks that will ever be encashed)
May 29 to June 15 Call center collects data
June 8 Monsoon rains arrive in Telangana
June 9 to June 11 Phone survey of MAOs is conducted
June 15 At this point, 75% of all checks have been distributed and
encashed (90.4% of all checks that will ever be encashed)
July 9 Reports sent to treatment MAOs and their supervisors. At this
point, 79.4% of all checks have been distributed and encashed
(95% of all checks that will ever be encashed)
September 26 Research team receives bank records of check distribution through
this date
29Table 2: Balance tests
(1)
(2) (3) (4)
Variable Control Mean Treatment Mean Diﬀerence SE
1.
Characteristics of Rythu Bandhu beneﬁciaries
Land Ownership (acres) 2.27 2.28 -0.06 (0.39)
Median Land Size 1.57 1.54 -0.00 (0.05)
Land Size - 25th Percentile 0.65 0.65 0.02 (0.04)
Land Size - 75th Percentile 2.97 2.87 -0.06 (0.06)
Registered Mobile Numbers 0.60 0.63 0.03 (0.05)
Farmers per MAO 10312 10017 -288 (363)
2.
General Mandal Characteristics
Mandal population 46715 49895 -3264 (2603)
Share of female population 0.50 0.50 -0.00 (0.00)
Share of SC population 0.18 0.18 -0.00 (0.01)
Share of ST population 0.13 0.14 0.02* (0.01)
Literacy rate in mandal 0.59 0.59 -0.00 (0.01)
Share of working population 0.52 0.52 0.01 (0.00)
Share of villages with paddy as main crop 0.68 0.65 -0.01 (0.04)
Share of irrigated land 0.52 0.51 -0.01 (0.04)
Share of electriﬁed villages 0.95 0.94 -0.02 (0.02)
Average village distance from Hyderabad 135.91 134.76 0.32 (2.09)
3.
Mandal Characteristics Related to Rythu Bandhu
Number of banks in mandal 3.52 4.12 -0.26 (0.35)
Average distance to nearest ATM 12.72 12.43 -0.18 (0.47)
Share of HHs using banking services 0.45 0.43 -0.01 (0.02)
Average distance to nearest bank 7.51 7.22 -0.15 (0.31)
Share of villages with all-weather road 0.91 0.91 0.00 (0.01)
Share of HHs owning mobile phones 0.52 0.50 -0.01 (0.01)
Average rainfall in mandal 2013-17 (mm) 707.35 714.26 8.76 (10.19)
Age of MAO 35.57 36.36 0.89 (0.77)
Gender of MAO (Female = 1) 0.30 0.33 0.02 (0.05)
Observ
ations 417 131 548
Diﬀerences in (3) are estimated through regressions on a treatment indicator, with ﬁxed eﬀects at the
randomization strata level. Standard errors are clustered at the MAO level and reported in parentheses.
For distance to nearest bank or ATM, the census records the distance to the nearest bank and ATM as one
of three categories (less than 2.5km, 5-10km, or more than 10km). We substitute 2.5km, 7.5km, and 20km
respectively for each of these categories, and calculate the average distance, weighting each village according
to population. This produces the average distance across all farmers in the mandal.
30Table 3: Eﬀect on encashment outcomes
Encashed before
June 8thEver encashed
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Treatment Control
meanTreatment Control
meanObs.
Overall 0.0231∗∗∗0.69 0.0126∗0.83 5,645,937
(0.00807) (0.00655)
Land quartiles
Quartile 1 0.0278∗∗∗0.52 0.0224∗∗0.68 1,449,482
(0.00960) (0.00932)
Quartile 2 0.0248∗∗∗0.71 0.0145∗∗∗0.85 1,460,294
(0.00791) (0.00631)
Quartile 3 0.0241∗∗∗0.76 0.0113∗0.88 1,443,788
(0.00755) (0.00601)
Quartile 4 0.0208∗∗0.77 0.00699 0.89 1,443,836
(0.00803) (0.00621)
Test ofHo:
βQ1=βQ2=
βQ3=βQ40.64 (0.59) 1.72 (0.16)
Phone coverage
No listed phone 0.0229∗∗0.57 0.00691 0.72 2,254,142
(0.0116) (0.116)
Listed phone 0.0202∗∗0.76 0.0128∗∗0.90 3,543,258
(0.00821) (0.00554)
Test ofHo:
βNo−Phone =
βPhone0.04 (0.84) 0.17 (0.68)
All speciﬁcations include ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata ﬁxed level. Standard errors are clustered
at the MAO level and reported in parentheses. The bottom row of each panel reports the F-statistic and p-
value from a test of the null that coeﬃcients are statistically similar across categories. Models are estimated
using administrative data at the individual check level, as a handful (0.8%) of individuals in the database
were issued multiple checks. According to the Revenue Department, amounts above Rs. 50,000 (12.5 acres
of land) were split into multiple checks. Outcomes are essentially perfectly correlated within individual, as
farmers either picked up and encashed all or none of their checks, which is accounted for by clustering at
the mandal level. Farmers with less than 0.025 acres of land (less than 1% of the sample) were still issued
checks, but in the amount of Rs. 100.
31Table 4: Eﬀect on time to encashment
Days till encashed
(1) (2) (3)
Treatment Control mean Observations
Overall -0.759∗20.16 4,663,678
(0.388)
Land quartiles
Quartile 1 -0.655 23.99 984,251
(0.511)
Quartile 2 -0.676∗20.08 1,239,604
(0.383)
Quartile 3 -0.842∗∗18.71 1,278,096
(0.359)
Quartile 4 -0.982∗∗∗18.79 1,284,734
(0.367)
Test ofHo:
βQ1=βQ2=βQ3=βQ40.80 (0.50)
Phone coverage
No listed phone -1.295∗∗∗22.14 1,614,180
(0.475)
Listed phone -0.475 19.13 3,172,505
(0.396)
Test ofHo:
βNo−Phone =βPhone3.75 (0.05)
All speciﬁcations include ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata ﬁxed level. Standard errors are clustered
at the MAO level and reported in parentheses. The bottom row of each panel reports the F-statistic and p-
value from a test of the null that coeﬃcients are statistically similar across categories. Models are estimated
using administrative data at the individual check level, as a handful (0.8%) of individuals in the database
were issued multiple checks. According to the Revenue Department, amounts above Rs. 50,000 (12.5 acres
of land) were split into multiple checks. Outcomes are essentially perfectly correlated within individual, as
farmers typically encashed all of their checks at the same time, which is accounted for by clustering at the
mandal level.
32A Appendix Tables and Figures
Figure A.1: Distribution of Check Amounts Under Rythu Bandhu
02.0e+054.0e+056.0e+058.0e+05Frequency
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Check Amount (in INR)Distribution of Check Amounts
This graph shows the frequency of check amounts in our sample, excluding the top 1% of landowners,
corresponding approximately to amounts greater than INR 50,000.
33Table A.1: Eﬀect of MAO Survey Among Control MAOs
Ever encashed Encashed on time Days to encashment
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Sampled for MAO survey 0.00876 0.0112 -0.0214
(0.00767) (0.0107) (0.438)
Completed MAO survey 0.00219 0.00127 0.249
(0.00839) (0.0124) (0.534)
Observations 4348248 4348248 4348248 4348248 3575083 3575083
Outcome in header. All speciﬁcations include district ﬁxed eﬀects since a ﬁxed number of MAOs
in each district were sampled for the survey. Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the
MAO level.
34Table A.2: Impact on beneﬁciary experience
(1) (2) (3)
Received at
Gram SabhaAsked to
pay bribeSatisﬁed
with scheme
Treatment 0.00759∗0.00108 0.00232
(0.00457) (0.00230) (0.00359)
Control Mean 0.94 0.02 0.93
Observations 19,890 19,830 22,329
Outcomes in header. Estimates are weighted using (inverse) sampling probability, as pre-speciﬁed, based on
the probability that an individual was sampled for an attempted call. All speciﬁcations include randomization
strata ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors are clustered at the MAO level and in parentheses. The number of
observations varies due to lower rates of response on some questions, which were asked later in the phone
survey.
Table A.3: Direct Eﬀect of Reports on Encashment (Hazard Model)
Exponential
Proportional HazardStratiﬁed Cox
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Treatment .074∗∗.034∗∗.044∗∗.041∗∗
(.030) (.017) (.021) (.020)
Treatment×Report -.045 -.023
(.079) (.039)
Observations 5,527,320 5,527,320 4,560,929 4,560,929
Model speciﬁcation in header. All speciﬁcations include ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata ﬁxed level.
Standard errors are clustered at the MAO level and reported in parentheses.
35Table A.4: Testing for spillovers
(1) (2)
Ever distributed Ever encashed
Number of treatment mandals in
revenue division0.000679 0.00847
(0.00473) (0.00551)
Observations 399 399
As pre-speciﬁed, this table tests for the possibility that these results could be explained by supervisors
of MAOs focusing more attention on treatment MAOs. Districts in Telangana are divided into “revenue
divisions”, which each contain several mandals. Although roughly the same fraction of mandals were treated
in each district, we did not stratify the randomization at the revenue division level. As a result, there
is random variation in the fraction of MAOs within each revenue division that are treated. If there were
diversion of revenue division supervisor-level attention and attention matters for performance, we should
expect worse performance among control MAOs with more treated MAOs in their revenue division, as these
control MAOs would get less attention paid to them. This table does not ﬁnd this to be the case. Outcome
in header. All speciﬁcations include ﬁxed eﬀects for districts and number of mandals in the revenue division.
Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the revenue division level. 17 mandals could not be matched
to revenue divisions, so were not included.
36Table A.5: Eﬀect of Being Randomly Selected for Calls
(1) (2) (3)
Ever Encashed Encashed on time Days to encashment
Sampled -0.0005 -0.004∗0.03
(0.001) (0.002) (0.08)
Observations 3500017 3500017 3134416
Outcome in header. Each speciﬁcation contains mandal ﬁxed eﬀects, as this is the unit at which random
sampling of farmers to be called by the call center was done. Standard errors are clustered at the farmer
level. These observations only include farmers who had a listed phone number, and hence a non-zero chance
of being sampled for the phone survey.
Table A.6: Main Outcomes, Excluding Those Randomly Selected for Calls
(1) (2) (3)
Ever encashed Encashed on time Days to encashment
Treatment 0.012∗0.022∗∗∗-0.749∗
(0.007) (0.008) (0.387)
Observations 5538379 5538379 4570405
Outcome in header. All speciﬁcations include ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata ﬁxed level. Standard
errors are clustered at the MAO level and reported in parentheses. These observations do not include farmers
who were randomly sampled to be called by the call center.
37Table A.7: Agreement between phone and administrative data on MAO performance
(1) (2) (3)
Actual
agreement rateAgreement rate
from sampling
variationResidual
disagreement
rate
Pair-wise order of
rankings68.6% 77.6% 9.0%
Bottom 20% in PD
found in bottom
20% of AD43.0% 61.7% 18.7%
Bottom 20% in PD
found in bottom
50% of AD83.0% 92.7% 9.7%
AD (Administrative Data). PD (Phone Data). The actual rate of agreement between phone and adminis-
trative data is reported in (1). Next, a comparison is made between the entire population of administrative
data and 1,000 random draws of farmers sampled from the administrative data, where each draw is the size
of the phone call sample. The mean of these 1,000 agreement rates is reported in (2), showing the amount
of disagreement that we would expect due simply to sampling variation in which farmers were selected for
the phone call sample. The residual disagreement rate after accounting for (2) is reported in (3).
38B Reports Sent to District and Mandal Agricultural
Oﬃcers
B.1 Report to Mandal Agricultural Oﬃcers - Example
Report on Rythu Bandhu Scheme in (Mandal name)37
Dear (MAO Name),
As you were informed at the beginning of May, the Department of Agriculture carried out
a pilot program in your mandal during the Rythu Bandhu Scheme. For this program, a call
center called farmers from all of the villages in your mandal and collected information about
their experience with the Rythu Bandhu scheme. The below table gives the results of this
survey.
The ﬁrst row gives the percentage of farmers who received their cheques in your mandal,
as well as in the whole district and the state. The second row is the percent of farmers
who received their cheques before May 20th. The third row is the percent of farmers who
reported being satisﬁed or very satisﬁed. The fourth row is the percent who have success-
fully encashed their cheques, if they got them. The ﬁfth row is the percent of farmers who
reported having a payment demanded for receiving their cheques.
This report will also be shared with district and state level agricultural oﬃcials.
We hope that the availability of this data on program performance is helpful to you. If
you have any questions about this report, you can call (Name of member of ﬁeld team)
(Mobile number), an outside consultant who is working with Government of Telangana to
implement the pilot.
(Name of bureaucrat)
Commissioner of Agriculture
37The report was sent out in the working language of the state (Telugu). This is the original pre-translation
version of the report.
39Category In Man-
dalDistrict
AverageState Av-
erageOverall
Rating
Farmers Received Cheque 90.5% 82.2% 83.3% Excellent
Cheque Received Before May 20 43.9% 38.9% 45.1% Fair
Satisﬁed Farmers 91.5% 93.4% 92.2% Excellent
Successfully Encashed Cheque 81.1% 76.8% 75.4% Excellent
Money Requested for Cheque 3.7% 2.0% 1.5% Fair
GUIDE:
Farmers Received Cheque:
0-75% (Poor), 75%-80% (Fair), 80-85% (Good), 85-100% (Excellent)
Cheque Received Before May 20:
0-40% (Poor), 40%-50% (Fair), 50-60% (Good), 60-100% (Excellent)
Satisﬁed Farmers:
0-80% (Poor), 80%-85% (Fair), 85-90% (Good), 90-100% (Excellent)
Successfully Encashed Cheque:
0-55% (Poor), 55%-60% (Fair), 60-75% (Good), 75-100% (Excellent)
Money Requested for Cheque:
>4% (Poor), 2%-4% (Fair), 1-2% (Good), 0-1% (Excellent)
40Village Cheque Received (%) Cheque Encashed (%)
(VILLAGE 1) 84.1% 75.8%
(VILLAGE 2) 88.0% 48.6%
(VILLAGE 3) 88.4% 74.7%
(VILLAGE 4) 89.6% 79.6%
(VILLAGE 5) 90.4% 77.1%
(VILLAGE 6) 91.3% 77.9%
(VILLAGE 7) 91.6% 84.1%
(VILLAGE 8) 91.7% 80.4%
(VILLAGE 9) 91.9% 78.5%
(VILLAGE 10) 92.6% 80.4%
(VILLAGE 11) 93.4% 82.6%
(VILLAGE 12) 94.0% 85.4%
(VILLAGE 13) 94.3% 80.3%
(VILLAGE 14) 95.3% 82.3%
(VILLAGE 15) 96.1% 81.4%
(VILLAGE 16) 96.7% 82.6%
(VILLAGE 17) 96.7% 79.1%
(VILLAGE 18) 97.0% 76.6%
(VILLAGE 19) 97.1% 83.1%
(VILLAGE 20) 97.9% 74.5%
41B.2 Report to District Agricultural Oﬃcers - Example
Report on Rythu Bandhu Scheme in (District name)38
Mandal MAO
NameFarmers
Received
ChequeCheque
Received
Before
May 20Satisﬁed
FarmersSuccessfully
Encashed
ChequeMoney
Re-
quested
for
Cheque
79.3% 38.0% 91.3% 65.2% 1.1%
(Mandal 1) (MAO 1) Fair Poor Excellent Good Good
78.7% 36.0% 88.0% 73.3% 2.7%
(Mandal 2) (MAO 2) Fair Poor Good Good Fair
80.5% 43.9% 91.5% 78.1% 3.7%
(Mandal 3) (MAO 3) Good Fair Excellent Excellent Fair
38The report was sent out in the working language of the state (Telugu). This is the original pre-translation
version of the report.
42C Discussion of disbursement and encashment data
The Agriculture Department at the Government of Telangana (GoTS) wanted to collect
administrative data on the progress of the Rythu Bandhu program using two independent
databases. The ﬁrst database was maintained by MAOs. MAOs were given tablets on which
they were supposed to input which checks had been distributed on a given date. The second
database was maintained by banks, and tracked whether each check was encashed and the
date of encashment. The bank database was updated in real-time as checks were cleared.
Clearly, the reliability of these systems may diﬀer: the MAO-based system depends on
clerical and administrative processes, while the bank-based system is linked with existing
payment systems and largely mechanized. Banks were required to maintain updated data
to ensure they received payments from the government, while we observed that the MAO-
based system was updated in a more haphazard and inconsistent manner. We did not know
this during the study design phase, but after observing the distribution process, we came
to suspect that the MAO-based data on distribution of checks may not be as reliable as
bank-based systems on encashment.
We conducted a number of checks and found that the suspected unreliability of MAO-based
distribution indicators was borne out in the data itself, such as in the following instances:
•We received the up-to-date MAO and bank-based databases at three points in time:
once in July, once in August, and once in September 2018. When we compare the
September data to the previous two rounds, we see that for 1% of the observations,
disbursement status was revised from “distributed” to “not distributed”. This indicates
an error was caught in these cases, but is worrisome since there may be other errors
that were missed. The bank-based data had no such revisions.
•The September round of data lists dates of distribution for 700K checks that are also
recorded as never having been distributed.
•From our conversations with GoTS, there was a misunderstanding on the part of MAOs
regarding the date of distribution indicator. A signiﬁcant number of MAOs updated
the “date of distribution” ﬁeld with the date on which they uploaded their data, which
may be weeks after the actual date of distribution. This is obvious in the data, where
many MAOs are recorded as distributing an impossibly large number of checks on a
given day, with no checks delivered on other working days. Based on this, we do not
believe the date of distribution ﬁeld to be a usable indicator for speed of distribution.
•There are substantial revisions in the indicator for date of distribution in the MAO-
based database. Between the three rounds of data, there are diﬀerences in dates of
distribution in 1-5% of the observations.
43Overall, there are signiﬁcant reasons to distrust the MAO-based data on check distribution,
including that MAOs might have tried to overstate their performance by recording that they
distributed more checks than they actually did. The bank-based data on check encashment,
on the other hand, do not have these concerns and closely match data from the phone
surveys. We report results below in tables A.8 and A.9 based on the MAO database since we
committed to this in the pre-analysis plan, but believe the outcomes to be noisily measured
in that dataset as compared to the check encashment data.
44Table A.8: Eﬀect on check distribution outcomes (MAO reports)
Distributed before
June 8thEver distributed
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Treatment Control
meanTreatment Control
meanObs.
Overall 0.00924 0.81 0.00793∗0.87 5,645,937
(0.00653) (0.00468)
Land quartiles
Quartile 1 0.0177∗0.67 0.0165∗0.74 1,449,482
(0.00984) (0.00878)
Quartile 2 0.00955 0.83 0.00910∗∗0.89 1,460,294
(0.00634) (0.00417)
Quartile 3 0.00742 0.87 0.00654∗∗0.92 1,443,788
(0.00568) (0.00319)
Quartile 4 0.00546 0.87 0.00371 0.93 1,443,836
(0.00569) (0.00334)
Test ofHo:
βQ1=βQ2=
βQ3=βQ40.43 (0.73) 1.18 (0.32)
Phone coverage
No listed phone 0.00814 0.69 0.00673 0.76 2,254,142
(0.0114) (0.0104)
Listed phone 0.00544 0.89 0.00498∗0.94 3,543,258
(0.00536) (0.00269)
Test ofHo:
βNo−Phone =
βPhone0.10 (0.75) 0.08 (0.78)
All speciﬁcations include ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata ﬁxed level. Standard errors are clustered
at the MAO level and reported in parentheses. The bottom row of each panel reports the F-statistic and
p-value from a test of the null that coeﬃcients are statistically similar across categories.
45Table A.9: Eﬀect on time to distribution (MAO reports)
Days till distributed
(1) (2) (3)
Treatment Control mean Observations
Overall -0.125 11.70 4,930,113
(0.310)
Land quartiles
Quartile 1 -0.220 13.55 1,082,824
(0.386)
Quartile 2 -0.0543 11.53 1,302,380
(0.312)
Quartile 3 -0.104 18.71 1,334,261
(0.299)
Quartile 4 -0.232 11.23 1,343,004
(0.297)
Test ofHo:
βQ1=βQ2=βQ3=βQ40.61 (0.61)
Phone coverage
No listed phone -0.128 13.85 1,729,723
(0.403)
Listed phone -0.0826 10.57 3,332,746
(0.286)
Test ofHo:
βNo−Phone =βPhone0.05 (0.83)
All speciﬁcations include ﬁxed eﬀects at the randomization strata ﬁxed level. Standard errors are clustered
at the MAO level and reported in parentheses. The bottom row of each panel reports the F-statistic and
p-value from a test of the null that coeﬃcients are statistically similar across categories.
46