International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878, Volume -8 Issue -4, November 2019  
 
7085   
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
  
Abstract— Financial Inclusion in India is growing with 
adaptation of increasing Digital Banking Trends with more 
Fintech players entering into the market. With more disruptive 
technologies and intervention with help of internet and mobile 
banking, adaptation and usa ge of electronic banking in rural and 
semi rural areas is also reflecting increasing trends. This reflects 
that more households are provided with affordable banking 
services including savings accounts, loans, pension and Rupay 
Debit Cards for the day to da y retail transactions. This paper 
focuses on recent trends of digitalisation and analyzes the 
sustainability impact on increased and advanced Financial 
Inclusion in India.  
 
Key Words : Digital Banking, Financial Inclusion, 
Sustainability, Retail Payment  
I. BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY  
Current Scenario of Indian Banking System is facing many 
disruptions due to various banking reforms and new 
initiatives jointly by Government of India, Ministry of 
Finance and Reserve bank of India. It started with Financial 
Inclus ion Initiatives with Launch of PMJDY in 2014 – A 
mega event to open the accounts of common man to 
Demonetization in 2016 to remove illegal money from the 
economy. Demonetization paved the way to increase in 
digitalization products like digital wallets to ma ke new 
digital and cash free India.  
Digital Banking have been existed in India for a very long 
time and it’s not a new initiative but the adaptation by 
customers  as well as the focus of the bankers have increased 
in the recent past 2 -3 years . In India, various forms of 
payment system exists which are broadly classified into two – 
paper based and non paper based (E Banking). Banks have 
adopted new emerging technologies and RBI has also 
introduce new law on payment and Settlement Act, 2007 for 
new rules an d guidelines to be adopted by the banks in their 
internal operations for safety and providing excellent 
customer services. On 28th July, 2018 Srikrishna Panel has 
 
 
Manuscript published on November 30, 2019.   
* Correspondence Author  
Dr. Narinder Kumar Bhasin *, Professor , Amity University , Uttar 
Pradesh , Noida ( AUUP ) , Uttar Pradesh, India.  
Dr.  Anupama Rajesh  , Professor , Amity University , Uttar Pradesh , 
Noida ( AUUP  ), Uttar Pradesh, India.  
 
     © The Authors. Published by Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering and 
Sciences Publication (BEIESP). This is an open access  article under the  
CC-BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
 
 submitted report to the Government on the personal data 
protection for taking explicit consen t for using like 
biometrics, religious, personal messages and political belief.  
Financial Inclusion – PMJDY scheme played an important 
role to give access to affordable banking services like 
savings, deposits , remittances , insurance cover both 
accidenta l as well as life , pension and loan up to Rs. 5000/ - 
to people who have been excluded from banking facilities for 
want of KYC documents. Demonetization forced the people 
to adapt digital banking options when paper currency money 
supply was short for few m onths. Kiryana shops, milkman, 
photocopy shops, vegetable vendor’s etc start accepting 
credit cards or digital wallets for very small transaction 
Worth Rs. 100 or 50 through QR code based by Scan.  This 
enable customers to make small Payments for utility da y to 
day needs. Make in India and Digital India Projects have been 
launched by the Government of India to take this initiative of 
Financial Inclusion and Digitalization to the next level to 
bring paradigm shift of replacing cash and cheques with 
digital wa llet, internet and mobile banking.  
The research paper throws light on the relationship 
between financial inclusion and digital India. Financial 
inclusion is recognized globally as an important tool for 
connecting and delivering the financial services to a ll the 
sectors of the economy. Digital Banking through mobile and 
internet banking can reach to remote areas rural, weaker, 
farmers and low income section of society so that they can 
shift their financial needs to proper banking channels instead 
of unorgan ized financial channels like money lenders, friends 
and relatives.  Digital Financial Inclusion can further 
strengthen the payment system of the country to secure and 
faster movements of funds. Digital India is an initiative taken 
by Indian government to p rovide government services 
electronically to all the citizens. The research studies the 
sustainability effect of digital India initiatives on the concept 
of financial inclusion. P K Oziler 2017 explain the various 
benefits of financial inclusion and digita l financial services to 
various stakeholders of financial system like digital banking 
users, banks, financial institutions and Government . These 
studies also focus on various issues and challenges exist to 
for sustainable development of digital finance to  make 
financial inclusion benefits more effective for the economy 
as a whole.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Increasing Digital Banking Adoption and Usage 
Trends in India and its Impact on Financial 
Inclusion  
Narinder Kumar Bhasin , Anupama Rajesh  
 
Increasing Digital Banking Adoption and Usage Trends in India and its Impact on Financial Inclusion  
7086  Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
 II. INTRODUCTION  
Indian Banking System have witnessed the cash less drive 
after Demonetization in Nov 2016 but the Journey of 
transformation from traditional banking models to 
digitalization have started long back in 1987 when ICICI 
Bank became the first bank and started p roviding Internet 
banking facility. This was followed by introduction of first  
ATM in India by HSBC in 1987, First Public Sector Bank - 
Central Bank of India introduced Credit Card but the pace of 
growth of E / Digital banking was slow. Recent Invest or`s 
presentations by the banks as on 31st march 2018 shows that 
customers services by the banks at retail branches are 
decreasing. HDFC Bank stated the customer transactions in 
bank branches have been reduced from 43% in 2008 to 8% as 
on 31st March, 2018 where Axis Bank’s business has 
undergone a similar digital change with 92 per cent 
transactions happening outside branches as opposed to 87 per 
cent a year ago. The major reason for this shift is due to 
increase in Internet and Mobile Banking adaptation by 
customers and financial awareness created by Retail bank 
branches.    
PMJDY was launched in 2014 to achieve Mission 100% 
financial Inclusion to increase opening of savings accounts 
with Rupay Debit cards with deposits mobilization by both 
public and privat e sector banks. Digital Financial Inclusion in 
developing countries has played an important role to increase 
financial literacy and awareness to reach the customer who 
are far off and have been excluded from the affordable 
banking services. Digital Banking  & Finance and Financial 
Inclusion has become the tool for economic growth and 
poverty reduction. Fintech companies like Paytm, Airtel are 
also playing an important role in reaching the common man 
for small digital payments as well as posing threat for the  big 
banks. This chapter focuses on the growth of digital banking 
in India and impact of digital finance for achieving Financial 
Inclusion and Financial System stability.  
There has been a paradigm shift in Indian Banking 
Customer in fast adoption of using digital technology like 
card payments, internet and mobile banking for settlement of 
commercial transactions in their day to day life. The main 
reasons for this growth in internet and mobile banking are 
due to easily availability of data plans at low cost,  increasing 
awareness, and convenience in operations to online banking 
systems from manual and offline payment systems. Changing 
needs of the customers and their behavior have kept the banks 
to develop new range of banking products and services via 
differe nt digital modes and channels. Indian Banks have 
implemented the important innovating digital technologies 
and infrastructure to improve customer relations in all 
segments – Urban, Semi urban and rural market. The 
advanced Digital cloud  based technologies which are 
bringing the change in conduct of the business processes 
across all industries globally.  The main advantages of Digital 
banking are the speed and accuracy in the movement of funds 
and the big challenges is security, data analytics and data 
priva cy. Huge investments have been made by banks in their 
IT spend budgets. The Digital Revolution has changed 
customer’s expectation, innovative high profile relationship 
model, avid consumer of new product components and 
services.  Digital innovation and tran sformation has created need of 
dedicated and expert workforce who understands these 
technologies and smoothly mange this transformation. 
Artificial intelligence, Block chain technology, IOT, and 
other emerging technology are the forefront of E Banking and 
banks requires the leaders who can change these legacy 
systems and improve the customer experiences. In digital 
banking customer just need an internet connection to have 
access to the multichannel banking and avail the services 
from home or outside through  Mobile or laptop.  
III. OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY  
1. To study the trends of growth of Digital banking and 
initiatives being taken in its implementation in India.  
2. To examine and analyze the sustainably impact of 
Digitalization in Achieving Financial Inclusion in  India.  
IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  
Secondary Data has been collected, Studied and Analyzed 
from the various sources as mentioned below:  
1. Research Journal and Papers  
2. Websites  
3. Newspaper Articles  
4. Published Reports  
5. Reserve Bank of India Journals – Payment System 
Indicator  
6. National Payment Corporation of India – Retail 
Payment System Statistics  
7. Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana Website – 
Pmjdy.gov.in  
V. LITERATURE REVIEW  
Niti Aayog Report on Digital Payments - Trends , Issues 
and Opportunities ( 2018 ,India )  highlights the back ground 
of evolution of digital payments in India , explain the legal 
definition of electronic / digital banking , traces the growth 
trends in customer adoption and usage of digital banking by 
using the data from  Reserv e Bank of India , National 
Payment Council of India , Ministry of Finance , Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India , Ministry of Finance and 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. This 
report also explains  the Digital Payment Summary trends in 
2017 -18 and suggest that though there has been robust 
growth in both volume and values of digital banking and 
three times higher growth in total retail payments in last three 
years. RBI Journal Payment and System Indicator (Jan 2019) 
report reflects in creasing trends in usage of electronic 
banking. RBI Report reflects that in November 2018 - 
Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) value has reached 
1347.57 billion and National Automated Clearing House 
(NACH) 1428.33 Billion. Debit Cards usage at ATMs and 
POS h ave increased to 3319.10 Billion whereas  Mobile 
banking has touched 2458.59 Billion.  NPCI, Retail Payment 
Statistics,( Jan 2019 ) reflects Unified Payment Interface 
Value Rs. 822.32 billion – with break up BHIM – 79.82, 
USSD 2.0 – 0.20 and UPI excluding BH IM & USSD – 
742.31 . Rupay Card usage at ( 
POS ) Rs. 75.50 billion and 
Rupay Car d Usage at eCom – 
31.81 billion . International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878, Volume -8 Issue -4, November 2019  
 
7087   
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
 Business Line, Sept 2018 – BHIM UPI, Rupay swipe maser 
card visa reports that that these two UPI BHIM and RUPAY 
home grown payment systems have  touched more than 60% 
of Digital transactions. Unified payment Interface is a digital 
banking product launched by National Payment  
Corporation of India (NPCI) which connects the various 
accounts of the customer through single mobile application 
device. UPI is fully compliance with regulatory guidelines 
and secure with single click two factor authentication works 
with virtual address without entering bank account, card  
number or IFSC Code. Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM) is 
another simple, quick and easy application for payment 
transfer using UPI platform. Various features of BHIM are 
Send Money, Request Money, Scan and Pay, Check 
Transactions History, View, Share and  Download the QR 
Code and set Payment Reminders.  
ADB 2016 report on Financial Inclusion on the Digital 
Economy Conference focused on the five important themes 
as the digital economy is rapidly developing worldwide.  
 
These five themes are  
a. Trends in digital ﬁnancial inclusion —key opportunities 
and challenges for reaching the unbanked and under banked  
b. A customer -centric approach to ﬁnancial inclusion  
c. Digital business models for accessing ﬁnancial services  
d. Supervision and regulation of digi tal ﬁnancial services  
e. Cost and value of digital ﬁnance.  
This report further discusses how multilateral development 
banks can support the financial inclusion through digital 
financial technologies. Session 2 of this conference 
highlights the main lessons  learnt in developing few 
important business models that focus on financial Inclusion 
like Technologies as Market Drivers, Freemium models and 
cross selling’s other financial services, Alternative data for 
small and medium sized enterprise, Role of social media 
network payment option, Thin Sim card overlay technology, 
E Commerce and Crypto currency and block chain 
technologies  
Badar Alam Iqbal, Shaista Sami 2016 explains the role of 
banks in financial inclusion in India. This study focused on 
the various f actors which affect the access to financial 
services like place of living, absence of legal identity, gender 
biasness, Limited knowledge of financial products and 
services, level of income and bank charges, rigid terms and 
conditions and nature of occupati ons and business.  
VI. INCREASING TRENDS IN DIGITAL BANKING 
IN INDIA  
The footfall of the customer in retail bank branches are 
decreasing as technology has played an important role in 
bringing the change in the customer delivery of the banking 
and financial  services. The New Digital trends in Indian 
Banking System in 2018 lead to innovative digital 
disruptions with the entry of new fintech players from the non 
financial sector that are emerging as a competitor to the 
traditional banks. Going ahead the relati onship between 
banks and fintech companies will improve and collaborative 
fintech approach will be followed which will be helpful to 
both the banks and Fintech Company. Fintech have supported 
banks to grow so the banks have to move the next level of 
innova tive technology in compliance with regulatory guidelines of RBI. First, Block chain provides real time 
banking and has benefit of cost savings, accuracy and fast 
speed of settlement of financial transactions. Block Chain is 
similar to digital ledger with s pread sheet distributed across a 
network and no risk of hacking data as the data is not stored 
on server or centralized data centre. Second, end to end 
digitalization by banks is helping the banks to shift and move 
ahead from conventional banking to conven ient banking. 
Third Artificial intelligence has enabled banks to support 
clients, improve their banking experience and resolve their 
queries and issues.  
India Digital Payment trend reflects the increase in number 
and values of internet, mobile and debit c ard users. India is a 
second leading market in the world for purchase of mobile 
phones and smart phone users are increasing as a result 
m-commerce sale have surpass e -commerce sales. It is 
expected that by 2021 Indian Markets will touch 63 billion 
USD. In India Digital Commerce Spend reflects people spend 
majorly 44% on travel services, 28% online non travel , 22%  
on E -Tailing and 6% distributed on financial services (3%),  
2% other online services and 1% on matrimony classifieds.  
 
 
Figure 1: India Digital Payment Trends Source: FSS 
Powering payments – www.fstech.com/india  
 
 
 
 
 
Increasing Digital Banking Adoption and Usage Trends in India and its Impact on Financial Inclusion  
7088  Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
   
  
Figure 2: Banking Modes of the Past and Future: 
Source Deloittte December 2017 the Financial Brand  
 
 
  
 
 
 
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878, Volume -8 Issue -4, November 2019  
 
7089   
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
 Above Figure 2 reflect that the Future of Banking in 
connected through Mobile thus replacing branch banking.  
Figure 3 above reflects that out of the ten emerging trends in 
retail banking all over the world , the top three trends relates 
to Customer Centricity vision of the banks , adaptation of big 
data , block chain , artificial intelligence and data analytics .  
Banks are looking to serve the customer through various 
channels and modes like point of sales machine, ATMs, Mall 
and E tailing. Various Imitative has been taken by RBI and 
NPCI with objective of shifting customer dependence on 
cash and paper based cheque system in India’s payment 
system to digital payments system.  
With further growth and advancement in information and 
technology, t he trends reflect growth and evolving payment 
systems. NPCI has introduced new digital secure products in 
consonance with the path envisioned by the Reserve Bank of 
India.  As part of this vision, the NPCI has been spearheading 
the development of the retai l payments system. The Journey 
of Evolution and development of Indian Banking payments 
system moved on from manual settlement of funds transfer 
and clearing settlement to Electronic Payment System in last 
three decades. With introduction of Magnetic Ink Ch aracter 
Recognition (MICR) clearing in the early 1980s and in 
1990`S Electronic Clearing Service (ECS) – both Debt and 
Credit was introduced. National Financial Switch in 2003 that brought about interconnectivity of ATMs across the 
country, the RTGS  and N EFT in 2004, National Electronic 
Clearing Services ( NECS ) IN 2008 ,  Cheque Truncation 
System (CTS) in 2009, the second factor authentication for 
the ‘card not present’ transaction in 2009 and the new RTGS 
with enhanced features in 2013 [Mundra (2015)]. Fintech 
entities and companies have introduced and created the new 
market of the users who have adopted pre -paid instruments 
(PPI), financial transactions through digital wallets and 
mobile banking. These measures have been complemented 
by significant init iatives by the NPCI including the launching 
of CTS grid wise. CTS is an image based clearing system 
which has interoperability on IMPS , NFS , NACH,  NFS and 
domestic card RuPay network , APBS and AEPS (which are 
an important part of the financial inclusio n process), National 
Unified USSD Platform (NUUP), UPI and the BHIM 
application [Gandhi (2016)]. All these digital banking 
initiatives were launched pan -India which enabled faster 
movement of funds within 24 hours. Manual and MICR 
clearing of cheques were replaced by CTS and electronic 
funds movement through NEFT, the IMPS, mobile 
banking/payments and card payments. These Initiatives by 
RBI, Payment and Settlement Department and NPCI has 
brought a revolutionary evolution of the Digital Payments in 
Indian Ba nking Payment System.  
 
Table 1: Increasing Trends of E Banking Payment Systems in 2016 -17 & 2017 -18 - Source RBI Journal – Payment 
System Indicator Statistics  
 
Table 2: Retail Payment Systems on NPCI  Platform  – April 2018 – Jan 2019  
  
 
Increasing Digital Banking Adoption and Usage Trends in India and its Impact on Financial Inclusion  
7090  Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
 VII. GROWTH TRENDS (DURING 2016 -17 TO 
2017 -18) 
The two official sources on Digital Payments are RBI and 
NPCI, both of which are relevant and important. The 
narrative on the growth trends which  covers the period from 
2016 -17 to 2017 -18 is presented based on RBI Data. The 
analysis covers the trends over the years 2016 -17 to 2017 -18 
i.e. Years preceding demonetization and compares the 
growth trends over the last two years i.e. 2016 -17 and 
2017 -18 which was the post demonetization period.  
Seven Important Payment Systems are selected for study 
to analyze the growth trends and data collected from RBI 
Journal – payment and System Indicators Statistics.  
1. Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) is an on line re al 
time settlement electronic funds transfer system for financial 
transactions for two lacs and above. All the four parties to 
RTGS Transactions have to ensure that remitter’s who has 
initiated the transactions should have IFSC Code of the bank 
branch of t he beneficiary, Both the bank branches of remitter 
and beneficiary should be RTGS enabled. Individuals, 
Corporate as well as banks can participate in RTGS for 
customers as well as interbank transactions. Above table 1 
shows the increase of Rs. 17.10 millio n in volume and Rs. 
213779 billion in values of RTGS in the year 2016 -17 and 
2017 -18 which reflects the customers are shifting from paper 
based payment systems to RTGS for high value transactions 
which are more secure, fast and accurate.  
2. Cheque Truncation  System (CTS) is an Image based 
cheque clearing settlement system where the physical image of the cheque is truncated and transmits for settlement 
through electronic clearing house. It takes  48 hours i.e. T +1 
for final credit to payee`s account. However w ith more focus 
on electronic and digital banking payment system, customers 
are shifting from usage of cheques therefore the table 1 shows 
the minor increase of Rs .26.19 million in volumes and 
5415.07 billion in values in the year 2016 -17 and 2017 -18. 
3. Simi larly, we observe from the above table 1 that all 
retail electronic clearing like NEFT, NACH, Cards, 
prepayment instruments and mobile banking are showing the 
increasing trends of customer usage. This is a positive impact 
in country like India where cash a nd cheques are traditional 
payment instrument used by both individuals and business 
community.      
Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) is another new 
initiative by NPCI where funds transfer system through 
mobile phones and available 24/7. Table 3 shows that IMPS, 
UPI, BHIM and Rupay card usage both at Point of Sales 
(POS) as well as on e commerce websites are reflecting 
increasing trends both in number of transactions volume as 
well as in funds transfer value. NPCI announced on its 
official twitter that the n umber of UPI transactions increased 
up to 620.17 million as compared to 524.94 million in Nov, 
2018, up 18%. In Jan 2019, UPI volumes touched to 672.75 
reflecting further increased to 8. % and total UPI volumes 
from April 2018 – Jan 2019 touched 3879.69 Mi llion. With 
increasing UPI transactions, it has enabled users to establish 
digital transactions trails and this will provide access to credit 
to MSME sector at cheaper rate of interest.  
 
 
Table 3: Progress Report on Number of Beneficiaries under PMJDY as on 20th Feb, 2019 (All figures in Crores)  
 
 
 
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878, Volume -8 Issue -4, November 2019  
 
7091   
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
 VIII. SUCCESS STORY OF PMJDY – FINANCIAL 
INCLUSION  
Success story of PradhanMantri Jan DhanYojana which 
started in 2014 as a revolutionary national moveme nt mission 
to achieve the Financial Inclusion in India is reflected in 
above table 2.  PMJDY has ensure and provided an 
opportunity to people from the different parts of society to 
open savings account and operate them for various banking, 
remittances, pen sion and insurance transactions at very low 
and affordable cost. Three special benefits under PMJDY 
made it a successful implementation was an accidental 
insurance cover of Rs. 1 lac, life cover of Rs. 30000/ - and OD 
benefit of Rs. 5000 / per household per  account and 
preferable in women of the household.   
PMJDY implementation was very effective and efficient 
that by 31stJan, 2015, banks open 75016094 accounts in rural 
area and 50457195 in urban area, thus totaling account 
number 125473289. Balances in these  account s reached Rs. 
1049962.62( in lacs ) and number of Rupay Debit Card 
110792799. Within the span of four years of launch of these 
scheme, total deposits in these accounts reached 91794.72 
Crore and Rupay Debit card number 27.44 Crore.  
IX. IMPACT ANALY SIS OF DIGITALIZATION ON 
FINANCIAL INCLUSION  
A. Bank Accounts for the Unbanked : Evidence from a Big 
Bang experiment – This empirical study in May 2017 
suggests that with increase in the financial literacy level of 
the people , the following encouraging trend s were observed 
by the bankers :  
1. 70% of the dormant account moves to the active status 
as the operations and transactions between these accounts 
started by the account holders.  
2. Number of accounts and funds in these accounts 
continue to increase.  
3. Government  direct benefits subsidy in PMJDY 
Accounts delivered directly  
4. Cash balances and Small deposits transactions appear in 
these accounts.  
In May 2016 another article “Who wants to be an 
Entrepreneur “recommends that by moving or shifting 
workers to more produc tive work from less productive jobs 
can facilitates the Financial development and Economic 
Growth .In India, people do many informal business and 
entrepreneurial functions and if Government can take 
initiative and shift these people into more productive 
organization and nurture their individuals talents, it will 
impact the economic growth in much big way. Since it would 
more time consuming process and more efforts to put to 
move from this position of financial literacy to next level. 
The two important chall enges of non -performing assets 
(NPA) in the Indian banking sector and second Economic 
Dynamism in the formal business sector with long -term 
capital investments should be made by industry.  
B. Digital Financial Inclusion Initiative is next 
revolutionary step an d efforts by National Payment 
Corporation of India to reach the common man who have 
open accounts under PMJDY. NPCI with introduction of new 
payment systems like IMPS, Unified Payment Systems (UPI) and BHIM is able to connect customer at remote areas to 
deliver digital banking services. Digital Financial Inclusion 
through NPCI`s E Banking Products have interconnected 
customers, financial service users , banks , mobile wallets , 
Fintech Companies , point of sale , Government and 
Economy as a whole. Digital F inance and schemes like 
PMJDY Financial Inclusion jointly can give many benefits to 
all these stakeholders. Digital Financial Inclusion can 
increase assess of the finance or loans to common man, less 
financial intermediation costs to Fintech providers and banks.  
C. Small and Payment Banks: The objective of giving 
licenses to Payment and Small banks is to further strengthen 
and increased the assess of financial inclusion by providing 
banking services to low income households, unorganized 
sector and small busine ss entities. But these banks needs to 
follow all the rules and regulations under banking Regulation 
and RBI Act.  Airtel Payment bank which was opened in Jan , 
2018 and on 7th March , 2018 , RBI imposed penalty on Airtel 
Payment Banks to the tune of Rs. 5 crore for violating and 
non adherence of KYC guidelines and opening of account 
without customer consent. On 20th June, 2018, RBI has 
instructed Paytm Payment Banks to stop acq uiring new 
customers for the process followed in new account opening 
and adherence to KYC norms. Paytm Payment banks have a 
very progressive and impressive increase in adaptation of 
customer `s digital payment transaction in Tier 1and 2 Cities. 
50% of the Paytm users from Tier 1 and Tier 2 cities have 
recorded Five Billion transactions as annual run rate and 
Gross transaction value $ 50 Billion in July 2018 where as it 
was just $ 1 Billion in June 2017. Paytm Payment Banks uses 
UPI for their services like r echarges and utility bill payments 
P2P mobile wallet. Small and payment Banks are very 
important tool of achieving Financial Inclusion and they need 
to ensure full compliance with Banking Laws and KYC 
Norms.       Fintech Companies: Growth rate of Fintech  
ecosystem around the world is growing with collaboration of 
Global Fintech software and likely to touch USD 45billion by 
2020 and 7.1% CAGR – Compounded Annual Growth Rate. 
Indian Fintech Software market is expected to reach USD 2.4 
billion. Fintech compa nies promote use of smart phones 
which can connect increasing youth demographic both in 
urban as well as rural areas. Fintech companies with high 
level of advance technology can promote financial inclusion 
in a big way. Fintech companies plays an important  role of 
collaboration and integration with various agencies and take 
holders like Start Ups , universities and research institutions , 
government and regulators ,Financial institutions , Incubators 
and Accelerators and Financial users. ( Figure 4 )  
KPMG R eport 2015 role of digital banking in furthering 
financial inclusion suggests that technological innovations in 
Indian banking System is likely to drive more financial 
inclusion as brick and mortar retail banking branches are 
proving to be costly and not a ble to connect rural areas .  
The report focus on The Impact of Digital India 2019 vision 
document issued by Government of India and various 
initiatives like provision of WIFI services. Broad band 
internet access, Direct benefit transfer, Aadhar Data 
analytics, Aadhar based 
Payment Services for 
biometric identification.  
  
Increasing Digital Banking Adoption and Usage Trends in India and its Impact on Financial Inclusion  
7092  Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
 Figure 4: www.make in  india.com/Pillars of Fintech Auto System  
 
X. CONCLUSION  
Based on the above discussion and trends of increasing 
digitalisation in Indian Economy reflects that there are 
progressive signs of paradigm shift  in adaptation of E 
Banking services by the customers thus replacing old 
traditional banking systems .People are now using internet 
and mobile banking for their day to day transactions in large 
number . With India’s population going digital at a very fast 
pace, the number of Internet users in India expected to 
increase from  242.92 million in 2015 to 420.17 Million by 
2019 .Mobile phone users who access internet in India in 
2018 were 390.90 Million  and projected to touch 500.90 
Million in 2023 .( Statstia.com 2018) . However, only 186 
million out of 918 rural population are using internet as 
compared to 295 million using internet out of 455 million 
populations. Here is where the role of Small, payme nt banks 
and Fintech companies become important to achieve the 
dream of Government to achieve the national mission of 
100% Financial Inclusion and Digital India. All the stake 
holders’ banks, small banks, payment banks, fintech 
companies, government and fi nancial users have to 
collaborate to achieve the full benefits of Digital Financial 
Inclusion.  With Indian government’s continuous focus and 
efforts to increase the growth rate of digital services will 
result in increase in benefactress in Jan Dan Yojana.  Fintech start-ups and potential investors will create new jobs as well 
as Economic Dynamism.  
 All these signs are encouraging, though the market is still 
nascent and fragmented. Increasing trends in value and 
volume of digital finance from early adopters urban and semi 
urban areas users. To make digitalization more effective , 
convenient and attractive , banks needs to provide more and 
more value added services , Overdraft and loans to farmers 
and low household on case to case basis . Digital Financial 
Inclusion has a sustainable potential of achieving a success 
story of transforming India by 2022 by providing digital 
banking services to each and every individual who has a bank 
account.  
REFERENCES  
1. Lessons from PradhanMantri Jan DhanYojana, The Mint. 9thAug ust, 
2017. Retrieved from https://www.livemint.com/Opinion . 
2. Internet Users in India Expected to Reach 500 million by June – 
IAMAI ,The Economic Times dated 20TH Feb , 2018. Retrieved from 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/internet.  
3. Number -of-mobile -internet -user-in-India 2019. Retrieved from the 
website : https://www.statista.com/statistics/558610  
4. Department of Financial Services , Ministry of Finance , Government 
of India , Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana ( PMJDY ) , Progress 
Reports ( 2019 )  - Beneficiaries as on 20th Feb ,2019. Retrieved from 
the website 
www.pmjdy.org.in/account  
 
 
 
International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE)  
ISSN: 2277 -3878, Volume -8 Issue -4, November 2019  
 
7093   
Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering 
& Sciences Publication  Retrieval Number: D5240118419 /2019©BEIESP  
DOI:10.35940/ijrte. D5240.118419  
Journal Website: www.ijrte.org  
 5. Top 10 Retail Banking Trends and predictions for 2018 – The Financial 
Brand –Retrieved from the website 
-https://thefinancialbrand.com/69180/2018 -top-banking -trends -predic t
ions-outlook -digital -fintech -data-ai-cx-payments -tech/all/ ( Written 
permission from the Financial Brand Mr. Jim Marous held)  
6. Niti Aayog, Government of India, Booklet on Measurement of Digital 
Payments – Trend, Issues and Challenges Report 2017.  
7. Badar Ala m Iqbal., Shaista Sami., (2016). Role of Banks in Financial 
Inclusion in India .644 -655 Retrieved from. 
https://reader.elsevier.com/reader/sd/pii/S0186104217300104  
8. KPMG Report 2015 – Role of Digital Banking in furthering financial 
Inclusion. Retrieved from  kpmg.com/in.  
9.  RBI Journal 2018 –Payment System Indicator Data. Retrieved from 
www.rbi.org.in  
10. NPCI – Retail Payment Statistics – Jan 2019 .Retrieved from 
www.npci.org.in  
 
 