 
1 
  
  
. 
  
 Indonesia Agro -Value Chain Assessment  
 Background Paper 2  
Issues and Options in Promoting Digital Agriculture   
. 
 23-June -2020  
. 
 Agriculture and Food Global Practice  
  
. 
 
 
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized 
2 
 . 
 
   
3 
  
Contents  
1 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  4 
2 Sector context  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  4 
2.1 The Agriculture Sector in Indonesia  ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
2.2 Digital Agriculture Transformations  ................................ ................................ ..............................  7 
2.3 Promoting digital agriculture: entry points for public action  ................................ .......................  8 
3 Current  landscape of digital tools and policies in Indonesia  ................................ ................................  9 
3.1 Digital infrastructure, availability and access  ................................ ................................ ...............  9 
3.2 E- Governance, data, policies and regulations  ................................ ................................ ............  11 
3.3 Challenges for digital agriculture  ................................ ................................ ................................  12 
4 Enabling digital agriculture services and solutions  ................................ ................................ .............  14 
4.1 Agricultural Extension Services  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 14 
4.2 Market Linkages  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  15 
4.3 Financial services  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  16 
4.4 E-commerce  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  17 
4.5 Capacity Development  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  18 
5 The way forward:  options  for promoting  digital  agriculture  ................................ ..............................  18 
Annex 1: Agri -Tech Startups in Indonesia  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 23 
 
Figure 1: Indonesian mobile market at a glance  ................................ ................................ .........................  10 
Figure 2: Barriers to owning a mobile phone  ................................ ................................ .............................  11 
Figure 3: Service delivery categorizations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 14 
Figure 4: Digital te chnologies in agriculture  ................................ ................................ ...............................  15 
Figure 5: Identifying key building blocks to sustain digital agriculture services/solutions  . Error! Bookmark 
not defined.  
Figure 6: Suggested stakeholder composition of a digital agriculture strategy for Indonesia  .............  Error! 
Bookmark not defined.  
 
   
4 
 1 Introduction  
To inform the preparation of a proposed World Bank project that  aims  to support agriculture value chain 
development in Indonesia, a comprehensive study on agriculture value chain s was planned during 
March and April 2020. The study was expected to be conducted in partnership with the Ministry of 
Agriculture and FAO and contain the following parts:  
1. Value chain constraints analysis : to identify opportunities for improvement and possible project 
interventions , based on the examin ation of performance o f selected key value chains   
2. Agriculture finance overview : to identify private and public providers of agriculture and 
agribusiness finance, highlighting constraints regarding access to finance by farmers and other 
value chain participants  and identifying entry points for project interventions.  
3. Digital agriculture overview : to identify entry points for project interventions through 
assessment of issues and options for promoting digital agriculture and  mapping the landscape of 
digital service providers . 
4. Huma n resource development in agriculture : to assess how agriculture extension, training and 
education will need to be adapted  to attract a new generation of farmers and agro -
entrepreneurs , and bring about agriculture modernization .  
Due to COVID -19 related tr avel restrictions, the full set of activities under this ASA could not be 
undertaken  as planned . Only the agriculture finance overview (2) and the digital agriculture overview (3)  
were completed , with in the limitations imposed by the inability to organize physical meetings or field 
work. Hence, the se report s offer an initial assessment which can be further supplemented during 
2020/21.  
This background paper aims to provide an assessment of the issues and options in promoting digital 
agriculture in Indonesia , within the broader technology landscape of the country , with the primary aim 
of informing the design of the proposed World Bank investment project. The study considers glob al best 
practices as well as the status of Indonesia in product traceability, e -commerce, agriculture fintech 
service providers, weather index insurance providers, and precision farming technology 
providers.  Although digital agriculture is cross -cutting ac ross all commodities, the focus was on the 
horticulture and small ruminant value chains as those were identified as priority commodity categories 
by the Ministry of Agriculture. The study also offers high -level recommendations for policymakers on 
reforms a nd programs that can accelerate the adoption of digital agriculture.  
In the first section, the national context and the importance of ICT technology in agriculture are 
summarized. Section 2 presents the current landscape of digital agriculture in Indonesia , followed by 
section 3 that suggests key areas where ICT can play a role in agriculture, based on global experience. As 
scaling up the digitization of the agriculture sector involves a complex set of policy, investment, 
innovation, and capacity -building m easures, a number of high -level recommendations are provided for 
policymakers and practitioners in the fourth and last section .  
2 Sector context  
2.1 The Agriculture Sector in Indonesia  
Indonesia is the fourth most populous country in the world. With its vast  land endowments  and 
abundant fertile soils, it is a major global producer of a wide variety of agricultural tropical products ,  
5 
 which  provide income for the majority of Indonesian households today. Moreover, w ith an agricultural 
area of 60 .2 million ha , Indon esia still has significant untapped agriculture potential.   Agriculture retains 
an important role in the Indonesian economy, even though its share of the country’s gross domestic 
product (GDP) has declined, as  is typical in the process of economic growth and structural 
transformation. The share of  the agriculture sector declined from 30% in 1975 to  about 12.8 % in 201 8. 
The structural transformation is also  reflected in employment patterns , with the share of agricultural 
labor in the country’s total labor  force decreasing from 62% in 1975,  to 29.7% in 2017 (BPS  2018). The 
slower decline in the share of agricultural labor compared with agricultural GDP  indicates the relatively 
slow absorption of labor outside agriculture. As the service sector  is less labor -intensive than the 
agriculture and manufacturing sectors, and the GDP share  of the manufacturing sector has declined, 
excess agricultural labor has remained in the  agriculture and rural sectors, often as disguised 
unemployment.1 
The vision of the In donesian Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) in the medium -term development 2020 -2024 
is to achiev e an independent, developed, and prosperous agricultural sector by increasing food security 
and agricultural competitiveness . It involves: (1) achieving farmer welf are through protecting and 
empowering farmers; (2) obtaining food security by incre asing availability, affordability, and utilization 
of foods , fulfilling community consumption; and (3) improving added -value and competitiveness of 
agricultural commodities by enhancing competitive advantage and improving production, storage, 
processing and distribution.2 
The major priorities of the MoA are:  
• Improving infrastructure (irrigation, agricultural markets, and farm roads) . 
• Increasing investment s (agricultural lands, livestock population, agricultural tools and 
machineries, and working capital) . 
• Promoting innovations (high yielding seed/seedlings, cultivation technology/ integrated 
technology packages, and cropping patterns) . 
• Improving access to i nputs (supplies, and input access assurance) . 
• Strengthening i ncentives ( appropriate inputs and output prices and risk protection/insurance) . 
• Promoting i nclusion (equitable distribution of aid and food barn s in border region s); and  
• Strengthening institutions (farmer institution, cluster development and governance 
improvement).  
• Promoting digitat agriculture ( ICTs to boost development through use of relevant devices, 
networks, services and applications)  
With a population of 273 millio n as of 2020 , food security continues to be one of the national 
development priorities. In 2019, Indonesia ranked 62 nd out of 113 countries in the Global Food Security 
Index3. 
Consisting largely of smallholder farmers (defined as having landholding less t han two hectares) and 
large plantations, millions of Indonesians depend on this sector to earn their everyday livelihoods. 
Smallholder farmers, who typically come from agriculture -dependent households, are also part of the 
 
1 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/534336/indonesia -food -agri-development -2020 -2045.pdf  
2 http://ap.fftc.agnet.org/ap_db.php?id=1107  
3 https://foodsecurityindex.eiu.com/Index   
6 
 segment of SMEs in Indonesia. Inf ormation nonetheless regarding SMEs (in the case of smallholder 
family farmers) that contribute to the agriculture sector remains limited.4 
Limited education, declining land holding sizes, complex and insecure tenure arrangements , together 
with low access to appropriate technologies, infrastructure, financial services and input and output 
markets, have result ed in sub -optimal use of landholdings and has led to low labor  productivity.5 
With almost 119.8 mobile -cellular telephone su bscription s per 100 inhabitants, and mobile -broadband 
subscription of 87.2% , and less than 40% of the adult population using the internet, Indonesia ranks 72nd 
out of 141 countries in the ICT adoption rating.  Indonesia has about 193.4 million mobile connec tions. 
According to forecasts, the smartphones penetration rate  in Indonesia will rise from 26 to 33 percent 
between 2018 and 2023. The  number of smartpho ne users in Indonesia  could reach as high as 89.86 
million by the year 2022.6  
According to the  Global  Competitiveness Index 4.0  2019 , released by the World Economic Forum ( WEF) , 
Indonesia scored 64.6 .7 Indonesia scores better than the global average in terms of technology adoption 
related to implementation of  the legal framework, adapting to digital business models ( e.g. e-
commerce, sharing economy, FinTech etc.,).  
Digital l iteracy remains a main obstac le to provide digital agriculture advisories or services to rural 
communities directly.  Increased use of digital technologies for advisory services would involve 
strengthen ing the access to knowledge of the intermediary agents (i.e. public and private ext ension 
agents ) and improving women’s access .  
Indonesia leads the South -East Asian startup ecosystem  and with the Fintech, especially peer to peer  
(P2P) lending -based startups , it is expected that cumulative fintech lending in Indonesia will reach 
US$16 bn  by end of this year8. This has led the Indonesian Financial Services Authority (OJK)  to tighten 
regulations on P2P lending. Farmer advisory ( e.g. eFishery, KARSA, NeuraFarm), mechanization 
platforms ( e.g. Sentragro, AgroDrone), digital marketplace ( e.g. TaniHub, Chilibeli, Kedasayur), 
traceability ( e.g. HARA, Koltiva) and peer -to-peer lending ( e.g. Crowde, iGrow, Tanijoy) are some areas 
where startups are active in the country.  
According to The Global Competitiveness Report 2019,  Indonesia boasts of a vibrant business culture 
(scoring 69.6, ranked 29th) and a stable financial system ( scoring 64.0, ranked 58th) —both of which are 
improvements over 2018 —and a high rate of technolog y adoption ( scoring 55.4, ranked 72nd), 
considering the country’s stage of development . However, the quality of access remains relatively low. 
Innovation capacity remains limited ( scoring 37.7, ranked 74th), but is increasing.9 
Connected services for agri culture will help build business cases as well as encourage investment and 
startups to develop solutions to benefit the rural community and/or connect producers to consumers in 
a more efficient and transparent manner.  The primary challenges to digital agri culture in Indonesia  still 
 
4 https://www.unglobalpulse.org/2019/08/mapping -smallholder -farmers -in-indonesia -to-inform -agriculture -policies/  
5 https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/127/docs/EB -2019 -127-R-26-Project -Design -Report.pdf?attach=1  
6 https://www.statista.com/statistics/274659/forecast -of-mobile -phone -users -in-indonesia  
7 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_TheGl obalCompetitivenessReport2019.pdf  
8 Indonesia’s Fintech Lending: Driving Economic Growth Through Financial Inclusion 
<https://www.pwc.com/id/en/fintech/PwC_FintechLendingThoughtLeadership_ExecutiveSummary.pdf>  
9 The Global Competitiveness Report 2019   
7 
 remain  to be infrastructure development, digital literacy, an enabling policy environment  and a cohesive 
strategy to link dispersed agri culture  services . 
The horticulture and livestock value chains have potential to grow and beco me competitive. Horticulture 
is important in Indonesia . Indonesian consumers currently pay high prices for fresh produce and do not 
consume sufficient nutritious foods.  Local production is insufficient to meet domestic demand  and 
import restrictions cause high market prices . Creating market opportunities for producers while 
reducing costs , including through the use of digital technologies,  within the value chain would create 
significant opportunities for producers and downstream value chain actors. Although  30% of the 
country’s labor force is involved in agriculture, only 11% of agricultural workers are in the horticulture 
sector. Indonesian horticultural products currently suffer from poor product quality due to the lack of 
knowledge on post -harvest managem ent, inconsistent supply and poor infrastructure.  
Indonesia’s livestock sector is becoming an increasing contributor to the overall  Indonesian agriculture 
industry. About 70% of the population are involved in the livestock, feed and fisheries industry. In terms 
of production cost, Indonesia was ranked third for sheep and goat and fourth for broiler production per 
kilogram live weight c ompared to other member ASEAN countries. Indonesia has seen a major boom in 
demand for livestock products such as red meat, milk, and eggs in recent years. The livestock market in 
Indonesia needs to develop more efficient marketing channels , including digi tally enabled channels and 
food safety systems,   in order to create more opportunities to export to international markets.  
 
2.2 Digital Agriculture  Transformations  
Digital agriculture is a pervasive game -changer.  Digital agriculture, understood as applying information 
and communication technologies (ICTs) through relevant devices, networks, services  and applications 
with a primary focus on agriculture, can help agricultural stakeholders to make the best possible 
decisions and use the resources available in the most productive and sustainable manner. As such, it can 
boost  on-farm productivity (thro ugh improved both technical and allocative  efficiencies ), off-farm 
profitability , equity, and environmental sustainabilit y of agri -food systems . It does so by potential ly 
impact ing every stage along an agricultural value chain as well  as influenc ing the incentives and 
behaviors of the various players involved at each step of the chain.  
With respect to boosting on-farm  productivity, use of digital approaches can improve generation, 
dissemination and absorption of technical knowledge and good practices ; measured application of 
water, fertilizer, feed and other inputs in relation to specific crop, soil, climatic and anima l-breed  types;  
more effective use of p hysical capital, including tractors, machinery and equipment, on the farm; 
improved farmer  decision -making and mitigation through provision of more accurate, timely, and 
location -specific weather, agronomic and livesto ck data ; and better alignment of production decision 
with broader market conditions , trade opportunities and storage options. Individually, and cumulatively, 
these can significantly improve the output -mix (allocative efficiency) and input -mix (technical ef ficiency)  
as well as dynamic growth prospects, together measured as Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth. And 
TFP growth is, ultimately, the basis of rising incomes and living standards in agriculture.  
With respect to enhancing profitability of off -farm (post - production ) activities, digital approaches 
essentially facilitate myriad transactions across different links (players) of a value chain, fundamentally 
through generating and transmitting massive amounts of information at virtually zero marginal cost . 
Illustrative examples include:   
8 
 • Reducing search costs to match potential buyers and sellers  
• Improving “price discovery” (i.e., more stable and predictable prices) by pooling potential buyers 
and sellers through virtual markets  
• Reducing riskiness through provision of greater and more reliable /verifiable  information about 
insurable risks ( e.g., weather conditions, pests, diseases, localized disasters)  
• Facilitating coordination amongst parties involed in inter -connected transaction s through more 
transparent sharing of relevant information and scenarios  
• Enabling trade in “quality” (or reputational products) by allowing digital verification and 
certification , thus allowing additional value capture in niche markets  
• Raising efficiency  and robustness of supply chains by allowing multiple players to participate 
(rather than vertically integrate).  
Through these and related ways, adoption of digital approaches enhances the profitability of value chains, 
thus creating incentives for their fur ther growth and innovation.   
With respect to boosting equity, d igital agriculture can help narrow economic, spatial and social divides 
in rural areas. Economic divide  – systematic differences between large and small farmers - can be 
narrowed through increa sing productivity of small farmers through digital ly-enabled methods, improved 
access to markets  (including financial ) and their integration into more extensive and profitable value -
chains. Spatial divide – remoteness from markets, infrastructure and public services - can be narrowed 
though use of digital technologies that offset these disadvantages through lowering hurdles to market 
information, connectivity and technical goods and services . Finally, social divide  – unequal access to 
resources or markets of particular disadvantaged groups - can be narrowed through digital technologies 
that create opportunities to integrate disadvantaged groups into society , including through social media 
and changes in social  interaction .   
Finally, w ith respect to environmental sustainability, digital agriculture can have potentially beneficial 
societal impacts in three ways:  
• Direct effects : adoption of improved technologies and practices, greater production control ( e.g., as 
precision agriculture), greater alignment of production and consumption/market, and reduction in 
waste can reduce pressure on natural resources as well as GHG emissions.  
• Enabling effects : digital technologies that can better measur e, model, and commun icate the 
environmental impacts of agri -food systems  can assist in better inventor ying and stewardship of natural 
resources at national and global levels, and ensuring compliance with relevant environmental 
regulations  (thus addressing the issue of environmental externalities ) 
• Behavioral effects : as digital technologies enable the rise of sustainable production practices and their 
awareness among consumers through traceability  and certification, they can drive the trend for more 
enviro nmentally responsible consumption, thus creating additional momentum for more 
environmentally friendly production practices and waste management.  
2.3 Promoting digital agriculture: entry points for public action  
As mentioned above, d igital innovation in the ag riculture sector can be at the core of improving efficiency 
in crop production, aggregation, quality assurance, logistics and marketing, thus reducing cost, enhancing 
connectivity and increasing competitiveness.  Of course, agriculture is being “digitized” all over the world  
9 
 in various ways. However, how extensive, how deep, how fast and how transformative this process will 
be depends to a considerable extent on public policies and actions  for the following reasons:  
• First, d igital information and digital pro ducts (software, apps, videos etc .) typically involve high set -
up costs but nearly zero marginal costs to replicate, store and transmit/share. They are also be non -
rivalrous and non -excludable in consumption . These techno -economic characteristics may ca use a 
“market failure” wh ich significantly distorts incentives for the private sector to provide appropriate 
amounts of digital information/goods  - especially in dispersed rural settings  -, causing a severe under -
investment in an enabling digital environmen t for producing the desired deep -seated agricultural 
transformations.  Hence, public actions (discussed in more detail in Chapter 5) to correct these market 
failures may be necessary.  
• Second, international evidence suggests that the development and ownershi p of digital systems and 
data lead to a concentration of knowledge, power, and revenue. The cost of infrastructure 
(telecommunications, security protocols, ledgers, clouds) and the advantage of accumulated data 
tend to favor big actors and first -movers in the development of new digital technologies, while 
creating barriers for new entrants.  As a result, a few powerful companies dominate markets , including 
the market for digital solutions in agriculture. Robust public policy and regulatory systems are needed  
in this regard to ensure that the huge information and power asymmetries do not hurt consumers 
and impede the digital transformation of agriculture.  Third, digital ization of  agriculture can also 
perversely create conditions for a “digital divide ”: differences in the capacity to access and use ICTs 
among socioeconomic /ethnic  groups, geographic areas and so on. Since t he capacity to access and 
use ICTs requires investment in physical and digital assets (devices , apps, subscription services) as in 
“digital literacy”, inequality in this regard can stem  from and reinforce the same economic, spatial, 
and social divides that already prevail in rural areas . Hence, proactive public actions to ensure 
inclusion become essential in this regard.  
• Finally, the adop tion of digital approaches and technologies tends to be skill - and knowledge -biased , 
tilting labor demand in favor of skilled workers and creating losers among the ranks of the unskilled. 
Appropriate public policy measures are needed to ensure to mitigate the negative effects of the digital 
transformation , through smarter safety nets, income and training support.  
The next two sections survey the digital landscape in Indonesia and the state of  digital services and 
solutions in the  agriculture sector. Building on these, section 5 presents options and next steps for 
promotion of digital agriculture in Indonesia.  
3  Current  landscape of digital tools and policies  in Indonesia  
3.1 Digital infrastructure,  availability and access  
The mobile sector in Indonesia has experienced massive growth, with 176 million Indonesians now 
subscribing to a mobile service. Mobile  phones have been instrumental in connecting millions to the 
internet, particularly in the areas  that are hardest to reach. In the next five years, the forecasted number 
of mobile subscribers will reach 199 million, with 177 million using their mobile services for internet 
access  (Figure 1 ).10 The essential ingredient behind this growth has been the smart use of ICT to spur 
progress in all sectors.  
 
10 https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press -release/gsma -indonesia -on-brink -of-becoming -digital -economy -giant/   
10 
  
Figure 1: Indonesian mobile market at a glance11  
While Indonesia is the third largest mobile services market in  the  Asia Pacific ( APAC ) region, the main 
barriers identified by non-mobile owners  included: affordability, literacy and network coverage and 
quality  (Figure 2).  In Indonesia, 12 per cent of men and women who do not use mobile internet both 
cited the latter  as the main barrier.  
 
11 Source: GSMA Intelligence  
 
11 
  
Figure 2: Barriers to owning a mobile phone12 
Mobile  phones are essential  in the digital transformation of traditional industries such as agriculture and 
manufacturing and  in stimulating innovation among domestic start -ups. Indonesia has produced five 
‘unicorns’13 such as GoJek, Tokopedia etc . However, a lack of spectrum is lim iting operators’ ability to 
expand network coverage, hindering future adoption.  
3.2 E- Governance , data, policies and regulations  
E-governance :  The Presidential Regulation Number 95 of 2018 on Sistem Pemerintahan Berbasis 
Elektronik or e -Government (e -Gov)  works “ To increase integration and efficiency of an electronic -based 
system of governance in order to achieve clean, effective, transparent and accountable governance as 
well as to improve quality and reliability of public services. ”  
Indonesia has made con crete commitments to champion open data  and the country has seen slow but 
steady improvement supported by strong regulatory frameworks concerning public access to 
information. Yet, the need to improve data policies, strategies, and data management practice s, as well 
as to strengthen data protection framework and implementation, remain. 14 
Open data : Indonesia passed the Public Information Disclosure Act  in 2008 , in order to improve 
transparency. In 2011, the country was among the founders of the Open Government Partnership. 
Indonesia launched its Open Data initiative to promote open government. Initiatives using the Open 
Data platform ( https://data.go.id/ ) are improving good governance at the national and local level . It is 
currently hosting close to 43,486 datasets and encourages policymaking based on data.  
The basic principles of One Indonesian Data are One Data Standard, One Standard Metadata, Data 
Interoperability, and Data Reference. Thus, the use of government data is not only limited to internal 
use between agencies, but also as a form of meeting public data needs for the community.  
Agricultural War Room  (AWR) : The Indonesian AWR is a strategic command centre for national 
agricultural development , established i n the MoA . It collects and analyses different type s of information 
 
12 Source: GSMA Intelligence Consumer Survey, 2018  
13 privately held start -ups valued at over $1 B  
14 https://labs.webfoundation.org/why -is-the-new -e-gov-policy -in-indonesia -critical -for-open -data/  
 
12 
 such as rainfall intensity , wind movement to assess the hazard, crop calendar using sentinel 2, fertilizer 
allocation ,  information about cattle birth and slaughtering, crop yield , machiner y monitoring and flood 
risk area  that inputs into the MoA policy and decision making . In addition, the AWR offers the possibility 
to have videoconference s with Kostrawil, Kostrada, Kostratani and CCTV for monitoring. MoA plans to 
procure  of 1000 CCTV in th e field for monitoring crop growth.  
3.3 Challenges for digital agriculture  
The primary barriers to digital agricultural solutions in Indonesia  include s the lack of an enabling 
environment,  generally low digital literacy rates,  limited  access to technology, unfavorable polic ies, 
limited information integration across value chains, and inability to build agri culture services that 
generate revenue due to lack of ecosystem  and regulatory standa rds and in some cases cultural barriers .  
Policy , Framework  and Strategy . Many stakeholders  around the world  have acknowledged the need for 
national e -agriculture strategies for some time; however, many countries have not yet adopted a 
national strategy for use of ICTs in the agricultural sector. In most countries, there are many elements to 
e-agriculture, but a ll are part of the existing ICT strategy or embedded as small projects within e -
government strategies (mostly OECD countries).  Indonesia does not yet have an ICT strategy for the 
agriculture sector. In Asia -Pacific, FAO together with the International Tele communication Union has 
worked in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Fiji, Philippines, Mongolia and Papua New Guinea 
with national governments and partners to develop their national e -agriculture strategy, based on the 
FAO -ITU E -agriculture Strateg y Guide15. 
IT Infrastructure in rural areas.  The 2014 Village Law significantly increased financial resources for 
Indonesia’s 74,954 villages to invest in rural infrastructure, human capital and job creation. The law also 
expanded the roles and responsibi lities of villages on administration, infrastructure, basic service 
delivery, and community empowerment.16 Globally, IT infrastructure is critical to the growth of digital 
agriculture, Indonesia also has large gap s in IT infrastructure, especially in far flung islands and efforts 
are needed to fill that gap through the private sector and if regulations allow through the village grant 
under the village law . Typically, m illions of people live and work in rural communi ties, but mobile 
network operators (MNOs) focus on cities, in which required investment in infrastructure is usually 
lower and purchasing power of consumers is higher, thus creating a spontaneous gap and leaving a 
technological vacuum between urban and rur al areas . 
Digital literacy  in rural communities. Educational systems and attainment must keep pace with the 
process of digital transformation  and the new administration in Indonesia has repeatedly highlighted the 
importance of education to spur the digita l economy.  The nature of the target audience of the modern 
educational system, mostly youth who are digitally connected, means that teachers must possess 
appropriate digital skills and education must adapt to accommodate expectations of future generations . 
Institutional  Linkages /Strategy . Enhanced communication and coordination between stakeholders, 
institutions and individuals using information  and communication technologies is paramount to realize 
the potential of digital technologies  especially in agric ulture domain .  
 
15 For more details: FAO -ITU E -agriculture Strategy Guide http://www.fao.org/3/a -i5564e.pdf   
16 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press -release/2019/06/26/indonesia -boosting -rural -government -capacity -infrastructure -and-citize n-
engagement -to-accelerate -poverty -reduction   
13 
 There are many organizations – government, private and some private working with the  various  
government divisions implementing many agricultural services. One key service is agricultural extension 
advisories. Given that there is no strategy to identify, develop and sustain key digital agriculture services 
in the country, there  is a lot of ‘reinvention of the wheel’ . To capitalize on the potential b enefits of 
digital technologies, t here is a need for the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the Ministry of 
Communication and Information Technology , to develop a national e -agriculture strategy . 
This digital agriculture  strateg y will help to rationaliz e resources (financial and human) and address 
holistically the ICT opportunities and challenges for the agricultural sector in a more efficient manner 
while generating new revenue streams and improv ing  the livelihoods of rural communit ies  as well as 
ensu re the goals of the national agriculture master plan are achieved.  
The existence of a digital agriculture  strategy and its alignment with other government plans will enable 
e-agriculture projects and services  to be implemented with greater coordination an d synergies. The way 
forward is to facilitate effective coordination between the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of 
Communication  and Information Technology, Indonesian Telecommunication Regulatory Authority 
(BRTI)  and other private sectors such as the m obile network operators  in contributing to a strategic 
roadmap for identification, development and sustaining digital agriculture services . The role of 
insurance, banks and value -added service providers and innovators/incubators such are also key to 
develo ping and sustaining ICT for agriculture services in the country.  
Services.  Improved market access, risk mitigation, disaster management, and logistics have the potential 
of enhancing  agriculture  income s and improving profitability. Emerging technologies can provide 
actionable information to communities and governments on disaster prevention, in real -time, while also 
providing advice on risk -mitigation techniques. Linking markets, inputs and trade in a variety of ways  can 
also help with complying with inter national standards for traceability by providing reliable data.  
In the agriculture value chain, producers look for information to improve their productivity, yields and 
profitability. Digital agriculture service s and solutions offer a vehicle to achieve this  through  better 
access to  productivity enhancing information and technologies and market access . Information on 
pricing of agricultural products (inputs and outputs) and markets, providing logistics, storage 
information services and in some ca ses access to virtual trading floors are much needed.  Financial 
inclusion plays a key role for rural producers, digital agriculture solutions for payments, credits, savings 
and facilitating transactions including micro -loans and insurance are very essentia l for smallholder 
farmers in  Indonesia .   
14 
  
Figure 3: Service delivery categorizations  
Digital services can be classified into categories such as push, interactive, transactional and connected. 
The higher the service category, the b etter the opportunity to build business models and thereby ensure 
sustainability (financi al) of the service (see Figure 3).  
4 Enabling digital agriculture  services and solutions  
4.1 Agricultural Extension Services  
The information seeking behavior  of rural communities have traditionally been influenced by the 
existing structures in the rural areas where the neighbor , a big farmer in the village or in most cases the 
input dealer plays a major part in providing knowledge and information on agriculture. These linkages 
have traditionally worked but with  the increasing impact of climatic variabilities, the opportunity exist 
for technology to help strengthen these link ages with more current and reliable advisories.  A summary 
of digital technologies in agriculture is provided in Figure 4.  
In Indonesia, there are  three types of extension workers: public, private, and self -help/voluntary. The 
input suppliers usually employ  private workers and  the last category of voluntary or self -help workers 
are lead farmers whom the Government train and provide with certificate of competency.17 
However, the public e xtension service , the main extension provider, is lacking in terms of rea ch and 
capacity. Severely constrained by the decentralization process in Indonesia, the public extension 
workers are dwindling in numbers and they suffer from low morale and poor capacity.  The private 
extension workers who are an important source of inform ation for the farmers is the input suppliers’ 
agronomists. Unfortunately, these private agronomists’ reach is even more limited due to cost 
constraints. A third category that we can see emerging is for villages to hire “extension workers” at the 
village le vel. These people will not be agriculture -trained, but through the support of application and 
 
17 https://aip -prisma.or.id/data/public/uploaded_file/2018 -03-10_07 -34-48am_16._17._Extension_and_ICT_Services -GSD_2017_v 2.pdf  
 
15 
 technology, they  could provide extension services at the village level.  As the usage of mobile phones, 
particularly smartphones, is increasing in rural areas, dev eloping mobile services can be a useful 
complement to the existing multi -modal extension systems.  
Weather information is an important input to farmer decision making  and is useful to include in 
agriculture extension services. For farmers to understand weather parameters and its relevance to their 
crop cycle, it is important to provide decision -support system for automating the generation and 
dissemination of climate inform ation -based agro -advisories for farmers.  Scaling -up and mainstreaming 
agro -meteorological early warning systems, as done by Agrometeorological Field Unit (AMFU)  to be 
accessible to rural communities through various access points (mobile, web, community ce ntres, etc.,) 
could be facilitated by the National Center for Agricultural Extension Development (NCAED)  in 
coordination with Provincial Agricultural Extension Coordination Offices and the District Agricultural 
Extension Offices.  The involvement of private  extension workers using digital technology (e.g. PISAgro, 
Nestle , Danone with Cargill, Syngenta) as well as NGOs and farmer producer organizations (FPOs) are  
also important  to improve the breadth of agriculture extension services in rural areas.  
 
Figure 4: Digital technologies in agriculture   
4.2 Market Linkages  
Smallholder farmers in the uplands of Indonesia generally have good resource potential and a 
demonstrated willingness to produce marketable surpluses that would increase their incomes and 
reduce poverty. There is a strong demand for diversified higher valu e crops, however, supply chains are 
underdeveloped,  and sustainable commercial relationships have failed to emerge. Smallholders face 
several  technical and organizational constraints that keep them from realising their potential, while off -
 
16 
 takers face othe r constraints that keep them from sourcing from upland areas. Investment in ensuring a 
more enabling environment for effective business relationships with better access to improved inputs, 
technologies, and public and private sector investment in market in frastructure, has  great potential for 
increasing the income levels of upland smallholder farmers. 18 
However, p ayments and logistics continue to be a major bottleneck to the growth of e-commerce 
especially in dealing with perishable produces. The public se ctor can help boost market access by 
removing barriers to digital trade  by introducing legal, regulatory and institutional reforms to 
accommodate electronic business, facilitate access and connectivity, and enable e -payments  for 
agriculture products . 
Foste r an enabling environment  for digital businesses and innovative startups, like GoJek 8Villages, 
through  complementary  investment s will ensure sustainability.  
4.3 Financial services  
For Indonesia, Digital Financial Services (DFS) may well be the next big thing,  combining existing mob ile 
phone usage and the countries  increasing appetite for financial services. Digitizing the value chains and 
actors is a pre -requisite to developing and implementing focused DFS services and solutions. The 
prospective entry of millions of unbanked and underbanked consumers into the financial system is the 
result of the increasing prevalence of mobile devices.19 While the growth of mobile is increasing among 
rural communities, mobile money and e -wallets are just a small part of t he entire DFS ecosystem.  
 
Digital innovation can shape financial services for agriculture in many ways. This will also help in offering 
greater accessibility, affordability, and more tailored products that meet the distinct needs and 
capabilities of rural  customers.  
Digital credit scoring could potentially increase the scale and scope of lending to smallholder farmers by 
complementing or augmenting existing value chain finance programs and informal lending from the 
farmer’s local community. Currently, most  value chain finance programs lend  funds  based on the 
dynamics and relationships within specific structured value chains, rather than on data about those 
relationships.  Informal credit, the only choice for many smallholder farmers, is widely perceived to b e 
expensive and a barrier to increasing small farmer productivity  and use of digital technologies can 
improve access and bring down costs . 
In Indonesia, geographical fragmentation represents an unavoidable challenge for banks that plan to 
expand their pres ences or reach to the unbanked market segments. Without any access to financial 
services, the bankable unbanked currently use the following alternative financial services and products 
to fulfil their needs:  
Deposits and loans : The majority of the bankable  unbanked Indonesians fulfil their savings needs via 
Arisan, an interest -free financing provided during social gatherings, or the traditional way of self -saving 
at home. Others resort to borrowing from friends and relatives or cooperatives when there is a n eed for 
loan. The banks are slowly encroaching into this product segment.  
 
18 https://webapps.ifad.org/members/eb/127/docs/EB -2019 -127-R-26-Project -Design -Report.pdf?attach=1  
19 https://www2.deloitte.com/th/en/pages/financial -services/articles/digital -financial -indonesia.html     
17 
 Bill payment and remittances : Indonesians have  traditionally preferred to pay their bills at Perusahaan 
Listrik Negara (PLN) and Perusahaan Daerah Air Minum (PDAM) branches rather th an through the 
networks of financial institutions. Remittances companies such as Western Union have gained a strong 
foothold in serving the remittances market, especially for transactions across neighboring  countries such 
as Singapore and Malaysia.  
Airtime  top-up: With 99% of the 282 million mobile  subscriptions in Indonesia being prepaid customers, 
there is immense potential in capturing the voluminous transactions of airtime top -up via DFS. 
Currently, traditional top -up counters, minimarkets and mom -pop g rocery stores are amongst the first 
choices used by the unbanked Indonesians for airtime top -up.20 
Some of the innovative start -ups in the fintech space are given in Annex 1. 
The biggest challenge has been for various DFS players to be able to show tangible benefits to switching 
to digital finance is behavior  change. It  has been quite difficult and hence innovative incentives are 
needed.  
Several innovative funding mechanisms su ch as Peer -to-Peer lend money to individuals or businesses 
through online services that match lenders with borrowers. Technologies like blockchain makes it 
transparent and trustworthy.  However, an appropriate  P2P lending regulatory framework  will need to 
be developed.  As seen in other countries, a key player in brin ging DFS is the  mobile network operators 
(MNO s) and telecom regulators – including the banking regulator and connected public sector in 
countries. To manage such diverse partnerships building int er-sectoral leverage opportunities is 
important to address some of the challenges and brin ging in new regulations or relaxing existing 
regulations on software systems such as Know Your Customer (KYC). 
4.4 E-commerce  
There is a need for Indonesia’s logistics se ctor to adopt a more integrated approach that ensures 
efficiencies across the entire supply chain. Indonesia's logistics sector is currently recording strong 
double -digit growth due to the continuous development of the Indonesian economy driven by the 
resilient domestic demand . However, Indonesia's logistics performance in international rankings 
remains weak.21  
More than 50% of Indonesia’s economy in GDP is compr ised of micro, small and medium enterprises, 
and Java has been the beneficiary of big commerce marketplace platforms such as Tokopedia.  But for 
the rest of the 17,000 islands, it is also crucial to narrow the gap, and the country’s focus  on building the 
ICT infrastructure and its goal to  connect all regions of Indonesia by broadband is important . 
Regulation and incentive s on promoting e -commerce such as the Presidential Decree No. 74/2017 on e -
Commerce Road Map in which skills development is included and tax incentives for start -ups and 
venture capital (KMK No. 1251 Year 1988 and KMK No. 250 Year 1995)  are key to supporting e -
commerce in Indonesia . 
 
20 https://www2.deloitte.com/th/en/pages/financial -services/articles/digital -financial -indonesia.html  
21 http://www.gbgindonesia.com/en/services/article/2016/indonesia_s_logistics_sector_making_connections_11383.php   
18 
 4.5 Capacity Development  
To participate in the digital ecosystem, capacity development at all levels is necessary.  With the 
improvement in digital infrastructure, Indonesia has a good potential to harness the power of digital 
technologies to accelerate its human resource development.  While TVET in Indonesia has been 
improving and helping youth to gain skills and find jobs; regional disparities still exist due to the 
geographical dispersion of Indonesia.22 
The government of Indonesia has invested in several initiatives, notably in improving access through 
digital infrastructure through the  Palapa Ring Project, Pipa Bers ama, BTS Provision for  
Telecommunication Blankspot Area Project, and Wireless Connectivity Pilot Project for Rural Areas .  
Several G overnment to Consumer services and online services have been implemented in the last few 
years. Human resources are strengthened by providing capacity development through the Nongsa 
Digital Park program in Batam, improving skills of workers,  creating jobs in technology -based 
entrepreneurship and revamping of vocatio nal education institutions.  
5 The way forward : options  for promoting  digital  agriculture  
 
For the promise of digital transformation to be realized in Indonesian agriculture to boost productivity , 
profitability, equity and environmental sustainability  and to mitigate downside risks, it is essential to 
have proactive public actions ( policy and investments) that can coordinate and leverage relevant private 
sector investments, stimulate both supply of and demand for digital agricultural solutions, facilitate thei r 
widespread and equitable adoption and use  and ensure “open”, competitive environment that fosters 
innovation and growth.  This chapter presents a framework for promoting digital agriculture which 
comprises action s at three distinct levels:  
(i) Specific actions at a “project ” (or, more generally, a scheme or territorial unit) l evel 
(ii) Enabling -condition  actions  at sectoral level, to enhance supply of and demand for digital 
agricultural solutions   
(iii) Cross -cutting foundational actions , to deepen and extend digital transformation   
Level One: Specific actions at a “project” (or, more generally, a scheme or territorial unit) level  
A key interest of this report is to contribute to the design and formulation of the proposed World Bank -
assisted project to support agriculture value chain development in Indonesia.  The project mode (more 
generally , the operational mode of  a public sector scheme or a program implemented over a defined 
geographical area) provides unique opportunities to promote more granular digi tal solutions to specific 
problem types in defined geographical space and socio -economic setting. As such, it allows for pil oting 
of good practices and innovations, scaling -up of recent successes, and experimenting with bottoms -up 
solutions  to various prob lems. As a form of public  (financed)  action, the project mode therefore 
represents a very flexible and customized form of support towards promoting digital  transformation  
Working from this perspective, this study has identified seven candidate technologies for consideration 
for a project -mode operation. These technologies have been drawn from international and national 
 
22 Mahatmi Parwitasari Saronto, Director of Employment and Job Opportunity Expansion of Bappenas   
19 
 experience, especially with regard to their impacts on the key development objectives of efficiency, 
equity and employment, and environmental sustainability. Table 1  below presents the relevant details .  
Table 1: Potential Digital Technologies and Impact  
Impact of Technology on : 
Efficiency  Equity and employment  Environmental sustainability  
Technology 1: Satellite Imagery (On -Farm)  
More rational use of natural 
resources including soil (organic 
content monitoring) and water 
(evapotranspiration monitoring) 
leading to reduced production cost. 
Improved farm management pest 
management capacity through 
drones  To th e extent that the technology is 
made accessible to small farmers 
through tailored applications 
supported by public interventions, 
satellite imagery could contribute to 
improved small -scale agriculture 
through yield forecast, irrigation 
water management, weather 
forecast and natural hazard 
prevention. Food security could be 
enhanced through better yield 
prediction.   
 More rational use of water and soil 
in cropping and livestock activities  
 
Better adaptation to climate change 
if   improved weather forecast is 
made accessible to producers 
(tailored smartphone -based weather 
advice could be considered - see 
below). Ecosystem services could be 
enhanced through satellite imagery  
Technology 2: Digital Communication Tools – mobile, tablets, broadband (On -Farm)  
Increased efficiency will come from 
digital communication tool -based 
services such as e-agricultural 
extension, weather forecast, E -
payment system and sourcing 
management sys tems  To the extent that barriers of entry 
are lowered, combined cost 
reduction and yield increase from 
tailored smartphone -based services 
will generate increased income for 
small farmers  
These services are likely to 
retain/attract youth in agriculture  
Job creation within digital startups 
can have a high youth content  
 Better adaptation to climate change 
through more accessible and 
tailored weather forecast  
Technology 3: Precision Agriculture – combining drones, IOT, low power Wide Area Networks, LPWAN, GPS, 
precision soil sampling, big data, cloud computing, machine learning, variable rate technology (On - & Off -Farm)  
On-farm:  Precision agriculture is 
about optimizing farm and livestock 
management. The efficiency of all 
factors of production including 
labor, soil, water and capital will be 
enhanced. Incidence of pests will be 
reduced. Mechanized labor will be 
enhanced (UBER tra ctor services ). 
Off-farm:  through IOT, GPS and 
cloud computing, possible efficiency 
improvements can take place on 
post -harvest losses; storage 
management for both inputs and On-farm : To the extent that ba rriers 
of entry are lowered for small 
producers, equity gains can be 
significant. In particular, precision 
agriculture combined with 
smartphone -based services could 
have a strong impact on 
smallholders.  
Precision agriculture is likely to 
retain/attract you th in agriculture  
To the extent that artificial 
intelligence will be adopted in 
agriculture, labor will be displaced 
by machine work  On-farm:  Optimization of agriculture 
practices will b ring about 
environmental benefits in the form 
of reduced use of unnecessary 
chemical inputs, more rational use 
of irrigation water, improved soil 
management and fertility. Climate 
change adaptation will be improved 
through   
Off-farm : IOT will improve clim ate 
change mitigation thorough 
improved energy and material use in 
processing, storage and  
20 
  
Further details on the “how -to” of promoting these technologies in any socio -economic an d 
geographical setting will need to be scoped out as part of the detailed project design.  
Level Two: Enabling -condition actions at sectoral l evel , to enhance supply of and demand for digital 
agricultural solutions  
While the development, provision and utilization of digital agricultural technologies are intrinsically 
private sector activities, there is an important role for public policies and actions to create the right 
enabling conditions ( adequate investment incentives, complementary infrastructure and capacities)  in 
order to correct the market failures discussed in section 2 above.  Entry points for sector -level public outputs; cold chain management 
and transportation.  Job creation within digital start -ups 
can have a high youth content.  transportation especially for 
products requiring cold chains.  
Technology 4: Fintech – digital solutions for finance and insurance markets (On - & Off -Farm)  
Time and labor savings will occur 
because of E -payment system 
through the value chains. These 
savings will find more efficient uses 
both on -farm and off -farm  
 Big data will improve access to rural 
finance for smallholders through (i) 
improving their credi t history (access 
to databases providing additional 
information on potential clients); 
and (ii) improving insurance 
products that could be used as de -
risking factors for small scale 
agriculture investment  
 Time and labor savings will occur 
because of E -payment system 
through the value chains. These 
savings will find more efficient uses 
both on -farm and off -farm  
 
Technology 5: Blockchain (On - & Off -Farm)  
Blockchain will have undeniable 
efficiency gains along the whole 
value chain through registration of 
holdings, animal, plant and 
transactions; smart contracts; 
transfer of import and export 
certificates; traceability and food 
safety  
 Smart contracts  combi ning 
blockchain and IOT technologies will 
generate equity impacts in terms of 
(i) higher producer prices following 
exclusion of intermediaries; (ii) 
lower cost crop insurance and 
improved access to finance; (iii) 
savings associated with pay -per-use 
agricul tural services; (iv) blockchain 
will allow traceable products from 
small farms getting better market 
conditions; and (v) Social transfer 
mechanisms and E -voucher system 
will see their targeting efficiency 
increased when blockchain is 
adopted  
 Accurate traceability will allow for 
improved certification of low 
environment/ energy/ material 
content products  
Improved food safety will allow 
savings in health public expenditures  
Technology 6: E -commerce (Off -Farm)  
By directly linking producers and 
consumers, E -commerce allows to 
make rural supply more responsive 
to market requirements  Higher producer prices are likely to 
be generated through E -commerce 
linkages  Environmentally friendly products 
are likely to be pro moted through E -
commerce   
21 
 actions c an be grouped into supply -side actions, demand -side actions and actions to ensure 
environmental sustainability (i .e., offset environmental externalities).  
With respect to the supply -side of promoting digital agricultural solutions, four kinds of public ac tion are 
relevant:  
• Reducing private sector investment risks – e.g., through clear digital property rights  and patent 
protection , stable (agricultural) policy regimes , encouragement for equity/venture -capital 
financing  
• Fostering innovation ecosystems – e.g., , innovation hubs to lower entry and establishment 
costs for new competitors, incubation centers for agri -entre preneurs, public provision of 
technical training and advice  
• Enabling access to and use of data in agriculture – e.g., public -led ‘open -data” initiatives, 
creation of (or s upport for private initiatives) for standards of consistency and inter -operability 
in handling agricultural data, ensuring transparency and accou ntability of agri -food system data 
(especially for quality assurance and certification)  
• Aligning agricultural policies – e.g., review legacy policies and subsidies – like water and fertilizer 
subsidies – that undercut precision farming that economi zes on w ater and fertilizers, expanding 
public agriculture R&D to support digital transformation . 
With respect to the building up the demand side  for digital agricultural solutions , the following public 
measures need to be considered:  
• Strengthening digital knowledge and skills development – e.g., promoti on of digital literacy 
among farmers and target disadvantaged groups , digital extension and advisory services to 
enable farmers to undertake on-line transactions and link up through e -platforms.  
• Support ing customization of digital tools – e.g., incentivise/mandate development of digital 
tools in local languages, with user -friendly designs, and addressing specific problems faced by 
particular communities or areas . 
• Building trust in digital applications – e.g., laws and regulations to strengthen data security and 
privacy or ownership rights, transparent protocols for data col lection, storage and processing, 
overall digital governance arrangements to build trust in digital transactions.  
With respect to public actions to enhance environmental sustainability through use of digital 
technologies,  the following entry points need to be considered:  
• Strengthening digital environmental monitoring in agri-food systems  -e.g., incentivizing and 
resourcing use of modern agr oecological monitoring systems (remote sensing and ground -based 
monitoring systems with real -time, smart, wireless, internet -connected sensor webs)  to the 
cataloguing , interpreting, forecasting and dissemination of data about the status and trends of 
agroecosystems to ensure that agricultural products are delivered with smaller environmental 
footprints and the ir prices reflected the life -cycle costs of production .  
• Incorporating environmental sustainability goals into agricultural policies – e.g., using s tronger 
monitoring of environmental impacts to provide incentives for creating and integrating 
environmental  and production data streams and directing them to decisionmakers.  This could 
lead to evolution of policy goals and targets that reduce environmental footprint while 
enhancing efficiency   
22 
 • Influencing consumer behaviour and agri -food markets – e.g., supporti ng information and 
communication initiatives to achieve voluntary shifts in consumer choices toward more 
sustainable production, transpor tation and waste disposal modes.  
Level Three: Cross -cutting foundational actions, to deepen and extend digital transfor mation  
Establishing the foundations for a long -term  and successful  digital transformation requires 
complementary actions in related areas. Of these, three are particularly important:  
• Availability of digital i nfrastructure : The set of digital solutions applicable across farms, value 
chains, and public services require different levels of mobile phone and internet connectivity .  
Good quality, accessible mobile and internet networks are essential to maximize the efficiency, 
equity, and environmental sustainability gains from digital agriculture in agri -food systems.  
Especially in remote and sparsely populated rural areas, c reating an enabling environment for 
telecom sector activity for expanding network coverage can be a challen ging pre-condition. 
Supportive measures in this regard can include a regulatory environment that is stable, flexible, 
predictable, and low cost ; tax policies crafted to reduce investment risks and support expansion 
in rural areas without creating inappropr iate incentives ; subsidies and other support policies to 
try to encourage companies to expand coverage to underserved areas.  
• Availability of non -digital enablers : Lack of complementary rural infrastructure —such as roads, 
energy, post -harvest storage, and logistics —can limit the adoption and impact of digital 
technologies in agriculture. For example, it is difficult to sell products on e -commerce platforms 
if there are no roads to markets, or to sell high -quality fruits to online customers if t here is no 
storage to preserve their freshness.  Beyond access and storage  infrastructure, policy and 
regulatory framework need to evolve to support e -commerce  to legitimize and encourage 
transactions. Similarly, as transactions shift to e -platforms, trade policies need to adapt to 
streamline the import process and reduce transaction costs.  Finally, private sector investments 
in agro -logistics and cold -chain capacity should be encouraged to fuel growth of e -commerce.  
• Development of an overarching vision , strategy  and action plan : In the medium term, it will be 
helpful to develop a cross -cutting National Digital Agriculture Vision , which can harmonize 
actions across different areas and stakeholders and prevent costs and mis -steps from more ad 
hoc initiatives.  The vision should be translated into a multi -stakeholder roadmap for  digital 
agriculture , spanning various  government ministries, including those dealing with ICTs, food 
production  and processing, rural development, irrigation and water management,  disaster 
management, telecommunication, governance, transportation,  finance and commerce.  
  
23 
 Annex  1: Agri -Tech Startups in Indonesia  
Source: https://tracxn.com/ex plore/AgriTech -Startups -in-Indonesia  
TaniHub    | App-based online marketplace to trade agriculture commodities  
 
TaniHub is an app -based online marketplace to trade agriculture commodities. It allows farmers and 
producers to sell the products to retailers, wholesalers, and individual customers. It allows buyers to 
buy fruits, vegetables, grains, meat, seafood, etc. It delivers products through an in -house delivery 
team Tani -Express. The mobile platform is available for Android users.  
 
Investors:  Tenaya Capit al, Intudo Ventures, Vertex Ventures and 7 Other Investors  
 
 
Chilibeli  | Online community -based  platform for agricultural products  
 
Chilibeli  is an online community platform for agricultural products. It connects farmers and 
manufacturers with agents through instant -messaging tools.  
 
Investors:   AltoPartners, Golden Gate Ventures, Kinesys Group and 2 Other Investors  
 
 
eFishery | Provider of a n IoT based automatic fish feeding solution  
 
eFishery is an Indonesia -based company offering a smart fish feeding solution for commercial 
aquaculture. It comprises of a feeder that can sense the fish’s appetite through motion sensors, and if 
the fishes fee l agitated or hungry, the machine feeds them automatically. It also provides a data 
platform that allows fish farmers to monitor and schedule feeding times in real -time on their phones, 
and control the system if needed.  
 
Investors:  Unreasonable Capital, 50 0 Durians, Ideosource and 6 Other Investors  
 
 
Crowde  | Online platform for connecting farmers with retail investors  
 
Crowde  is an online platform for connecting the farmers with retail investors for obtaining capital for 
their farming operations. The farmers can get their project listed upon registration. Investors can 
choose among the listed projects for making their investme nts. There is no lower limit of investment 
on the platform.  
 
Investors:  Mandiri Capital Indonesia, Instellar, Crevisse and 3 Other Investors  
 
 
8Villages  | Marketing solution for companies in agribusiness  
 
8villages product comes in the form of a mobile p hone subscription service called LISA (Farmers’ 
Information Service). By subscribing to LISA, users will be put into corresponding community groups 
based on their crops and location. It connects the farmers directly with the companies engaged in  
24 
 agribusine ss. These companies can push through targeted marketing and advertising messages to 
farmers via 8village's platform.  
 
Investors:  IMJ Investment Partners  
 
 
iGrow  | Crowdfunding platform for farming  
 
iGrow  partners with farmers and agribusinesses and allows users to invest in and take ownership 
(Productive farm ownership) of farms by allowing them to buy seeds. The proceeds are utilized by 
farmers to carry out the entire farming operation and the farmers sh are the revenue generated by 
selling the harvest in proportion to the seed investment with the users.  
 
Investors:  Rekanext, East Ventures, 500 Duri ans 
 
 
InFishta  | Online platform connecting investors with fish farmers  
 
inFishta is an online platform con necting investors with fish farmers. It allows investors to choose the 
cultivation method, determine the funds to be invested, and invest in fish farming projects. Users can 
receive real -time updates on the projects they invest and earn from profits.  
 
Investors:  Mandiri Capital Indonesia  
 
 
Jala | IoT enabled solution for monitoring water condition in the shrimp farm  
 
Jala is an IoT device for monitoring water condition in the shrimp farm. The device can be submerged 
in the pond and is equipped with multiple sensors for monitoring parameters like dissolved oxygen, 
temperature, humidity, pH, salinity, and TDS (total dissolve d solids). It collects the above -mentioned 
data and sends the same, in real -time, to the cloud. The company additionally provides a web -based 
portal wherein the collected data is processed and uses decision -making algorithms to produce 
actionable insights for the farmers. Also provides a companion application enabling the farmers to 
access data in case there is no internet connectivity. Claims that in March 2015, it won a grant from 
ASME. One of the clients includes Shrimp Club Indonesia.  
 
Investors:  brinc,  Conservation, Instellar and 3 Other Investors  
 
 
Habibi Garden  | IoT-based precision farming platform  
 
Habibi is an IoT -based precision farming platform. They deploy a central device which connects to a 
number of sensors to record data related to light i ntensity, humidity, moisture, nutrients and send it 
to the central cloud platform. The information is processed and used to control on ground devices like 
water pumps to supply water to the field when it is required. All the information is processed and is  
available in a dashboard like an interface for farmers to monitor their fields.  
  
25 
 Investors:  brinc, Instellar, Indigo Creative Nation and 1 Other Investors  
 
 
Eragano  | Mobile application for effective farming  
 
Eragano  is a mobile application for smallholder farmers for effective farming. The application's 
features include AI generated farm schedule, integrated with e -commerce farm supply and crop 
protection program. The application is available on Google Play Store. No table customers include 
PISAgro, Agrina, Paskomnas, and others.  
 
Investors:  East Ventures  
 
 
Gojek  | Wallet for consumer payments  
 
Go-Jek provides a wallet for consumer payments. Its services include utility bill payments, travel 
reservations, money transfers, online/offline payments, and more. It also enables businesses to 
accept online payments via credit/debit cards. Its mobile app is av ailable for iOS and Android devices.  
 
Investors:  Golden Gate Ventures, Shunwei Capital, JD.com and 40 Other Investors  
 
 
Lemonilo | Marketplace for healthy grocery items, snacks and food  
Lemonilo  is a marketplace platform for healthy food and grocery items. Sellers or merchants can list 
their products on the platform under appropriate categories. Lemonilo offers delivery from the 
merchants to the customers and also collect CoD payments. In additio n to health grocery and snacks 
items, users can also place orders for ready to eat healthy food and salad.  
 
Investors:   East Ventures, Alpha JWC Ventures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 