WORKING PAPERThis paper was written with the support of GIZ (Joscha Albert, Katharina Braun Botao, Enas Halaiqah, and Byoung Hwa Hwang) 
and the Central Bank of Jordan (Amr Ahmed and Maha Bahou). The authors are grateful to all external reviewers for their time 
and insights on drafts of this paper. External reviewers include Nana Boakye-Adjei (independent consultant), Peter McConaghy 
(World Bank), Volker Schimmel (UNHCR), Kirsten Schuettler (KNOMAD), and Kim Wilson (Tufts University).
The results presented in this paper are from an IPSOS survey conducted as part of a comprehensive baseline study of digital 
person-to-person remittances in Jordan. The research was funded by the German Government through GIZ. The project “Im -
proving Access to Remittances and other Financial Services through Digital Solutions in Jordan” (Digi#ances) is part of the 
special initiative “Tackling the Root Causes of Displacement, Reintegrating Refugees” initiated by the German Federal Ministry 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) in 2014 as a means to provide short-term support to refugees and their 
host communities.
The Digi#ances project is jointly implemented by GIZ and the Central Bank of Jordan, with whom CGAP partnered to conduct 
the baseline study.Remittances and 
Financial Inclusion: 
A Demand-Side 
Analysis of Low-Income 
Jordanians and Syrian 
Refugees in Jordan
Nadine Chehade, Antoine Navarro, and 
Danielle Sobol
December 2017
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION  .................................................................................... 1
II. RATIONALE AND METHODOLOGY  ...................................................... 2
III. REMITTANCES PATTERNS  ..................................................................... 5
IV. ACCESS TO OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES  ........................................... 8
V. POTENTIAL FOR DIGITAL REMITTANCES  
AND MOBILE WALLETS  ...................................................................... 11
VI. REACHING SYRIAN REFUGEES WITH DIGITAL  
FINANCIAL SERVICES  ......................................................................... 12
VII. CONCLUSION  ..................................................................................... 16
BOXES AND FIGURES
Box 1. Sample composition and key demographics ................................................................. 3
Box 2. Benchmarking financial inclusion data sources  .......................................................... 9
Figure 1.  Low-income Jordanians and Syrian refugees  
engaging in remittances  ................................................................................................... 5
Figure 2.  Remittances amount per transaction, annual value,  
and cost  .................................................................................................................................... 7
Figure 3.  Remittances market sizing for low-income  
Jordanians and Syrian refugees (US$)  ........................................................................ 7
Figure 4. Comparison of data across sources  ........................................................................... 10
Figure 5. Syrian refugees’ access to ATMs (% of respondents)  ........................................ 13
Figure 6. Phone ownership of Syrian refugees per income level  ..................................... 14
Figure 7. Phone ownership of Syrian refugees per education level  ............................... 151
Remittances and Financial InclusionI. INTRODUCTION
Remittances volumes to low- and middle-  
income developing countries have a 
potentially large development impact 
because they are three to four times big -
ger than official development assistance 
and more stable than foreign direct in -
vestment. They are projected to reach 
US$450 billion in 2017 (KNOMAD 2017). 
On such important volumes, the slightest 
decrease in transaction cost amounts to 
millions more channeled to end recip -
ients. Over recent years, the global av -
erage cost for sending remittances has 
stuck at around 7 percent of the amount 
sent, still far from the goal of 3 percent 
by 2030 that is envisioned by the Sus -
tainable Development Goal to “reduce 
inequality within and among countries.” 
Understanding remittances behavior and 
designing adapted, innovative, and low-
cost remittances services have thus be -
come important issues for both financial 
inclusion and economic development.
In this environment, CGAP and GIZ ini -
tiated research in 2016 to assess the 
potential for digitizing domestic and 
international person-to-person (P2P) 
remittances as part of the broader 
Digi#ances project. Jordan has long been 
a net receiving country, with inbound 
remittances representing 11.3 percent of GDP in 2016 (Verme et al. 2016). The 
protracted Syrian conflict and its uncer -
tain resolution suggested remittances 
could be an important mechanism of 
family support. GIZ and CGAP sought 
to inform development interventions 
aimed at improving access to financial 
services for low-income Jordanians and 
Syrian refugees living in Jordan.
CGAP worked with IPSOS to conduct a 
demand-side survey of both low-income 
Jordanians and Syrian refugees in Jordan 
and with Developing Markets Associates 
(DMA) to conduct a supply-side analysis 
of the market, infrastructure, and regu -
lations for domestic payments and for 
international remittances over selected 
corridors (CGAP , GIZ, and DMA 2017).1 
This paper presents the main findings 
from the demand-side survey, with a 
specific focus on Syrian refugees. Data 
showed that remittances are proba -
bly not the primary entry point to for -
mal and digital financial services for 
the studied population because only a 
limited number of Syrian refugees and 
low-income Jordanians engage in remit -
tance activities.2 However, the survey 
provided valuable insights into the fi -
nancial lives and use of financial services 
of both groups.
1 This supply-side analysis found a sound infrastructure and regulatory framework for domestic mobile payments and a 
unique opportunity to digitize international remittances. However, both are highly cash-based and require business and 
consumer efforts to move toward digital solutions. Remittances also require a level playing field among all current actors, 
regardless of their registration type.
2 Recent works reflect a diversity of situations when it comes to refugees’ use of remittances. A forthcoming study by BFA on 
Uganda indicates 8 percent of refugees in camps receive remittances. Work by UNCDF suggests 22 percent of refugees in 
Tanzanian camps receive international remittances via mobile phone.2
Remittances and Financial InclusionII. RATIONALE AND METHODOLOGY
This study used a quantitative analysis 
of the key remittance patterns and be -
haviors of low-income Jordanians and 
Syrian refugees in Jordan to under -
stand the demand, use, and preferences 
of current and potential customers of 
both formal and informal domestic and 
international P2P remittance services. 
The study also focused on awareness 
of mobile wallets and broader access to 
financial services and technology.
The methodology consisted of a quantita -
tive survey of 2,132 Syrian refugees and 
low-income Jordanians, the latter defined 
as belonging to socioeconomic classes D 
and E (i.e., with a household income of 
less than 400 JOD [US$560] per month). 
Jordanian respondents were recruited in 
seven geographic areas that host the larg -
est number of low-income people. Syrian 
respondents were recruited in five areas 
that host the largest number of refugees 
based on data from the United Nation’s 
Refugee Agency (UNHCR), in addition to 
two camps. The survey ensured repre -
sentativeness only on key criteria such as 
gender and age given the scarce and some -
times outdated availability of other demo -
graphic data on low-income Jordanians 
and Syrian refugees (Box 1).
Surveys were carried out between June 
and August 2016 in two phases: before 
and after Ramadan. Individual sur -
veys were complemented by a series of 
eight qualitative focus groups that were 
conducted in Amman and in the large 
northern cities of Irbid and Mafraq.
The raw data, detailed quantitative 
and qualitative methodologies, ques -
tionnaires, and full results are available on the World Bank’s microdata library 
website.3 Those data include partici -
pants’ profile; access to information and 
technology; access to financial services; 
mobile wallet awareness; remittances 
behavior, market sizing, and forecasting; 
concept testing for mobile remittances; 
and product suggestions. A summary 
presentation is available on the Microf -
inance Gateway (see CGAP 2017).
Data Limitations
■■Though efforts were made to en -
sure a randomized sample, there 
are no reliable data on the demo -
graphic makeup of low-income Jor -
danians and of Syrian refugees in 
Jordan. Therefore, the data were not 
weighted, and should not be consid -
ered representative.
■■Irregularities in declared occupation 
status and income sources confirm 
that respondents may have misre -
ported financial issues, including 
remittances.4 This is particularly the 
case with Syrian refugees, who may 
be inclined to under report income 
to meet donor criteria for aid.5
■■No Syrian refugee declared a house -
hold income of more than 400 JOD 
(US$560). This may be due to a 
sampling bias toward lower-income 
Syrian refugees and/or to under 
reporting to meet criteria to receive 
aid. However, the majority of Syrian 
refugees in Jordan are considered 
poor (see Section VI).
■■The survey did not screen for 
people who specifically engage in 
3 See http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2908 .
4 Other studies have documented the under reporting of income in a refugee context and have used expenditure aggregates 
as indicators of welfare. See Verme et al. (2016).
5 Donors may ask similar questions in surveys aimed at identifying the poorest households that qualify to receive aid.3
Remittances and Financial InclusionBOX 1.  Sample composition and key demographics
Respondents to the survey included 1,041 (49 percent) Syrian refugees and 
1,091 (51 percent) low-income Jordanians.
Location
■ In line with population distribution, 68 percent of low-income Jordanians and 
62 percent of Syrian refugees in Jordan who live outside camps were in urban 
areas, and 32 percent and 38 percent, respectively, lived in rural areas. Since 
80 percent of Syrian refugees do not live in camps, only 20 percent of interviews 
were conducted in camps (Zaatari and Azraq).
■ The study found that Syrians originate mainly from Daraa (51 percent), followed 
by Homs (16 percent), Damascus (10 percent), Aleppo (9 percent), Raqqa 
(5 percent), and other locations (10 percent). A quarter of refugees from Daraa 
live in camps. This is more than for respondents from Damascus and Aleppo who 
are the least likely to be living in camps (10 percent and 9 percent, respectively) 
and is probably explained by the time of migration and geography.
Employment and incomea
■ Of low-income Jordanian men, 51 percent reported an occupation. Thirty-four 
percent had full-time paid employment, and 17 percent were self-employed or 
reported a temporary or part-time occupation. Eighty-one percent of Jordanian 
women were housewives, and only 6 percent had full-time paid employment. 
Sixty percent of households relied on wages and salaries as a source of income, 
followed by retirement plans and government aid.
■ Thirty-five percent of Syrian men were working, with the majority (22 per -
cent) engaged in part-time or temporary work. Only 5 percent of Syrian men 
reported having a work permit, which indicates that occupation is largely infor -
mal. Ninety percent of Syrian women were housewives, and 2 percent reported 
some type of part-time or self-employment. A majority of Syrian households 
rely on aid: 73 percent receive aid or assistance; 40 percent rely exclusively on 
aid. Twenty-eight percent rely on wages and salaries, and 25 percent rely on 
temporary or seasonal work income.
Education
■ Thirty percent of low-income Jordanians have completed only primary school, 
and 42 percent have completed secondary school. Low-income Jordanian wom -
en are more likely to be illiterate or to have no formal education (7 percent vs. 
4 percent of men) and less likely to have completed primary school (28 per -
cent vs. 32 percent). However, the completion rate above this level (secondary 
school, university) is relatively comparable across men and women.
■ Sixty-five percent of Syrian refugees have completed only primary school, and 
20 percent have completed secondary school. The completion rate of primary and 
secondary is similar for men and women. However, women are more likely to be 
illiterate or to have no formal education (12 percent vs. 8 percent of men). Men are 
twice as likely to have an undergraduate or master’s degree (6 percent vs. 3 percent).
a. The survey did not collect information on the sectors of professional activity.4
Remittances and Financial Inclusionremittances because researchers 
wanted to assess the share of this 
segment within a random sample of 
Jordanian and Syrian refugee pop -
ulations. The small number of ac -
tual remitters among respondents 
limited the relevance of insights on 
remittances and prevented disag -
gregation at times. Analysis of other financial services, however, covers 
all respondents.
■■Practically no information was 
collected on informal remittances 
channels going through third par -
ties, although informal channels 
usually represent a significant share 
of remittances markets.5
Remittances and Financial InclusionIII. REMITTANCES PATTERNS
A small proportion of the surveyed 
populations engage in remittances.  
Of low-income Jordanians, 11.3 percent 
engage in P2P remittance activities. Of 
Syrian refugees in Jordan, 13.6 percent 
engage in P2P remittance activities. 
Respondents usually engaged in only one 
type of remittance activity: They either 
send or receive, domestically or interna -
tionally. However, there is a small num -
ber of remitters who perform more than 
one type of transaction (see Figure 1). 
A large share of domestic and interna -
tional remittances is channeled through 
exchange houses, the largest group of 
formal and regulated nonbank financial 
institutions in the country.6 Even though 
remittances may involve electronic fund 
transfers or compensation between ex -
change houses, most transactions are 
either initiated or terminated in cash at 
the customer level.
Low-income Jordanians most often 
engage in domestic remittance activ -
ities, and are most often receiving. Of 
these Jordanians, 8.5 percent send or 
receive domestically, while 4.0 percent receive internationally. They tend to be 
middle-aged men who reside in urban 
areas, with about half working part or 
full time. In comparison, Syrian refugees 
in Jordan engage in international re -
mittances far more often than domes -
tic: 13.1 percent either send or receive 
internationally, and only 1.6 percent 
engage in remittance activities within 
Jordan. They are both men and women, 
middle-aged, residing outside of camps, 
mostly unemployed although working 
more than the average, and generally 
with a low level of education.
Gulf countries are the main source 
of international remittances  for re -
cipients in both groups (50 percent 
for Syrian refugees, 52 percent for 
low-income Jordanians). Neighboring 
countries follow with 25 percent of 
low-income Jordanians receiving money 
from Lebanon or Turkey, and 17 percent 
of Syrian refugees in Jordan receiving 
remittances from Syria. Syria, in turn, 
is the destination for 90 percent of 
Syrians sending internationally.  The 
flows of domestic remittances reported 
6 For a detailed introduction to the business model and regulation of exchange houses in Jordan and their role in remittances, 
see CGAP , GIZ, and DMA (2017).FIGURE 1. Low-income Jordanians and Syrian refugees engaging in remittances
Source: CGAP , based on IPSOS survey, 2016.Send
Receive5.8%
8.1%
8.5%
Overlap of remittances activities
Unique adults with at least one
type of remittances activity5.4%Domestically
Send
Receive6.9%
7.8%
1.6 %
Overlap of remittances activities –
=–
=Unique adults with at least one
type of remittances activity13.1 %Domestically
4.4% 1.4%
4.1% 4.0%
13.9%% of low-income Jordanians
2.6%
11.3%0.4% 6.5%
1.2% 6.6%
14.7%% of Syrian refugees
1.5%
13.2% Internationally  Internationally6
Remittances and Financial Inclusionby low-income Jordanians appear con -
centrated in the cities of Amman and 
Irbid, on both the sending and receiving 
side.
The main channel for domestic remit -
tances is informal.  Nearly 50 percent 
of domestic remittances are performed 
by handing over cash directly to another 
person. A third goes through exchange 
houses, and the remainder through 
other formal channels. Domestic re -
mittances were analyzed only for 
low-income Jordanians because few 
Syrian refugee respondents engage in 
such transactions.
International remittances are mostly 
formal, and exchange houses domi -
nate this market . Nearly 80 percent of 
remitters, Syrian refugees or low-income 
Jordanians alike, use exchange house 
services. When they do not, low-income 
Jordanians use other formal (and usu -
ally banking) channels whereas Syrian 
refugees use informal channels, mainly 
sending or receiving through third-party 
individuals. However, focus group dis -
cussions have shown that customers 
do not always differentiate between ex -
change houses and international money 
transfer organizations (IMTOs) of which 
they are agents. In several cases, ex -
change houses’ premises are the service 
point and IMTOs are the remittances 
channel.
The reported average transaction 
size of US$259 for international re -
mittances is slightly higher than 
the lower-end global benchmark 
of US$200 , and is relatively lower for 
Syrian refugees (US$144 for sending, 
US$270 for receiving, with about 
three transactions a year) than for 
low-income Jordanians (US$358 for 
receiving, less than three times a year). Domestic remittance amounts are lower 
than international ones for low-income 
Jordanians, at US$137 for sending and 
US$287 for receiving. They are also 
more frequent (five times a year).
A common pattern found between the 
domestic remittances of low-income 
Jordanians and the international ones of 
Syrian refugees is that remittances re -
ceived are usually for larger amounts 
than those sent, and are divided into 
fewer but larger transactions . Remit -
tances sent represent a smaller annual 
amount and are sent in more frequent 
and smaller transactions (see Figure 2). 
In the case of low-income Jordanians, it 
can be assumed that the differences in 
size of amounts between sent and re -
ceived domestic remittances is the result 
of transfers to low- from higher-income 
Jordanians, the latter are not covered by 
this survey.
The reported cost of sending re -
mittances domestically and inter -
nationally is around 20 percent of 
the amount sent.  This figure is higher 
than that indicated by the supply-side 
analysis, which covered international 
remittances only and pointed to a cost 
of sending remittances ranging be -
tween 1.8 percent and 6.2 percent. The 
difficulty to recall the price of past trans -
actions over a period of one year may 
be a factor of inaccuracy in answers re -
ceived by the demand-side survey.7
The reported cost for receiving 
remittances ranges from 4 percent 
to 12 percent of the amount re -
ceived.  This is closer to, although still 
higher than, the level suggested by the 
supply-side analysis, which showed a 
2.7 percent to 9.9 percent price range. 
The diversity of answers received, in 
terms of channels, transaction amounts, 
7 Other studies observed that although the costs of informal money transfer services were perceived to be lower than that of 
formal services, in reality, they were higher than the cost of formal ones. See e.g., Wilson and Krystalli (2017).7
Remittances and Financial Inclusionand origin or destination of the funds 
may explain the wide range. Also, it is 
possible that respondents included the 
assumed or informed price paid by the 
sender in addition to the one they had 
to pay personally while receiving the 
funds.
Extrapolating the survey results (per -
centage of adults engaging in remittanc -
es, average amounts sent and received) to the total number of low-income 
Jordanians and of Syrian refugees in 
Jordan points to a P2P remittances mar -
ket of US$231 million per year for these 
categories of the population ( Figure 3 ). 
Overall, this would classify them as 
niche segments  in the context of a to -
tal Jordanian international remittances 
market estimated by the supply side at 
US$4 billion inbound and US$500 mil -
lion outbound.FIGURE 2. Remittances amount per transaction, annual value, and cost
Source: CGAP , based on IPSOS survey, 2016.144270358
137287505703932
7961,205
19%
9%
4%20%
12%
0%5%10%15%20%25%
02004006008001,0001,200
Sent by
Syrian re fugeesReceived by
Syrian re fugeesReceived by
low- income
JordaniansSent by
low- income
JordaniansReceived by
low- income
Jordanians
Interna/g415onal remi/g425a nces Domes/g415 c remi/g425ances
Cost, %Amounts, US D
Averag e amou nt per transac/g415on Total annual  value Cost
Source: IPSOS (2016).FIGURE 3. Remittances market sizing for low-income Jordanians and Syrian 
refugees (US$)
Dome s/g415cI nterna/g415ona l
Send 62 M 11 M 73 M
Receiv e 77 M 81 M 158 M
139 M9 2 M 231 M8
Remittances and Financial InclusionIV. ACCESS TO OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
The study found much lower access 
to financial services among Syrian 
refugees  as compared to low-income 
Jordanians.
At least one out of four low-income 
Jordanians is banked— 26 percent of 
respondents reported having an account 
at a financial institution. This figure is 
higher than the 16 percent account own -
ership found in the Global Findex in 2014 
for the poorest 40 percent, a segment 
that roughly overlaps with the survey 
respondents according to available data 
(Box 2). Over-sampling in Amman and 
in other urban areas may have caused 
this discrepancy. This figure also shows 
a significant gender gap: men are nearly 
four times more likely to have an account 
than women (41 percent vs. 11 percent).
Access to formal accounts for Syrian 
refugees is close to zero . Only two 
respondents reported having a cur -
rent account or a checking account at a 
financial institution.8 Twenty-two per -
cent reported withdrawing cash at ATMs 
through the iris-scan technology used by 
UNHCR for cash transfers. Eight percent 
reported having an ATM card, which is 
also likely linked to humanitarian aid 
distribution because none of them also 
reported having an account. These digi -
tal payment schemes allow beneficiaries 
to receive subsidies through channels 
such as ATMs. However, because they 
do not go through individual accounts 
owned by beneficiaries, beneficiaries do 
not have access to a range of financial 
services and transactions. These digi -
tal payment schemes simply represent 
individual drawing rights on pooled ac -
counts held by disbursing organizations. As such, beneficiaries of these schemes 
cannot be considered “banked.” Besides, 
since cash transfers usually bear an ex -
piry date that requires beneficiaries to 
use or withdraw the funds within three 
weeks, these mechanisms cannot be 
used to store value.9
Syrian refugees use informal borrow -
ing sources much more than formal 
credit . Twenty-six percent of Syrian ref -
ugees declare borrowing but only 3 per -
cent (nine respondents) do so through 
formal channels. In comparison, 29 per -
cent of low-income Jordanians borrow 
from financial institutions and 12 per -
cent borrow informally, mostly through 
family and friends. Among refugees, the 
most frequent credit users seem to 
be the most vulnerable . Refugees who 
live in a camp are twice as likely to have 
a loan as those who live outside a camp 
(43 percent of those living in a camp had 
a loan compared to 21 percent of those 
living outside a camp). Refugees living 
in a household that receives aid are also 
three times more likely to have a loan 
(31 percent of aid recipients had a loan 
as compared to 10 percent for those not 
getting aid). The question remains, at 
this stage, whether people with such a 
profile borrow more because they have 
a greater need for loans or because they 
have a greater access to loans. From a 
supply perspective—even for informal 
lenders—residence in camps could be 
perceived as limiting flight risk, and aid 
subsidies could be seen as a stable in -
come that guarantees repayment.
Access to insurance is more wide -
spread.  It covers almost two-thirds of 
low-income Jordanians (59 percent) 
8 Feedback from various stakeholders indicates banks have been reluctant to open accounts for Syrians who do not have 
a residence permit—a document that de facto  disqualifies them from refugee status. Syrians also indicate that the 
documentation required is so important that they tend to drop out before opening an account.
9 In countries where individual accounts are set up for aid disbursement, recipients do not always understand that the 
individual account can be used for purposes other than receiving aid. This is especially that case if they did not previously 
have a formal account in their country of origin.9
Remittances and Financial InclusionBOX 2. Benchmarking financial inclusion data sources
This survey is thought to be the first large-scale financial inclusion survey of Syrian 
refugees in Jordan or in any of the neighboring refugee-hosting countries, which 
makes it difficult to set benchmarks. The following presents other sources of data 
known to the authors at the time this paper was published:
■ Findex 2014 data for the bottom 40 percent of Jordanians indicate 16 percent 
own an account, 33 percent are engaged in borrowing (11 percent through 
financial institutions), and 10–11 percent are either receiving or sending 
domestic remittances. They are less likely than the average to have access to 
financial services (the average being 25 percent account ownership; 32 percent 
borrowing with 14 percent through financial institutions; 9 percent receiving 
domestic remittances and 11 percent sending).
■ Findex data are available for Syria only as of 2011. The data indicate a 23 percent 
formal account ownership rate. This rate is surprisingly uniform across income 
brackets, unlike in Jordan. The data also indicate 62 percent had a loan in the 
past year, but only 13 percent had a loan from a financial institution.
■ The 2017 national financial inclusion survey, led by Business & Finance Con -
sulting (BFC) and GIZ for the Central Bank of Jordan (field work conducted by 
IPSOS Jordan; publication forthcoming), provides the latest quantitative data 
for 1,000 respondents in Jordan. Results show progress since the 2014 Findex 
survey: 33.1 percent of adults living in Jordan indicate that they have an account, 
9.9 percent a formal loan, 29.9 percent insurance, and 23.4 percent engage in 
remittances. Data for the bottom 40 percent of Jordanians mostly differ from 
this paper’s findings in lower reported access to formal loans (11.5 percent) and 
insurance (40.2 percent), whereas account ownership (32.8 percent) and remit -
tances (16.2 percent) are more in line with this paper’s findings. Data for Syrian 
refugees show an overall higher access to financial services (7.5 percent report 
having an account, 35.6 percent insurance, and 24 percent engaging in remit -
tances). Formal borrowing is the exception at 1.5 percent. The latter needs to 
be interpreted with caution in light of several other studies that show rising debt 
levels among Syrian refugee households, which may indicate a shift from formal 
to informal borrowing. For example, the CARE (2017) survey of 1,447 Syrians 
found that 89 percent borrow from their neighbors. It also found that 81 per -
cent of 465 vulnerable Jordanians borrow from their families. Similarly, UNHCR 
(2016) found that 67 percent of Syrian households owe an average of US$818, 
including unpaid rent. Methodological choices may otherwise explain the dif -
ferences with the results shown in this paper ( Figure 4 ). BFC surveyed all gov -
ernorates whereas CGAP focused on the largest refugee hosting communities; 
BFC surveyed people residing in Jordan for over two years whereas CGAP did 
not screen respondents based on the duration of residence in Jordan.
and a third of Syrian refugees (31 per -
cent). In the case of Syrian refugees, it 
is assumed that the free or subsidized 
access to health facilities may have been 
misconstrued as a health “insurance” by 
survey respondents although it is not 
a financial product per se. This would explain the high number of refugees in 
camps who declare having health insur -
ance (71 percent), but it also represents 
a bias outside camps where refugees 
have access to health services on a sub -
sidy model supported by either the 
Government of Jordan or UNHCR.10
Remittances and Financial InclusionFIGURE 4. Comparison of data across sources
Notes: Findex and BFC data for adults include non-nationals, except for BFC bottom 40 percent. Findex data for Syria 
as of 2011. Proxy for insurance in Findex is “Personally paid for health insurance.” Proxy for remittances in Findex 
is the greater of two values: “Sent domestic remittances in the past year” or “Received domestic remittances in the 
past year” (not available for Syria in 2011).Access to ﬁnancial services of Jordanians and residents of Jordan
Access to ﬁnancial services of Syrian refugees and re sidents of Syri a0%20%40%60%
Accoun tL oanI nsuran ce Remi/g425anc es
Findex (2014, re sidents of Jor dan) Findex bo/g425om 40%  (2014, residents of Jor dan)
BFC (2017, residents of Jordan) BFC bo/g425om 40% (2017, Jordanians )
CGAP  (2016, Jo rdanians )
0%20%40%
Accoun tL oanI nsuran ce Remi/g425anc es
Findex (2011, resi dents of Syria) Findex bo/g425om 40%  (2011, residents of Syria)
BFC (2017, Syrian refugees in Jordan ) CGAP  (2016, Syri an refugees in Jordan)11
Remittances and Financial InclusionV. POTENTIAL FOR DIGITAL REMITTANCES AND 
MOBILE WALLETS
On their own, international  P2P re -
mittances for the groups studied 
are probably not sufficient to fos -
ter large-scale adoption of formal 
digital financial services , given the 
limited number of respondents who 
engage in such activities. The larg -
est volumes are indeed inbound, sent 
by white-collar workers located in 
Gulf countries, through formal chan -
nels. Amounting to a higher total and 
going more often through informal 
channels, domestic P2P remittances 
bear some digitization potential .10 
However, users report very high sat -
isfaction rates with the services they 
currently use, despite relatively high 
reported costs. Across products and 
populations, the optimal pricing was 
estimated at 3–4 percent .The quantitative survey and the qualita -
tive focus group discussions also tested 
the awareness of, and interest in, mobile 
wallets. At a time when mobile wallets had 
not been rolled out beyond the pilot stage 
in Jordan, it is not surprising that aware -
ness of mobile wallets was very low (less 
than 3 percent), as was the interest for 
such a service in survey results. However, 
qualitative research revealed interest 
and enthusiasm for mobile transfers 
and remittances services  after detailed 
explanations and illustrations of the po -
tential services, calling for significant 
awareness-raising efforts to support 
rolling out mobile wallets . Such services 
were deemed “convenient” and “helpful,” 
even though some focus group participants 
had concerns related to the security of the 
funds and the risk of losing the phone.
10 The untapped market potential among low-income Jordanians did not appear to exceed 30 percent across domestic and 
international remittances, although figures are ultimately too small to be meaningful. Syrian refugees did not report any 
untapped need during the quantitative survey.12
Remittances and Financial InclusionVI. REACHING SYRIAN REFUGEES WITH DIGITAL 
FINANCIAL SERVICES
In late 2016, the Central Bank of Jordan 
made a public commitment, under the 
Maya Declaration,11 to provide refugees 
access to formal digital financial ser -
vices. Since then, UNHCR cards were 
legally recognized as eligible identifi -
cation documents for refugees to open 
mobile wallets—the first time this has 
been initiated anywhere in the world. 
This is significant because not having 
valid identification documents that sat -
isfy customer due diligence require -
ments is regularly cited as a key barrier 
faced by refugees in accessing financial 
services.12 However, refugees in Jordan 
still may have issues accessing financial 
products other than national payments, 
notably international remittances, be -
cause mobile wallets are not yet linked 
to international money transfer services.
Nearly 655,000 Syrian refugees live in 
Jordan. Their high poverty level pre -
sumably is a key contributing factor to 
this group’s relatively low access to fi -
nancial services.  In 2016, a World Bank 
study found that 69 percent of Syrian 
refugees in Jordan were poor according 
to UNHCR’s poverty line, and 87 percent 
were poor according to Jordan’s do -
mestic poverty line. It also found that 
refugees in Jordan were poorer than 
refugees in Lebanon and that poverty 
had increased over time but decreased 
among the poorest refugees.
The extensive use of informal financial 
services and financial management 
tools, however, indicates a potential 
for formal financial services.  The 
fact that some Syrian refugees report not using financial institutions because 
they do not have enough money to do 
so (28 percent) or because they do not 
need a financial institution (42 per -
cent) suggests financial education and 
awareness-raising on the benefits of for -
mal financial services may be key drivers 
of demand.13 In this respect, however, 
the supply gap is not fully bridged given 
that the formal financial services avail -
able to refugees—mobile wallets, lend -
ing by some microfinance institutions—
are in an early stage of development 
and growth. Financial institutions that 
want to serve this segment will need to 
identify target groups, understand their 
financial circumstances, and work out 
how they can offer formal financial tools 
that provide more added value than the 
informal ones the potential customers 
currently use.
The survey also highlights aid dis -
bursement as an opportunity to 
offer formal transaction and savings 
accounts to Syrian refugees in Jordan . 
Data collected, notably on ATM and mo -
bile phone access and use, provide valu -
able insights into different segments. 
With 48 percent of aid recipients having 
ATM access, aid distribution appears to 
be a powerful tool linking refugees to 
formal financial channels. Statistically 
significant relationships can also be ob -
served between certain segments and 
ATM access: men, overall, have greater 
access, though female household heads 
are well-integrated, and youth are less 
likely to have ATM access (Figure 5). 
This may be due to the design of tar -
geting techniques and distribution 
11 For more, see AFI (2016).
12 A forthcoming KNOMAD study on the impact of the regulatory environment on refugees’ ability to use formal remittances 
channels finds that refugees face a number of challenges sending and receiving remittances, first of which are identification 
requirements. Two other recent policy papers reveal the same issue. See AFI (2017) and GPFI (2017).
13 Recent empirical evidence suggests that education is a much more important determinant of financial inclusion than wealth 
(see Cook [2017]).13
Remittances and Financial Inclusionmodes for aid (e.g., household rather 
than individual level). Refugees from 
Homs and Daraa have the most access 
to ATMs (37 percent and 27 percent, 
respectively) and they rely the most on 
aid income (83 percent and 74 percent 
of households, respectively). As such, aid 
recipients, men, female household 
heads are good candidates for further 
financial inclusion because they al -
ready have access to formal financial 
tools , are more familiar with these tools, 
and are likely to be more comfortable 
using them than other segments of the 
population. Conversely, these data also 
indicate that additional efforts will be 
needed to integrate women and youth 
into the formal financial system. While 
youth are less acquainted with the sys -
tems created by aid disbursement, they 
are more tech-savvy and may be early 
adopters of digital financial services. 
More generally, it can be assumed that 
a significant number of Syrian house -
holds either collect or have at some time 
collected aid through digital transfer schemes.14 However, bottlenecks will 
need to be overcome for aid mechanisms 
to lead to financial inclusion. First, cash 
transfers usually end with the with -
drawal of the full amount upon receipt 
because the funds expire if they are not 
withdrawn. Second, the Jordanian econ -
omy remains largely cash-based, so the 
vast majority of transactions happen in 
cash. Third, and perhaps more impor -
tantly, beneficiaries’ privacy concerns 
will need to be addressed, because fear 
of losing benefits makes them wary of 
formal financial services.15
Nearly universal mobile phone pen -
etration offers another opportunity 
to integrate Syrian refugees into 
the formal financial system through 
digital financial services . Eighty-six 
percent of survey respondents own a 
mobile phone, and 10 percent have ac -
cess to a shared phone. Phone ownership 
appears to be unrelated to age, house -
hold income, or whether a person lives 
inside or outside a camp.16 However, 
14 There is no readily available information on the aggregate unique number of aid recipients among Syrian refugees. 
Interviews with various stakeholders indicate that at least 30,000 households receive cash transfers through UNHCR, and 
that at least as many are served by international nongovernment organizations. This is at least 23 percent of Syrian refugee 
households (based on 655,000 Syrian refugees and five members per household, the total number of households would be 
of 131,000).
15 See Wilson (2017).
16 A recent webinar by the Social Performance Task Force’s Refugee Working Group highlighted the challenges to using digital 
channels such as mobile phones for financial services, especially in refugee camps. Among these, the bandwidth in the 
absence of nearby cell-phone towers and scarce electrical access increase the opportunity and financial cost of recharging 
phones. See SPTF (2017).Source: IPSOS survey, 2016.FIGURE 5. Syrian refugees’ access to ATMs (% of respondents)
32%
25%27%37%
11%32%49%
22%35%
10%
0%10%20%30%40%50%
MenW omen MenW omen 18-24 24+ YesN oY es No
Gender Househol d
headAgeA id recipien t
(individual)Aid recipient
(household )14
Remittances and Financial Inclusionthose who share a phone are more than 
twice as likely to be women (68 percent 
of phone sharers are women), indicating 
that women may be less able to access 
digital financial services without spe -
cific targeting. That said, 49 percent of 
those who share phones have their own 
SIM card, which would allow them to 
open a mobile wallet. Those who share 
phones without owning the SIM card 
may be the most vulnerable group: they 
are the least likely to have any formal 
education, are the most likely to be liv -
ing inside a refugee camp, and have the 
lowest income.
The type of phones used varies, as 
does the availability of internet ac -
cess . Syrian households below the 
US$37 (27 JOD) per month poverty line 
are more likely to own basic phones 
(37 percent have a basic phone vs. 
29 percent for Syrian refugees above the poverty line).17 Reaching out to this 
segment would require USSD channels, 
unless these households are able to gain 
better access to smart phones (Figure 6) 
and to 3G or internet services. Indeed, 
45 percent of Syrian refugees surveyed 
have no access to the internet. Sixty-four 
percent of refugees in camps do not have 
access to the internet, and 20 percent 
have access on a weekly basis or less 
frequently. Forty-nine percent of refu -
gees outside camps have internet access 
at least daily, but 40 percent don’t have 
access at all. In general, aid recipients 
report less access to internet.
Access to electricity , another important 
factor when considering digital readi -
ness, is highly dependent on the living 
location . Only 33 percent of refugees 
who live inside a camp report regular 
access to electricity, while 90 percent 
of those who live outside a camp say 
17 Equivalent to the international poverty line of US$1.25 per day. In 2014, the Jordanian poverty line was of 3.6 JOD or 
US$5 per day.Source: IPSOS survey, 2016.FIGURE 6. Phone ownership of Syrian refugees per income level
4% 3%11%10%37%
29%13%
11%35%
47%
< 27 JO D>  27 JO D
Household in come pe r
capitaOwn a smartp hone
Own a feature phon e
Own a basic phone
Access to a shared phon e
No acce ss or no answer15
Remittances and Financial Inclusionthey have regular access. Having only 
limited access to power in camps poses 
a technical and financial barrier because 
a fee may have to be paid to charge a 
telephone. Those with higher incomes 
are typically more likely to have regu -
lar access to electricity, as well as to the 
internet.
Building up digital literacy will be 
another challenge when trying to use 
digital channels to inform and serve 
refugees . The majority of Syrian refu -
gees surveyed would trust information 
on financial services provided on televi -
sion the most, followed by information through the radio. But only 53 percent 
of those who own or share a phone have 
performed a function beyond calling 
or sending text messages—this figure 
mirrors the penetration of smart and 
feature phones (Figure 7). Those who 
have performed an advanced function 
(sending or receiving pictures or video, 
accessing the internet, etc.) are evenly 
split between men and women, are 
younger (61 percent are under 34 years 
old vs. 53 percent of the overall popula -
tion), and are slightly better educated 
(29 percent have a secondary education 
or above vs. 24 percent of the overall 
population).
FIGURE 7. Phone ownership of Syrian refugees, by education level
Source: IPSOS survey, 2016.3% 6% 4% 2%10%16%
9% 14%
2%33%54%
32% 25%
26%12%6%
13%
10%
12%42%18%
42%49%
60%
0%25%50%75%100%
All
respondentsIlliterate or no
form al
educa/g415onPrimary -
middle schoolSecondar y
schoolUniversi tyOwn a smartp hone
Own a feature phon e
Own a basic phone
Access to a shared
phone
No acce ss or no answer16
Remittances and Financial InclusionVII. CONCLUSION
The survey showed a very low level of 
formal financial inclusion for Syrian ref -
ugees in Jordan. Levels of formal account 
ownership are close to zero, as is the use 
of formal credit, although many Syrian 
refugees, especially those who live in 
camps and those who receive aid, rely 
on informal borrowing sources. Access 
to health insurance for this group seems 
more widespread than access to other fi -
nancial services, although survey results 
suggest that free access to health facil -
ities in camps is often misunderstood 
as being a form of insurance. That said, 
many Syrian refugees have access both 
to formal financial tools, through aid 
disbursement mechanisms, and to digi -
tal channels, as implied by the high rates 
of (smart) phone ownership. There may 
be an opportunity for Syrian refugees in 
Jordan to integrate into formal finance, particularly if the focus is on women and 
youth who currently have low access.
The need for formal financial services 
and opportunities for the development 
of digital channels extends to the broader 
scope of low-income Jordanians. Given 
the limited use of remittances by the 
target groups surveyed, remittances are 
not likely to be the main entry point to 
digital financial services in Jordan. Digi -
tizing international remittances is likely 
to first depend on the up-take of mobile 
wallets in Jordan and, eventually, on dig -
ital humanitarian payments as a push 
factor for the segments studied. In all 
cases, significant awareness-raising and 
marketing campaigns would be needed 
to leapfrog from low financial inclusion, 
particularly for refugees, to digital finan -
cial inclusion.17
Remittances and Financial InclusionREFERENCES
AFI (Alliance for Financial Inclusion). 2017. 
“Financial Inclusion of Forcibly Displaced 
Persons: Perspectives of Financial Regula -
tors.” Kuala Lumpur: AFI. https://www.afi-  
global.org/publications/2533/Financial-  
Inclusion-of-Forcibly-Displaced-Persons-  
Perspectives-of-Financial-Regulators
———. 2016. “Central Bank of Jordan Makes 
Bold Maya Commitment to Financial Literacy, 
Access for Refugees, Gender, DFS and Data.” 
Kuala Lumpur: AFI. https://www.afi- global .
org/news/2016/11/central-bank-jordan-  
makes-bold-maya-commitment-financial-  
literacy-access-refugees
CARE. 2017. “7 Years into Exile: How Urban 
Syrian Refugees, Vulnerable Jordanians and 
Other Refugees in Jordan Are Being Impact -
ed by the Syria Crisis.” https://reliefweb.int/
report/jordan/7-years-exile-how-urban-  
syrian -refugees-vulnerable-jordanians-  
and-other-refugees
CGAP . 2017. “Baseline Study on Digital Re -
mittances—Highlights. Demand-side Survey 
of Low-Income Jordanians and Syrian Refu -
gees in Jordan.” https://www.microfinance  
gateway.org/library/baseline-study-digital-  
remittances-highlights
CGAP , GIZ, and DMA. 2017. “Paving the Way 
for Digital Financial Services in Jordan: 
Market and Regulatory Assessment of Pay -
ments and Remittances.” Washington, D.C.: 
CGAP , GIZ, and DMA. http://www.cgap.org/
publications/paving-way-digital-financial-  
services-jordan
Cook, William. 2017. “Who Are Kenya’s 
Financially Excluded.” Blog post, 9 November. 
http://www.cgap.org/blog/who-are-  
kenya’s-financially-excluded
GPFI (Global Partnership for Financial In -
clusion). 2017. “GPFI Policy Paper: Financial Inclusion of Forcibly Displaced Persons—
Priorities for G20 Action.” Geneva: GPFI.  
http://www.gpfi.org/publications/gpfi-  
policy-paper-financial-inclusion-forcibly-  
displaced-persons-priorities-g20-action
KNOMAD. 2017. Migration and Develop -
ment Brief n°28, October. https://www.
knomad.org/sites/default/files/2017-10  
/Migration and Development Brief 28.pdf
Making Cents, Sanad, OEB, Al Majmoua, and 
Vitas. 2017. “Microfinance for Syrian Refu -
gees: The Lebanese and Jordanian Market.” 
http://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/cf5fc8_  
623179d7c4c44334a3ea97392c3f6d4c.pdf
SPTF. (Social Performance Task Force). 
2017. UNCDF Projects in Refugee Camps in 
Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. https://sptf  
.info/working-groups/ refugee -microfinance
UNHCR (United Nations High Commis -
sioner for Refugees). 2016. “Regional 
Refugee & Resilience Plan 2016–2017: 
Mid-Year Report.” Geneva: UNHCR. http://
www.3rpsyriacrisis.org/wp-content/  
uploads/2016/09/3RP-Mid-year-Report-
Final.pdf
Verme, Paolo, Chiara Gigliarano, Christina 
Wieser, Kerren Hedlund, Marc Petzoldt, and 
Marco Santacroce. 2016. “The Welfare of 
Syrian Refugees: Evidence from Jordan and 
Lebanon.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org  
/handle/10986/23228
Wilson, Kim. 2017. “The Digital Demands of 
the Displaced: Don’t Track Me, Don’t Expose 
Me, Don’t Cut Me Off.” Blog post, 9 March. 
https://cfi-blog.org/2017/03/09/the-  
digital-demands-of-the-displaced-dont-
track-me-dont-expose-me-dont-cut-me-off/
Wilson, Kim, and Roxanne Krystalli. 2017. 
“The Financial Journeys of Refugees.” Med -
ford, Mass.: Tufts University.