Making Development Finance Management Information Systems Work 
for the Evolving Development Cooperation Landscape
February 2018GUIDANCE NOTE
Empowered liv es. 
Resilient nations . 
United Nations Development Programme
2
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEUNDP partners with people at all levels of society to help build nations that can withstand crisis, and drive and 
sustain the kind of growth that improves the quality of life for everyone. On the ground in more than 170 countries and territories, we offer global perspective and local insight to help empower lives and build resilient nations.
Copyright © 2018
United Nations Development ProgrammeOne United Nations PlazaNew York, NY 10017, USA
COVER: 
Photo: © UN Photo/Isaac Billy
 GRAPHIC DESIGN:  Phoenix Design Aid, Denmark3
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEAcknowledgements
This Guidance Note brings together good practices and lessons learned from establishing information management 
systems for tracking development co-operation across a number of countries. It benefitted from a wide consultative process involving governments, UNDP and UN Country Team staff. 
The Guidance Note was drafted and edited by a team from UNDP’s Bureau for Policy and Programme Support (BPPS), 
based on consultancy work undertaken by Stepan Kanayan and Sarah McDuff. The main contributors from BPPS included Philippe Chichereau, Piper Hart, Kristina Leuchowius and Anna Whitson.  Additional feedback and input was provided by UN and UNDP personnel at headquarters, regional offices and country offices: Abdoulie Janneh, Annelise Parr, Artemy Izmestiev, Ashley Palmer, Christian Shingiro, Danila Boneva, Emily Davis, Emily Meron, Frank Thomas, Hyrean Kim, Jakob Schemel, Masaki Mifune, Meron Tekola, Mohammad Mejbahuddin, Orria Goni, Owen Edwards, Pau Blanquer, Rogers Dhliwayo, Shaila Khan, Susan Rasuli and Zumrad Sagdullaeva. 
We also gratefully acknowledge the substantive contributions of the following individuals: Aftab Ahmad, Government of 
Bangladesh; Alex Mpangala, Government of Tanzania; Amina Khamis Shaaban, Government of Tanzania; Arounyadeth Rasphone, Government of Lao PDR; Arvind Nair, World Bank, Myanmar; Clifford K. Tandari, Government of Tanzania; Hodan Osman, Government of Somalia; James Herrera, Government of Timor-Leste; Lal Bahadur Khatri, Government of Nepal; Lamin Bojang, Government of The Gambia; Mahdi Abdulla, Government of Kurdistan, Iraq; Mitch Blaser, MCC-PEPFAR Partnership, Tanzania; Nakuala Senzia, Government of Tanzania; Neema W. Moshy, Bank of Tanzania; Phillip Gaspar Mboya, Bank of Tanzania; Stephanie Jaquet, University of Bern; Sunil Kumar, Government of India; Thuzar Khin, Government of Myanmar; Violeta Corpus, Government of Philippines; and Yamara Chieng, Government of Cambodia.
Special thanks to the UN Resident Coordinator’s Office and UNDP Tanzania for organising a country mission to test 
applicability for this Guidance Note, and for the support provided to the consultants in organising meetings and discussions with relevant national and international stakeholders. 
Finally, we appreciate the cooperation provided by Synergy International Systems and the Development Gateway 
Foundation in sharing information on their experiences on Aid Information Management Systems and providing specialist advice on the various solutions for development finance information management implemented worldwide. 
This Guidance Note was finalised under the policy guidance of Yuko Suzuki Naab (Global Policy Adviser, Effective 
Development Cooperation) and strategic guidance of Simona Marinescu (Chief, Development Impact Group). 4 MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT CO-OPERATION LANDSCAPEAcronyms and Abbreviations 
AAAA   Addis Ababa Action Agenda
AFMIS   Afghanistan Finance Management Information System
AIMS   Aid Information Management System
AMP   Aid Management Platform
AP-DEF  Asia-Pacific Development Effectiveness Facility
ASBPS   Afghanistan State Budget Planning System
BPPS   Bureau for Policy and Programme Support (UNDP)
CRS   Creditor Reporting System (OECD)
DAC   Development Assistance Committee
DFA   Development Finance Assessment
DFI   Development Financial Institution
DMS   Debt Management System
DPAF   Donor Performance Assessment Framework
FDI   Foreign Direct Investment
FMIS   Finance Management Information System
Global Partnership  Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation
GPI   Global Partnership Initiative
IATI   International Aid Transparency Initiative
ICT   Information and Communications Technology
IDMS   Iraq Development Management System
IFMIS   Integrated Financial Management Information System
INFF   Integrated National Finance Framework
INGO   International Non-Governmental Organisation
KDMS   Kurdistan Development Management System
MAPS   Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy Support
MCC-PEPFAR  Millennium Challenge Corporation-United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS relief
MDG   Millennium Development Goal
MIS   Management Information System
MOFP   Ministry of Finance and Planning
MTEF   Medium Term Expenditure Framework
NBAMS  National Budget and Aid Management System
NDS   National Development Strategy
NGO   Non-Governmental Organisation
NSA   Non-State Actor
NTSDMS  National Transport Sector Data Management System
ODA   Official Development Assistance
OECD   Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
OOF   Other Official Flows
PFM   Public Finance Management
PFMIS   Public Finance Management Information System
PPP   Public-Private Partnership
SDGs   Sustainable Development Goals5
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPETable of Contents 
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................... 3
Acronyms and Abbreviations .................................................................................................. 4
Table of Contents   ............................................................................................................ 5
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................... 6
1. Introduction   ............................................................................................................ 7
 1.1 The Evolving Development Finance Context  .................................................................... 7
 1.2 About the Guidance Note  ...................................................................................... 9
 1.3 The Challenge of Coherence at the Country Level  ............................................................. 11
 1.4 From Aid Management Information Systems to Development Finance Management Information Systems  ...... 11
 1.5 What is the Role of DFMIS in Strategic Decision-Making?  ...................................................... 13
2.  Understanding Common Data Systems  .................................................................................. 14
3. Establishing and Strengthening Management Information Systems ...................................................... 18
 3.1 Determining what information should be tracked ............................................................. 18
 3.2 Assessing what information is already being collected and finding the gaps  ................................... 25
 3.3 Institutional environment and legal framework for information-sharing ........................................ 31
 3.4 Assessing cost implications ................................................................................... 36
4. Final recommendations .................................................................................................. 39
5. Role of UNDP  .......................................................................................................... 40
6. Conclusion    .......................................................................................................... 42
Annex 1. Case Study: Development Finance Information Management in Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Annex 2. Technical Note on determining priority flows for integrated monitoring ............................................. 50
Annex 3. Country Survey .................................................................................................... 52
 Part I.  Institutional Arrangements and Mandates .................................................................... 52
 Part II:  Coordination Mechanisms and Structures ..................................................................... 53
 Part III:  Scope of Information Captured and Reported through Data Systems  .......................................... 54
 Part IV:  Bottlenecks and Challenges in Managing Information on Development Finance  ............................... 55
 Part V:  Summary of Your Experience and Plans in Managing Information on Development Finance  .................... 586
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEExecutive summary
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are an ambitious and universal 
plan of action, encompassing a wide range of areas including poverty reduction, combatting economic inequality and confronting climate change, among others, and highlighting the increasing importance of partners such as civil society and the private sector. While Official Development Assistance (ODA) will continue to play an important role in aid-recipient countries, it alone is not enough to meet the resource needs for realisation of the SDGs. As such, many country-level development co-operation landscapes have experienced an explosion of innovative financing flows, development partners and modalities of cooperation, necessitating an evolution in the way funds for development are tracked and managed. 
At the country level, the increasing diversity of public, private, external and domestic development resources calls for a review 
of systems for managing development flows, including Aid Information Management Systems (AIMS) or other Management Information Systems (MIS), moving away from a sole focus on ODA, and toward integration of new sources of development financing. In this context, UNDP seeks to harness lessons learned from its work on aid management in nearly 80 countries, including the need for better integration of aid and development cooperation information with national systems for financial, debt and macroeconomic management 
1. 
UNDP’s role in this work has been to support programme countries in setting up, institutionalising and operating AIMS and M&E solutions to help governments in decision-making processes around transparent and effective management of development resources, financing for development and poverty reduction strategies. It will continue to provide support in these areas, including through the exploration of innovative solutions. Drawing on these lessons, it is clear that there is a need to develop vigorous, beyond-aid systems to ensure a comprehensive overview of all development flows and support optimal resource allocation and decision-making at the country level. 
In the current landscape, there are no Management Information Systems able to track all flows and results in a way that allows 
for monitoring the links between plans, budgets and results, while integrating information from multiple sources into a coherent framework. Systems to track all available information, when they exist, are often scattered, making systematic use of data difficult and posing challenges for evidence-based policy-making and resource allocation. Such a system, tracking all financial flows supporting development priorities, could offer governments and their partners high-quality data for financial performance and value for money analyses, leading to increased efficiency and financial sustainability. 
To this end, based on increasing country demand, this Guidance Note offers concrete recommendations for governments looking 
to establish or strengthen robust systems for tracking comprehensive financial information, in support of enhanced development effectiveness and realisation of their own national priorities. The Guidance Note proposes the establishment of a Development Finance Management Information System (DFMIS) through the following steps:
 
1  Global Project Document: Managing Development Cooperation Effectively (UNDP , 2014).1. Determine the scope of information to be tracked and consolidated, and assess the availability of information
2. Review the systems currently tracking flows and consolidating data
3. Assess the institutional environment and legal framework for information-sharing
4. Review cost implications
  7
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEDetermine the scope of information to be tracked and consolidated, and assess the availability of information. Collection 
and consolidation of development finance information from various MIS requires considerable effort, and therefore, the scope of information to be tracked, as well as how the information will be processed, consolidated and reported must be carefully managed. As such, this Guidance Note lays out key actions for governments who wish to identify essential information for resource allocation and decision-making, including mapping major (and prioritised) sources of development finance to better understand resources available for development activities; identifying what essential information, and on what flows, is to be tracked through the DFMIS; and developing an information flow diagram for consolidated reporting on development resources.
Review the systems currently tracking flows and consolidating data. Secondarily, because country context is key when establishing 
a DFMIS, there is no singular blueprint that will work for all countries. This note provides key recommendations for governments who wish to examine existing systems and identify any gaps or information needs, including guidance on how to map all MIS currently used across government entities; assess the performance of existing MIS to identify gaps and duplications across systems; and explore standardisation of data on financing flows to ensure that it can be comprehensively tracked and monitored.
Assess the institutional environment and legal framework for information-sharing, as well as cost implications for information 
management. In order to create an enabling environment for the comprehensive management of development finance data, a careful assessment of the institutional environment and legal frameworks at play, as well as an appraisal of cost implications for the strengthening or building of DFMIS, must be addressed. A DFMIS cannot successfully manage data without an enabling legal environment and strong institutional and human resources capacities to support it, underscored by realistic and long-term strategic planning for cost implications. Accordingly, this note provides guidance on how to holistically address institutional, legal and policy considerations, as well as cost implications, to create the necessary conditions for effective and sustainable management of development finance information over time.
Photo: © iStock, absolut_1008
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE1. Introduction
1.1 The evolving development finance context
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a universal call to action in support of people, the planet and increased prosperity. 
Its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set an ambitious and global agenda for change, touching on a wide range of areas including poverty, economic inequality, health, gender parity, climate change, innovation, sustainable consumption and peace and justice, among others, and supporting a role for emergent non-state development partners such as civil society and the private sector. Given the scale of its aspirations, full implementation of the agenda will require mobilisation of significant and varied financial resources 
2, both public and private, national and international, while maximising their effectiveness. Financing 
the SDGs will not take place through global agendas alone, but will instead be built from a bottom-up, holistic and country-level approach. To this end, the country level development cooperation landscape is increasingly characterised by an explosion of innovative financing flows, development partners and modalities of cooperation, necessitating an evolution in the way funds are tracked and managed. 
Agenda 2030, with its transformational and inclusive nature, presents a significant challenge for governments in terms of their 
traditional fiscal, planning and budgeting capacities. Given the rising complexity and diversification of financing flows and partners, information on planned and available funds is often scattered across systems and ministries, hindering the holistic use of information to inform both policy decisions and allocation of resources. To address these challenges, countries are increasingly demanding new, more effective and integrated approaches to tracking and managing all resource flows, recognising that consolidated data availability is crucial for the most efficient use of funds. In the evolving development cooperation landscape, streamlining of diverse financing instruments, strongly linked to national priorities and fiscal constraints, can help address the scale and interconnected nature of sustainable development challenges. 
Over the past decade, UNDP has supported a number of countries in their efforts to build national capacity for development co-
operation management and co-ordination, working with nearly 80 programme countries in establishing, institutionalising and operationalising Aid Information Management Systems (AIMS), software that stores aid data across projects, budgets, activities and indicators. However, while Official Development Assistance (ODA) will continue to play an important role in aid-recipient countries, it alone is not enough to meet the growing resource needs inherent to the SDGs, In tandem, the evolving development co-operation landscape, as described above, increases the complexity of managing development finance and results information. As such, current Management Information Systems (MIS) must evolve into robust and comprehensive systems for tracking the full spectrum of financial flows for development.
In this context, UNDP seeks to harness lessons learned from supporting countries in the development of AIMS, including the 
need for better integration of aid and development cooperation information with national systems for financial, debt and macroeconomic management 
3. Drawing on these lessons, it is clear that there is a need to develop vigorous, beyond-aid systems 
to ensure that a comprehensive overview of all development flows is available to support optimal resource allocation and decision-making at the country level, and to ensure that this information is simultaneously integrated in national planning and monitoring processes. As such, this Guidance Note was developed in response to the growing demand from developing country governments for increased access to quality and timely information on diverse resources for development, including through the strengthening or construction of Development Finance Management Information Systems.
2  The financing resources needed to achieve the SDGs surpass current development finance flows. Substantial financing gaps exist to fully address hunger, health and 
education needs (annual additional financing requirements are estimated at $186 billion USD). The cost of a global safety net to eradicate extreme poverty is about $66 billion annually and annual investment requirements in infrastructure amount to $5 trillion to 7 trillion globally. Meeting the need for credit for small and medium enter -
prises – a main provider of employment in many countries – has been estimated to be up to $2.5 trillion in developing countries and about $3.5 trillion globally (United Nations, the Report of the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing, 2014).
3  Global Project Document: Managing Development Cooperation Effectively (UNDP , 2014).9
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE1.2  About the Guidance Note
Purpose of the Guidance Note
This purpose of this Guidance Note is to provide information on the key issues to be considered when assessing, strengthening or 
building a Development Finance Information System (DFMIS) to respond to the evolving financing landscape at the country level. A DFMIS can broadly be defined as a computerised system to record and process information about development activities and results across flows, as well as related financial information.
Specifically, the Guidance Note aims to answers the following questions:
1.  Given the evolving development cooperation landscape, what development finance data (e.g. information on which 
resource flows) should be collected?
2.  What types of systems are currently used to collect information on diverse financial data, including on how data is connected to development results?
3. What are some of the challenges related to the policy and institutional frameworks surrounding DFMIS? 
4. What are the some of the cost considerations related to assessing, strengthening or building new DFMIS? 
Formulation of the Guidance Note
This Guidance Note draws on evidence gathered through surveys conducted in 14 countries across Africa, Asia and the Pacific, as well as information from two private vendors of external finance MIS. The evidence is complemented by follow up interviews with government officials, representatives of UNDP country offices and other development partners within the participating countries. The Guidance Note was assessed for applicability to the country-level development cooperation landscape through a case study in Tanzania (see Annex 1). 
UNDP support to effective development cooperation at the country level
This Guidance Note also draws on lessons learned from UNDP’s past support in the area of effective development cooperation. Over the past decade, UNDP has supported close to 80 countries in their efforts to increase national capacity for development cooperation management and coordination. Support provided in this area includes assisting in establishing development cooperation policies and co-ordination architecture; building capacity to monitor and evaluate progress on implementation of effective development cooperation commitments; and fostering transparency between development stakeholders. 
UNDP’s work on effective development cooperation is guided by the principle of national ownership over the development 
process. Effective management and transparency of development resources is key to supporting countries’ development planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, and ensuring that countries remain firmly in the driver’s seat of their own development planning and management.
At the country level, UNDP country offices work closely with governments through their Country Programme / Project Documents 
to provide technical assistance and capacity-strengthening support, at the request of national counterparts. This Guidance Note highlights many issues that can be considered by UNDP country offices as they strengthen their support to developing countries in the evolving context of financing for development and effective development cooperation.  10
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPELessons learned
Through its support to nearly 80 countries in their efforts to increase national capacity for development cooperation management 
and coordination, UNDP engagement has produced the following relevant lessons 4:
1.  To ensure all development resources are aligned with country priorities and used effectively, a whole-of-government approach is needed. 
2.  A stronger focus on results-based financing is necessary to ensure the maximum impact of development resources. To this end, country results frameworks could be revisited to incorporate more diverse financing flows, allowing for deeper integration of these types of resources with national planning and budgeting processes. For example, impact investing, venture capital, development impact bonds etc. 
3.  Policy and institutional reforms that enable cohesive management of development resources and enhance mutual accountability between stakeholders are vital to successful achievement of the SDGs.    
Additionally, and most recently, UNDP through its Bangkok Regional Hub, has developed the Development Finance Assessment (DFA), a tool to respond to the growing demand from countries in the Asia-Pacific region to support policy and institutional reforms for managing the increasing complexity of domestic and international sources of financing for development. UNDP is currently rolling out the DFA to interested counties across the Africa, the Arab States and Latin America and the Caribbean regions.
4  Strengthening Development Cooperation in Support of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: UNDP Discussion Paper, Nov 2015.Setting the stage •   The evolving development context•   An introduction to MIS•   Shifting from AIMS to DFMIS•   Understanding types of data and tracking systems
Practitioner’s guide to establishing / strengthening DFMIS•   Determining the scope of information to be tracked and consolidated, and assessing  the availability of information
•   Reviewing systems currently tracking financial flows and consolidating data
•   Assessing the institutional environment and legal framework
•   Assessing cost implications
Key recommendations •   Final recommendations
•   UNDP’s entry points
Annexes •   Tanzania case study
•   Developing priority flows for integrated monitoring
•   Country survey
  Structure of the Guidance Note11
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE1.3  The challenge of coherence at the country level
At the country level, managing diverse sources of development 
finance poses significant challenges for governments in terms of their traditional fiscal and development planning. For example, the competing interests of different stakeholders and the need to streamline diverse financing instruments which are strongly linked to national priorities and fiscal constraints can be problematic. Due to the integrated nature of SDG implementation, investment decisions by the private sector, civil society entities as well as development partners and Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) will also have an increasing impact on the government’s policy decisions and allocation of public resources. 
This complexity requires the collection and organisation of large 
amounts of data on both the financial and contextual parameters of development interventions. Equally, the process of tracking, monitoring and analysing information on development finance and activities will also need to evolve alongside development planning, budgeting and monitoring. In this context, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA), an internationally-agreed framework for financing the SDGs, recognises the importance of ‘cohesive nationally owned sustainable development strategies, supported by integrated national financing frameworks’ . 
1.4  From Aid Management Information Systems to Development Finance Management 
Information Systems 
Broadly, a Management Information System (MIS) is a computerised database, generally organised in a way to support decision 
making5. While there exist a variety of information systems to support decision-making, such as enterprise information systems, 
public financial management information systems or enterprise resource planning systems, in the past, with ODA playing a larger role in development financing, Aid Information Management Systems were commonly used as the sole MIS to track information on external resources for development activities. Generally, AIMS manage data related to ODA, including South-South Cooperation (SSC) and technical assistance; resources from non-governmental organisations (NGOs); and results related to these resources. 
The increasing diversity of public, private, external and domestic development resources at the country level necessitates review 
of the AIMS or other MIS, moving away from a ‘traditional’ AIMS and toward integration of new sources of development financing, while strengthening linkages with development planning, monitoring and evaluation processes. 
As such, this note will focus on building or strengthening a Development Finance Management Information Systems (DFMIS), 
which can be defined as a computerised system to record and process information about development activities and results across flows, as well as related financial information. The specific data and systems used to collect and manage information vary from context to context, however the following table gives an example of the types of information that may be collected and managed through a DFMIS.
5   Management Information Systems: Test and Cases, Fifth Edition, McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, 2013, page 5.
Photo: © UN Photo12
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEType of information Flow parameters
Financial information Commitments, disbursements, projected disbursements, expenditures
Financing instruments Loans, grants, technical assistance, blended finance 
Source and destination of flows Funding source, executing agency, implementing agency, on / off budget
Dates Agreement date, start date, end date, extensions 
Alignment Sector, national development plans, international development goals
Geographic destination National or subnational, region or district, project sites
  TABLE 1  Types of information collected through a DFMIS
Source: Country Surveys, July 2016
Photo: © UN Photo/Martine Perret13
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE1.5  What is the role of a DFMIS in strategic decision-making?
Data-driven decision-making is an approach that values decisions which can be backed up with verifiable evidence. In the 
development context, this means making policy and resource allocation decisions based on country-generated data, including comprehensive information on financial flows and development results. Of course, the success of this approach is reliant upon the quality of the data gathered and the effectiveness of its analysis and interpretation. DFMIS can play a vital role in organising and tracking key metrics and allowing for analysis of information in a way that can support data-driven decision-making. Ideally, this process should be informed by two streams of information captured in the DFMIS – on financial inputs and achieved results – as outlined in Figure 1 below.
Collection, aggregation and analysis of data are the main elements of the workflow for monitoring both financial flows and results. 
Consolidation and integration of information is typically needed at the top of the workflow pyramid to transform the data into usable information for decision-making. There are two main areas in which the DFMIS can contribute to improvements in data management and informed decision-making. These are: 
1.   Consolidation of data on multiple financial flows / integration of information from multiple sources into a coherent 
framework, with a classification that allows for comparability at the global, regional and national levels; and
2.   Monitoring the links between plans, budgets and results to support decision-making and to track progress on development 
effectiveness. 
FIGURE 1  Workflow diagram of the decision-making process on management of development finance
Monitoring and tracking 
of resource flows 
(public, private, domestic, external)Monitoring of 
development indicators  
(outcome, output, process)Data analysis and aggregationConsolidation and integration 
of information
Data analysis and aggregationDecision-making
Data on progress of various indicators Data on various flowsReporting Reporting14
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE2. Understanding common data systems 
The 14 country surveys undertaken in preparation for this Guidance Note demonstrate that there are often two to three databases 
for monitoring information on development finance at the country level – each tracking a specific flow, as outlined in Table 2 below. Financial Management Information Systems (FMIS) are primarily used for the management of data on domestic revenue, capital, recurrent government expenditure and external flows that are channelled to the public sector. Debt Management Systems (DMS) are mostly used for the management of loans, government guarantees or other financial instruments that create debt obligations for the government. While the DMS can track data on projects funded by those instruments, their primary role is to capture contracts – DMS do not track development results. Conversely, AIMS manage data on external development finance flows, both public and private, and can allow for the tracking of development results. 
In the current landscape, there is no MIS able to track all development finance flows and results in a way that allows for monitoring 
the links between plans, budgets and results while efficiently integrating information from multiple sources into a coherent framework to support decision-making and track progress on development effectiveness. As such, governments have had to use more than one system to capture and analyse data on development finance and its impact on development results. Figure 2 outlines the typical ecosystem of national MIS currently established in many developing countries.
These systems, all with different objectives, are implemented and managed by different government departments and agencies. 
This inevitably leads to a fragmented view of the country’s financial situation, and often a duplication of efforts in collecting data and overlapping datasets (Table 3). In addition, the process of retrieving information from multiple MIS, either manually or using fragmented computerised records, is time-consuming and often results in incomplete information.
Financial Management Information Systems  (FMIS)Aid Information Management Systems (AIMS)Debt Management  Systems (DMS) Other
•  General accounting
•   Cash management
•   Expenditure control
•   Treasury operations
•   Capital investments
•   Public debt
•   Tax revenue•   External flows, including 
ODA, other official flows, South-South and Triangular Cooperation and technical assistance
•   Domestic capital investment project management
•   Resources from non-governmental organisations
•   Integration with the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI)
•   Results monitoring 
•   Publicly accessible reporting•   Public debt
•   Concessional and commercial loans
•   Grants
•   Record borrowings from financial markets
•   Record government guarantees and bonds, including Eurobonds  and diaspora bonds
•   Contract management•   Foreign direct investment (FDI)
•   Remittances 
•   Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects
•   Domestic and international philanthropy 
•   Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds 
•   Equity finance 
  TABLE 2  What is tracked by MIS for development finance management? 
Source: Country Surveys, July 201615
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPECountries
ODA
SSC
Technical 
Cooperation
Climate  
funds
National 
budget
Local budgetFixed Direct 
Investment
Remittances
INGOs
Philanthropy
Afghanistan 2 3 2
Bangladesh 2 2 2
Cambodia 2 2 2
Gambia 2 2
Lao PDR 3 3 3 3 2 2 2
Myanmar 2 2
Mozambique 3 2
Philippines 2 3 5 4 3 5
Somalia 2 2 2 2
  TABLE 3 Countries where multiple institutions are custodians of development finance data for the same flow
Note: the number below represents the number of institutions within the same government that are responsible for collecting data on a particular flow.  
Source: Country Surveys, July 2016Note: this figure displays common flows captured by each type of MIS, but is not an exhaustive list.FIGURE 2  Typical eco-system of national Management Information Systems
Tax Revenue Project Loans
RemittancesOther Public 
RevenueProject Grants
Technical 
Assistance
FDI
PPPsBudget Support Loans
Public BorrowingBudget Support GrantsSSC and TrCDMS FMIS AIMS Other Flows
(not generally  systematically captured)Other Debt Budget ODA
16
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEIn addition to the fragmentation caused by use of different systems 
by diverse government entities, difficulty in populating MIS is a common challenge that results in the system not being used to link plans, budget and results. This is particularly true for information related to external public flows that are provided off-budget, including SSC, funding provided by NGOs and international non-governmental organisations (INGOs) and flows originating from private providers. The overall result is ineffective use of information for resource-allocation and decision-making.
As called for in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for 
Development, improving access to and processing of essential data on development finance and cooperation beyond ODA is crucial for achievement of the 2030 Agenda. As such, broad access to the tools necessary to turn data into useful information for policy decisions, appropriate allocation of resources and ultimately to support countries’ implementation of the SDGs, is crucial. Situating the DFMIS alongside development planning, budget, and monitoring processes can enable strengthened analysis of the links between objectives, budgets, resources and results as outlined in Figure 3. ‘Data access alone…is not enough to fully realise the potential that data can offer to both achieving, monitoring and reviewing sustainable development goals. We should endeavour to ensure broad access to the tools necessary to turn data into useful, actionable information. We will support efforts to make data standards interoperable, allowing data from different sources to be more easily compared and used’ . 
- Addis Ababa Action Agenda, July 2015
FIGURE 3  DFMIS support to the links between objectives, budgets and results
Multi-year plan Annual planning
AlignmentAllocationCumulative 
investments
Monotoring and evaluation measuring resultsNon-project activityDevelopment 
ObjectiveApproved
Budget
SDGsEstimated  
CostProgramme/
ProjectSector/ 
Industry
Source of 
Finance17
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE
Photo: © UNDP/Andrei Liankevich18
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE3. Establishing and strengthening Development Finance 
Management Information Systems
The previous section highlighted how changes in the development financing landscape have necessitated capturing increasingly 
important financing flows in current MIS. As such, in order for this data to inform decision-making and resource allocation, it must be collected and consolidated along with other financial flows. Systems to track all available information, when they exist, are often scattered, making systematic use of data challenging. Based on increasing country demand, this Guidance Note offers recommendations for governments looking to establish more robust systems for tracking financial information in a comprehensive way. Lessons learned in this area point to the need to take a systematic approach and the Guidance Note therefore recommends the use of assessment frameworks as a guide for establishing / strengthening management information on development finance.
Drawing from country experience, this Note recommends steps (Figure 4) that will help ensure that decisions on adapting and 
expanding current MIS to consider comprehensive financial flows (e.g. to become a DFMIS) are well informed and will lead to improved development finance management.
3.1 Determining what information should be tracked
Collection and consolidation of development finance information from various MIS requires considerable efforts. Therefore, to ensure the most efficient use of resources while ensuring availability of all necessary information, the scope of information to be tracked, as well as how this information will be processed, consolidated and reported, must be determined with great care. The following parameters can guide the determination of the scope of information to be tracked: 
•  A flow is identified as a development resource.•  Information on a flow is deemed essential for decision-making.•  Information is, or could be, made available with reasonable investment. 
1. Determine the scope of information to be tracked and consolidated, and assess the availability of information.
A flow is prioritised as a development 
resource  Information on a particular flow is 
needed by decision-makersInformation is or could be made 
available
2. Review the current systems tracking flows and consolidating data.
Inventory all information systems’ 
monitoring flowsReview experience and performance 
of other MISExchange with countries with similar 
experiences
3. Assess the institutional environment and legal framework for information-sharing.
Consider the confidence-level that 
information will be freely-shared 
among stakeholdersAssess whether the institutional and 
legal framework are conducive or 
need strengtheningEvaluate wheter staff competencies 
are relevant and meet needs
4. Review cost implications
Determine the model of the new 
DFMIS architectureAssess the cost and efforts needed to 
implement change  Design an implementation and 
financing plan
  FIGURE 4  Assessment framework for strengthening MIS19
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEAs such, the following actions are recommended for governments who wish to identify essential information for resource allocation 
and decision-making, and are further detailed in the section below:
Actions Considerations Country Examples and Available Tools
Step 1. Map major (and 
prioritised) sources of development finance•   Comparative finance flows (knowledge and trends)
•   Availability of information•   Development Finance Assessment (DFA) - Bangladesh example (Box 1)
•   Mapping of development finance flows – Sudan example (Box 2)
Step 2. Identify essential information to be tracked •   Nature and use of information for decision-making
•   Cost
•   Speed of access
•   Geographic or sectoral destination, target populations•   DFA - illustration of analysis from Solomon Island (Box 3) and Kenya, Rwanda and Zambia (Annex 2)
Step 3. Develop an information  flow diagram•   Linking information to decision-making and planning processes
Photo: © UN Photo/Albert Gonzalez Farran20
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEPublic Private
External •  Tax revenue
•  Direct, indirect
•  Non-tax revenue
•  Government borrowing
•  Debt, bonds•  Private sector equity•  Domestic borrowing
•   National NGOs, foundations and 
philanthropists
Domestic •  ODA grants
•  ODA loans
•  Other official flows
•  South-South Cooperation•  FDI•  Portfolio investment
•   International borrowing
•  Remittances•  International NGOs
  FIGURE 5  Main sources of finance to a countryStep 1. Map major (and prioritised) sources of 
development finance to better understand resources available for development activities.
As noted above, comprehensive, timely and accurate 
information on development finance flows is essential to sound decision-making. Using a Development Finance Management Information System can help to ensure that information is available quickly. However, the significance of various flows varies widely from country to country based on specific country context, and as such, information tracked through DFMIS may be different from country to country. A good first step in establishing or strengthening a DFMIS is mapping the current overall development resource envelope of the country, including those shown below in Figure 5. 
A helpful tool for governments to shed light on the 
availability of resource flows is the Development Finance Assessment (DFA) (see Box 1: Example of Bangladesh). Developed by UNDP’s Bangkok Regional Hub, DFAs respond to the growing demand from countries to establish evidence and analysis, and introduce policy and 
Photo: © iStock, Nikhil Patil 21
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEBOX 1  Illustrative example of DFA in Bangladesh 
The Development Finance Assessment (DFA) is a tool developed by UNDP’s Bangkok Regional Hub, which serves as the 
Secretariat for the Asia-Pacific Development Effectiveness Facility (AP-DEF). It was developed in response to the growing demand from countries in the region to establish evidence and analysis, and introduce policy and institutional reforms, for managing the increasing complexity of domestic and international sources of financing for development. UNDP is currently scaling-up the DFAs not only in the Asia-Pacific but also in other regions including Africa, the Arab States and Latin America and the Caribbean. 
The DFA in Bangladesh mapped the various financial flows to the country. As noted in the graph below, borrowing and 
revenue are the biggest sources of financing for the Government of Bangladesh. In 2015, borrowing was at 18 percent of GDP , tax revenue as a share of GDP was around 10 percent and official development assistance (ODA) was about 2 percent. Outside of the public sector, the most important development finance flows were: private investment, which was $23.3 billion in 2014, and remittances standing at $14 billion in 2014. Bangladesh’s DFA has shown the increasing importance of harnessing private finance for achieving development results. 
FIGURE 2  Example from Bangladesh
Source: DFA MethodologyDevelopment Finance Flows in Bangladesh, 2005-2014 
Tax revenues
Private InvestmentPublic debt
Remittance
FDI
Domestic CCFODA
SSC30000
25000200001500010000
5000
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014Current USD Millions.
institutional reforms for managing the increasing complexity of domestic and international sources of finance for development. 
UNDP is already supporting a number of countries to implement the DFA methodology, with the use of a full, detailed methodology guide published separately by UNDP . 
Governments can also map development resources through a combination of international, regional and national existing 
databases / systems, such as the World Bank Development Indicator database, IMF Article IV Assessments, UNCTAD database, OECD-DAC ODA and OOF database, Central Bank, national budgets, IATI data depository etc. (see Box 2: Example of Sudan). This step can also provide insights on current availability and sources of information around various development financing flows at the country level. 22
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEBOX 2  Illustrative example of financing flow mapping in Sudan
Development finance flows in Sudan were mapped as part of the joint OECD and UN financing strategy mission. The mapping 
was based on desk research and combined with interviews with a broad range of development and humanitarian stakeholders in the country. 
Sources: OECD, IMF World Revenue Longitudinal Data, World Bank, author calculations. No tax and non-tax revenue data available for 2015.Development Finance Flows in Sudan, 2012-2015
Domestic Credit to  
Private Sector
Tax and Non-Tax 
Revenue 
FDI
RemittancesODA
External Debt20000
1500010000
5000
0
-5000
2012 2013 2014 2015Current USD Millions.
Step 2. Identify essential information to be tracked for more effective resource allocation and decision-making. 
Once a full understanding of the development finance flows in-country is achieved, a determination can be made on what 
information should be tracked through the DFMIS. The following guiding questions can be considered in analysing the relative importance of information to be tracked in the context of informing strategic decision-making and resource allocation:
•  How much of each resource is being raised as a proportion of GDP? 
•  Who are the major partners (including ODA providers, South-South Cooperation providers, international NGOs, foundations and philanthropists, etc.) and what ‘types’ of finance or cooperation do they provide? 
•  To which sectors / thematic areas do these contributions flow? How have they supported national development priorities and results? 
• Are there any geographic destinations for various financing flows? 
•  Are there any patterns in activities / interventions supported by external public and private flows versus domestic sources of finance? What is the overall composition of public debt (external versus domestic) and are there any broad trends in this construction (e.g. changes in public versus private; a shift from external to domestic)? 
Step 3. Develop an information flow diagram.In addition, mapping a workflow for reporting on development resources can be considered alongside the core planning and monitoring and evaluation processes in order to identify essential information. In some cases, development cooperation policy (or a similar policy) outlines essential information for decision-making. Box 3 provides an example of a workflow analysis for reporting on development finance flows in the Solomon Islands. 23
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEBOX 3  Example of workflow analysis for reporting on development finance flows in the Solomon Islands
The Solomon Islands Development Cooperation Policy requires that all agencies, both those providing and using development 
resources, report on their respective projects and programmes to the Aid Coordination Department (ACD). 
Workflow mapping of reporting on development cooperationMinistry of Finance and Treasury On-budget and loan projects irrespective of the source of funding
Ministry of Development Planning and  
Aid Coordination All grants received from bilateral DAC and non-DAC donors
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and External Trade All requests from foreign sources offering assistance
Line Ministries All projects funded by external sources
Non-state actors and INGOs All projects funded by external sources and implemented by NGOs
M&E units of the Solomon Islands government Progress in implementing projects and results achieved
Development partners, including bilateral, multilateral donors, UN agenciesAll projects funded by the partner
  
FEDU
MO FT
Multilateral Financial 
Institutions
Debt Management unit
MO FTBudget suppor t
Loans
Bilateral DAC donors
Bilateral non - 
DAC donorsProposals, n egotiations Implementation, reporting
Line ministries
MFAET Any assistance
UN agencies
Line ministriesReporting
CABINET
PARLIAMENTUN agencies, N GOs,
Private sector
 NGOs, Private sectorProgramme suppor t
Project support
Programme suppor t
Project supportReportingReporting
Reporting
ReportingReporting
ReportingReportingACD
MD PACAppendix 5: Reporting and Aid Architecture24
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEData management planning to ensure 
reasonable investment and availability of key informationIf  information on a particular flow is to be tracked and consolidated, it needs to be consistently available from government institutions, nationally-situated development stakeholders or international sources. Once the availability of information on resource flows and relative importance of the information to be tracked are determined, a data management plan should be created to outline how information on each flow will be obtained in a timely and consistent fashion, ensuring an uninterrupted flow of information from producers to decision-makers and the public. It is suggested that this plan should also include an information flow diagram. 
BOX 4  Example of information flow diagram in the budget process of Rwanda
To strengthen the integration of aid management with public finance management processes, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning of Rwanda undertook a data flow analysis to identify data gaps and explore how they might be filled by expanding the scope of the existing information management systems. 
Source: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning Rwanda – Needs Assessment for upgrading of Development Assistance Database (DAD)
Photo: © iStock, Dushyant Kumar Thakur
Macro Unit
Formulation of Strategic
GoalsSetting Targets &
PrioritiesFormulates Budget
(Cellings, etc.)
Contributes info on Available
Domestic Revenues FundsExecutes Budget
Revenues AuthoritiesContributes info on
External Aid
DADEFU(Deﬁnition)The Budget Process
Data Flows
Planning Unit Budget Deppartment Treasurv25
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE3.2 Assessing what information is already being collected and finding the gaps
Because country context is key when assessing and deciding on establishing or refining a MIS, there is no blueprint for a singular 
system or combinations of systems that will work for all countries. As such, this section will provide guidance on how to examine existing systems and identify future information needs.
The following actions are recommended for governments who wish to identify what information is already being collected and 
identify any gaps. These recommendations are further detailed in the section below:
Actions Considerations Examples and Tools
Step 1. Map all MIS currently in use•   Must be comprehensive, reaching across all government departments and agencies
•   Must identify gaps and areas of duplication•   Country survey (Annex 3)
Step 2. Assess the 
experience and performance of the MIS •   Comprehensiveness and comparability o f data
•   Understanding constraints to sound management of information
•   Ability to exchange or integrate with  other systems•   Country exchanges
•   IATI Standard
•   Comparability between IATI and  country systems 
Step 3: Explore standardisation of data on financing flows•   Comparability of data with other systems within the country and with international standards•   IATI Standard
Step 1. Map all MIS currently in use.The first step in assessing the effectiveness of a MIS is to map the current systems being used by all government entities. This means creating a list of all the systems being used and the information that is being tracked through those systems 
6, and then 
cross referencing this information to identify where there are gaps and duplications. An in-depth understanding of the diverse types of information available will inform the applicability of MIS and options for consolidation. 
In order to assess the scope and depth of the information being tracked or monitored through existing MIS, the following guiding 
questions can be considered for each type of priority development resource: 
•  What MIS are currently being used across government and who is the custodian of each system?
•  What information is collected by each MIS and at what levels (programme, project, activity, contract, transaction etc.)?
•  What are the properties of this information (commitments, disbursements, expenditures, projections, the level of disaggregation and frequency of updates, etc.)?
• How do these different systems ‘speak to’ or interact with one each other?
• How is information from each of these systems consolidated and checked for duplication?
• How is information from these sources connected to specific results and fed into decision-making?
These are just a small sample of questions that can be asked when assessing the strength of existing MIS and the surrounding architecture. A more complete list can be found in the country survey questionnaire in Annex 3, which was used to provide background for this Guidance Note.
6  The types of development finance information that should be considered can be found in section 2.26
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEDifficulties in collecting data and populating MIS have been cited by many governments as a key challenge inhibiting them 
from using systems for management of development finance to their full potential. This is particularly relevant to information on external public flows that are provided off-budget as well as flows originating from private providers. Country surveys undertaken in 2016 suggest that data availability is an institutional challenge rather than a technical one, noting that the information may be available through one of the in-country MIS, but not shared effectively between institutions. For example, the data on off-budget development flows is available in AIMS in many countries, but lack of intra-governmental communication and co-ordination mechanisms may inhibit access by those who need it (i.e. the Budget Department), which negatively affects the comprehensiveness of budget documentation. Another example of this phenomenon is the availability of data on loans captured in DMS. This data is not always shared with development planning ministries, which affects the comprehensiveness of information in budget and MTEF preparation systems, where they exist. 
Integration of MIS monitoring various flows could help consolidate this information to obtain a comprehensive picture of resource 
flows, help reduce duplicative efforts, ease the burden of reporting and increase the overall consistency of data across branches of government. In recognition of the need for access to consolidated data on various development resources, efforts are underway in many countries to integrate AIMS with national financial management systems. Examples of AIMS-IFMIS integration solutions implemented in different countries are outlined in Box 6. 
BOX 5  Illustrative examples of data beyond ODA tracked in AIMS 
According to the country survey undertaken in 2016, which covered 14 countries and two private vendors of AIMS, Aid Information Management Systems, which are typically used to track ODA, are now also being used to track a variety of other flows of public, private, domestic and external origins, as summarised in the table below. 
Data typically tracked in AIMS across various flows (non-exhaustive list)
Tracking beyond-ODA flows in AIMS does not always require system adaptation, but when required, AIMS vendors have responded to requests to develop this functionality. For example, a dedicated South-South Cooperation tracking module was recently designed for the AIMS of Honduras. 
There are also examples of advanced AIMS that manage information on public investment portfolios – something that 
would normally be covered by a DMS. Examples of this include the Afghanistan State Budget Planning System (SBPS), the Iraq Development Management System (IDMS) and the Kurdistan Development Management System (KDMS). In addition, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and Tajikistan tracked FDI through their respective AIMS.  Type of flows Countries where AIMS is tracking this flow 
South-South Cooperation Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Myanmar, Nepal, Timor-Leste
Non-concessional funding Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Lao PDR, Nepal, Timor-Leste
Technical cooperation Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Myanmar, Nepal, Philippines, Rwanda, Tanzania
Climate financeAfghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Nepal, Rwanda, 
Tanzania, Timor-Leste, Philippines
Foreign Direct Investment Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan
Contributions of INGOs Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Nepal, Tanzania, Timor-Leste
Contributions of philanthropic organisationsBangladesh, Tanzania, Timor-Leste
  27
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEBOX 6  Country examples where an AIMS is integrated into national financial management systems
º   Afghanistan’s National Budget and Aid Management System (NBAM) comprehensively captures information on budget 
allocations and supports the budget preparation process of the country, including both capital and recurrent budgets. It is integrated with Afghanistan’s FMIS through a semi-automatic data exchange and serves as an interface for report generation and decision-making on a wide range of development cooperation issues. NBAM also tracks non-project flows, including recurrent budget and FDIs.
º   In India, the AIMS has been linked to the FMIS. All financial information on projects is imported from the FMIS to the AIMS, 
the latter capturing data on the physical progress of project implementation. 
º   The National Transport Sector Data Management System (NATS-DMS) of Zambia – a development results monitoring tool 
at the sector level – has imports relevant financial data on sector activities from the FMIS. 
º   Cambodia has also integrated their AIMS and FMIS and is using AIMS data on external flows to inform budget preparation. 
A list of integration of AIMS and FMIS (non-exhaustive)
Country Integrated Systems Data transferred and direction Status
Afghanistan AIMS with FMIS Project expenditures and allocations 
FMIS → AIMSCompleted, in use
AIMS with FMIS Recurrent expendituresFMIS → AIMSCompleted, in use
Cambodia  AIMS with FMIS AIMS → FMIS Completed, in use
India AIMS with FMIS Project allocations and expenditures FMIS → AIMSCompleted, in use
Kenya AIMS with Budget 
preparation systemProject commitments 
AIMS → Budget preparation system Completed, in use
AIMS with FMIS Project expendituresFMIS → AIMSCompleted, in use 
Malawi AIMS with FMIS AIMS with FMIS AIMS with FMIS
Nepal AIMS with FMIS IFMIS → AIMS
AIMS → IFMISCompleted, not in use
Nigeria M&E System with FMIS Project expendituresFMIS → M&E System Completed 
Senegal AIMS with FMIS; import 
tool developed in AIMS to import FMIS dataPortfolio of government-funded  public investment (annual)
FMIS → AIMSCompleted, in use
Timor-Leste AIMS with FMIS AIMS → IFMIS Completed, not in use
Tanzania AIMS with FMIS AIMS → FMIS Planned 
Zambia Sector MIS with FMIS Project expenditures 
FMIS → Sector MISUndergoing user testing
  
Source: Country and Vendor Surveys, June-July 2016, compiled by Stepan Kanayan and Sarah McDuff28
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEIn addition, in order to strengthen evidence-based decision-making, a number of countries are also exploring ways to integrate the 
system(s) tracking financial information with the system(s) tracking results at various levels (Box 7: Example of Kenya’s E-ProMIS).
BOX 7  Kenya E-ProMIS automated interaction with budget preparation and IMIS
Kenya’s Electronic Project Monitoring Information System (E-ProMIS) is the country’s core system for monitoring on-budget development activities funded from external and domestic sources. E-ProMIS is integrated with Kenya’s budgeting system ‘Hyperion’ and its IFMIS. E-ProMIS monitors project implementation by measuring progress towards development results and by tracking the allocation of financial resources, the former being the primary objective of the system. E-ProMIS is designed to link and calculate progress toward project output indicators, outputs and outcomes as defined in the Kenya Vision 2030 and the monitoring frameworks of central and provincial governments’ development plans. 
Linking progress towards project output indicators and monitoring frameworks
The interaction between E-ProMIS (project monitoring and reporting), Hyperion (budget preparation) and IFMIS (expenditure control) is fully automated, with a schedule established by the E-ProMIS administrator. There is currently a plan to import the commitments for off-budget flows into Hyperion and IFMIS using the same technology. 
Simplified workflow diagram of E-ProMIS, Hyperion and IFMIS interaction
Step 2. Assess the experience and performance of the MIS.
Once a comprehensive list of all systems has been consolidated, the next step is to explore ways in which to address gaps and 
duplications by assessing the effectiveness of the existing MIS. While there are multiple possible scenarios depending on country context, it is likely that one or two systems can be expanded to cover all development finance flows and non-performing systems can be discarded. Alternatively, there are some cases where integration of existing MIS should be pursued. E-ProMIS
Project monitoring
 and reportingHyperion
Budg et preparationIFMIS
Expenditure controlCommittments Budget estimates
Budg et estimates and expendituresProjectOutput  
IndicatorProgramme    
OutputVision 203 0 
OutcomeNational or Count y 
Government ProgrammeVision 203 0 
Goals
Progress calculation based
 on evenly contribution Progress calculations
based on weighsProgress calculations
 based on weighsOutcome 
Indicator29
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEIn order to assess the experience and performance of 
the existing MIS, the following guiding questions can be considered: 
•  What is the quality of information on captured flows, such as accuracy, timeliness, comprehensiveness etc.) and how does this information link to national planning frameworks and systems (such as national development strategies, budget, medium-term expenditure frameworks and results frameworks)? 
•  What is the degree of interaction between the different systems containing information on development finance, including level of automation and automation frequency?
The Country Survey template (Annex 3) can be used to support the mapping and assessment of effectiveness. This process can be undertaken internally or by an external consultant, but will require a careful consideration of the existing institutional dynamics to ensure the neutrality of such an exercise.
Step 3: Explore standardisation of data on financing flows. 
Given the diversity of development resources monitored by national MIS in terms of origin, type, instruments of delivery, purpose and other parameters, the data tracked on each resource is often classified differently. However, if data on these flows are to be consolidated and monitored through MIS – either in one system or in an integrated manner – it is critical to introduce terminological coherence and standardisation in the classification of development finance flows and in the data captured and reported on each flow. 
While introducing a standard classification scheme across global producers of data will help to resolve ambiguities in interpretation 
and allow for interoperability between various systems / comparability of the development co-operation management products generated by them, there is not yet a single standard agreed and used at the global level. As such, determining how this standard should be translated into changes at the country level and into MIS implementation is yet to be explored. While a detailed discussion of the development of such a standard classification is beyond the scope of this Guidance Note, some basic requirements can be considered in order to ensure the comparability of information exchanged through an integrated or expanded MIS. Recommendations for governments include:
•  The taxonomy of various properties of development resources should follow a standard / uniform classification and terminology for consistency and comparability across various MIS at the country level.
•  Systems, particularly AIMS, should be able to produce reports on development resource flows disaggregated by type of flow (public, private, external and domestic) and by source of development finance.
•  Changes to the classification schemes of existing MIS should be done with the goal of minimising the re-classification of data already in the system, which could be labour intensive and time consuming. 
Photo: © UN Photo/Marco Dormino30
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEBOX 8  The International Aid Transparency Initiative’s support to data standardisation
Though it is not yet universally accepted among producers of development data, the International Aid Transparency Initiative’s 
Standard (IATI Standard) is a technical publishing framework gaining traction at the country level. IATI is a global initiative that aims to make information on development resources easier to access, use and understand. Its Standard allows data to be compared, and can also be used to inform the standardisation of data on financing flows to meet growing and diverse information needs. Currently, over 500 publishers, including development co-operation agencies, development finance institutions, international and national NGOs and foundations, are publishing their information on development resources to IATI. The growing number of publishers reporting to IATI has triggered the interest of developing country governments to import IATI data into their AIMS, and AIMS vendors have also responded to this by developing tools to enable the integration of AIMS and the IATI registry.
Country examples of AIMS linked to the IATI Registry include:
º   Rwanda’s AIMS, which has a module that enables automated import of data from the IATI database. The module was 
developed and operationalised in 2015 as part of the IATI pilots, and the implementation of a similar tool is underway in Ghana’s AIMS.  
º   In 2015, an open source IATI Import Tool that can be integrated into any AIMS was developed, allowing for the semi-
automatic import of data from the IATI registry into an AIMS. So far, this tool has been implemented in six countries – the Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Madagascar, Malawi and Senegal, with plans to replicate it in several more countries. 
º   In Myanmar, the locally-developed AIMS (Mohinga) was configured to be fully compatible with the IATI Standard. 
As such, Mohinga is able to import data from the IATI database directly into AIMS without mapping the data fields between the two. Development of tools to allow Myanmar’s development partners to import transactions is underway.  
Photo: © UN Photo/Albert Gonzalez Farran31
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE3.3 Institutional environment and legal framework for information-sharing
Sufficient human resource capacity and an enabling legal and institutional environment are key for a government to implement 
change and manage for results in this highly complex subject area (as well as in other government functions). Regardless of the type of MIS in use, even the most qualified people, equipped with the right tools, will not be able to affect sustainable change without an empowering legal, regulatory and policy environment. 
Long-term institutional planning and consideration of legal frameworks governing the management of development finance 
information are essential elements for implementing a MIS or integrating systems to consolidate data for better planning, resource allocation and decision-making, as confirmed by country surveys undertaken for preparation of this Guidance Note. The recommendations in this section are based on the premise that these factors need to be investigated and addressed holistically in order to create the necessary conditions for effective and sustainable management of development finance information over time. 
This section will focus on the following three parameters, which are required for an enabling environment for a DFMIS:
• Conducive institutional and legal frameworks.
• Staff competencies that are relevant and meet needs.
• Confidence that information will be freely shared among stakeholders.
Ensuring conducive institutional frameworks for development finance management
While there may sometimes be negative impacts of fragmentation in development finance information management, in particular situations, the distributed management of development finance information across institutions is necessary. Often more than one Ministry or department has a mandate to manage diverse aspects of development finance. For example, in some countries, programme-based and non-concessional development cooperation is managed by the Ministry of Finance, while concessional and project-based development cooperation is coordinated by the Ministry of Planning. For many countries, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is mandated to manage South-South Cooperation, while economic cooperation is dealt with by the Ministry of Industry.
However, the resulting challenge in consolidating data can be mitigated by creating inter-ministerial mechanisms for coordination 
and establishing operational guidelines for information-sharing among all government entities involved. For example, Rwanda’s Aid Policy Manual of Procedures (2011) outlines the operational roles and functions of various Ministries, Departments and Agencies in managing information on development aid. Kenya is also developing an operations manual that will detail the procedures for managing external resources, guided by the Kenyan External Resources Policy (2014). Increasing the transparency of national institutions through systematic communication, coordination and information-sharing is key to effective management of development finance, whether through an MIS or not. 
Ensuring conducive legal frameworks for development finance management 
Systems that primarily deal with the management of public resources originating from domestic sources (government budget) or external resources directed to the public sector (government borrowings), such as FMIS and DMS, are often in a better position to capture and produce good quality data, as they are typically regulated by legal instruments such as PFM acts, public debt laws, etc. In most countries, it is a legal requirement to manage government financial operations (e.g. allocations, expenditures, audit procedures, public debt management) through FMIS and / or DMS in order to combat corruption and the misuse of public funds. This legal requirement significantly raises the level of sustainability of these systems. 
However, challenges remain in obtaining data on off-budget flows that are public in purpose, but are not delivered through 
national budget systems. Typically, development support from international NGOs, foundations and philanthropists fall within this category. AIMS, which track resources and development results, are often not accompanied by laws, regulations and policies that ensure their proper use, despite governments’ strong commitment to monitoring development cooperation inflows. Additionally, information on non-public development finance flows (such as private sector investment / engagement leveraged through public funds / development cooperation) is difficult to obtain, as current legislative frameworks do not necessary mandate relevant institutions to track this information at the country level. Building appropriate legal frameworks, for example, a cabinet Decree 32
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEthat clarifies the roles and responsibilities of various entities in reporting on flows that are not delivered through national budget 
systems, can help overcome this constraint. 
Additionally, AIMS are typically developed under a finite grant agreement (unlike FMIS) and are rarely embedded in national 
strategic planning and programming. These unstable financing and institutional arrangements give the perception that AIMS are unsustainable and therefore not worth the investment of resources or time in their operationalisation or proper use. Significant investment at the country level, including proper training, is also needed – the business processes for managing the development resource flows typically tracked by AIMS are usually complex, involving a diversity of flows that originate from public, private, domestic and external sources, with different destinations, delivery mechanisms and monitoring parameters.
BOX 9  The International Aid Transparency Initiative’s support to data standardisation
•   In Tanzania, strengthening of legal frameworks regulating the management and consolidation of information on the 
growing scope of development finance is considered highly important and includes, among other things, plans to reinforce the mandate and function of the unit that is currently managing the AIMS. 
•   In Lesotho, the implementation of the AIMS is incorporated into the overall PFM reform agenda with PFM regulations 
covering the AIMS. 
•   In Lao PDR, a Government decree regulates ODA management and reporting by assigning relevant roles to various 
government Ministries. 
Source: Country Survey 2016
Key recommendations for ensuring conducive legal and institutional frameworks for development finance management 
To ensure that there is a conducive institutional and legal environment that supports better provision and use of information 
on development activities and effective management of MIS, the following actions can be considered: 
•   Amending national development cooperation policies, where necessary, to include a policy statement on the role of MIS 
(or other government system) as an authoritative database to record development finance flows, with a clear list of flows to be monitored. 
•   Revising the mandate of national institutions, if necessary, to clearly indicate their roles in the management of development 
finance information, including establishing coordination mechanisms or incorporating the consolidation of data as a function in an existing department of an appropriate Ministry. 
•   Considering appointment of a lead Ministry and clarifying intra-governmental flows of information, drawing on 
information flow diagrams. Providing guidance on the coordination of information between national and international development stakeholders. 
•   Enforcing, where necessary, information exchange among government institutions according to the data management 
plan, by exploring a cabinet Decree or a Law, as appropriate. As much as possible, governments should consider expanding the scope of information exchange beyond government to strengthen transparency with the general public and Parliament. 
•   Reaching an agreement with development cooperation providers in regards to provision of information on respective 
flows in the format and scheduled established by the government – both as parts of concerted efforts to strengthen integration of development planning and development financing systems.33
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEInvesting in institutional and human capacity
Once the necessary legal and policy environment has been created, it is vital to ensure that there is sufficient institutional and human capacity to administer and manage the system. There are broadly four categories of capacity that merit analysis and consideration (Table 5). 
Strengthening human capacity
Challenges in managing the complex relationships between various players involved in the delivery of development cooperation can be a critical contributor to low-quality data, and a key human capacity constraint to effective development finance management. This process can also be exacerbated by the lack of adequate skills to manage complex financial instruments, such as blended finance. Insufficient human resource capacity inevitably leads to poor practices in data collection, interpretation, analysis and reporting, and as such, this issue should be addressed regardless of whether development resources are monitored through a MIS, or they are of external or domestic origin. 
The Country Surveys and a scanning of DFAs also points to the need for systematic approaches to address human capacity 
constraints. The following factors were noted to impact the quality and use of information / MIS: 
• Siloed production of knowledge and analysis obstructs effective use and integration of information at more general levels. 
• Critical data is often confined to specific areas of government, making it difficult to find. 
•  Technical capacity limitations hinder governments’ ability to integrate all available information and produce the type of knowledge that is needed to inform policy decisions. 
A systematic approach to capacity strengthening is therefore needed, ensuring that appropriate training measures are targeted to the specific functions of government departments and individuals. An institutional framework that clarifies roles and functions should provide the basis for a functional analysis and needs assessment, which can be used to develop a training plan outlining specific types of training and means of learning. Such a framework may include all relevant entities such as aid coordination and debt management departments, planning units in government line ministries, the external cooperation department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, units managing major programmes that are funded by donors (such as Project Implementation Units, National Authorising Officers’ offices for the EU programme, national agency for management of the US Millennium Challenge Co-operation programme, etc.). 
Human Capacity Institutional Capacity
Technical •   Technical understanding of key  
objectives of MIS
•   Data collection and analysis
•   Computing software
•   Accounting
•   Financial analysis•   Physical infrastructure
•   ICT systems
Inter-personal •   Communication
•   Teamwork
•   Relationship-building
•   Timeliness•    Strong policies and frameworks to  guide work
  TABLE 5  Human and Institutional Capacity  34
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEStrengthening institutional capacity
Accessibility of information and functionality of MIS need to be supported by an adequate ICT environment and infrastructure. Quality and availability of internet capacity, both in terms of speed and stability, as well as the hosting arrangement of MIS, will require specific attention and assessment. Currently, a number of AIMS implemented by governments are hosted and / or managed outside of the country, while IFMIS implemented by governments are directly managed / hosted by the governments in many cases. Through the Country Survey, sustainability of AIMS was noted by various governments as a major concern. In this context, in many governments, continuous service contracts with AIMS vendors are necessary to sustain a functional AIMS. In order for governments to strengthen the sustainability of MIS, adequate institutional capacity in terms of ICT environment requires careful consideration, including assessment of readiness to host and manage MIS in-house.
Key recommendations for strengthening human and institutional capacity for development finance management
To ensure that there is sufficient human and institutional capacity to support better provision and use of information on 
development activities and effective management of MIS, the following actions can be considered: 
•   Undertaking a functional analysis of current institutional and coordination mechanisms, in accordance with the data 
management plan.
•   Conducting a joint capacity needs assessment for management of development finance information with development 
partners, ideally covering all national institutions responsible for this function.
•   Reviewing the job descriptions of government staff assigned to development finance information management and 
coordination functions to ensure that they are in line with recommendations derived through the assessment of institutional and legal frameworks. 
•   Developing and implementing a long-term capacity-building programme with supporting resources (manuals, intro 
guides, induction materials) that cover all aspects of development finance information management (e.g. collection, interpretation, analysis, reporting) and use of existing systems, including on accessing and understanding IATI data. 
•   Strengthening ICT systems and addressing other related institutional capacity challenges.  
Photo: © UN Photo/JC McIlwaine35
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEIncreased use of information in support of stronger 
partnershipsIncreased availability, comprehensiveness and compatibility of information on development resources is not an end in itself, but is a means to realise national development priorities and the SDGs. It is therefore important that there is full transparency of development plans and resources, heightening the confidence of various stakeholders, in order to increase their contribution and engagement and to strengthen partnerships for development. To maintain the trust of these stakeholders in the overall development process, it is essential that a robust mechanism exists for evidence and information-based dialogue, using information on development finance and results to assess the contribution, effectiveness and impact of development resources. 
As such, the institutional frameworks governing the 
management of MIS will need to be closely synchronised with the monitoring and evaluation framework as well as the coordination, dialogue and accountability mechanisms that support SDG implementation and review. In some cases, governments may find it appropriate to improve the monitoring of the effectiveness of development resources through the use of MIS. Some of the MIS vendors (AIMS vendors) have developed modules for monitoring and reporting on development effectiveness indicators.
BOX 10  Using AIMS to monitor development effectiveness for stronger partnerships
•   Rwanda’s Donor Performance Assessment Framework (DPAF) mainstreams development effectiveness indicators building 
on the monitoring framework of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation. Its Development Assistance Database incorporates a comprehensive set of more than 20 indicators to undertake an annual assessment of donors’ performance in the country. The results are used to inform annual policy and development partnership dialogue. 
•   Cambodia’s Development Cooperation Database incorporates monitoring indicators of effective development co-
operation. Data collected through this system is used to undertake monitoring of the internationally-agreed development effectiveness principles under the Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation biennial monitoring process. 
Key recommendations for increasing the use of information for stronger partnerships 
To ensure strong partnerships around the sharing and use of information on development activities and effective management 
of MIS, the following actions can be considered: 
•   Reflecting on what information can be collected from the MIS for M&E purposes and to support coordination, dialogue 
and accountability mechanisms for SDG implementation and review.
•   If appropriate, adapting the MIS to incorporate data needed to monitor the effectiveness of development cooperation and 
/ or support data collection for the Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation monitoring framework.
Photo: © UN Photo/Kibae Park36
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE3.4 Assessing cost implications
A crosscutting consideration for the entire MIS assessment process 
is, of course, the cost implication. While Sections 3.1 to 3.3 discuss how to determine the appropriate MIS architecture, any solutions to strengthen its current form will require financial resources and technical expertise, which may not be available to all governments undertaking this effort. Therefore, assessing the cost implication of any adaptation or enhancement to existing systems, and identifying the source of funds to finance these efforts, is of paramount importance. 
If not adequately assessed and planned for, the lack or limitation of 
these resources may cause frustration for governments, particularly when the implementation and use of the systems are not progressing as intended. In such cases, systems often are perceived by governments as financially unsustainable. As such, an important step for any adaptation or enhancement to existing systems, or deciding to undertake the construction of a new MIS, should be to assess the cost and the effort required to implement the planned changes. 
A suggested list of activities to be carried out in completing this 
assessment is provided in Table 6 below. Depending on the available domestic capacities in a country (whether within or outside government systems), resources needed to carry out an assessment of costs of may vary significantly from country to country. When new systems or enhancements to existing systems are being planned, inputs will typically be required from both governments 
and development partners in the form of international and / or local technical assistance (TA). Private suppliers of MIS are often contracted to carry out this work as as part of their needs assessment at the national level. 
Private vendors of MIS
UNDP currently manages a Long-Term Agreement of pre-vetted MIS vendors. Based on UNDP’s experience contracting these external service providers for open data information management systems, two service areas have been identified:
• Provision of modular open data information management systems; and 
• Support with technology services and system sustainability. 
The former service area includes a Core Modular Open Data Information Management System solution that meets the demand of the implementing country and operates in synergy with existing or planned government systems, while the latter provides technical support to the administrators and users of the AIMS, such as training tools, technical personnel support and regular ‘issue log reports’ , illustrating the volume and nature of technical or other issues raised by implementing countries.
7 
7  For more information on UNDP LTAs for MIS, contact the LTA holder Annelise Parr at annelise.parr@undp.org (DIG / BPPS).
Photo: © Sayed Omer Sadaat/UNDP Afghanistan/201537
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEActivity Method Inputs and resources  
Assess the scope of information to be tracked Mapping or DFA International TA or Government
Conduct inventory of existing MIS and their 
functionsICT assessment  Local TA or Government 
Assess ICT infrastructure and determine the need for offline MIS solutionsICT assessment MIS vendor  
Identify required institutional frameworks and assess cost to establish themCross-government consultations Government lead, International  or Local TA
Analyse gaps in legal frameworks and assess cost to strengthen themDesk and document reviewInternational TA or Government
Analyse the underlying business processes, reporting lines and scopeDocument review and specialised interviewsMIS vendor or International TA
Assess existing capacity and determine cost to develop itHR assessment International TA and Government 
Undertake a cost estimate of possible MIS solutions and financial sustainability analysisDesk and document review, web resources Local TA and Government 
Develop plan to adapt existing / setup new MIS 3-5 years functional upgradeInternational TA or Government 
Assess cost and time for MIS implementation at full operational statusReview of global experienceLocal TA and Government 
Assess requirements for post-implementation support Hosting and technical support MIS vendor
Design implementation and financing plansCross-government consultationsInternational TA or Government
  TABLE 6  Areas of cost analysis for adapting or designing MIS architecture 
Note: this table has not been prioritised, nor does it depict a recommended order of action.38
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE
Photo: © Tran Vinh Nghia, Viet Nam39
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE4. Final recommendations 
The complexity and diversity of development resources available at the country level provides both opportunities and challenges. 
Adapting national MIS architecture to fit the changing landscape of development finance is necessary, and many countries have already implemented adaption solutions. To support more countries in establishing / strengthening their MIS to better consolidate and increase the use of data on development resources, the following general considerations can be taken in account, within the context of this Guidance Note:
•  Start with an analysis of the financial landscape and a careful review of existing systems in the country, and, as much as feasible, in countries in similar contexts. A DFA may be a useful instrument for mapping and analysing relevant financial flows. 
•  Avoid strengthening or operationalising a MIS in isolation from the institutional and legal environment in which it will operate;  
• Implement gradually. An incremental approach should be considered.
•  MIS should not necessarily be fully automated, as long as the objective of the consolidation of data is achieved with reasonable efforts and costs.
Improvements and enhancements to national MIS architecture should be considered a ‘work in progress’ , needing continual adaptation to as needs evolve and new solutions are explored. This Guidance Note reviews a range of international experiences, including successes, challenges, and lessons learned in using MIS to track and monitor development finance information. However, to continue providing useful inputs to work in progress, including improvements and enhancements to national MIS architecture, the following additional areas would merit further research and investigation, including: 
•  Analysis of best practices in measuring and tracking development finance flows that are traditionally difficult to track, such as overseas remittances, FDI, contribution of private foundations, etc., and the development of practical methodologies to track these flows; 
•  Analysis of the relationship between the quality and quantity of development finance data, including complex blended flows, and presence (or lack thereof) of institutional mechanisms for information exchange;
•  As part of strengthening monitoring and evaluation of the SDGs, design horizontal and vertical co-ordination and reporting mechanisms, across levels of government and across national and international development agencies, that can be used to facilitate the exchange of development finance and results data.40
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEWith UNDP support, Bangladesh’s Aid Information Management System, which tracks development cooperation data, 
was technically upgraded to reduce administrative time spent on reporting requirements. The upgraded module allows automatic, regular transfer of IATI data into the AIMS. In addition, several rounds of software improvements and technical training sessions were executed to enhance accessibility of the development information system to improve management of development cooperation resources. 
The United Republic of Tanzania has an Aid Management Platform (AMP) and been a member of IATI since 2011. UNDP 
has finalised a new proposal contained in a third-generation support project for the Ministry of Finance on development 
effectiveness. This support includes enhancement of the AMP and innovation in terms of reporting, the possibility of adding new components (i.e. gender component) and accelerating data entry for focal points with an offline application.
The Government of Armenia is exploring the potential of blockchain to strengthen the integrity of public transactions. In 
July 2017, UNDP Armenia, in partnership with the Centre for Strategic Initiatives (CSI), started mapping the opportunities for blockchain use within the public sector, including in the management of development finance information. 5. Role of UNDP
The frequency and scope of requests for UNDP support in aid effectiveness and effective development co-operation have grown substantially since the mid-1990s. Over the past 20 years, UNDP has supported close to 80 programme countries in setting up, institutionalising and operating AIMS and M&E solutions to help governments in decision-making processes around transparent and effective management of development resources, financing for development and poverty reduction strategies, and UNDP remains a trusted partner in this area. This Guidance Note has provided specific issues that may be considered by UNDP country offices as they endeavour to make their support stronger and more relevant to the evolving context of financing for development and effective development cooperation. 
8 
8  The United Nations Development Group (UNDG) has adopted a common approach for co-ordinated and coherent UN support to Member States. The MAPS approach 
refers to Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy Support. ‘Mainstreaming’ aims to ‘land’ the agenda at national and local level; ‘Acceleration’ targets resources at root bottlenecks to sustainable development; and ‘Policy Support’ makes the thematic expertise housed in different UN entities available in an effective and coherent way. However, MAPS is not comprehensive, exclusive or prescriptive. It builds on what the United Nations system has learned through extensive experience with implement -
ing the Millennium Development Goals, processes arising from related summits and conferences, as well as the mandates and resources of different UN agencies.
Photo: © UN Photo/Kibae Park41
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEAreas Entry point(s)
Strengthening the functionality of MIS in the 
context  of an integrated national financing framework•  DFA analysis
Mainstreaming the function of MIS into national development plans and SDs implementation•   UNDP support to MAPS  and SDG institutional architecture
•  DFA analysis
Supporting MIS integration with IFMIS,  DMS and M&E systems•   UNDP support to the SDG data ecosystem at the country level
•   Existing UNDP country project support in development effectiveness and MIS
Support in data standardisation •   Advocacy and facilitating progress towards data standardisation at the global (i.e. IATI, TOSSD, SDG Philanthropy Platform, SSC / Triangular Cooperation, etc.), regional and country levels
•   Support to implementation of standardisation schemes and solutions to meetcountry needs
Advocating for the use of IATI data, and improving the quantity and quality of data•   At the global level, strengthening efforts to improve the quality and usability of data published to the IATI registry
•   At the country level, supporting governments in interpreting and 
validating IATI data integrated into national AIMS / MIS and identifying readiness of IATI datasets for automatic imports into national AIMS / MIS
Improving the use of information / data •   Support to the SDG institutional architecture, national monitoring and 
evaluation systems, and in-country co-ordination and accountability mechanisms, including support to National Voluntary Reviews for the HLPF
Increase transparency on global  experiences with MIS •   Consider making information on MIS implementation worldwide publicly accessible and easily retrievable, including costs involved, implementation timeline and its impacts
Facilitate knowledge-exchange and  peer-learning•   Involvement with the Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation or SSMART
  To this end, UNDP country offices could potentially support their national counterparts in:
To provide further assistance to governments in strengthening the effectiveness of development financing for implementation of the SDGs, UNDP has also prioritised sustainable financing as output 1.2.2 of its new Strategic Plan (2018-2021)’s Integrated Results and Resources Framework (Annex 1- Draft IRRF), aiming to support the optimisation of development financing architectures and the results they support at the country level.42
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE6. Conclusion
 
The evermore complex development financing landscape at country level presents both opportunities and challenges for developing countries. The greater diversity of development finance offers the potential to use the comparative advantages of various financing flows to maximise overall impact. The challenge lies in changing the way resources are used and prioritised and building new capacities in planning, budgeting, information management, monitoring and evaluation and stakeholder engagement. The increasing reliance of countries on a diverse mix of development finance puts an even higher premium on coherence of data systems, national institutions and enabling legal and institutional frameworks for managing information. 
As the variety and the scale of resources available, as well as the capacity to access them, will invariably differ from country to 
country, there is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach and strategies to meet this challenge will need to respond to specific country contexts.  To this end, based on increasing country demand, this Guidance Note has offered concrete recommendations for governments looking to establish or strengthen robust systems for tracking comprehensive financial information, in support of enhanced development effectiveness and realisation of their own national priorities.43
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE
Photo: © UN Photo/Martine Perret44
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEAnnex 1. Case Study: Development Finance Information 
Management in Tanzania 
by Stepan Kanayan and Sarah McDuff
Objective
The objective of this case study is to inform the Guidance Note, ‘Making Management Information Systems Fit for an Evolving 
External Development Finance Landscape’ .This study first reviews how development finance information is currently managed in Tanzania, with a particular focus on current efforts and future plans to consolidate information through linking finance and results, tracking additional finance flows in existing systems and by integrating systems. Second, the key considerations outlined in the Guidance Note – determining the flows to be tracked and consolidated, institutional and legal frameworks and cost implications – are examined in the Tanzanian context. This study has been informed by a desk review of relevant documentation, the government of Tanzania’s feedback to the Country Survey and a series of in-country meetings with the government, UN and other international stakeholders.  
Context  
Tanzania’s National Five Year Development Plan (FYDP II) 2016 /17 – 2020 /21 integrates the SDGs and places particular emphasis on the monitoring and evaluation of results. The FYDP II also recognises that the changing landscape of development finance, while creating new opportunities for developing countries to access new external and domestic development resources, creates challenges in managing development finance flows. 
The scope of development finance is expanding in Tanzania – ODA is decreasing and beyond-ODA flows are increasing, with this 
trend expected to continue as Tanzania moves toward MIC status and the government prioritises beyond-ODA flows. The variety of development finance sources that the Government of Tanzania intends to explore and develop is impressive, with a major focus placed on private finance, such as FDI, philanthropy, foreign market bonds, diaspora bonds and so on, as well as regional and South-South Co-operation. Currently, management of information on this expanding set of development finance flows is distributed across four institutions and involves the use of three MIS, detailed in Table A below. 
Given the distributed management of information and the need for a comprehensive picture of development finance, the 
government is interested in consolidating information on development finance flows and results in order to improve decision-
Institution Finance Flow(s) Tracked Management Information System(s) Used
Ministry of Finance and 
PlanningODA, technical co-operation, climate finance, contributions from INGOs and philanthropic organisationsAIMS = Aid Management Platform
National budget, local budget IFMIS = Strategic Budget Allocation System (SBAS), EPICOR Active Planner, EPICOR 905
Non-concessional funding DRMS
Ministry of Foreign Affairs SSC None
Bank of Tanzania FDI, remittances Internal stand-alone systems
Tanzania Investment Centre FDI None
  TABLE A  Institutions and MIS involved in development finance information management
Source: Country Survey, Tanzania45
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEmaking on the allocation of resources for development, possibly through the use of MIS. The government has also identified that 
guidance on how best to achieve this may be needed, including support in building the human resource capacity to implement such consolidation.  
Responding to the needs of the government, the UNDP country office – in consultation and agreement with the government 
– has strategically re-focused its support by shifting from traditional support to aid management and co-ordination, to more comprehensive, coherent and integrated support to data collection and analysis systems for the monitoring of the SDGs and development co-operation, including beyond-ODA flows, as defined in the Country Program Document, 2016-2021. It is at this juncture that this case study has been carried out.  
Part I: Development finance information management in Tanzania
Consolidating information on multiple flows
As is the case in many countries, Tanzania’s AIMS, the Aid Management Platform, primarily tracks ODA, but is also used to track other finance flows (see Table 1). For example, some data on contributions from philanthropic organisations and INGOs are entered into the AMP , but there is interest to more fully capture this data, along with the contributions of CSOs. There is a new initiative being led by the Foundation for Civil Society to track data on these flows using the AidStream Platform, which allows CSOs to enter project data which is then reported to IATI. SSC is not tracked in any system but could be tracked in AMP , assuming there is willingness to share information on the resources provided by these partners. 
FDI records are managed jointly by the Tanzania Investment Centre (TIC) and Bank of Tanzania (BoT). Investment projections are 
currently tracked in a database, and there is an ongoing effort to obtain data on actual investments through surveys and project visits. Remittance records are maintained by BoT, but there is no dedicated system to manage this information.
Consolidating information through systems integration
Given the need for information exchange between the three primary systems managing development finance information (AMP , IFMIS, DRMS), the government began exploring possible ways to integrate these systems in 2014 through an integration assessment. Possible benefits of integration were identified as:
•  Commitments and MTEF projections could be imported from AMP into IFMIS to contribute to comprehensiveness of the budget; 
• Standardisation of the exchange rates used among systems to improve consistency in data;
• Reducing opportunities for human error in information exchange.
In conducting this assessment, challenges in carrying out automatic data exchange between many different systems were identified, including their incompatibility, network and information security regulations of IFMIS, and so on. As such, using a single interface to retrieve, exchange and report on data from multiple development finance MIS is not seen as feasible at this point in time. In the short-to-medium term, the government will pursue the goal of formalising a manual or semi-automatic data exchange between systems to ensure that consolidated information on development finance flows is made available to decision-makers. Such integration will be implemented as part of a larger e-government initiative currently underway in Tanzania. 
While the government recognises the potential of AMP integration with IATI to improve the quantity and quality of data at the 
national level, it has not yet upgraded the AMP to include the IATI Import Tool due to some concerns about using IATI data. This is in part because of varying definitions of key properties of development finance flows between the AMP and IATI (e.g. definition of a project, on / off budget and on / off treasury flows), which makes it difficult to map the data of IATI projects with the projects in AMP . The lack of government involvement in the validation of IATI data – which they effectively carry out for the development co-operation data reported to AMP by development partners with in-country presence – is a reason to treat the data reported by development partners directly into AMP as more credible than the data retrieved from the IATI database, and when discrepancies 46
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEare observed between the two, the former will be considered more credible. However, the need to better understand how IATI 
integration could improve data at the national level has been expressed by the government to further inform its decision on whether to pursue AMP-IATI integration.   
Monitoring development effectiveness
In support of national efforts to monitor development results, the government has implemented the Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation’s reporting tool as a module in its AMP , which allows reports to be generated on progress on the GPEDC indicators, provided the raw data at the project level is regularly inputted into the system. While the government still manually collects data for each GPEDC monitoring round, it is interested in better utilisation of this tool, which could help to significantly reduce manual work and produce relevant reports in much less time.  
Challenges in development finance information management
Many of the challenges faced by Tanzania in development finance information management are similar to those of other surveyed countries. While the government assesses data quality to be relatively high for ODA and public finance, obtaining good quality information on contributions from philanthropic organisations, SSC and remittances, among others, is a significant challenge. For example, the Bank of Tanzania estimates that actual remittances and FDI flows are much higher than currently captured. According to a study by the German Development Institute, the contributions of private foundations to development in Tanzania may have reached USD $45 million annually – commensurate with assistance of such official DAC donors as Finland and Denmark, but these resources are not captured in any of the development finance management systems in Tanzania. As private capital is considered a key resource to finance the FYDP II, the government is highly interested in improving the processes and methodologies for better assessment and capturing of these flows. The graph below illustrates the quality of data on various flows, as perceived by the government of Tanzania. 
Apart from data access and quality, there are also challenges in the implementation of the MIS used in development finance 
information management. These challenges mostly relate to processes and institutional arrangements, rather than the systems themselves. In the case of the AMP , timely and consistent reporting by development partners is key to ensuring good data quality in the system. In that regard, development partners suggest that the guidance on data entry should be provided as and when functionality change is implemented, which among other things should also be discussed with them in advance. Insufficient and unclear guidance materials, particularly definitions, may lead to interpretations that are inconsistent among partners and to double counting. Connectivity issues also present a challenge for entering data, as the system is often unavailable or too slow to use effectively. The government acknowledges this issue and is working to resolve it by increasing the bandwidth allocated to the AMP to ensure its availability and speed of access. 
Source: Country Survey, July 2016FIGURE A  Data quality of development finance flows as assessed by the Tanzanian government
National budget
Local budgets
National budget
Non-concessional assistance
Contributions of INGO’s
FDI
Climate ﬁnance
Technical cooperation
Remittances from diaspora and migrant workers
SSC
Contributions of philanthropic organizations4
4
4
33
3
3
2
2
1547
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPESources: WB DataBank, OECDFIGURE B  Development finance flow trends in Tanzania, 2004-2014Part II: Key considerations in adapting MIS architecture
Consolidating information on development finance and results
The Tanzania FYDP II outlines a robust M&E framework, that, among other things, will allow reporting on SDGs as they are 
integrated into the FYDP II, as well as supply reliable information to decision-makers and communicate progress to the citizenry. In this regard, using existing MIS for establishing and monitoring the links between development plans, finance and results has been of considerable interest to both the government and development partners, including the UNDP country office. Currently, no MIS is set up to monitor development results, but there are ongoing discussions on how and where results should be tracked, and there is potential to adapt one of the existing MIS to carry out this function. According to the Deputy Principal Secretary of the MOFP , linking financing and results within a system will make it easier to assess what results have been achieved from the resources invested, and will make it easier to report to citizens and development stakeholders on this progress.
Determining scope of information to be tracked
While ODA is still a critical source of funding for development, the role of private resources is increasing in importance. Analysis of development finance flow trends in Tanzania also suggests that beyond-ODA flows are increasing in importance (see Graph 2), and discussions with TIC and BoT confirm that both FDI and remittances are prioritised as potential sources of development finance. As shown in graph below, FDI is steadily increasing.. This trend is expected to continue, especially with considerable investments being made in Tanzania’s oil and gas sector.
While remittances and FDI are currently tracked by the government, due to the absence of credible methodologies and operational 
processes, the lack sufficient quantity and quality of data is one of the key obstacles in considering their consolidation with other development finance flows. This is a practical example of the importance of confirming the availability of information or importance of a specific flow before embarking on its management in a MIS – one of the key recommendations of the Guidance Note. 
Institutional and legal frameworks
The lead institution managing development finance is the MOFP . However, according to the DPS of MOFP , the current institutional arrangements, particularly legal frameworks regulating information exchange, are insufficient and unclear, and need to be improved in order to ensure that crucial information is reported, made available and exchanged among governments institution and between the government and external partners. Information available in various government departments is being communicated upon request on an ad-hoc basis, but it is not formally regulated and not freely available outside of the government, which is an indication of insufficient transparency and accountability on resources spent for development. 
Lack of legal instruments also make it difficult to obtain data from actors outside of the government, including data from 
development partners (reported into AMP), foundations and CSOs, and from the private sector on PPP projects.
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014% of GDP10
5
0
-5ODA
FDI
Remittances48
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEThe government recognises the need for 
improved legal instruments for consolidating data on development finance and results, and in that regard is considering the reinforcement and expansion of the Aid Co-ordination Unit’s mandate (including changing the name) to better define and solidify its role in development finance information management in light of the significantly expanded landscape of development resources. According to the BoT, better information on development finance, especially on external flows, could improve Tanzania’s Balance of Payments as well.
Cost Factor 
Given the importance of ensuring the financial sustainability of MIS used in development finance information management, the Guidance Note provides recommendations on how to conduct a comprehensive cost analysis if the government proposes adapting the existing MIS architecture to better fit the changing development finance landscape. 
The government of Tanzania has been considering 
adapting their MIS architecture since 2014, which now seems to be of higher importance in light of implementation and monitoring 
of the FYDP II. While systems integration has been explored as one possible step in improving information sharing, a full needs assessment (determining scope of information to be tracked, assessing necessary adjustments to institutional frameworks, developing new or customising existing legal bases) is yet to be completed. Strengthening human resource capacity (particularly in the MOFP’s External Finance Department) is seen by the government as key to conducting this assessment. 
This Guidance Note’s recommendations on a comprehensive cost analysis for MIS integration are considered relevant by the Aid 
Co-ordination Unit. However, given capacity and resource constraints, the time estimates provided in the draft Guidance Note may not be realistic for many countries.
Reflecting on the financial sustainability of the AMP – it is already hosted by the government, which is considering financing or 
mobilising resources for functionality upgrades, as the overall strategy for development finance information management – in light of its expanding landscape – is finalised. 
Conclusion
As a country targeting MIC status by 2025, the majority of this Guidance Note’s recommendations on managing development finance information have proven relevant for the Tanzanian context, particularly in relation to:
• The importance of consolidating information on relevant development finance flows and results;
•  The need to determine which finance flows should be monitored and consolidated according to needs and trends, and for transparency and accountability;
• The need for improved institutional and legal frameworks;
Photo: © UN Photo49
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE•  The importance of a comprehensive cost analysis (linked to a previously completed needs assessment) before embarking 
on changes / adaptation of existing MIS to the evolving landscape of development finance;
•  The role of AIMS in managing a large variety of development resource information and acting as an open reporting interface for development stakeholders and the wider public.
This case study also highlights areas where Tanzania may take its own approach in adapting its MIS to meet the needs of consolidated development finance monitoring in light of the SDGs. Further attention may be paid to:
•  Integration of MIS for development finance tracking is being considered in a larger context of e-government implementation. This implies that in the short-to-medium term Tanzania will consider manual or semi-automatic exchange of data between the systems;
•  Integration with IATI needs a deeper analysis to fully weigh the benefits and challenges in using IATI data, and perhaps more evidence from other countries already implementing this integration;
Documents Consulted
• National Five Year Development Plan, 2016/17-2020/21, Ministry of Finance and Planning, United Republic of Tanzania
• Country Program Document for United Republic of Tanzania, 2016-2021, UNDP
• Tanzania AMP and IFMIS Integration Assessment Report, 2015
• Private Foundations and Development Cooperation - Insights from Tanzania, Erik Lundsgaarde, et., 2012 
• Development Co-operation Framework of the United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Finance and Planning, 201450
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEAnnex 2. Technical Note on determining priority flows for 
integrated monitoring  
By Stepan Kanayan and Sarah McDuff
Assessing the relative importance of a country’s various development resources is critical to inform decisions on whether it is worth 
the effort and resources required to integrate the monitoring of a particular flow into a MIS 9. To illustrate this, we compare below 
development finance flows in three countries where their relative shares are notably different. The graphs below visualise trends in selected flows in Kenya, Rwanda and Zambia.
We opted to use ODA, FDI and remittances, as comparable recent data on these flows are available from internationally-recognised 
sources – the OECD Creditor Reporting System (CRS) (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; www.stats.oecd.org) and the World Bank Databank (World Development Indicators; www.databank.worldbank.org). The exercise would have been more illustrative if data from emerging SSC providers, philanthropic and other flows were available, since respective Development Finance Assessments indicate an increasing interest by many countries in prioritising these sources. However, comparison of these 
9  It is assumed that information on a majority of development finance flows exists within governments to a different degree of quality, although it may not be shared 
and thus may not be a common asset across all government institutions. Source: OECD Statistics, World Bank IndicatorsFIGURE C  Trends in selected flows as % of GDP
2004
ODA20,00
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20140,00Rwanda20046,00
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 20146,00
6,00
6,00Kenya
200415,00
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 201410,00
5,00
0,00Zambia
FDI RemittancesI51
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEselected flows – which includes flows of both public and private origin – serves the purpose of this particular task: to demonstrate 
how knowledge on trends can be used to determine whether the information on a particular flow should be consolidated with others. 
As illustrated in the graph, in Kenya, ODA and overseas remittances as a share of GDP are relatively stable, fluctuating between 
2-4%, while FDI has increased significantly from 0.3% in 2004 to 1.5% in 2014. ODA is tracked in Kenya by the Electronic Project Monitoring Information System (E-ProMIS), and integrating information on FDI and remittances (they together formed close to 4% of GDP in 2014) into this system could be valuable.   By contrast, in Zambia, ODA as a share of GDP has been steadily declining from 12% in 2004 to 2.5% in 2014. At the same time, FDI oscillated between 5% and 10% of GDP , and in 2014 was twice of the size of ODA. Remittances in Zambia compared to other flows are almost negligible, having held a stable share of GDP , around 0.2%, in the past decade. This could indicate that integrating information on remittance flows as part of the overall development finance envelope of the country may not be beneficial at this point in time.  
In Rwanda, ODA has reduced almost twofold, FDI increased nine-fold and remittances threefold in the period under review. However, 
FDI and remittances are still much smaller than ODA. ODA is being monitored in Rwanda using its AIMS and the government would need to decide whether there would be significant gain from integrating the information on these three flows, considering their experience with tracking ODA, along with the institutional and cost implications.  52
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEAnnex 3. Country Survey  
This survey template was used to carry out a scoping analysis of existing institutional and co-ordination arrangements, the range 
of information tracked / used and also supported the identification of bottlenecks and challenges in managing information on development finance and co-operation. 
Part I. Institutional Arrangements and Mandates
Type of development finance Custodians of development finance information Ministry of Planning
Ministry of FinanceMinistry of Foreign Affairs
Ministry of Trade and 
Industry
Central BankNational Statistical 
Service
Ministry co-ordinating 
NGOs
Other – please specify
N/A Select a 
system from 
drop-down 
listIf “None” is selected, please indicate how 
respective flows are 
monitored
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1. ODA (grants and loans)
Choose an item.
2.  Non-concessional funding
Choose an item.
3.  South-South Co-operation
Choose an item.
4.  Technical co-operation 
Choose an item.
5.  Climate finance
Choose an item.
6.  National budget
Choose an item.
7.  Local budgets
Choose an item.
8.  Foreign direct investment (FDI)
Choose an 
item.
9.   Remittances from diaspora and 
migrant workers Choose an item.
10.  Contributions of INGOs
Choose an item.
11.   Contributions of philanthropic organisations 
Choose an item.
12.   Other (please indicate what  else is useful to monitor)

If available, please provide / attach a simplified organigram of how these relevant institutions relate with respect to information 
exchange.53
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEPart II: Co-Ordination Mechanisms and Structures
Type of development financeCollection, consolidation and 
use of development finance 
information is co-ordinated by:   Legal framework regulating information 
exchange (e.g. PFM act, Aid Policy, Cabinet 
decree, other instructions)Cross-ministerial committee
Multi-stakeholder forum
Designated ministry
Other (please specify here)
1 2 3 4 5 6
1. ODA (grants and loans) 
2.  Non-concessional funding 
3.  South-South Co-operation 
4.  Technical co-operation 
5.  Climate finance 
6.  National budget 
7.  Local budgets 
8.  Foreign direct investment (FDI) 
9.   Remittances from diaspora and migrant workers 
10.  Contributions of INGOs 
11.   Contributions of philanthropic organisations 
12.   Other (please indicate what  
else is useful to monitor) 
Note: Please attach any summary paper describing how the mechanism works, and, if existing, the National Development Co-
operation Policy paper.54
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEPart III: Scope of Information Captured and Reported through Data Systems
Financial information captured at different levels*
Level of information List of key 
properties (e.g. commitments, 
disbursements, 
expenditures, projections, etc.)Disaggregation (e.g. by provider, recipient, sector, location, 
financing instrument, 
type of flow, loan / grant, etc.)Name of system or source of informationFrequency of 
updatesType of development 
finance
1. Sector

2.  Programme 
3.  Project 
4.  Activity 
5.  Contract 
6.  Transaction 
7.  Other (please specify) 
Monitoring of development results at different levels 
Indicators Quantitative (e.g. target 
and progress value, etc.)Alignment to national priorities (e.g. national, sector, MDG / SDG etc.)Please indicate the system used, if anyFrequency of updates
1.  Output

2.  Outcome 
3.  Process / KPI 
4.   Other  
(please specify here) * Applicable primarily to traditional types of development finance (e.g. ODA).55
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEPart IV: Bottlenecks and Challenges in Managing Information on Development Finance
Issues that are likely to create bottlenecks in managing development finance 
Custodians of development finance information Custodians of development finance information Very low
Low
Average
HighVery High
NDS
Budget
MTEFOther
N 1 2 3 4 5 N 1 2 3 4 5
A A
1. ODA (grants and loans) 
2.  Non-concessional funding 
3.  South-South Co-operation 
4.  Technical co-operation 
5.  Climate finance 
6.  National budget 
7.  Local budgets 
8.  Foreign direct investment (FDI) 
9.   Remittances from diaspora and 
migrant workers 
10.  Contributions of INGOs 
11.   Contributions of philanthropic organisations 
12.   Other (please indicate) 56
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEIntegration of information on development finance 
Interface / interaction  between 
systems containing information on 
development finance Level of automationPlease list data fields 
exchanged and 
frequency Has integration 
been useful, what 
are main reasons for 
success or difficulties encountered?   Please indicate future plans for integrationAutomatic
Semi-automaticManual
None
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
1.  AIMS and IATI 
2.  AIMS and PFMIS 
3.  AIMS and DRMS 
4.  PFMIS and DRMS 
5.  Other (please specify here) 57
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEChallenge areas of critical importance 
Description of challenge Please describe any steps taken or planned to address the challenges
1.   On-budget development finance flows are not 
sufficiently complete or accurate (e.g. external 
financing of capital and recurrent budgets, projections of external financing in medium term 
perspective, etc.)
2.   Mechanisms for consolidation of information on 
development finance flows and development results 
captured by different institutions are weak or do not 
exist 
3.   Reporting on information on development finance flows and development results meets resistance by 
respective sources 
4.   Functional and technical limitations in systems and 
databases 
5.   Lack of legal instruments regulating use of data systems (laws, policies, government decrees) 
6.   Not enough demand from decision-makers for information on development finance
7.   Insufficient government institutional and HR capacity to manage implementation of systems 
8.  Other  58
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEPart V: Summary of Y our Experience and Plans in Managing Information on Development Finance 
1 ON QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF INFORMATION ON DEVELOPMENT FINANCE
1.1Do you think that the information pertaining to external / development finance is currently properly captured via existing 
information / data management systems? Please indicate best performing systems and those that need technical or organisational improvements.  
1.2Do you think that integration of IATI data could improve overall quality and quantity of information on external development finance?
1.3Do you think that interfaces / interactions between national systems could improve overall quality and quantity of 
information on development finance?
1.4What measures have you taken or would you take to improve the quality and quantity of information on development 
finance?  What worked and what has not?
2 ON ADEQUACY OF INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORKS 
2.1Do you think that the architecture of the institutions in charge of the various elements of development finance is coherent and facilitates the consolidation and utilisation of the data collected by each of them?
2.2What are the groups of best performers in terms of provision and use of information on development finance to national systems?
2.3What is the status of integrating SDGs into national development strategies and what specific arrangements have been made for their monitoring and information sharing among stakeholders?
2.4What measures have you taken or would you take to improve the institutional set up and performance in development finance information provision and use? What works and what does not? 
3 ON COMMUNICATION OF INFORMATION ON DEVELOPMENT FINANCE
3.1 Who are the users of information on development finance within and outside the government?
3.2How is the information on development finance communicated to its users both in government and externally?  
Is this satisfactory? 
3.3 What measures have you taken or would you take do to improve it? 59
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPE
Photo: © iStock, Rawpixel60
MAKING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS WORK FOR THE EVOLVING DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION LANDSCAPEUnited Nations Development Programme
One United Nations PlazaNew York, NY, 10017 USAFor more information: www.undp.org Copyright 2018, UNDP
Empowered liv es. 
Resilient nations . 