Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store aA
Micro-merchant Ecosystems for 
Low Income Communities
Fixed Storein partnership with
Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store aB
Disclaimer: This publication is made possible by the generous support of the American people through 
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). The contents are the responsibility of 
CATALYST and do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government.Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store Contents
Context
Understanding the fixed store landscape in low income contexts
Case Study 
Digitizing Fixed Store Transactions in Jaipur, Rajasthan 
  
Opportunity 
Transforming the Fixed Store Ecosystem
Designing a Business Model
Product Suite  
User Experience and User Interface Design
Sales & Distribution Model 
Developing a Revenue Model
Key Partnerships 2
9
17
21Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 2
Context 
Understanding the Fixed Store 
Landscape in Low Income Contexts
Recent changes in the policy and regulatory landscape in India have 
encouraged a move towards a cash-light economy. This has been 
accompanied by the development of an enabling public technology 
infrastructure, that has opened up the participation of public and private 
sector in bringing the mass market into the financial mainstream through 
technology driven innovations. While this combined effort has led to a 
significant increase in cashless payments, these have been confined to 
certain markets and use cases. 
The mass market in India continues to remain cash-dominated. Micro 
merchants, typified by neighborhood mom and pop stores, account for 
over 90% of retail value and are a key link in the digitization journey for 
most Indians and transformation across the broader commercial value 
chain. 
The Fixed Store  as a category of merchant establishments is incredibly 
diverse with significant variation in number of customer and supplier 
transactions, average transaction size, customer profiles, business 
turnover and margins etc. These variations point to the fact that there 
is no singular digitization solution that can work across this merchant 
category and any product or service aimed at fixed store merchants will 
need to respond to this diversity with customized experiences and 
price points.Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 3
Digitizing the fixed store ecosystem means overcoming serious 
challenges from both the supply as well as the demand side. 
On the supply side, traditional banks are yet to find compelling 
incentives in investing in the merchant acquisition side of 
business. On the demand side, there are several challenges 
such as:
• a disinclination on the part of merchants in declaring formal 
 incomes for tax reasons
• ease and comfort of cash transactions especially for 
 businesses with high velocity of micro transactions (for eg: 
 a juice stall) 
• the entrenched cash habits of their counterparts both 
 downstream (consumers) and upstream (suppliers)
• an evident gap in relevant solutions and business models 
 aimed at digitizing this ecosystem
In spite of these challenges, there are favorable headwinds to address 
the digitization potential of this segment. These include:
• Policy and institutional reforms such as GST, tax breaks for digital 
 businesses, new licenses for payment banks, favorable merchant 
 discount rates (MDR) for digital payment technologies etc. 
• The development and proliferation of affordable and convenient 
 technologies encapsulated within the India Stack including Aadhar, 
 UPI amongst others.Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 44
General Store
Dairy Booth
Hardware and 
Homeware
Apparel & 
Footwear
Toiletries & 
Cosmetics
Medical
Wholesale
Food
eMitra
Hardware & 
ManufacturingGeneral, often 
domestic help
General, often 
domestic help
Middle class 
and vendors 
(e,g, plumbers, 
electricians)
Middle class
Middle class 
with women 
a dominant 
consumer group
Middle class
Vendors
Older customers, 
low-income
Vendors 150
50
500
500
300
200
50
100
45019%
3%
19%
20%
23%
22%
25%
40%
24%50%
75%
30%
30%
30%
50%
50%
50%
33%Low
Low
High
High
Medium
Medium
Low
Medium
HighFragmented
Federated
Fragmented
Fragmented
Fragmented
Fragmented
Fragmented
Federated
Fragmented70%
52%
78%
83%
84%
90%
69%
94%
69%37%
13%
50%
53%
29%
38%
30%
95%
32%RetailAverage 
ticket 
size 
(INR)Profit as a 
% of salesRepeat 
customer 
ratesCustomer 
profileSmartphone 
ownershipSupply 
chain 
organizationDigital 
payment
adoption 
ratesAmount 
of time 
spent by 
customers 
during 
purchase The table below1  highlights the diversity of the segment and some 
key characteristics of each category within it. These figures are 
representative of the segment in general:
1 https:/ /cashlessCATALYST.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Price-Report-Short-20-June-edited-min.pdfCatalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 55
Summarized below are a few critical pain points that fixed store 
merchants face related to digitization: 
Lack of tools and avenues to achieve 
the growth that most fixed store 
merchants aspire towards
CATALYST’s study of this segment revealed that almost 90% of the 
small traders and retailers surveyed showed a strong aspiration to 
grow their businesses - through new customers, increased sales, and 
greater product diversification. This is especially true in an environment 
where competitive pressure is increasing from corporatized and online 
retail. However, merchants often lack the necessary tools and avenues 
to effectively meet their business goals. For example, formal credit 
- crucial for such activities as inventory expansion, expansion into 
new product categories, refurbishment of the establishment etc. – is 
largely unavailable to fixed store merchants in spite of clocking a large 
velocity of transactions. Often the inability of merchants to record their 
transaction histories or a systematic capture of their business metrics 
makes their credit worthiness impossible to evaluate. As a result, even 
merchants that can demonstrate an ability and willingness to pay, tend 
to rely on typically inefficient and informal modes of financing for their 
business needs.
Design Principle #1:  Demonstrate the immediate and tangible link of 
digital payments to greater business value Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 6
An ad-hoc approach to transactions 
and record keeping precludes access 
to key business insights  
On an average, most micro-merchants have significant room to tighten 
operations, focus their energy on strategic matters and conduct more 
targeted sales. Business insights, however, require a process oriented, 
formalized approach to record keeping and transactions. There are 
several disadvantages to manual methods of record keeping and 
transactions, primary being that they are tedious and time consuming. 
Design Principle #2:  Provide actionable business insights in the short 
term, with least disruption to workflows
Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 7
The cost of non-compliance 
will only ratchet up with time 
for micro-merchants
A cash based environment accompanied by little to no long term 
bookkeeping means that many micro-merchants operate outside the tax 
system. In the short term this is a powerful disincentive for digitization for 
many shopkeepers. However, in the long run, the government is expected 
to pursue tax compliance aggressively. The GST regime is an important 
milestone in what the government expects would be a journey towards 
formalization for large parts of the informal sector. This implies that over 
time, the cost of non-compliance will increase for micro-merchants, in 
the form monetary penalties and other punitive measures. Furthermore, 
their journey towards compliance will be complicated by reliance on cash 
and manual bookkeeping, which will mean a more time consuming and 
expensive auditing process. 
Design Principle #3  Design digital solutions with a view to reduce 
time, effort and money involved in key business workflows especially 
tax complianceCatalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 8
Razor thin operating margins 
Traditional digital payment instrument costs (for eg. the card ecosystem) 
have included significant upfront installation costs, monthly recurring 
rental fees, and transaction fees. New acceptance technologies that are 
built for smartphones are more affordable, but even transaction fees 
alone can be a barrier for micro merchants that deal with small ticket 
sizes and razor thin margins, not to mention low trust and high 
transition costs.
Design principle #4:  Pricing needs to be directly tied to value created
Cash is endemic in the ecosystem and 
any change is seen as disruptive
Often, what may motivate the merchants to adopt digital payments is 
a demand from counter parties such as customers and suppliers. 
However in this ecosystem, cash is so entrenched that there is little 
expectation from these counterparties to go digital. Furthermore, 
customers habituated to paying in cash anonymously, will likely find 
the nudge to pay digitally disruptive. 
The pain points described above point towards how an effective 
digitization strategy can be framed to tackle them. The opportunities 
associated with the digitization potential of this segment is discussed in 
the following section. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 9
Case Study
Digitizing Fixed Store Transactions 
in Jaipur, Rajasthan  
Barkat Nagar is a major low-income market cluster in Jaipur that 
stretches about 1.5 km with pre-dominant presence of specialized stores 
dealing in apparel, general merchandise and books with a presence of 
approximately 600+ merchants. The familiarity with digital payments 
in the neighborhood is relatively high owing to a consumer population 
engaged in white collar jobs or businesses, a strong youth presence and 
a reasonable penetration of mobile wallets amongst the merchant cluster.  
CATALYST conducted a set of pilots in Barkat Nagar seeking to digitize 
customer-to-merchant payments. These efforts were largely focused on:  
• Digitizing a dense market cluster of ~500 shops  in two phases - 
 one with a broad spectrum of solutions and a follow-on focused 
 more narrowly on UPI (with QR code as acceptance form factor for 
 ease of use) 
• Targeting certain federated networks of merchants that CATALYST 
 had access to – namely eMitras (outlets providing Government of 
 Rajasthan’s G2P services) and dairy
• As part of its incubation program, partnering with two companies - 
 PayNearBy and FingPay - both of which are building new 
 propositions relevant to fixed store merchants. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 1010
Digitizing a Dense Market Cluster
In an ecosystem where there is limited penetration of digital payments 
among customers, the challenge is two-fold – adoption of digital 
payment by merchants and nudging customers to pay digitally. This 
becomes even more challenging with newer technologies, which require 
a cumbersome onboarding process (eg. UPI). The main activities carried 
out by CATALYST in the two phases and the key learnings from each are 
captured below. 
Phase One 
In the first phase of engagement in Barkat Nagar, CATALYST partnered 
with a set of solution partners (including banks) offering spectrum of 
solution technologies and price points. CATALYST, then aligned and 
consulted with local stakeholders including the Government of Rajasthan, 
the local councillor and the local merchant association to frame the 
best engagement strategy with the community. The next step was to 
disseminate information, including distribution of collaterals with relevant 
and accurate data comparing benefits, costs, terms & conditions of 
different solutions on offer. This was accompanied by store to store visits 
by trained feet-on-street whose focus was on education and awareness 
building. Finally, decisions impacting merchant adoption of digital 
methods of payments and their sustained use over time were recorded.    Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 11
Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 12
 Key Learnings from Phase One
• Demand from customers for digital payments is a powerful nudge 
 factor for merchants. However, the market in Barkat Nagar had a high 
 consumer preference for cash payments thereby creating a 
 disincentive for merchants to shift to digital payments 
• mPoS solutions saw more adoptions primarily since the cost of trial 
 was lower when compared to traditional PoS solutions. Additionally 
 the ease of use of the mPoS solution was also an influencing factor
• Web-link solutions similarly were also adopted by some because 
 there was no upfront cost associated with them
Phase Two
In the second phase, CATALYST focused their efforts on UPI, which had 
shown more adoption from merchants (primarily driven by factors such as 
no upfront fee). CATALYST also sought to test QR codes as an acceptance 
form factor for merchants along with the role that incentives would play 
in driving adoption. To this end, CATALYST ran a store-to-store beat to 
engage merchants on UPI QR, onboard them when there was interest and 
print and stick a QR in a prominent place in the store. Furthermore, the 
merchant was trained on how to use UPI QR and usage-based incentives 
were conveyed to the merchant. These included incentives for the 
merchant over and above those already being offered by digital payment 
solutions and a lottery based incentive for the merchant’s customers.2
Like in the first phase, adoption and follow on usage was tracked and 
reasons recorded.
 
2 https:/ /cashlessCATALYST.org/merchant-perspectives-bhim-experience/Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 13
Key Learnings from Phase Two
• BHIM activations were driven by the simplicity of the solution including 
 instant sign-up and activation
• With BHIM, government association led to enhanced trust from 
 merchants and customers
• Failed activations caused primarily due to debit card issues and other 
 issues with mobile linking to bank accounts, led to drop offs
• There was a lack of demand for UPI payments from consumers driven 
 by a lack of solution awareness
Digitizing eMitra Payments  
Context and Rationale
The efforts here were focused on ascertaining the digitization potential of 
a network of e-governance service providers, who are already digitally 
connected, and where the influence of a single institution could possibly 
drive large scale conversion. 
eMitra is a Government of Rajasthan (GoR) e-governance platform, 
which provides government to customer (G2C) and business to customer 
(B2C) services to citizens that primarily includes utility bill payments and 
other services such as registrations for government services. Rajasthan 
has over 52,000 physical eMitra centers across the state of which 
approximately 5,000 operate in Jaipur. The eMitra merchant operates 
with a prepaid wallet. These merchants usually have other sources of 
income (usually grocery or department stores, cyber cafes, online ticket 
booking offices etc.) with the eMitra establishment serving as additional 
secondary income. On a monthly basis, eMitras conduct business worth 
Rs 5-7 lakhs (in terms of total throughput). The transaction value for 
eMitra services ranges somewhere between Rs 300-2000, with 50-75% 
of the transaction value in electricity and water bill payments.
The CATALYST pilots were implemented across two phases – first, where 
35 eMitras were given free of charge POS machines to accept debit 
card payments and the second, where UPI payments were facilitated 
and also promoted through incentives (over and above those offered by 
the platforms themselves). Across both cases, target merchants were 
educated, handheld and trained to nudge their customers to pay digitally. 
Treating merchants as change agents in the marketplace was 
an important component of the pilot. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 15
Key Learnings
• For the experiments with PoS machines, charging an MDR to the small 
 entrepreneur (which is usually passed onto the customer by them), 
 creates the perverse effect of reducing attractiveness of digital vs. 
 cash payment
• First time customer and merchant experiences with payment 
 methods can shape long term trust and behavior. Specifically, a 
 bad first experience can result in low trust and alienation which is 
 much harder to overcome later
• The eMitra agent by their very design is an offline channel to pay bills. 
 Nudging customers to pay digitally detracts from their own relevance. 
• The customer demographic at the eMitras is typically elderly people 
 from lower income groups, who were observed to be less tech-savvy 
 and had preference for cash as a mode of transaction. The two main 
 challenges with this demographic were the lack of smartphones (to 
 make UPI payments), and issues of trust
• For the eMitra the key benefit of digital payments was the time saved 
 due to the reduced number of bank visits that they had to make to 
 deposit cash
• For both large and small transactions, there were clear benefits of 
 digitization. For large transactions, the time needed to count cash was 
 eliminated while for smaller ticket size, entrepreneurs no longer 
 required loose change. It was also easier to nudge customers to use 
 digital payment methods for large transactionsCatalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 16
• For businesses that were extremely busy on account of high footfalls 
 and therefore had limited time, expecting merchants to nudge 
 behavior change amongst their customers was a challenge. This was 
 more successful in instances where the entrepreneur was familiar with 
 the customer and so could communicate the benefits and help 
 onboard them
• For businesses that were extremely busy on account of high footfalls 
 and therefore had limited time, expecting merchants to nudge 
 behavior change amongst their customers was a challenge. This was 
 more successful in instances where the entrepreneur was familiar with 
 the customer and so could communicate the benefits and help 
 onboard them.
-------------
As a part of the investigation into the digitization potential of federated 
networks, CATALYST also explored digitization in the dairy value chain. 
In this value chain, institutional inertia is a big barrier – with the dairy 
board getting immediate payments from distributors already, there is 
little incentive to digitize the ecosystem. Additionally, typical customers at 
dairy booths comprised of domestic help who lacked the means to make 
digital payments. With limited interaction time and small ticket sizes, 
there was little potential for digitization. 
Learnings from the incubator program with PayNearBy and FingPay, 
and the potential for a business model built around digitizing fixed store 
ecosystems, is captured in the following sections of this report. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 17
Opportunity
Transforming the 
Fixed Store Ecosystem
The fixed store merchant ecosystem is a well 
organized business community that is highly 
growth-oriented. However, they also feature a very 
entrenched & longstanding way of conducting 
business that is cash dominated and riddled 
with manual processes. These ways of doing 
business are undergoing significant structural 
transformations and may unlock the business 
growth that this community desires. However, 
there are tough challenges to overcome in order 
to convince this segment to adopt digital payments 
and therefore other propositions that can create 
new value for the businesses, may offer a better 
chance at success.Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 18
Opportunity 1 
Credit opportunity for merchants 
Opportunity 3 
Augmenting revenue and deepening 
customer relationships by leveraging 
the unique proposition of Fixed Store 
MerchantsOpportunity 2 
Efficiency, Compliance and Business 
insights for fixed store merchants  Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 19
Opportunity 1 
Providing access to digital finance as a way to amplify and provide 
leverage for business stability & growth
Digital transaction histories created with digital payments can help 
unlock access to formal credit for micro-merchants, who have little 
access to it currently in the cash dominated ecosystem. These transaction 
histories can also provide context for other financial services, such as 
shop insurance or short term cash flow management solutions. 
Apart from barriers to credit access, the application and approval 
process for formal credit is also cumbersome and slow. Fixed store 
merchants as a business community see value in process efficiency and 
would be attracted to credit propositions that reflect that. Furthermore, 
merchants would benefit from a structured and transparent roadmap 
towards access to formal credit with attractive terms and clear 
digitization goals. 
Opportunity 2
Efficiency, compliance and business insights for fixed store merchants  
Digital payments can potentially make micro-merchant enterprises more 
efficient. Solutions can leverage digital payment histories and digital 
bookkeeping to generate data-based, business and customer insights 
that can in turn help make better business decisions (for eg: ability to 
target customers with products and services at relevant times, optimizing 
inventory and better pricing and cash flow management). Similarly, digital 
payments can help the merchants in the journey towards enhanced tax 
compliance. With GST, the government is keen to nudge informal sector 
players to become tax compliant and over time non-compliance will 
likely become a very serious concern for most small merchants. Digital 
payments and bookkeeping solutions that automate tax filing from 
invoice and payments data, will make tax-compliance cheaper and 
easier for merchants by reducing reliance on accountants. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 20
Opportunity 3 
Augmenting revenue and deepening customer relationships by 
leveraging the unique proposition of fixed store merchants
Micro-merchants share a unique and personal relationship with their 
customers - they understand the customer’s needs and preferences and 
have significant influence over them. Digitally enabled micro-merchants 
can not only provide better customer service but can also be great assets 
for other businesses who wish to leverage the last mile access they 
provide. For example banks and other financial institutions are already 
providing simple financial products (such as savings, withdrawals, money 
transfers etc.) through micro-merchants mediated by third parties. These 
services not only bring the providers and end consumers in contact but 
have the potential to make significant revenue for the micro-merchant. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 2121
Designing a 
Business Model
Viable business models for effective digital solutions in this segment are 
still evolving and require a lot more learning. What is presented below 
are some tenets based on insights from the work that CATALYST and 
it’s incubation partners have done in the segment. In the higher end 
of the stand-alone merchant segment (for eg: those linked to brands, 
corporates and e-tailers), players such as EZtap and PineLabs are 
already demonstrating traction. However, in the lower end of the segment 
– which has been the focus area for CATALYST – the precedence of such 
solutions has proved harder. The focus of the Government to formalize 
small businesses and remove bottlenecks in adoption of digital payments 
by them, are some developments in the external environment that offer 
some hope. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 2222
Product Suite   
Product Strategy 
In the fixed store ecosystem, digital payment methods will often be 
followed up with value added services that ultimately translate to top line 
growth. There are a few product ideas that can provide significant value-
add to merchants and therefore may find favor with them.
Digitizing traditional customer and merchant transaction mechanisms
There is an opportunity to build on existing transaction mechanisms 
between customers and merchants such as digitizing the khaata system. 
Khaatas are a long held, informal tool used by merchants to provide 
products and services to loyal and trusted customers on credit. Digitizing 
can lead to efficient management of khaatas, drive business insights 
around customer behavior for merchants and through digital payments, 
provide a convenient way for customers to make aggregated payments. 
Aggregation of payment options
Payment services for digitizing transactions between merchants and 
customers should offer both entities some choice of payment types (card, 
UPI app, Aadhaar fingerprint). These choices should be based on the 
merchant context and on the backend, they should streamline workflows 
across transaction management, simplified pricing, merchant discount 
rates (MDRs), reconciliation processes, bank account analytics, insights 
& compliance.Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 23
Digital marketplace for third party services
Technology now offers the ability to provide a digital marketplace that 
connects with several third party services on the back-end and on the 
front-end leverages the micro-merchant’s ability to provide trusted, last 
mile sales and service support to customers. This is especially relevant for 
those services that remain under penetrated in these low income contexts 
on account of limitations of traditional channels. These services 
could include:
• Traditional banking and financial services such as savings, 
 withdrawals, money transfers etc.
• Credit and investment instruments such as insurance, loans, mutual 
 funds. There is an opportunity to distribute these products in disruptive 
 formats with small ticket sizes and narrower scope (for eg: instead 
 of a full-fledged health cover, insurance could involve cover only for 
 hospital visits)
• Know your customer (KYC) services for third parties
• Bill payments and other recurring payment collections at the 
 micro-merchant
• Mobile and DTH rechargeCatalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 24
For solutions provider opening up their platforms to third party services, it 
is important to think through their own role in this model. Do they own the 
merchant relationship? Do they train, incentivize and drive sales through 
their captive channels and capture value against it?   
It is also important to gradually build the product portfolio of the 
merchant starting with those that are most relevant to them. For example, 
a merchant who operates in an area with a large migrant population, 
will likely find money transfer or remittances as a valuable and readily 
monetizable service.  
Digital bookkeeping 
Solution providers may provide digital bookkeeping to improve the 
efficiency of the merchant’s enterprise and enable them in their journey 
towards tax compliance. This would include features such as invoice 
tracking, discount tracking, inventory management, tax compliance and 
other business insights based on data analysis. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 2525
User Experience and User 
Interface Design
While some fixed store merchants may be technologically very savvy, a 
large number of them are new to modern technology. Additionally, micro-
merchants, with their specific business needs and entrenched manual 
and cash dominated practices, present a unique context to design a user 
experience (UX) for which there aren’t too many established precedents. 
As such, designing for this context will involve flexibility and multiple 
iterations informed by feedback received from users. Summarized below 
are some key aspects that need to be considered while implementing a 
UX and UI for this context:
• Interfaces have to be designed to minimize disruption of existing 
 workflows and transaction context. Complex, multi-step workflows 
 may be far more cumbersome than cash and would dissuade 
 merchants from moving away from cash 
• Speed and ease of transaction should be a guiding principle. Among 
 other things, this may mean that the most used features are available 
 easily and more advanced and less frequently used features are 
 hidden behind menus Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 26
• In the situation where the merchant is providing multiple services, 
 it is important that money flow is seamless. For eg. they may receive 
 digital money into their mobile wallets from a customer against sale of 
 a product. Another customer may pay them by cash for an 
 e-governance service, for which they should be able to transfer 
 money from their wallet directly to the government
• Leveraging the UX and UI principles of platforms they frequently use 
 and are already familiar with such as WhatsApp or Facebook
• Performance reliability and consequently low failure rates, with quick 
 refund management in case of failures, are very important. Since 
 many customers may be new to digital payments, a bad experience, 
 especially one that results in monetary loss, can turn them away from 
 digital payments for a long time
• A focus on local language is critical 
• Ability for an agent to make payments on behalf of end consumers 
 who may not be conversant with digital tools may be important in 
 some cases (for eg. domestic help). This may require a wallet type, 
 stored value account, with easier authentication features.Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 27
Sales & Distribution Model 
The contrasting challenges of achieving business efficiencies through 
automation on one end and the need to handhold early adoption 
and usage of digital solutions on the other, points to the need for a 
combination of high-touch and low-touch sales and distribution models. 
On one end of the spectrum, a solution provider may own their own 
channel and customer relationship and on the other end they may choose 
to leverage other entity’s channel and become more of a back-end player 
themselves. 
A high-touch approach would involve:
• Feet-on-street teams in areas where the solution is deployed 
 and active 
• Hand holding and training of retailers to use the products 
• Support for manual troubleshooting and grievance redressal
• Focus on value along with volume, which implies that charges or 
 fees would likely be higher than the low touch model  
• High levels of flexibility, especially on the backend, where multiple 
 customizations may be needed to meet requirement of customers. 
 This is often enabled by a modular design of the technology stack 
A low-touch approach would involve:
• High levels of automation and very little street presence 
• Automated support and lower emphasis on enhanced 
 customer service
• More active relationships with organizations that have access to a 
 large number of retailers such as distributors
• Focus on volume, which implies that charges and fees would be lower 
 than the high touch modelCatalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 2828
Developing a Revenue model
Micro-merchants are often not aware of many intangible costs they 
incur due to inherent inefficiencies in their cash dominated enterprises. 
As such, the benefits of digitization are lost on them if the value is not 
demonstrated upfront. Summarized below are some ways in which a 
solution provider can approach this:
• Capturing data from merchants and showing them benchmarks 
 around inefficiencies in their enterprise and the tangible benefit that 
 digitization will bring in terms of enhanced revenue
• Grab their attention with new products and services that they will be 
 able to provide to their customers and how that can impact their 
 bottom line if they were to add the ability to transact digitally 
• Freemium models (for eg ones that waive off transaction charges) 
 that allow merchants to experience the value creation without taking
 monetary risks
 
Revenues
Once merchants are convinced of the value of digitization, a pricing 
model can be negotiated with the following components:
• Subscription fee monthly or annually (discounted) 
• Fee paid on transactions that flow through the platform. With 
 pricing models based on transaction fees it is important to take 
 into consideration the margins in the value chain. Among low income 
 groups and micro-merchants, the transaction fee needs to be low. 
 This is especially true in extremely low margin settings such as the 
 dairy value chain, where profit margin for retailers are only around 3% 
• Revenue from third parties that are looking to leverage a captive
 merchant base to reach end consumers, can be an additional source 
 of income for solutions provider Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 29
Costs   
Summarized below are some key costs that a solutions provider is 
likely to incur:
• Outreach, including sales, marketing and relationship management. 
 This cost can be significant in the high touch model where relationships 
 with individual merchants needs to be established through an active 
 feet-on-street
• Paying channel partners for customer acquisition. For example, in the 
 low touch model a distributor may be paid against their services for
  on-boarding their retailer base onto the platform 
• Product development, which will be significant to begin with but 
 reduce when a stable product is arrived at. However, maintaining 
 technology infrastructure (such as servers) and updating UX and UI 
 will need to be considered as well
• Incentives for: 
- merchants, to nudge them onto the platform and make the effort 
 to digitize
- customers, to nudge them to try out digital payments while paying 
 merchantsCatalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 30
Key Partnerships 
Summarized below are some key partnerships that will help in making 
the business model more viable for a solution provider as well as provide 
opportunities for growth: 
Credit Organizations: 
Micro-merchants, who have a significant digital transaction history, 
can be attractive customers for lending agencies including banks 
and NBFCs. Partnerships with lenders can not only add to the value 
proposition of the solutions provider, but also be a potential source of 
revenue for them. Here are some considerations around integrating 
credit into the solution design:
• Credit partners can be nudged to integrate credit as part of the 
 platform itself, as opposed to a standalone offer (for eg. instant loans 
 to fulfil bill payments)
• Need for a local presence: Working with a local company with greater
  field presence may be helpful in reducing operational delays 
 associated with dispensing credit. Local presence can reduce the 
 time between application and disbursement of credit.
• It is important that the full transaction history across different digital 
 payment modes adopted by a merchant be included in any evaluation 
 of credit worthiness and while calculating credit terms 
• A transparent and achievable roadmap of milestones along the credit 
 eligibility scale for merchants to graduate toCatalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 31
Channel Partners: 
Especially for low touch models, but not exclusively for them, channel 
partners can be very important for growth. The primary objective with 
these partnerships will be to drive customer acquisition. Considering the 
difficulty and costs associated with reaching merchants directly, this can 
be a powerful way to acquire a large market. Channel partners 
could include:
• Brands such as FMCG companies who are looking to digitize supply 
 chains downstream
• Distributors, who like brands, may be keen to digitize retailers 
 under them 
Governments:
Partnership with State Governments can provide access to specific 
programs or initiatives as in the case of CATALYST’s experiments 
with e-Mitra or Bhamasha in Rajasthan. These partnerships can give 
immediate access to a network of agents for whom one half of the 
value chain (merchant to government) is digital by default and hence 
there is relatively greater value and reduced friction in adopting digital 
payments for the other half i.e. customer to merchant transactions. 
On the other hand, there is also a need for policymakers & regulators 
to think boldly and creatively about the case to subsidize merchant 
acceptance of digital solutions given the efficiency benefits that can 
accrue to the broader ecosystem i.e. reduced cash handling across 
the banking ecosystem, knock-on effect on supplier & consumer 
digitization, additional tax revenues, jobs & growth. Advocacy with central 
agencies can therefore play a pivotal role in creating a more favorable 
environment for digitization of the fixed store ecosystem. 
 Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 32
The more straightforward case for providing digital payment solutions 
to the large mass of fixed store merchants in India is constrained by the 
behavioral and economic challenges to adoption. It is critical therefore 
that the journey towards digitization is premised on addressing their 
strong desire for growth and willingness to be intermediaries for a 
much larger suite of products and services. They are one of the most 
important bridges the economy has between mainstream brands and 
manufacturers on one end, and the underserved mass of consumers on 
the other. Therefore, while the right incentives and mechanisms might 
be elusive, they have to be seen as change agents that can provide the 
critical missing link in the journey towards formalization of 
Indian economy. Catalyst | Micro-Merchant Ecosystems For Low Income Communities | Fixed Store 33H-5, Second Floor, Green Park Extension, New Delhi - 110016 
011-49096529 | info@cashlessCATALYST.org | www.cashlessCATALYST.orgin partnership with
