 
 
 MOLDOVA ’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 
FOR DOING BUSINESS I N THE DIGITA L 
ECONOMY   
SME PREPAREDNESS   •  DIGITAL FINANCIAL SE RVICES   •   
TRADE LOGISTICS   
 
November  2018 
  
 
PHOTOS: NICK KLISSAS  FOR NATHAN   
DISCLAIMER  This report is made possible by the generous support of the American people through the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID). The contents are the responsibility of Nathan Associates Inc. and its subcontractors and d o not 
necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
ii    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  CONTENTS  
ACRONYMS  IV 
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODU CTION  1 
SUMM ARY OF UNDERTAKING  1 
METHODOLOGY  4 
THRESHOLD CONDITIONS  UNDERLYING MOLDOVA’ S “DIGITAL BEE” IN 2 018 6 
SUMMARY OF CHAPTER F INDINGS  11 
CHAPTER 2: SME PREPA REDNESS  14 
POLICY AND LEGAL FOU NDATIONS  15 
CORE INSTITUTIONS  21 
ADDITIONAL STAKEHOLD ERS 26 
POLITICAL ECONOMY  28 
CHAPTER 3: DIGITAL F INANCIAL SERVICES  29 
POLICY AND LEGAL FOU NDATIONS  31 
CORE INSTITUTIONS AN D ADDITIONAL STAKEHO LDERS  35 
POLITICAL ECONOMY  39 
CHAPTER 4: TRADE LOG ISTICS  41 
POLICY AND LEGAL FOU NDATIONS  42 
CORE INSTITUTIONS AN D OTHER STAKEHOLDERS  44 
POLITICAL ECONOMY  54 
CHAPTER 5:  CASE STUDIES  54 
VASCONI  55 
VITALIE BURLACU  56 
SALESZONE.PR O 57 
HERMINA FABRICAT  58 
CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSIO NS AND RECOMMENDATIO NS 59 
SME PREPAREDNESS  59 
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SE RVICES  61 
TRADE LOGISTICS  62 
MOLDOVA CUSTOMS  63 
MOLDOVA POST  64 
REFERENCES  66 
SAF-DE CHECKLIST: SM E PREPAREDNESS  68 
SAF-DE CHECKLIST: DI GITAL FINANCIAL SERV ICES 71 
SAF-DE CHECKLIST: TR ADE LOGISTICS  76 
  
iii    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY     
iv    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  ACRONYMS  
AA Association Agreement  
APIUS  Asociatia Patronala din Industria Usoara (Employer’s Association in Light 
Industry)  
BEE business -enabling environment  
DCFTA  Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area 
EU European Union  
EUR euros (currency)  
GBP pound sterling  (currency)  
GDPR  General  Data Protection  Regulation  
ICT Information and Communications Technology  
ISP Internet Service Provider  
ITU International Telecommunications Union  
LPFM II  Leadership in Public Financial Management II  
MDL Moldovan leu  (currency)  
MSME  micro, small, and medium -size enterprise  
MoEI Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure  
NDS  National Development Strategy   
OECD  Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  
ODIMM  Organizația pentru Dezvoltarea Sectorului Întrepriderilor Mici și Mijlocii 
(Organization for Small and Medium Enterprises Sector Development)  
POS  point of sale 
PSRM  Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova  
PPP purchasing power parity 
SAF-DE Systems Analytic Frame work for the Digital Economy  
SME small and medium -size enterprises  
USAID  United States Agency for International Development   
v    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  USD US dollars (currency)  
USTR  United States  Trade Representative   
CHAPTER ON E: INTRODUCTION  
Worldwide, commercial enterprises must embrace recent advances in information and 
communications technology (ICT)  not merely to stay competitive but , in fact , to survive.  All 
industries —across manufacturing, agriculture, and services —are impacted by the digital economy . 
Yet, whether an enterprise can rise to the opportunities presented by new technolog ies depends as 
much on the enabling  environment for doing so —including a country’s pertinent policies, laws, 
regulations, institutions, and infrastructure —as on the imagination , commitment , agility, and skills of 
the company’s operators. The marketing, buying, and selling of goods, services , and digital products 
via the internet (which together add up to a broad description of e-commerce ) requires access and 
the capacity to engage a range of electronic resources, systems, and tools.  Moreover , a truly 
dynamic and growth -producing system of e -commerce necessitates the adaptation and even the 
disruption of traditional systems of telecommunications, commerce , and trade.  
SUMMARY OF UNDERTAKING  
This report on the Republic of Moldova ’s enabling environment for doing business in the digital 
economy  is a pilot undertaking of USAID’s new diagnostic tool, the Systems Analytic Framework for 
the Digital Economy ( SAF-DE).  
 
 
The SAF -DE diagnostic aims to help economies construct an agenda for capitalizing on 
opportunities and addressing constraints , one that reflects both the immediate needs of 
private enterprise and the most realistic prospects for positive change.  
 
 
Drawn from US policy objectives and international best practice,  the SAF -DE consolidates key 
qualitative and quantitative data for the purposes of assess ing a country’s “Digital Business Enabling 
Environment” (or “Digital BEE”) — in other words, the policy, legal and regulatory, institutional  and 
political economy conditions supporting  private -sector activities  that engage – directly or indirectly –
internet -oriented tools and resources.  
 
The full SAF -DE resource bank consists of a comprehensive set of checklists and supporting 
documentation across nine policy areas: (1)  telecommunications regulation , (2) service s 
liberalization , (3) ICT infrastructure , (4) digital financial services , (5) private commercial law , (6) 
trade logistics , (7) data privacy/consumer protection , (8) cybersecurity , and (9) SME readiness. 
Designed for agility of implementation, the SAF -DE ad apts to specific country contexts and priority 
subject areas  – in Moldova, for example, three of the nine policy areas have been selected for 
review.  Specifically, in September 2018, b ased on a preliminary review of Moldova’s enabling 
environment for doin g business in the digital economy, the USAID Moldova Structural Reform 
Program identified three priority areas to examine in its pilot application of the SAF -DE:  
 
• Small and medium -size enterprise (SME) preparedness  to engage in e -commerce  
• Digital financial services   
• Trade logistics  
Considering how the nine SAF-DE policy areas build on and relate with one another (Figure 1.1), 
this selection of topics reflects the fact that Moldova is well along in terms of foundational support 
for e-commerce . That is,  although  not without certain limitations, Moldova’s primary environment 
for telecommunications regulation, services liberalization, and ICT infrastructure functions 
effect ively.  
2    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY    
 
 
 
FIGURE 1. 1. USAID SYSTEMS ANAL YTIC FRAMEWORK FOR T HE DIGITAL ECONOMY  
Figure 1.1 shows the 
relative progression of 
topics of key interest in 
building a thriving digital 
economy. 
Telecommunications, 
Services Liberalizatio n 
and ICT Infrastructure 
represent the 
foundational blocks of a 
digital economy, with the 
remaining issues 
representing the next 
stages of policy 
implementation and 
expansion of issues and 
opportunities. The 
graphic further shows 
that, as a true systems 
analysis, the SAF -DE 
cannot be inherently 
linear. Components of a 
system develop alongside 
of one another, and in 
different ways their 
success depends on the 
development of the 
others.  
How does the term digital economy  relate to this diagnostic study?  
In general, and for the purposes of the SAF -DE, the term digital economy  incorporates the 
following:  
• A country’s threshold conditions for telecommunications and competition among digital 
service -providers ; 
• The presence of  information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure necessary 
for digital networks to exist, operate, and reach economic actors ; 
• Commercial transactions that rely on that infrastructure, including for the sales and delivery 
of goods, services, and digital content, inclusive of digital systems of finance and payment ;  
• The content that internet users create and access —for example,  websites and “apps;” 
software in all formats, including video games; artistic designs; recorded music; radio and 
television broadcasting; motion pictures; books; newspapers and periodicals .  
3    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Specifically , though still notable for the lowest per capita 
earnings in Europe, Moldova stands out in its Eastern 
European neighborhood for having —next to Singapore 
and South Korea —the third-highest rate of “superfast” 
broadband connections  worldwide : most fixed 
broadband connections in the country permit users to 
surf the internet, download film and music, or stream  
television  shows  and other video . (Watkins 2008). 
Moldovan enterprises have the benefit of fiber optic 
connectivity through Romania , Ukraine , and other 
points both west and east, which allows for inexpensive 
access to the vast European Union (EU) market and 
beyond . The economy further benefits from integration 
of nearly all M oldovan communities , both urban and 
rural, through fiber optic cable . Finally, entrepreneurs 
have the advantages of  well-connected personal and 
commercial networks, an upside of outward emigration; 
strong and relatively affordable mobile network s; and an 
emerging, increasingly dynamic pool of local ICT firms 
and consultants that can help them build e -commerce 
strategies . 
Notwithstanding these conditions , as observed in the 
chapter on SME Preparedness, engagement of e-
commerce in Moldova today remains es sentially a one-way street. Goods and services from abroad 
are easily ordered , imported, and received. (Although time may be a factor in their arrival — 
especially where internal infrastructure may delay delivery —the underlying systems of e -commerce 
tend to  function well, where inbound goods and services are concerned). Exporting goods,  however, 
especially for micro and small enterprises, can be a confusing and inordinately expensive chore if 
undertaken through formal procedures.  The d ifficulties facing SMEs  stem from a combination of 
policies, laws, rules, and habits that needlessly raise expenses and make receiving payments from 
foreign buyers difficult.   
This report examines these and related issues in the following context , as delineated by the SAF -DE 
tool: 
 
• SME Preparedness . This issue  pertains to conditions for SMEs —as defined in the country  or 
economy to which the SAF -DE is being applied —to safely, reliably, and competitively par ticipate 
in the digital economy . For this report, discussion of SMEs significantly incorporates the 
perspective of micro -enterprises, which represent nearly 99% of existing enterprises in Moldova 
and employ more than 60% of the country’s workers.  
 
• Digital Financial Services . This section addresses branchless banking services that are enabled 
via electronic channels. Services may be accessed using a variety of electronic instruments, 
including mobile phones, point of sale (POS)  devices, electronic cards, and computers.  
 
• Trade  Logist ics. This topic encompasses the various phases of cross -border delivery of goods 
purchased through digital transactions. These phases include transport and shipping ; border 
crossing and customs clearing; delivery to the end -user; and facilitating product returns.   Republic of Moldova: Key Facts 
and Figures  
Population:  3.5 million (approx.)  
GDP: USD 8.1 billion  
FDI: USD 91 million  
Exports (% of GDP):  43% 
Imports (% of GDP) : 71% 
Poverty rate: 9.6% 
Unemployment rate:  4.1% 
Key Industries:  sugar  processing , 
vegetable oil, and food  processing ; 
manufacturing of agricultural 
machinery ; foundry equipment, 
refrigerators and freezers, and 
washing machines; production of 
hosiery, shoes, and textiles.  
 
0 
 
Republic of Moldova: Key Facts 
and Figures  
Population:  3.5 million (approx.)  
GDP: USD 8.1 billion  
FDI: USD 91 million  
Exports (% of GDP):  43% 
Imports (% of GDP) : 71% 
Poverty rate:  9.6% 
Unemployment rate:  4.1% 
Key Industries:  processing of sugar  
processing , vegetable oil, and food  
processing ; manufacturing of 
agricultural machinery ; foundry 
equipment, refrigerators and freezers, 
and washing m achines; production of 
hosiery, shoes, and textiles.  
  
4    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Following a summar y of its methodology  and a list of key foundational conditions underlying 
Moldova’s  digital BEE , this report details constraints and opportunities pertaining to each of these 
three areas. The final section presents recommendations suitable for immediate action by a variety 
of stakeholders, including government, the private sector, and  the donor community. The remaining 
SAF-DE topics —Private Commercial Law, Consumer Protection/Data Privacy, and Cybersecurity – 
represent next -degree  issues that will warrant deeper consideration as Moldova moves toward legal, 
regulatory, and institutional upgrades with respect to the topics examined  through this diagnostic .  
Table  1.1: Key “Digital BEE” In dictors  for Moldova versus the region and the world  
Indicator  Moldova  CIS Region  World  
Mobile cellphone subscribers (per 100 inhabitants ) 111 141.2  101.5  
Fixed broadband sub scribers ( per 100 inhabitants ) 16.3 15.8 12.4 
Active mobile -broadband sub scribers ( per 100 
inhabitants ) 56.2 59.7 52.2 
3G coverage (% of population)  99 77.1 85 
LTE/WiMAX coverage (% of population)  97 45.9 66.5 
Households owing  a computer  (% of population)  76 68 51.5 
Households having  internet access  (% of population)  71 65.1 45.9 
Source:  International Telecommunication Union (2016) .                                          
Note: LTE/WiMAX  = wireless interoperability microwave access/long -term evolution . 
 
METHODOLOGY   
In August 2018, the USAID Leadership in Public Financial Management II (LPFM II) project complet ed 
a beta version of the full SAF-DE tool. That version —the foundation for Moldova’s pilot diagnostic — 
incorporate s input not only from a vast range of publishe d sources but also from representatives of 
several US government agencies, including USAID, the US Trade Representative , the Federal Trade 
Commission, and the Commerce, Treasury , and State  departments .  
In addition, the SAF-DE’s beta version incorporate s perspectives from a host of private -sector 
representatives  that do business in the services industry and the worldwide digital economy. As part 
of the process of refining a final iteration of the SAF -DE, the beta version has been put into use in 
pilot form,  with this report representing a “first -take” in implementing this new and important tool.  
As noted, as a preliminary step in undertaking the pilot SAF -DE diagnostic, the USAID Moldova 
Structural Reform Program  elected to undertake a “deep dive” into the topics of SME Preparedness;  
Digital Financial Services ; and Trade Logistics . The selection of these topics is informed by broadly 
understood conditions and relevant data about the state of Moldova’s digital economy, including 
those aspects that would benefit from dedicated analysis leading to recommendations for targeted 
action.   
As applied in a rapid review that entails both thorough research and extensive in -country meet ings 
with stakeholders, the SAF -DE checklists cover the following areas:  
(1) Overall government policy . Policy objectives for each issue studied reflect U.S. policy and 
international best practice and consensus among market economies. They further aim to 
incorporate matter s of inclusiveness – that is, the extent to which digital policy is conceived  
5    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  and implemented based on a range of experiences and perspectives, including those of 
women, rural populations, or other traditionally excluded groups.  
   
(2) Pertinent legal and regulatory frameworks . The checklists cover e ssential areas of law, 
regulation, rules, or other authority that serve as the structural basis for a digital economy 
to achieve its policy objectives. In addition to consistency with emerging internat ional 
standards in digital commerce, a country’s legal foundations are to be examined for their 
clarity, accessibility, and fairness.   
 
(3) Core institutions . Building on the legal foundations necessary to achieve the section’s overall 
policy objectives, the checklist s next seek to understand  the landscape of institutions that 
exists for the purposes of (a) enacting key laws and regulations; (b) implementing public 
policy and the legal/regulatory foundations; and , (c) enforcing the letter and t he spirit of the 
laws and regulations. Diagnostic implementers strive to examine these institutions for 
capacity, accessibility, transparency, accountability, inclusivity, and fairness.   
 
(4) Additional stakeholders . The checklist s then guide SAF -DE diagnostic implem enters in 
identifying key organizations, initiatives, and activities that support the robust and effective 
implementation of section -specific policy objectives and legal foundations. These may include 
chambers of commerc e, trade and professional associations, women’s business 
organizations, universities and training resources, think  tanks, the media, etc. To the extent 
possible, the diagnostic process will elucidate the relative capacity, accessibility, 
transparency, acco untability, inclusivity, and fairness of these stakeholder institutions.  
 
(5) Relevant issues associated with the political economy.  Diagnostic implementers then reference 
one or more key power dynamic(s) and/or social/political/economic incentives that operat e 
and interact with the SAF -DE topic under review . This is not a detailed inquiry, but rather 
sets the stage for closer review in the future of why a certain component of the digital 
economy may fail to achieve its purpose and potential. With respect to th e enunciated issue, 
implementer s may review and comment on the following:  
a. Who has an interest in preserving the status quo? Why?  
b. Who has an interest in change, reform, etc.? Why?  
c. In terms of reform, what can be done? (What is politically feasible)?  
d. Who sho uld make the changes – and why?   
 
(6) Key indicators. To the extent possible, implementers review and integrate available, third -
party data that reveals comparative information about how a certain segment of the digital 
economy meets its goal vis -à-vis its nei ghboring countries or other world economies.  
The in-country portion of this diagnostic took place from September 10 –21, 2018, when two 
consultants  for Nathan A ssociates Inc. (Nathan) , the implementer of the USAID Moldova Structural 
Reform Program —Nick Klissas and John Adams, both lawyers and international development 
professionals —traveled to Moldova for the purposes of this inquiry. The consultants studied the 
three topics, assisted  by Moldova Structural Reform staf f and by a third , part -time consultant, 
Thomas Leonard, who responded to research inquiries remotely. Using the SAF-DE checklists as 
their guide ( copies follow the body of this report ), the implementers sought insights fro m as many 
relevant perspectives as possible , conducting more than 40 meetings, consultations, and interviews , 
and reaching about  100 individuals. Staff from both the US -based Nathan headquarters and Chisinau -
based Moldova Structural Reform Program supporte d the compilation and editing of the final report.   
6    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  As in any rapid review process, the “360-degree” collection of data was an intensive undertaking that 
required many meetings with a far -reaching, inclusive sample of people, as well as time each day to 
reflect on findings, compile notes , begin discer ning key themes, and anticipate the addition of 
supplementing perspectives. The consultant team conducted interviews across Moldova’s business 
environment, including those of central government officials, SME owners, business associations, tech 
workers, banking and other lending sector  representatives , large and small traders, and many others.  
With the exception of those featured in this report’s case studies, p articipants in interviews were 
assured of the anonymity, to ensure full candor.  
Essentially a diagnostic of key constraints and opportunities, this final report focuses on the 
fundamentals of “facts on the ground”; notes key areas of ambiguity or diverging view points; and 
proposes next st eps for attention and intervention, to be implemented by a range of stakeholders 
across the whole of the system. This report may also be used for a number of additional purposes: 
among them, as a foundation for policy development; a framework for donor int ervention and 
coordination; a benchmark for monitoring change over time; a reference for potential investors; a 
teaching tool for professional trainings and academic courses; a basis for articles, “think pieces,” or 
other public dialogue; or as a “jumping off point” for stakeholder discussion and consensus -building.   
THRESHOLD CONDITIONS UNDERLYIN G MOLDOVA’S “ DIGITAL BEE” IN 2018  
The threshold conditions underlying Moldova’s enabling environment for the digital economy  as of 
October 2018 are the summarized in the following  order : (a) the country’s  political and economic 
backdrop ; (b) the political and legal founda tions of the digital economy, and (c) the role of the 
Moldovan diaspora .  
Political and economic b ackdrop  
• Since 2000, Moldova has experienced significant economic growth, with average annual GDP 
expansion  of over 5 percent.1 However, Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in 
Europe, with a GDP per capita of USD 5,679 in PPP terms in 2017 . 
 
• Moldova’s economy reli es heavily on agricultural exports, including fruit, vegetables, wine, wheat, 
and tobacco. In addition, g rowth in private consumption is driven primarily by remittances , which 
account for a quarter of GDP, among the highest shares in the world. Coupled with a limited 
capacity for domestic production, increased demand for goods and services has led to Moldova’s 
widening current account deficit . The gap between imports and exports was an estimated USD –
379 million  in 2017 , far exceeding Moldova’s USD –268 million deficit in 2016.                                                                                       
 
• Since 2014, the government of Moldova has pursued a broad structural reform agenda in 
accordance with its Association Agreement (AA) signed with the EU in 2014, while benefiting 
from preferen tial trade access with the EU under the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area 
(DCFTA ). Today, EU economies (including the United Kingdom) represent Moldova’s most 
significant  market  for Moldovan goods and services.  Roughly 65  percent  of Moldova’s exports go 
to the EU compared to 11  percent  to Russia.2   
                                                
1 “The World Bank in Moldova,” World Bank , (updated October 11, 2018),  
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/moldova/overview#3 .  
2 See Michigan State University’s website , “Global Edge, Moldova Trade Statistics ,” at 
https://globaledge.msu.edu/countries/moldova/tradestats   
  
7    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY   
• Moldova’s SME Development Strategy 2012 –2020 calls for a more supportive regulatory and 
financial climate for SMEs,3 which in 2018 constitute over 95 percent of all enterprises in the 
country  (though many that are registered are likely inactive) . On paper, Moldova has taken great 
strides toward minimizing excess regulation and streamlining bureaucratic processes .  
 
• For example, i n the World Bank ’s Doing Business 2019 report , published on October 31, 2018 
and measur ing legal and regulatory conditions for doing business, Moldova ranked 4 7th of 190 
countries, with its highest scores found in the metrics of Starting a Business and  Registering 
Property .4 The one Doing Business category that remains persistently low among Moldova’s 
rankings is Dealing with Construction Permits, a topic that—while seemingly unrelated to the 
digital economy in g eneral —signals the continued struggles among SMEs with nontransparent, 
informal systems of business regulation  and inspections,  particularly at the local level , as shown in 
Table 1.2.  
 
 
• Notwithsta nding several  positive economic indicators, Moldova ’s political economy in 2018 is 
broadly regarded as a volatile , oligarchic duopoly . The ruling Democratic Party ’s economic 
platform purports to  be squarely oriented toward western markets and growth opportunities . 
But in practice , the government’s commitment to transparent , accountable systems of economic 
                                                
3 See “Small and Medium Enterprise Sector Development Strategy for 2012 –2020,” Annex No. 1 to the Decision of the 
Government No. 685 of 13 September 2012, retrieved from 
https://www.etf.europa.eu/sites/default/files/m/C3B5E5CCD6AF7AEEC1257AC3005250A3_Moldova%20SME%
20Strategy%202012 -2020.pdf   
4 See World Bank Group’s website “ Doing Business: Measuring Business Regulations: Ease of Doing Business in Moldova,” 
http://www.doingbusiness.org/en/data/exploreeconomies/moldova#DB_sb .  
TABLE 1.2: DOING BUSINESS AT A GLANCE: MOLDOVA VERSUS ITS NEIGHBORS  
Economy  Overall  Starting a 
Business  Trade across 
Borders  Dealing w/       
Construction Permits  
Moldova  47 14 35 172 
Bosnia & 
Herzegovina  89 183 37 167 
Georgia  9 2 43 27 
Macedonia, FYR  10 47 29 13 
Romania  52 111 1 146 
Serbia  48 40 23 11 
Ukraine  71 56 78 30 
Source:  World Bank, Doing Business 201 9.  
8    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  governance mandated through the DCFTA is badly undercut by the business interests of its 
leaders  and their cronies .  
 
• Moldova’s President Igor Dodon  is aligned with Moldova’s Socialist Party ( that is, the PSRM) and 
strongly advocates for reinvigorated economic engagement with Russia . Although the two sides 
spar for overall supremacy in the system, the issue of Moldova’s orientation to Moscow v ersus  
the EU is increasingly perceived as posturing to distract the public  (Całus 2018) . Both sides have 
an interest in both preventing other parties from com ing to power and avoiding reforms that 
could undermine their political position and personal gains (Całus 2018) . As parliament ary 
election s near, there is  a diminished sense of urgency among parliamentary leadership  in support 
of Moldova’s fulfillment of its DCFTA commitments.   
 
• Parliamentary elections are scheduled for February 201 9. In July 2017, a slim parliamentary 
majority  delayed the elections by nearly three months, one of several decisions pushed through at 
the end of its legislative session that were undertaken with minimal public input or review  
(Necsutu 2018) . Indeed, p ublic wariness over the self -dealing and poor capacity exhibited by the 
ruling party runs deep. Where Moldova’s legislative and economic alignment wit h the EU once 
seemed assured, there can be no certainty about  the direction the government’s priorities will 
take after the elections.  
 
Policy and legal foundations of the digital economy  
• In recent years, Moldova has adopted a host of laws that pertain t o the digital economy . Relative 
to its peers in the region, the country is ahead of the curve in terms of legal and regulatory 
readiness to engage in e -commerce. For example, t he enactment in 2007 of a law providing for 
digital signatures underscored Moldo va’s commitment to consistency with international models, 
including the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce (1996) (which set the basic terms 
for legal predictability in electronic commerce) and the United Nations Convention on the Use of 
Electronic Communications in International Contracts (2005 ) (which ensures the validity and 
enforceability of contracts formed online). The general suite of laws pertaining to electronic 
commerce, digital financial services , cybersecurity, and data privacy include th e following:  
o The Law on Informatics  (2000) addresses the rights and duties exercised by the 
state, legal entities and individuals when creating, managing, using and maintaining 
information systems, as well as principles and means for ensuring personal freedoms; 
protecti ng data; and securing the right to access information services;  
o The Law on Access to Information  (2000) addresses the ability of individuals to 
exercise of their constitutional right to access information and the principles, 
conditions, ways and order of accessing official information held by the providers of 
the information;  
o The Law on E -Commerce  (2004, amended in 2017 ) regulates the main aspects of 
transactions over the Internet  and introduc ed the term “electronic contract ” into 
Moldova’s business enabling environment ;  
o The Law on Information and State Information Resources (2004) provides 
for, amo ng other protections, limitations on the state use of personal data;  
o The Law on Electronic Communications  (2007, amended in 201 7) establishes 
the basic rules and conditions of activities in the field of electronic communications ;  
o The Law on Electronic Do cument and Digital Signature  (2007) sets forth the 
conditions under which d igital signatures have the same legal effect as a handwritten 
signature ;   
9    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  o The Law on Personal Data Protection  (2011, amended in 2016) sets forth the 
protections for the individuals’ fundamental freedoms and rights with regard to 
personal data processing, inclusive of protection of information pertaining to the 
private lives, including personal and familial secrets ; and 
o The Law on Payment Services and Electronic Money  (2012) generally 
regulates digital financial payments. Issues concerning this law are discussed in this 
report’s chapter on Digital Financial Services.  
 
• Adopted in 2012, Moldova’s National Development Strategy 2020 commit s policymakers to 
address ing the country’s economic vulnerabilities and establish ing a sustainable pathway to 
economic development.  The Development Strategy  aims to transition Moldova from a remittance 
and consumption -reliant model of growth to an export -driven model, facilitated in part by an 
improved business environment and increased access to finance.  The Strategy  specifically 
highlights the need to streamline Moldova’s regulatory framework and support the digitization of 
financial services  (GOM 2012) .  
 
• Adopted in 2013, Moldova’s  Strategy for Development of an Information Society, or “Digital 
Moldova 2020,” presented a set of priorities for expanding internet  access and connectivity, 
ensuring competitiveness of the broadband market, support ing digital content and service 
developme nt, and promoting information security. By 2018, the Strategy has achieved several of 
its objectives, includ ing connecting all localities to at least a 30 Mbps (“super -fast”) fiber optic 
network ; supplying 85 percent  mobile broadband coverage of localities ; and achieving more than 
60 percent  household penetration rate .  
 
• The Strategy followed earlier approaches to digitization, including the State Program for 
Electronic Moldova (2005) and the State Program for Broadba nd Development for the period 
2010–2013 (2010) . The “Digital Moldova” strategy further promised to build understanding and 
capabilities in cybersecurity , increase the rate at which public services are provided online,  and 
ensure interoperability of governm ent services . Achieving these goals remains a work in progress.  
 
• In 2017, Moldova amended its Law on Electronic Communications to align the country with the 
EU’s 2009 directives on common regulatory frameworks and users' rights relating to electronic 
commu nications networks and services.  These changes , as mandated through the DCFTA,  
pledged improve ment to  conditions for effective competition  among internet providers , while 
also “strengthening the internal market for electronic communications, improving the use of radio 
spectrum, enhancing the protection of end -users’ rights and confidentiality in the electronic 
communications sector, and implementing access and interconnection mechanisms. ”5 The extent 
of and effectiveness of this legal alignmen t warrants close monitoring and evaluation over time.  
 
• Since 201 1, there has been considerable effort, led by the World Bank, to build a host of “e -
governance” systems within  Moldova, many of which are directly relevant to the ability of 
enterprises to ta ke advantage of the digital economy.  The first phase of the World Bank’s 
Government e -Transformation project (2011 –2016) focused on “putting in place the core ICT 
                                                
5 See “ANCRETI Brings Telecoms Legislation in Line with EU Framework,” TeleGeography (August 22, 201 7), available at 
https://www.telegeography.com/products/commsupdate/articles/2017/08/22/anrceti -brings -telecoms -legislation -
in-line-with-eu-framework .  
  
10    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  infrastructure (both hard infrastructure in form of a cloud and a range of e -services, and so ft 
infrastructure in terms of capacity and enabling frameworks).”6 Launched in 2017, a second phase 
of this work focus es on deeper institutional reforms in public sector governance , made possible 
through the digitization of many services that regulating au thorities are now able to offer or 
accomplish online.  Today, t he World Bank work s with Moldova’s government to expand the use 
of cloud technology  and to  leverage developed e -services  (such as by increasing the ability for 
citizens to pay fees and debts electronically , obtain certain business licenses or permits , and 
participate in government procurements) .7  
 
• There also has been considerable effort , chiefly led by donors, to strengthe n the extent to which 
Moldova’s parliament and government agencies allow for stakeholder participation in the 
development of laws and rules pertaining to the economy, including e -commerce and related 
concerns.8 Today, the Parliament publishes significant l aws in draft form for public comment. Final 
laws and regulations are published in the Official Gazette (Monitorul Oficial ), while a database of 
laws and regulations is available online (www.lex.justice.md ). Still, as exhibited by the Parliament’s 
hasty enactment of more than 50 laws in two days at the end of its 2018 legislative session —
including a Fiscal Amnesty Law that allows people enriched through illicit money and goods to 
legalize them by paying a three-percent  tax to the state —there is little confidence in the 
government ’s commitment to transparency and firm systems of public engagement in the law -
making process  (Necsutu  2018) .   
 
• The dominant internet  service provider in Moldova is the state -owned Mo ldtelecom, which holds 
60–65 percent market share . Moldtelecom’s former management is closely connected to the 
Moldova’s ruling party and the Ministry of Economy.  There is dynamic competition among 
internet service providers , including fr om four  large, privately  owned firms  (some partially owned 
by international development banks) : Starnet,  Orange, Moldcell , and Sun Communications. 
Orange  (95 percent owned by Orange S.A., a French multinati onal telecom corporation ) is the 
largest mobile carrier in the co untry.9 The issue of free , fair competition in th e provision of high -
speed networks and services is important — personal enrichm ent through the management of 
public goods is always cause for concern.  Although the issue warrants pause for further 
considerati on and potential political economy analysis , it is beyond the scope of this report.   
 
• As of early October 2018, the specific policy imperative of strengthening conditions for trade 
facilitation in the context of the digital economy has been highlighted be fore the Moldovan 
government and donor community. The Office of the Coordinator of the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) convened a four-day workshop in Chisinau 
that included representatives from the Moldovan Customs Service, th e Post of Moldova, the 
Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure; the National Bank of Moldova; the State Tax Service the 
National Agency of Road Transport; the Investment Agency, the Consumer Protection Agency; 
the Economic Council to the Prime Minister/Nati onal Trade Facilitation Committee; the 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry; the Organization for Development of Small and Medium 
                                                
6 World Bank, Report on a Credit in the amount of SRD 12.7 million (US USD 20 million equivalent) to the Republic of 
Moldova for the Governance E -Transformation Project. Implementation Completion and Results  Ju ne 26, 2017. Page 23.   
7 Ibid.  
8 For example, see  UNDP Project Document for “Strengthening Parliamentary Governance in Moldova,”  available at  
http://www.md.undp.org/content/dam/moldova/docs/Project%20Documents/Project%20Document_Strentheni
ng%20Parliamentary%20Governance_00088088_MDA.pdf .   
9 “Internet Ownership:  Moldova: Mostly Still Under Sta te Control.” January 28, 2016.  Available at 
https://www.reportingproject.net/internetownership/?p=244 .   
11    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Enterprises; the EU High Level Adviser to Moldovan Customs; and local enterprises. Participating 
donor and multinational company r epresentatives included professionals from the World 
Customs Organization (WCO); the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE); 
USAID Moldova Structural Reform Program; the European Commission Directorate -General for 
Taxation and Customs Union (DG TAXUD); the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD); and DHL. The workshop facilitated a “comprehensive discussion of 
challenges, opportunities, and possible solutions pertaining to Moldova’s facilitation of cross -
border e -commerce. ” (Office of the Co -ordinator 2018). Details and recommendations from 
this session are incorporated into this report’s chapter on trade logistics, as well as the final 
section spelling out conclusions and recommendations.  
The diaspora: A key player in Mold ova’s present and future digital economy  
• About a third of Moldova’s population reportedly resides abroad , temporarily or permanently . As 
of 2013, about 520,000 Moldovans were involved in long - and short -term external migration ; of 
these, 109,000 were seaso nal migrant workers, according to a government survey. By 2015, 
according to border police data, about  753,800 Moldovans resided abroad. As of 2017, the 
migrant  population was estimated to have grown to about 1.2 million.  
 
• Moldova’s diaspora is settled in more than 30 countries, with the largest populations residing in 
Italy, Romania, and Russia. The diaspora is a major source of income for the national economy 
through remittances, which in 2016 accounted for almost 2 5 percent  of Moldova's GDP, the 
seventh -highest percentage in the world.10 The Moldova information and security service 
estimates that 1.2 to 2 million Moldovan citizens (almost 45 percent of the population) work 
abroad.   
 
• In February 2016, the Moldovan gover nment approved the national strategy “Diaspora -2025” 
adopting strategic initiatives to capture the economic potential and intellectual capital of this 
group  of migrants .11 In particular, t he diaspora represents a significant potential target market for 
e-commerce sellers in Moldova. During this diagnostic, online sellers reported that the majority 
of their transborder sales and shipments are to members of the diaspora, many of them in Italy.  
SUMMARY OF CHAPTER FINDINGS  
Overall observations and findings from  the individual subject -matter inquiries are summarized below:  
SME Preparedness.  Public policy supports and encourages the robust participation of SMEs in 
Moldova’s digital economy, including through the provision of accessible  and affordable access to the 
internet across the country. Moreover, t he overall legal and regulator y environment for SMEs is  – 
on paper – relatively accessible and simple to implement .  Implementation is an ongoing problem, 
but Moldova’s large and vigorous SM E sector suggests that the legal and regulatory framework is at 
least adequate. With international support, the government has transferred a number  of important  
                                                
10 See, generally, GOM 2016 (p. 47), Mosneaga (2014); World Population Review’s webage “Moldova Population 2018,” 
available at http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/moldova -population/ ; and the International Organization 
for Migration’s webpage “Migration Profile of the Republic of Moldova,” available at www.iom.md/migration -profile -
republic -moldova . See also  World Bank Group’s webpage “Personal Remittances, Received (% of GDP),” available at 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.TRF.PWKR.DT.GD.ZS?year_high_desc=tru e.  
11 To harness the development potential of private transfers, the government established the investment program PARE 
1+1, which attracts migrants’ remittances into the SME sector with a one -to-one matching funds scheme from the 
government and donors. Se e GOM 2016, available at 
https://brd.gov.md/sites/default/files/sn_diaspora_2025_web.pdf .  
12    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  services online , and efforts in this direction are continuing.  
Also, with support of the donor community, including USAID and the Wo rld Bank, SMEs have 
access to a range of programs that provide low -interest loans, guaranteed loans, grants, and capacity -
building services.  
The existence  of a large diaspora raises the opportunities for Moldovans doin g business online, given 
their ready , enterprising contacts in developed economies all over the world.  
Still, SMEs face practical constraints to realizing their full potential in the digital economy.  As a threshold 
matter, there is not yet a full sense in  Moldova of the potential of  the services sector as a growth 
opportunity for local enterprises. As summarized by the International Trade Center in 2016, “While 
the delivery of goods across borders normally consists of five different steps (i.e. warehouse p roduct 
identification; secure packaging for delivery of goods; transport and shipping; crossing the border and 
customs procedures; and delivery to end user), for services only a single phase suffices: delivering 
the service electronically to the customer, upon online payment. ” (ITC 2016). Examples of high -
potential service areas include the outsourcing of business services (such as technical support to ICT 
companies worldwide), tourism, and international distribution of creative works produced in 
Moldova, s uch as films, video games, and artistic designs.  
With respect to producers of or traders in goods, SMEs in Moldova widely engage online platforms 
for doing business , including social media; shared platform s, such as Amazon or eBay; or their own 
websites . However, there are a number of constraints on online activity. One is c onsiderable 
confusion  and lack of information:  about laws and regulation s, privacy, cybersecurity, and about 
intellectual property rights. Another is the high  expense s associated with a ccepting payments. SMEs 
also find that the expense of shipping often overwhelms thei r prospects for selling lower -value 
goods.  
As SMEs become more sophisticated, there is increased need for local understanding of topics that 
are essential to their long -term survival, including issues of cybersecurity, data privacy and consumer 
protection, and intellectual property rights. Through i ts twinning project, the EU supplies assistance 
to the government in harmonizing Moldova’s legislation with the EU’s General  Data 
Protection  Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR), which applies to data protection  and privacy  for all 
individuals within the  EU and  the European  Economic Area.  Going forward, SMEs in Moldova will 
need to understand the practical applications of the GDPR.  
Digital Financial Services.  The legal and regulatory framework for digital financial services, 
including the use of non -cash paymen ts instruments, is largely in place in place in Moldova.  In general, 
businesses and consumers in Moldova have access to a variety of safe, accessible, and reliable digital 
payment systems. Infrastructure for non -cash payments is in place, and digital finan cial services are 
widely available in Moldova.  
Notwithstanding strong infrastructure for digital payment services , Moldova lags behind most 
Central and East European countries in the use of non -cash payment instruments. This lag appears 
driven by several factors , including  consumer preferences based on a tradition of paying cash ; a 
mistrust of banks and other institutions ; and a prevalent desire to avoid taxes and bank fees.  Existing 
electronic payment channels remain underutilized, and there is substantia l room for growth. Even if 
the legislative gaps that cause some of these high fees are addressed  and lead to reduced bank 
interchange fees, merchant charges, and the transaction costs faced by non -bank e -payment services 
providers, lowering the costs of us ing non -cash instruments , in itself, may not be enough  to  
13    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  overcome persistent consumer habits and the lack of familiarity with non -cash instruments. Financial 
education and other incentives  are necessary to shift Moldova’s common paradigm of habits and 
expectations.  Opportunities include educating the public at large – including through issue campaigns 
or social media – as well as working with the private sector to create incentives for digital payments, 
including assurances that the digital economy is capa ble of keeping people’s money safe.  
Trade Logistics. There is broad consensus in the business community that the complexity and 
expense of customs procedures represent major impediments to the developments of cross -border 
e-commerce in Moldova. The custom s software  (ASYCUDA)  that comprise s Moldova’s system for 
customs administration is out of dat e.  It is incapable of performing several of the administrative key 
functions that are necessary preconditions before measures can be introduced to speed up and 
facilitate order fulfillment for transborder e -commerce.  
The main gap is in the pre -arrival declaration capacity of the current ASYCUDA version, which will 
not support e -filing of a simple declaration form for small and lower -value shipments. Today, there i s 
an informal system of “workarounds” for importing and exporting smaller goods that have been sold 
via the internet —namely, Moldova’s system of “maxi -taxis” , which  consolidate and carry small 
packages over the border while skirting some customs rules. As the digital economy grows, this 
state of affairs is not sustainable over the long term. An emerging agenda for addressing constraints 
in trade logistics, summarized  in this report’s recommendations, can result in collaborative and 
purposeful action in the near term.  
The government and donor community have begun to tackle the broad issue of cross -border trade 
as it pertains to e -commerce. There is an immediate opport unity to reach a system -wide 
understanding of how stakeholders will work together to address the clearly delineated next steps. 
The most effective plan will have clear expectations for action, feedback loops, benchmarks of 
progress, and built -in systems of  accountability.  
   
14    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  CHAPTER 2: SME P REPAREDNESS  
Moldova has an energetic SME sector that is undergoing both growth and diversification . Small 
fashion apparel companies are developing local brands and gaining popularity. Vineyards are also 
enjoying success  internationally, in recent years significantly shifting markets from the former Soviet 
Republics to E U member  countries .  Digital awareness abounds throughout Moldova’s economy, 
facilitated by inexpensive internet and mobile telephone services. SMEs incre asingly us e digital tools 
for payments, advertising, government services, and trade.   
Nonetheless, most SMEs in Moldova are not yet at the stage in which the costs of doing business 
over the internet allows them to extend their reach from their locality or region to the markets that 
await them in the EU and beyond. They face considerable difficulties in navigating a dynamic , changing 
enabling environment —particularly with respect to managing payments and trading a cross borders —
that works at odds with the government’s articulated policy goals. They assert that they cannot 
export with vigor and efficiency , not for a lack of understanding but owing  to a lack of synergy 
between laws, policies, and institutional mission . Moreover, certain donor -supported efforts to 
reduce administrative burdens on SMEs through increased digitization of government services have 
proven slow to take effect.  
SMEs employ over half of Moldova ’s workforce and play an important role in the econo my. While 
three quarters (75.64%)  of SMEs in fact qualify as microenterprises —meaning they have fewer than 
10 employees and assets less than MDL 9 million —microenterprises employ less than a third of the 
all employees working for SMEs , as shown in the tables below.   
 
Moldovan Definition of SME 
Category  Employees  Turnover  
(in MDL ) Assets  
(in MDL)  
Microenterprise  Up to 9  9 million  9 million  
Small enterprise  10–49 25 million  25 million  
Medium -size enterprise  50–249 50 million  50 million  
Source:   Law 179/2016 . 
   
   
15    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  MSME Participation in the Economy  
 
Although SMEs generally have the requisite skills to undertake e -commerce through  easy, 
inexpensive access to the  internet , the exploitation of online selling opportunities  remains  something 
of a one -way street. Goods and services from abroad are easily ordered and received. In contrast, 
shipping goods, especially for micro and small enterprises, is a very confusing and expensive chore if 
done legitimately .12 The difficulties  stem from a combination of laws, rules, and policies that 
needlessly raise expenses and make receiving payments from foreign buyers difficult.  
Aligning with the SAF -DE checklist of issues (see the Appe ndix), this chapter reviews and 
summarizes the key digital BEE issues associated with SMEs in Moldova, including those regarding 
overall policy  and legal foundations, core institutions, other stakeholders , and briefly,  the political 
economy.    
POLICY AND LEGAL FOUNDATIONS  
                                                
12 According to Doing Business 201 9 (published October 31, 2018), documentary complianc e with export customs 
procedure s takes 48 hours to complete  in Moldova, as compared to 24.3 hours in the region and 2.4 hours in OECD 
economies.  The typical medium -size company in Moldova spends an average of USD 1 20 to complete the customs process.  Category  Micro  SMEs  MSMEs  
Enterprises 
(absolute 
#) 46,184  7,389  53,573  
Enterprises 
(% of total)  85.03
% 13.60 % 98.64 % 
Enterprises 
density 
(per 1000 
people)  13.02  2.08 15.10  
Employme
nt 
(absolute 
#) 107,78
9 215,488  323,277  
Employme
nt (% of 
total)  20.39
% 40.77% 61.16 % 
Source s: National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova (2016), “Indicatorii principali 
privind activitatea întreprinderilor mici şi mijlocii  în anul 2017” [Indicators on the activity of small 
and medium enterprises in 2017 ]   
http://www.statistica.md/public/files/ComPresa/Antreprenoriat/Anexa_IMM_2017.xls    
16    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  SMEs can access the internet to a degree that enables meaningful participation in the 
digital economy.  In general, digital policy and law in Moldova track international best practice s. 
Fundamentally, Moldova’s internet is open to all . Companies and custome rs may move data as they 
see fit , including to reliable fixed broadband connections , and Moldovans enjoy quality mobile access 
to the internet. Cloud computing services are also emerging to both supplement and replace 
traditional ICT inf rastructure. As a virtual storage space for documents and other electronic files, 
the cloud facilitates cheaper, more flexible e -commerce. Also, World Bank efforts to support 
integration and the use of cloud computing in the context of e -governance similar ly add to local 
experience and engagement with the cloud.13  
Public policy supports and encourages the robust participation of SMEs in the digital economy , 
although SMEs face practic al constraints to realizing their full potential.  In general, t he government of 
Moldova, leveraging donor assistance, has long engaged in efforts to accommodat e or prioritize  the 
needs of entrepreneurs . For example, for more than a decade, agencies of the Mo ldovan 
government have been under a mandate to avoid excessive regulation of enterprises. Issued in 2006, 
Government Decision No. 1230 requires that all new legislation undergo a regulatory impact 
assessment).14 Specifically, “draft normative acts regulatin g entrepreneurial activity” may only be put 
on the government’s regulatory agenda if they are accompanied by analysis of the costs and benefits 
of doing business . This analysis must also be accompanied by the opinion of the working group for 
the regulation  of entrepreneurial activity. The working group meets every Wednesday and publishes 
its agendas and results of its proceedings.  
Pursuant to its commitments under the AA s and the DCFTA, Moldova today strives to 
harmonize its laws and policies with EU direct ives. “Strive ” is the operative  word , however, 
as harmonization in the numerous legal areas for DCFTA implementation is an ongoing challenge . 
There remains a massive agenda for not only revising legal and regulatory conditions, but also for 
building capacity for implementation, in such areas as product standards for health and safety, 
intellectual property rights, consumer protection, and —with r espect to the digital economy —
adherence to EU standards for cybersecurity and data privacy.  
The overall legal and regulatory environment for SMEs generally is relatively accessible, 
and simple to implement.  Moldova has made strides since independence in i mproving and 
simplifying its legal framework for SMEs. In 2016, Moldova revised its legislation supporting the SME 
sector with Law No. 179.15 The new provisions revised previous legislation passed in 2011 and now 
aims to improve conditions for MSMEs while a lso providing certain “state support measures” to  
support their creation and development. The law also aims to “ensure the competitiveness and 
performance of micro, small and medium enterprises, as well as to facilitate prompt adjustment to 
economic and te chnological changes.”   
Law 179 establishes a comprehensive set of policies in support of SMEs , as outlined below.  
                                                
13 Worl d Bank, Implementation Completion and Results Report on a Credit in the amount of SRD 12.7 million 
(US $20 million equivalent) to the Republic of Moldova for the Governance E -Transformation Project . June 26, 
2017. Page 23.  
14 Government Decision No. 1230/2006, available at 
http://lex.justice.md/index.php?action=view&view=doc&lang=1&id=318208 .  
15 See Republic of Moldova, Parliament, Law No. 17 9 of July 21, 2016, with regard to small and medium -sized enterprises. 
Date of entry into force: 16.12.2016. Published: 16.09.2016 in the Official Gazette Nr. 306 -313 art Nr: 651, 
http://lex.justice.md/md/36 6638/ .  
17    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • The law obliges  (but significantly does not compel)  that all public agencies adopt a “ think small 
first” principle under which government bodi es have the responsibility to assess the ramifications 
of all new laws and regulations on SMEs . 
• The law establishes tax incentives for the development of SMEs, as established under the 
Moldovan Fiscal Code . 
• The law sets  aside a minimum share of public procurement contracts, as established by public 
procurement legislation . 
• The law offers loan guarantees through a Credit Guarantee Fund, to be made available through 
the Organization for Small and Medium Enterprises Sector Development , a state agency 
headquartered in Chișinău.16 The law also calls for entrepreneurship education and continuous 
vocational training.  
To effectuate these and other policy prescriptions, the law provides that implementation is to be 
carried out by this state agency. While the law also calls for the creation of an advisory council for 
small and medium -size enterprises, whose purpose is to review the competitiveness of the SME 
sector, the functions of this council have essentially been subsumed by the previously mentioned 
Economic Council under the Prime Minister.  
Law 179 provides for the development of entrepreneurship and support for SMEs from professional 
training enterprises through the provision of advice, information services, promotion of innova tion, 
and so forth . To improve the competitiveness and development of the entrepreneurial spirit in 
young people, the law also provides for the introduction of entrepreneurship education at all levels 
of the education system.  
Implicit in the Moldovan governance system is that only juridical persons should engage 
in business activities, which leads to various bottlenecks and resulting workarounds in 
shipping and payments. Moldovan legislation allows for various forms of for -profit business legal 
entities that may be used by entrepreneurs seeking to incorporate:17 The most likely forms for 
entrepreneurs are the limited liability company18 (LLC) and the joint-stock company (JSC), both of 
which allow for sole proprietorships.19 (Other forms of juridical persons are available, including 
general partnerships, limited partnerships, and cooperatives.)  
For entrepreneurs seeking to establish an SME, the LLC and the JSC forms are the natural choices 
for incorporation as they remove shareholde r liability for the company’s obligations. Doing Business 
2018 ranks  Moldova at number 23, making it a leader among comparable economies. Registration 
takes place at the State Register of Legal Entities held by the State Registration Chamber of the 
Ministr y of Justice .20 The Chamber registers firms within five business days ; for a much higher fee, 
firms can be registered in as quickly as four hours .  
                                                
16 ODIMM was established by Decision No. 538 of May 17, 2007.  See 
http://lex.justice.md/index.php?action=view&view=doc&lang=1&id=325790 .  
17 For more information on  incorporation processes in Moldova, visit the website of the Moldovan Investment and Export 
Promotion Organization (part of the Ministry of Economy and Infrastructure):  http://miepo.m d/investment -
guide/establishing -business   
18 Governed by Law Number 135/2007, Law on Limited Liability Companies. See 
http://lex.justice.md/index.php?action=view&view=doc& lang=1&id=324892  
19 Governed by Law Number 1134/1997, Law on Joint Stock Companies.  See 
http://lex.justice.md/index.php?action=view&view=doc&lang=1&id=326515 . 
20 Pursuant to Law Number 220 -XVI/2007, State Registration of Legal Entities and Individual Entrepreneurs, as amended. 
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/natlex/natlex4.detail?p_lang=&p_isn=89942&p_classification=01.03 .  
18    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  While there is no minimum capital requirement for an LLC, there is one for a JSC set at MDL 
20,000. The regis tration cost is within means for most entrepreneurs: for an LLC, it is MDL 1,149 
(USD 69 as of 9/18/ 2018) (regular registration cost) or MDL 4,596 ( USD 273 as of 9/18/ 2018) for 
expedited, four-hour registration. Firms may order a stamp for an extra fee, bu t this is no longer 
required by law. According to a study published in 2017, “[t]he share of companies that had rated 
the procedures with the State Registration Chamber as being complicated has slightly decreased.” 
Only 22  percent  of respondents found the procedures prohibitive or costly, and 9  percent  difficult 
or impossible to fulfill. Interestingly, only 7  percent  reported a significant problem with requests for 
unofficial payments  (World Bank 2017) . 
Despite the legal system’s requirements for formality, it allow s day traders and merchants to hold an 
entrepreneurial permit , or patenta , to engage in business without incorporating.  The permit  is issued 
by municipalities for use by street and market vendors but apparently does not a llow the holder to 
import goods. The permit  system has been under review for some time by the Ministry of Finance 
owing  to a growing grey economy and problems of tax evasion. Today, policymakers are considering 
abolishing the patenta  and establish ing a simplified corporate form, a “sole trader company,” with 
lower compliance costs than an LLC or a JSC. With a sole trader company, entrepreneurs would 
have to submit a simplified report to pay tax on a quarterly basis.21   
SMEs enga ging in e -commerce and with a physical presence, like an office, warehouse, or store, must 
comply with the same requirements that apply to traditional SMES. One is the need to obtain an 
“internal trade authorization” —a permit issued by local authorities th at grants a firm the right to 
operate at a particular location in a municipality. The authorizations, which must be renewed 
annually, are required for nearly every type of business (USAID 2017, p. 25). The government is 
automating the issuance of authoriza tions through its one -stop centers. In addition, firms are subject 
to inspections by the state tax service  and by  police, fire, and other governmental bodies. For firms 
profiled by Doing Business, the number of inspections averaged almost 3 visits per year  with the 
overall amount of time spent by inspectors with a company was about 11 hours per year. Six 
percent of companies in 2017 reported bribing tax inspectors, a decline from 22  percent  in 2016  
(USAID 2017, p. 54) . 
SMEs are not yet fully aware of the ne ed to integrate the commercial priorities of data 
privacy, cybersecurity, and intellectual property rights.  Today in Moldova, d ata protection 
requirements are set forth throughout sector -specific laws. Though enacted, c onsumer protection 
law is weakly enfo rced in Moldova.22  The extent to which SMEs are able to take reasonable 
safeguards to secure the privacy and security of sensitive data, including the personal identity, health, 
and financial information of consumers, without unnecessarily restricting the cross -border flow of 
information, is not yet clear. Also, there is an imperative that Moldovan SMEs align with new EU data 
privacy standards, as found in General  Data Protection  Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR), which 
applies to data protection  and privacy  for all individuals within the  EU and the  European  Economic 
Area.  Again, it is not cl ear that most SMEs are even aware of the GDPR, let alone of their 
obligations under it.  
                                                
21 Cited by AmCham Moldova in an interview dated October 20, 2016.  See Infotag news agency’s post “AMCHAM 
Supports Amendments to Government Concerning Activities Based on Patents.” 
http://www.infota g.md/m9_economics/233226/   
22 See “Law of the Republic of Moldova on Personal Data Protection of 8 July 2011, Act No. 133/2011, as amended on 29 
November 2016 (Data Protection),” available at 
http://www.datepersonale.md/file/Data%20Protection%20Law%20133.pdf .   
19    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Calculating, filing, and paying taxes can be challenging for small businesses.  A firm 
operating cross  border will potentially have to account for corporate income taxes , value added 
taxes (VAT), and customs duties. Across Moldova, there is a general  presumption that 
entrepreneurs, like other taxpayers, either hide or underreport income. This encourages an 
adversarial relationship between SMEs an d tax and customs authorit ies. Tax avoidance, according to 
interviewees, is one of the primary reasons that Moldovans exhibit a preference for using cash ; thus, 
this helps explain why only 17  percent  of payments are handled electronically.  Yet, incongruously, 
firms may use electronic payment systems to pay their taxes and customs duties.  
Corporate income tax. According to a survey accompanying Moldova’s Doing Business 2017 
report, corporate income tax payments posed a critical or significant pr oblem for 34 percent of 
responding firms , while for many others , it did not present a problem  (World Bank 2017, p. 60) . The 
Fiscal Code of Moldova, Code No. 1163/1997, sets the parameters of the tax regime .23 The country 
has a general corporate income tax r ate of 12  percent , but for SMEs that meet qualifying conditions , 
the rate is 4  percent . Deductions from income may be made for expenses deemed as ordinary and 
necessary , aimed at deriving taxable income , and justified with adequate supporting documentation .   
Value added tax . Moldova collects a VAT at a standard rate of 20  percent . This rate is imposed on 
imports of goods. The VAT is 0  percent  for the exports of goods and services and for international 
transportation. A firm must register for VAT purposes if the ir total turnover within the past 12 
consecutive months reached MDL 600,000 ( about  USD 35,600).24 VAT payers must prepare and 
submit ret urns monthly. In the Doing Business Survey 2017, 27  percent  of respondent firms said that 
VAT payments posed a critical or significant problem.   
Customs issues  significantly interfere with the ability of small enterprises to export 
goods at a reasonable c ost. Moldovan firms are eager to sell goods to consumers in foreign 
markets. They regard r eady-made markets (consisting of Moldovan diaspora in the EU and a  
potential  customer base in adjoining areas of Romania  that speaks the same language and is 
geograph ically nearby ) as low-hanging fruit. But the fruit cannot be plucked because shipping small, 
low-value parcels is prohibitively costly . 
Specifically , to legitimately send parcels and packages, whether through the postal service , shipping 
companies, or international express carriers, all juridical persons must complete a 60 -field customs 
form and submit it electronically. This rule effectively requires a ll but the largest SMEs to use 
customs brokers to prepare customs documents. The customs agency has proposed making several 
reforms, including an ASYCUDA upgrade , to fix this problem . However , none of the currently 
proposed reforms would make sending cross -border parcels by post easy enough to not require a 
customs broker. The United States Postal Service provides an electronic form that both firms and 
natural persons can complete for shipping goods across borders. Moldova should consider instituting 
such a  form.  
To avoid these overwhelming requirements and costs, f irms interviewed during this diagnostic 
expressed significant interest in establishing operations in Romania. By doing so, these firms may 
more easily work around postal and customs rules and pra ctices that inhibit exports by SMEs. This 
may pose complications for firms because  they must properly determine the time and place of 
taxable events. That is, i f the sale is concluded online by a salesperson in Chișinău, but the item ships 
                                                
23 See CFRM1163/1997, Republic of Moldova, Parliament No. 1163 of 24.04.1997, Fiscal Code of the Republic o f Moldova; 
Published: 25.03.2005 in the Official Gazette Nr. ed. spec. http://lex.justice.md/md/326971/ . 
24 Source: http://www.miepo.md/inves tment -guide/tax -framework .  
20    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  from a wholly ow ned subsidiary’s warehouse registered in Romania, did the sale occur in Moldova 
or in Romania? Further clouding the issue is that transfer pricing regulations are currently at an initial 
stage of development, putting firms in potentially uncomfortable posi tions with tax inspectors. 
According to the tax law in force, transactions carried out between related parties should observe 
the arm’s length principle.25 Losses incurred as a result of transactions between related parties are 
not deductible for tax purposes .26 
The smaller the SME, the bigger the problem a firm faces in resolving commercial 
disputes.27 Micro enterprises, many of which are run on a shoestring and may be women -owned or 
migrant -owned, can ill afford the costs of litigation. Cross -border dis putes can be nearly intractable 
when considering the disruption involved in possible foreign travel, paying legal fees, and time away 
from the firm. Costs in such cases very likely exceed the value of the claim. Using platforms such as 
Alibaba, Amazon, or eBay to conduct transactions can mitigate these issues  because  these platforms 
contain an online dispute resolution mechanism. Firms on the larger end of the spectrum that engag e 
in high -value transactions usually avoid using platforms , owing  to fees and c harges involved, and may 
either seek redress in courts or through arbitration.  
Parties in Moldova have a choice to use courts or engage arbitration to resolve disputes. Moldova is 
a signatory to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, also 
known as the New York Convention, with foreign arbitration decisions enforced by domestic 
courts. Arbitration legi slation is modeled on UNCITRAL  model law , with two centers now in 
operation. The Arbitration Center of the Moldovan Chamber of Commerce and Industry is the 
most popular, while a new center —the Chișinău Court of International Commercial Arbitration —
has been set up under the aegis of the American Chamber of Commerce. The Court  charges an 
arbitration fee of  USD 500 for a claim less than  USD 12,500, with fees rising for larger claims.28  
The Export.gov website cautions parties that Moldova’s court system has a poor reputation , stating  
Moldova’s court system generally enjoys a low level of public trust and is perceived to be vulnerable 
to acts of corruption, while court processes lack transparency. The overall expectation in court 
hearings invo lving representatives of public authorities, including economic entities, is that final court 
rulings will be in favor of state representatives.29 
Prosecutors and judges are suspected of enabling corruption by ensuring impunity for corrupt 
customs offi cials and criminal bank executive by destroying evidence, enforcing fraudulent debt 
claims as part of money laundering schemes, and blocking attempted institutional reforms.  Reform 
efforts are inconclusive  (Chayes 2016) . 
SMEs across the country would benefit from a workforce that better serves their needs 
for technical skills and the ability to take advantage of business opportunities associated 
with the digital economy. With donor support, the government supports entrepreneurship 
training, developing business  incubators, expanding vocational training in ICT, and improving the 
                                                
25 Ibid.   
26 See Deloitte's webpage, "International Tax: Moldova Highlights 2017." 
https://www2.deloitte.com/c ontent/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/Tax/dttl -tax-moldovahighlights -2017.pdf   
27 Based on the United States Department of Commerce website, “Moldova - 3-Legal Regime.” Last Published: 11/2/2017. 
https://www.export.gov/article?id=Moldova -Legal-Regime .  
28 See the Chi șinău International Court of Commercial Arbitration’s (undated) pamphlet “Rules on Arbitral Fees and 
Costs,” available at 
https://www.amcham.md/tc_userfiles/file/Rules%20on%20arbitral%20fees%20and%20costs%20A5(1).pdf   
29 Ibid.  
21    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  speed and efficiency of customs, tax, and other government services. Still, as detailed in a 2017 
World Bank  study , skills deficits remain particularly acute for Moldovan firms seeking to  do business 
in a modern economy  (Rutkowski, Levin, and Bargu 2017) . In a 2016 survey of more than 3200 firms 
in Moldova, nearly 40  percent  of all employers reported that, with respect to higher -skill employees, 
insufficient knowledge of English or other f oreign language hampers the firm’s performance. Across 
all job types, they also emphasized skill deficits with respect to ( 1) motivation, initiative, and 
proactivity; ( 2) analytical and problem -solving skills; and ( 3) willingness to learn new things.  For 
enterprises that excel in delivering a certain product, but do not traditionally work in the digital 
economy, these deficits are particularly inhibiting their own growth potential. “More generally,” the 
report concluded, “education and training  policies need to put more emphasis on the development 
of skills demanded by employers but undersupplied by workers.”30  
As for building ICT skills among workers, Moldova’s government recently reorganized its system of 
vocational education and created 18 Ce nters of Excellence around the country  (See Table 2.1) . With 
the ICT training that they offer, vocational training programs have become a popular alternative to 
the traditional high school education. Students graduating from vocational education have the o ption 
of enrolling in post -secondary college and university programs. Brain drain is reportedly rampant, 
with many graduates leaving the country for greener pastures in Romania and the EU.   
Students Enrolled in Secondary Technical Vocational Education (2015/16)  
Total  16,098  
Electronic computer operator  583 (3.62%)  
Operator for computer technical support  505 (3.14%)  
  
Students Enrolled in Post -Secondary Vocational Education and Training (2015/16)  
Total  30,428  
Informatics  1,786 (5.87%)  
Electronics and communications  1,128 (3.71%)  
Information systems and computers  1003 (3.30%)  
  Source:  ETF 2017.  
CORE INSTITUTIONS   
The Prime Minister’s Economic Council.  The central government actively engages with the 
business community, associations, and international donors in supporting the promotion of 
                                                
30 Ibid, pp. 1 -2. TABLE 2.1: STUDENT E NROLL MENT IN PRE - AND POS T-SECONDARY TECHNICA L VOCATIONAL 
EDUCATION/TRAINING  IN MOLDOVA   
22    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Moldovan businesses’ ability to grow and trade. The Prime Minister’s E conomic Council is the 
government’s primary vehicle for this function. The Council was established as an advisory body by 
the Government Decision No. 631 of 22.08.2011 —and is now led by the prime minister  who 
appoints its 100 members , including 41 business associations , 43 state institutions, and 16 
representatives scientific and research entities and international organizations.31 The Council’s 
Secretariat maintains an online calendar and website , which announces scheduled meet ings and 
provides updates on initiatives and access to reports.32 The EU provides secretariat services to the 
Economic Council , and the USAID Moldova Structural Reform Program is among the donor 
activities that supplies substantive support to the work of th e Council.  
At the summer 2018 meeting of 
the Economic Council to the 
Prime Minister, businesses cited 
the complexity of customs 
procedures and complicated 
aspects of transferring and 
receiving money from other 
countries as major impediments 
to the development of cross -
border e -commerce. The 
Economic Council included 
constraints in development of 
cross -border e -commerce as an 
issue for resolution in its 2018 
Operational Plan.33 
Organization for Small and Medium Enterprises Sector Development (ODIMM).  In 
2007, Moldova created ODIMM, a quasi-governmental organization with the aim of increasing the 
country’s competitiveness  by supporting the development of the SME sector.34  ODIMM promotes  
entrepreneurship, supports access to finance, provides services for SMEs, and stimulates public -
private dialogue. It coordinates and receives support from numerous donors, including USAID, the 
EU, individual European economies, and the United Nation s International Organization for 
Migration.    
                                                
31 For the membership roste r, see the Secretariat of the Economic Council to the Prime Minister’s web page,   available at: 
https://consecon.gov.md/en/2018/06/04/members/ . See also, https://consecon.gov.md/en/grupurile -de-lucru/  
(Economic Council website).  
32 For information on the working groups, see the Economic Council’s webpage at 
https://conseco n.gov.md/en/2018/06/04/members/ .  
33 According to the Economic Council Secretariat, Employer’s Association of Light Industry raised this issue in an address 
to the prime minister. Thereafter, the working group concluded that part of the problem could be sol ved by a planned 
upgrade of the ASYCUDA system. Since funding has not been identified, the Council Secretariat planned to convene a 
meeting with the Customs Service, businesses, and international express mail carriers to create a temporary solution until 
the ASYCUDA system could be upgraded. It also began discussions with the OSCE Mission to Moldova to organize a 
workshop on e -commerce that could outline feasible solutions for Moldova; this meeting took place on October 1 –4, 
2018. While an ASYCUDA upgrade w ill assist larger size enterprises, it will not address certain acute problems that micro 
and small -size enterprises face. For more information, see Google spreadsheet dated 9/20/2018:  
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1K7zBrhPF7Qb -
IQ1lGwvfHP3JZQ7LmaMi6MEcmS9b600/edit#gid=699574333 . 
34 ODIMM was established by Government Decision 538/2007.  
 
The Prime Minister's Economic Council convenes in Chisinau.    
23    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  ODIMM is tasked with matching grants from remittances, supporting the establishment of SMEs, and 
organizing business training programs.35 While ODIMM’s grant program can generally provide up to 
EUR 12,000 , its special program aimed at women -owned firms, providing 170 grants worth up to 
EUR 8,000. Other donor -funded programs provide loan guarantees to SMEs and are run through the 
state credit authority.  
To support the development of entrepreneurship, ODIMM offer s classes consisting of numerous 
modules under the Efficient Business Management program.36 Modules include business planning, 
financial management, and online marketing. Trainings are conducted in person in Chișinău and are 
beginning to be rolled out  beyon d the capital city (promoting entrepreneurship in rural areas is one 
of ODIMM’s objectives). A video library is available containing certain modules. There apparently is 
little restriction on who may take these trainings.37    
ODIMM also coordinates with a network of business 
incubators located throughout the republic, that is,  
Rețeaua Incubatoarelor de Afaceri din Moldova (RIAM, or 
Moldovan Business Incubators Network). According to 
ODIMM, 180 firms are located within these incubators . 
Representative examples include ZIPhouse , an incubator 
targeted to young fashion designers and entrepreneurs. ODIMM  provides training, mentoring, and 
access to specialized equipment and CAD systems. Another model, Tekwill , is an ICT incubator that 
is linked with an extensive network of vocational schools . Colocated at Technical University of 
Moldova, t he facility contains coworking spaces and tech labs.   
With the support of European partners, ODIMM hosts https://www.businessportal.md/ , a business 
porta l that assist s entrepreneurs who would like to launch, register, finance, market , and grow their 
own businesses within and beyond Moldova.  Although very thorough in terms of simplifying the 
elements of starting and growing traditional enterprises, the site is notably thin on references to 
how Moldovan entrepreneurs can use digital tools to achieve their goals.   
Moldova n Investment and Export Promotion Organization (MIEPO) . A sister agenc y to 
ODIMM, MIEPO promotes Moldova as a destination for international IT companies. Its website has 
much useful information and contains a library of relevant laws for the investor.  
State Registration Chamber.  In 2018, r egistering an LLC or a JSC requires an in-person visit to 
complete an application. In time, a  World Bank project underway promises to remove the point of 
registration to new multifunctional one-stop-shop centers , discussed below. There, the processing of 
company registration will be added to  other governmental functions. Until then, company 
registration is carried out in the offices of the State Registration Chamber.   
A visit to the registration c hamber  in Chișinău require s a walk up to the third floor of an older -era 
building. A mechanical kiosk provide s patrons with a numbered ticket, and seating  is provided. 
                                                
35 See the International Organization for  Migration’s webpage “The Organization for Small and Medium Enterprises Sector 
Development (ODIMM),” available at http://www.iom.md/organization -small-and-medium -enterprises -sector -
development -odimm .  
36 See the ODIMM webpage, “The GEA Program,” available at https://www.odimm.md/ro/instruiri/instruiri -gea.html   
37 The registration form states that this program is “for entrepreneurs of all ages who practice economic activities under 
any form of legal organization who want to increase their entrepreneurial skills  to ensure efficient business management.” 
See  https://survey123.arcgis.com/share/f107fe920e1c470280c410dacc606a20   RIAM includes business incubators 
from Soroca , Rezina , Leova , Ceadir -
Lunga , Singerei , Calarasi , Stefan 
Voda , BI Nisporeni , Dubasari , Cahul , 
and Cimislia .  
24    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  During this diagnostic, when the 
consulta nts for this study  visited the 
registration chamber, all doors of 
staff along the narrow dim corridor 
were kept closed . Indeed, the 
consultants’ mission, that is to 
obtain the necessary registration 
documents for a proposed LLC, 
proved unsuccessful. After receiving 
a ticket, the consultants waited for 
40 minutes  without any guidance or 
contact with a chamber 
professional. The consultants 
aborted the ir visit when they 
observed all chamber staff leave at 
noon sharp for lunch, with working 
hours expected to re sume one hour 
later. T hat services are unavailable 
during lunchbreaks means that many working women and men will give up time away from their jobs 
or family, pay a facilitator to file documents on their behalf for an extra fee, or decide it  is not worth 
the trouble .  
Multifunctional Center/One -Stop Shop.  As of 2018, Moldova is finalizing and implementing 
one-stop shops to aid persons and firms in handling numerous administrative matters. Supported by 
Law Number 161/2011, “Implementation of the  One-stop Shop in the Conduct of Entrepreneurial 
Activity ,” the government has established modern, well -lit, street -level accessible, customer friendly 
centers.  
The consultants for this report visited Chișinău Multifunctional Center No. 1, where they foun d a 
brightly lit , well-organized space. The center’s hours are clearly posted, operating from 8:00 a.m. to 
5:00 p.m. , Monday through Saturday. Notably, the facility operates without a lunch break . Patrons 
receive ticket number s and may sit while waiting for their number to be called.  The ground floor 
location and seating is a convenience factor, allow ing senior citizens and people with disabilities to  
better avail themselves of services.  
 
Enterprise representatives await service at the registration 
chamber.   
25    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY   
The multi functional  centers are tak ing on an increasing number of 
business services.   
 
The consultants’ visit began with a greet ing upon entry by a center facilitator . The facilitator 
informed them that  integration of firm registration into the multifunctional one -stop shop system 
remained  under construction, and that they would have to return to the Chișinău offices of the State 
Registration Chamber.  
Online platforms. Worldwide, t he main channels for SMEs to become established in e -trade are 
online e -commerce platforms (such as eBay, Amazon, and Alibaba); social media (Facebook, 
Pinterest, YouTube); and the company’s own website.  The online platform model reduces the costs 
of doing  business over distance  and allow s enterprises  of all sizes to multiply the breadth of their 
potential markets.  
In 2018, Moldova’s strong ICT infrastructure supplies the online links between enterprises and  each 
of these options.  In addition, a  package of specialized incentives developed specifically for ICT firms 
was enacted with the Law on Informational Technology Parks, Law 77/2016. Participating firms can 
either reside in physical IT parks, or they may also establish a “virtual” presence, allowing them to be 
sited nearly anywhere in Moldova. Incentives include  a tax of 7  percent  on turnover, which replaces 
corporate and personal income tax es, social security and medical insurance taxes, and local and real 
estate taxes . In addition, i nspections on park te nants are performed simultaneously by all bodies  
every three years , rather than at an undefined or abruptly administered point in time.  
More commonly, Moldovan SMEs rely on Facebook their preferred marketing platform.  In fact, 
Moldovan consumers commonly head to Facebook first, rather than to a firm’s website, for offerings 
and sales events. Several SMEs interviewed for this study  said that they set aside a budget for 
advertising on Facebook —anywhere from  USD 30 to  USD 400 per year. The y explain ed that the  ads 
they place are aimed at a domestic audience and promote consumers to visit local shops for special 
sales events. During this diagnostic inquiry, f irms report that advertising in traditional newspapers 
and flier s cannot match the traffic that they realize through a Facebook or Google ad.  
EBay and Amazon are widely regarded, among Moldovan consumers , as platforms for purchasing 
goods and services that they cannot find in local retail outlets. But few firms realist ically see that they 
can become third -party sellers on any of these platforms. Problems with receiving payments , 
 
26    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  shipping , and paying the necessary brokerage fees nullify the benefits these platforms provide. “What  
good is selling an item for 30 euros when  the shipping costs will add another 30 euros to the cost?” 
asked one merchant during this diagnostic.  
In fact, there is a local market for information and training in how to make money through the use of 
digital platforms. The owner of one representative  firm shares his insights with students from buying 
wholesale and selling retail on Amazon, while also working around the difficulties Moldovan firms 
encounter with receiving payments, paying customs duties, and handling trade logistics. The firm 
shows tha t it is possible to avoid a Moldovan physical presence entirely by scouting the internet for 
lot sizes of goods, shipping , and consign ing them to an Amazon warehouse located in the EU, and 
then selling goods through the Amazon portal to individual buyers. Those that do, plan to expand.  
ADDITIONAL STAKEHOLD ERS  
Donors. The international donor community, including USAID and the World Bank, offers a range of 
programs that provide or support low-interest loans, guaranteed loans, grants , and capacity -building 
services to eligible firms.38 Many of the firms interviewed for this report indicated that they receive 
such support.  
Payment services . Moldovans prefer cash for their daily transactions, but for e -commerce to 
flourish , more transactions need to be handled through digital payments. With an official population 
of 3.5 million, Moldova has 1.8 million debit cards in circulation. As discussed in the chapter on 
digital financial services, credit and debit cards (including Visa, American Express, and  MasterCard ) 
are widely available and issued by the three major Moldovan banks. These cards are used by 
consumers to make payments on purchases, both online and at point-of-sale terminals. All 
merchants with turnover over MDL 2 million per year must accept  card payments. Many firms have 
three POS terminals , although they on ly need one . But using three POS terminals allows a merchant 
to directly debit from each major bank —and perhaps hold down fees.   
In 2018, most merchants having an online presence can accept card payments through their 
websites. In practice, however, ordering online typically en tails a cash-on-delivery transaction. 
Reasons cited by interviewees for Moldova -based enterprises not accepting credit cards vary. 
Merchants point out that customers lack confidence in data protection and , for various reasons, 
prefer paying with cash. Merc hants also mentioned extra fees involved in setting up a website 
capable of accepting online credit card payments ; some reported costs ranging from $200 -$300 to 
have this function installed on a website, while bank representative suggested it could be lowe r. 
Banks do require a vetting procedure to set up an online credit card function. And finally, c ompanies 
that develop small business  websites do not typically build in functions that allow consumers to pay 
by credit card.   
Still, some websites, like www.supergut.md , an online grocery site, and www.straus.md , an online 
meal delivery service, accept cards. Increasingly, websites operated by Moldovan enterprises include 
the ability t o pay online for goods and services with a credit card .  
Confusion abounds among merchants about  whether Moldovans are able to use online payments 
systems , like PayPal , to not only send but receive funds. Sharing his insights and demonstrat ing that it 
was possible , was o ne entrepreneur who actually trains budding entrepreneurs.  
                                                
38 For a robust catalog of programs, see https://finantare.gov.md/ .  
27    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  PayPal, the example that first comes to mind of an online payments system supporting money 
transfers, has limitations on the amounts that may be transmitted. Payoneer, a company founded by 
an ethnic Russian  but headquartered in New York City, provides such services too, but appears to 
have greater flexibility tha t at least one Moldovan entrepreneur highly regarded.  Payoneer account -
holders can send and receive funds in s everal ways, including via their bank account, an “e -wallet ,” or 
onto a reloadable prepaid MasterCard debit card . 
“Maxi -taxis.”  As detailed in the trade logistics section, the workaround of choice for Moldovans 
shipping goods and transferring cash across t he border  are “maxi-taxis.” These informal operations 
are used especially by microentrepreneurs, notably women, to ship cultural handicrafts to the 
diaspora.   
What explains the popularity of maxi-taxis? One explanation is that Moldova Post  does not have a 
responsive, capable system in place to accept, sort, and ship parcels internationally. Firms seeking to 
ship parcels abroad find the postal service option to be cumbersome and limited . Similarly, although 
Moldova is served by such internati onal express mail carriers as DHL and TNT , which  provide 
express shipping services , these services tend to be too expensive for micro and small enterprises to 
use regularly. Nonetheless, t he DHL main office has a n on-site customs officer who can clear 
packages almost always on the same day they arrive at the airport.   
Asso ciations.  The Moldovan business ecosystem comprises a number of trade and sectoral 
associations that serve to promote their constituency and advance members’  interests with the 
government . During its two-week , in-country visit to Moldova, the consultant team sought insights 
from a number of associations, nearly all of which mentioned their participation in promoting their 
members’ interests and participating in the 100-member economic council.  These included  the 
following : 
• The American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) , which has a vigorous presence in 
Moldova , actively advocat es for the implementation of customs reforms, including the 
simplified declaration and the upgrade of ASYCUDA.   
• The European Business Association/Moldova  (EUBAM)  is an independent NGO 
aimed at aligning the national economy and business legislation to EU standards.   
• The Employers' Association of Light Industry (APIUS ), which represents 110 
producers of textiles, knitwear, leather, apparel, and footwear and fashion accessories. 
Launched in 2006, the mandate of the a ssociation is to contribute to promoting products 
and services to companies in the sector  and to facilitate access to new technologies and 
information necessary to ensure an advanced level of competitiveness.   
• The Foreign Investors Association  was started by three Americans to support local and 
foreign entrepreneurs , and now m ore than 50  percent  of its members are Moldovan. The 
Association advoc ates on behalf of small business at the Economic Council and Customs 
Consultative Council.   
• The Professional and Business Women’s Association of the Republic of Moldova 
(AFPAM) , a membership of enterprise owners and managers , conducts advocacy and 
provides  mentoring, networking, and training services.  
• The Association of Information Communications and Technologies Companies 
(ATIC)  promotes the development of the ICT sector through public -private partnerships 
to enhance sectoral competitiveness, enlarge the m arket, attract investment, and engage 
state authorities in the decision -making  and regulatory process. Like many other 
organizations, ATIC has a number of women executives.   
28    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  POLITICAL ECONOMY  
Although Moldova  has vibrant commercial and civil society sector s, as well as an institutional 
mechanism for public -private dialogue, the impetus to further implement reforms suffers from a 
mixture of indecision, lack of a common perception of problems, and donor fatigue.  
Associations play a useful —but not pivotal role —in changing government policies and speeding up 
needed reforms with Customs and other agencies.  Possibly fearing the rise of such associations, a 
law was introduced in Parliament, which failed to pass, mandating that NGOs receiving foreign 
assistan ce must be registered as foreign agents.   
On the positive side, politicians are eager to show change as Moldova heads toward parliamentary 
elections in February 2019. Grandstanding, like the firing of customs border agents by the prime 
minister  in August 2018, is just such an example. Also, international donors, the EU, the US, and the 
IMF have leverage to cajole and insist on Moldova keeping on track with promised reforms.  
Nonetheless, Moldova’s performance o n civil society indicators has fallen since 201 5, as shown in 
Table 2.2.  
Source  Score  
Reporters without Borders Freedom 
of Press Index  2018 = 81/180  
2015 = 55/180  
Freedom House Democracy Score  2017 = 4.93/7 (7= least democratic)  
2015 = 4.86/7  
Economist Intelligence Unit 
Democracy Index  2017 = Score: 5.94/10 (10 = most democratic)  
            Ranking: 78/167  
2015 = Score: 6.34/10  
            Ranking: 70/167  
Transparency International 
Corruption Index  2017 = Score: 31/100 (100 = least corrupt)  
            Ranking: 122/180  
2015 = Score: 33/100  
            Ranking: 103/168  
CIVICUS Civic Space Rating  2018 = Obstructed (civil space is heavily 
undermined by state authorities)  
 
  TABLE 2.2: CIVIL SOCIETY INDICA TORS , 2015 VERSUS 2017 A ND 2018   
29    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  CHAPTER 3: DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES  
E-commerce requires that electronic payment  mechanism s and credit instruments, and the channels 
to support them, be in  place among banks, credit card issuers , non-bank e -payments providers, 
other  financial institutions, and buyers and sellers. The legal and regulatory framework for e-
commerce transactions , and the payment transactions that support them , must likewise be  in place . 
The structure of this market segment is illustrated in Figure 3.1, below . 
 
Undertaking its own process of buil ding systems to support digital payment systems, Moldova’s 
government undertook an e -Transformation Project in 201 1. By 2013, all public services and 14 
commercial banks had adopted the country’s “M-pay” mobile payment service. Meanwhile, a s 
documented by the World Bank Global Findex databank (the “Findex”), use of digital payments in 
Moldova increased among individuals by 20 percent, while internet banking and online bill payment 
increased by 30 percent  between 2014 and 2017 . As further illustrated in Tabl e 3.1, t he Findex’s 
evidence of an upswing of consumer use of formal banking shows that, following Moldova’s banking 
crisis of 2014 , which resulted in a devastating blow to the economy, conditions have recently 
improved.  
Moldova’s current competitive adva ntage with respect to digital financial services —in particular 
digital payments —may unlock opportunities of special interest to SMEs. These include the ability to 
more efficiently move money across the domestic economy as well as to engage in international  
trade in goods and services. Table 3.1 illustrates the shift in the use of digital payments over time and 
further shows commonalities and differences with conditions in neighboring Romania.  
 
 
 
FIGURE 3.1: E-COMMERCE  TRANSACTION AND PAY MENT CHANNELS   
30    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  FINDEX Indicator  Moldova  
2011 Moldova  
2014 Moldova  
2017 Romania  
2017 
Financial institution 
account (% age 15+)  18% 18% 44% 58% 
No account because 
financial services are 
too expensive (% 
without a financial 
institution account, age 
15+)  n.a. n.a. 35% 25% 
No account because of 
lack of trust in financial 
institutions (% age 15+)  n.a. n.a. 24% 11% 
Used the internet to 
pay bills or to buy 
something online in 
the past year (% age 
15+) n.a. 10% 37% 19% 
Saved at a financial 
institution (% age 15+)  4% 7% 9% 14% 
Saved any money in the 
past year (% age 15+)  n.a. 44% 55% 34% 
Borrowed from a 
financial institution (% 
age 15+)  6% 7% 9% 15% 
Borrowed from family 
or friends (% age 15+)  42% 39% 38% 21% 
Coming up with 
emergency funds: not 
possible (% age 15+)  n.a. 28% 24% 30% 
Sent or received 
domestic remittances in 
the past year (% age 
15+)  n.a. 26% 26% 24% 
Received wages in the 
past year (% age 15+)  n.a. 42% 46% 42% 
Received wages: in cash 
only (% wage recipients, 
age 15+)  n.a. 73% 45% 32%  
TABLE 3.1 : MOLDOVA’S SHIFTING L ANDSCAPE OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS   
31    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Received digital 
payments in the past 
year (% age 15+)  n.a. 13% 33% 41% 
Source: World Bank, Global Findex Database, available at http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/ .  
Adapting the SAF -DE checklist of issues (see the Appendix ), this chapter reviews and summarizes 
the key issues associated with digital financial services in Moldova, including those regarding  overall 
policy and legal foundations, core institutions, other stakeholders, and, briefly, the political economy.    
POLICY AND LEGAL FOUNDATION S  
In general, businesses and consumers in Moldova have access to a variety of safe, 
accessible, and reliable di gital payment systems.  The necessary infrastructure for e -payments 
is quite widely available, at least near urban areas (bank accounts, payment cards, internet banking, 
ATM “plus” terminals, POS terminals in many stores, etc.). Indeed, any merchant with tu rnover in 
excess of MDL 2 million is required by law to have POS terminals. According to a recent study, the 
infrastructure in Moldova is comparatively more developed than that in other comparable countries. 
With 273 ATMs per 1 million inhabitants, Moldova  is not far behind the Czech Republic (421) or 
even Poland (533). Similarly, with 3.4 merchant POS terminals per 1 million inhabitants , Moldova ’s 
rate is not much lower than that of Romania (6.5) or the Czech Republic (9.6)  (Luecke, Pintea, and 
Giucci 2016 , 7). 
The legal and regulatory framework for digital financial services, including the use of 
non-cash payments instruments , is largely in place in place in Moldova.  Under the host of 
laws identified in this report’s discussion of threshold conditions underlying Moldova’s digital 
economy, e lectronic transactions are legally recognized. E -government applications using non -cash 
payments are fully authorized. Electronic payments legislation providing for  prudential requirements 
to be followed by  bank and non -bank providers of digital financial services is in place. Data and 
consumer protection rules are in place , although these instruments would benefit from the addition 
of provisions more specifically focused on consumer electronic transactions (repudiation, right of 
return and refund, etc.) and from a more robust , transparent enforcement mechanism, including a 
private right of action . Some gaps remain at the regulatory level ; for example, there is no direction 
yet as to whether to lift current r estrictions on the activities of non -bank e -payment services 
providers and whether to enact regulations to cap interbank  interchange fees charged by the 
cardholder bank to the retailer bank for processing credit card transactions. By and large, however, 
the legal landscape for digital financial services does not pose an unreasonable barrier to the use of 
non-cash payments.  
Still, Moldova lags behind most Central and East European countries in the use of non -
cash payment instruments.39 Notwithstanding the adv anced state of its ICT infrastructure, 
Moldova’s lag largely regards consumer preferences based on a tradition of paying cash, a mistrust of 
banks and other institutions, and a desire to avoid taxes and bank fees. Some of this attitude may 
derive from the 2014 Moldovan banking scandal that led to the collapse of three commercial banks.  
From the point of view of merchants, the cost of offering card payments through POS terminals 
results in merchant service charges (that include the interbank interchange fees ) that are high by 
                                                
39 See Luecke, Pintea, and Giucci (2016, 7) regarding of comparative analysis of non -cash payments in Moldova, including 
direct debit, traditional credit transfers, cash withdrawals from ATMs as opposed to bank cash windows, and card 
payments). According to the authors, Moldova had fewer than 2 card payments per head in 2015, while the corresponding 
figure in the region ranged from 9 payments in Bulgaria to 59 in Lithuania.   
32    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  international standards. As a result, merchants also tend to prefer cash -to-card payments to avoid 
bank transaction costs and, reportedly, often tell consumers that POS terminals “do not work.” As 
discerned through interviews Merchants t hat engage in informal transactions using cash may also be 
motivated to do so with the intent to avoid creating auditable transaction records through POS 
terminals . 
Anecdotally, the consultant  team heard reports that employees who receive salary payments on 
prepaid cards will immediately cash them out at an ATM rather than using the cards to make non -
cash payments. Similarly, cash -in terminals in use in Chișinău for the payment of mobile phone, 
utility, and other bills tend to receive heavier use than online payment channels offered by the same 
merchants. These consumer preferences carry over to the use of online ordering and payments in 
domestic e -commerce. Many e -commerce sellers will offer online shopping and ordering ; however, 
to avoid merchant fees charged by banks to maintain a payment portal on a merchant’s website , this 
will either require buyers to pick up and pay for their orders directly . Otherwise, if they deliver, 
then this would require authorizing the driver to accept payments at delivery , either in  cash or using 
a handheld POS device . This behavior is also motivated , in part , by concern s about postal service 
fees and the reliability of prompt package delivery.  
The law of the EU may significantly influence digital financial systems as implemented 
in Moldova.  In January 2016, t he EU ’s Payment Services  Directive  entered into force, mandating a 
deadline of January 2018 for its transposition into national law by EU member states.40 This revised 
Directive opens up the EU payments market to third -party payment service providers , offering 
services based on access to information from the payment account.  It also prohibits merchants from 
charging consumers additional fees for using specified payment methods.41 The main objectives of 
this Directive are (1) to contribute to a more integrated, efficient European payments market; (2) to 
further level the playing field for payment service providers, by including new players; (3) to make 
payment s safer and more secure; and (4) to enhance protection for European consumers and 
businesses.  
In sum, once a bank has exercised its prudential obligation when it opens a customer account, a 
third-party digital financial services provider may rely on that guarantee of reliability, so long as it has 
robust authentication procedures in place to confirm a customer’s identity when the customer signs 
into an e -payments application . In furtherance thereof, the revised Payment  Services Directive lays 
out technical  standards on strong customer authentication and common, secure open standards of 
communication as well as issues guidelines on incident reporting and on measures for operational 
and security risks.42  
As of October 2018, t he National Bank of M oldova  is con sidering whether interchange fees should 
be regulated in Moldova and whether to propose legislation for Moldova  similar to that enacted by 
the EU. The non -bank e -payments services providers interviewed suggested that the National Bank 
should take immediate  steps to harmonize its legislation with the revised Payment Services 
                                                
40 Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of t he European Parliament and of the Council  of 25 November 2015 on payment services in 
the internal market, amending Directives 2002/65/EC, 2009/110/EC and 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, 
and repealing Directive 2007/64/EC, O.J. L 337/35, 23.12. 2015 (the “Revised Payment Services Directive”), available at 
https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32015L2366&from=EN .  
41 MIP Online, “The Revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) and the Transition to Stronger Payments Security” (March 
2018), available at www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/intro/new s/articles_2018/html/1803_revisedpsd.en.html . <<AU: Page 
not found message – please provide correct URL so that I can edit.>>  
42 The regulatory technical standards were published in the Official Journal of the European Union on 13 March 2018 and 
apply as of 14 September 2019.   
33    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Directive.  The commercial banks are vehemently opposed to a cap on interchange fees. They argue 
that a cap would so reduce the margin on revenues they can collect on card payments to the  extent 
that it would not be possible to run their card processing operations without imposing additional 
charges on their customers for issuing and maintaining credit and debit cards. The National Bank has 
not yet announced a deadline for enactment of the se new rules.  
The National Bank of M oldova  has ex ante jurisdiction over financial services and banking regulation, 
and it could conduct the economic analysis necessary to determine the effect of current interchange 
fees on competition in this relevant mar ket. A key question for this analysis would be whether, as 
the banks assert, low interchange fees would make it unattractive for banks in Moldova to invest in 
expanding the electronic payments business. This is a chicken -and-egg question because electronic  
payments processing is subject to economies of scale —and given a high, further growing volume of 
transactions, banks likely could process card payments profitably even with low interchange fees.  
Although non -cash payments in Moldova have grown since 20 10, cash payments 
continue to dominate Moldova’s retail payments’ market as demonstrated by the large 
stocks of cash in circulation,  as shown in Table 3.2.  
 
Economy  
Credit transfers 
per inhabitant  
Direct debits per 
inhabitant  
Card payments 
per inhabitant  
Cash withdrawals 
at ATM per 
inhabitant  
ATM terminals 
per 1 million 
inhabitants  
POS terminals 
per 1 million 
inhabitants 
(1000s)  Cash in 
circulation 
(percent of M1)  
Cash in 
circulation 
(percent of GDP)  
Moldova  4.6 0.02 1.8 5.6 273 3.4 66.0 15 
Source:  National Bank of Moldova  (2015)  [note: this is the most recent information available; see 
footnote 43, below]   
 
As of June 2018, the National Bank of Moldova  reported non -cash payments as shown in Table 3 .3.43 
 
Indicator  Number  As % of population  
                                                
43 The National Bank of Moldova collects and maintains statistics about the availability and use of non -cash payment 
instruments (e.g., cards, terminals). The Moldova National Bureau of Statistics does not collect statistics on the volumes 
and value of domestic and transborder e -commerce trade in Moldova as is done in the EU (EUROSTAT) and many other 
countries. Thus, the available data tends to be out of date and unreliable. The United Nations Commission on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD) last collected data on the value and volume of domestic and transborder e -commerce in 
Moldova in 2015.   
TABLE 3.2: NON -CASH PAYMENTS IN MOLDOVA  
TABLE 3.3: NON -CASH PAYMENT ACTIVI TY IN MOLDOVA, Q2 20 18  
34    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Total cards in circulation (at 
reporting period end ) 1,849,160  46%    
Total cards issued (during 
reporting period ) 141,482  4% 
Total cards withdrawn from 
circulation (during reporting 
period ) 88,227  2% 
Total transactions performed in 
Moldova with cards issued in 
Moldova  12,568,353  311%  
      Cash withdrawals  6,862,835  170%  
      Non-cash payments  5,705,518  141%  
Total value of transactions 
performed in Moldova with 
cards issued in Moldova (during  
reporting period  in MDL 
thousand ) 12,801,740.0  317%  
      Cash withdrawals  11,125,032.0  275%  
      Non-cash payments  1,676,708.0  41% 
Total transactions performed 
abroad with cards issued in 
Moldova  (during reporting 
period ) 2,212,833  55% 
      Cash withdrawals  62,598  2% 
      Non-cash payments  2,150,235  53% 
Total value of transactions 
performed abroad with cards 
issued in Moldova  (during 
reporting period in MDL 
thousand ) 1,372,532.2  34% 
      Cash withdrawals  170,745.8  4% 
      Non-cash payments  1,201,786.4  30% 
Total transactions performed in 
Moldova with cards issued 
abroad  (during reporting pe riod) 1,679,536  42%  
35    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY        Cash withdrawals  391,988  10% 
      Non-cash payments  1,287,548  32% 
Total value of transactions 
performed in Moldova with 
cards issued abroad  (during 
reporting period  in MDL 
thousand ) 1,860,799.5  46% 
      Cash withdrawals  941,633.4  23% 
      Non-cash payments  919,166.1  23% 
Total special devices  18,439   
      POS terminals  17,280   
      Imprinters  49  
      Automatic teller machines  1,110   
Source:  National Bank of Moldova , 2015 information  
To summarize  the data presented thus far , the infrastructure  for non -cash payments in 
Moldova is in place , and digital financial services are widely available  across the country.  
While increasing, however, these payment channels remain underutilized , and there is substantial 
room for growth.  Service costs associated with non -cash payments and digital financial services are 
high compared to other countries. But  it is not clear that lowering the costs of using non -cash 
instruments will be sufficient to overcome persistent consumer habits and lack of familiarity with 
non-cash instruments —even if the legislative gaps that cause some of these high fees are filled and 
lead to a reduction in bank interchange fees, merchant charges, and the transaction costs f aced by 
non-bank e -payment services providers . Financial education and other incentives may also be 
required.  
CORE INSTITUTIONS  AND ADDITIONAL STAKEHOLDERS  
Banking system.  Moldova ’s banking system has two tiers: the National Bank of Moldova, which 
regulat es the commercial banking sector and reports to Parliament, and 11 commercial banks. 
Moldova's three largest commercial banks account for about 65 percent of the total bank assets, as 
follows: Moldova Agroindbank , MDL 22.2 billion (USD 1.2 billion); Moldin dconbank , MDL 15.2 billion 
(USD 819.5 million); and Victoriabank , MDL 14.5 billion (USD 783.7 million). Foreign bank branches 
must register in Moldova and operate under the local banking legislation. Moldova has five foreign 
banks : among  them the most well  known are Societe Generale’s Mobiasbanca, Erste Bank’s BCR , 
and most recently , Victoriabank, acquired by Romania’s Banca Transilvania.  
In Moldova, t he market segment for non -cash payments is dominated by the three largest 
commercial banks  in the country’s  banking sector. According to some estimates, the commercial  
36    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  banks control 90 percent of the market (Moldova Agroindbank, 40%; 
Moldindconbank, 35%; and, Victoriabank, 15%).44 The three non -bank 
companies licensed to provide non -cash payment services in Moldova are 
hampered by restrictions in the Law on Payment Services and Electronic 
Money and by the secondary legislation promulgated thereunder that 
require them to use bank clearance systems to  process card payments.45 
Prudential requirements in the law designed to combat money laundering 
also prohibit non -bank e -payment services providers from serving as 
intermediaries for electronic money transfers from one person to 
another , also known as peer-to-peer (P2P) transactions  or P2P payments.  This 
market is reserved to banks that participate in the SEPA (Single Euro 
Payments Area), SWIFT 2017 , and Fedwire  networks. Mobile and P2P 
payments have exploded in popularity  in the US and other industrialized  
countries.46 
Payment services.  The National Bank  of Moldova ’s public register of 
payment companies, postal service providers , and electronic money issuers  
show that , as of August 2018 , there are five licensed e -payment services  
providers registered to do business in Moldova. Of these, one has had its license withdrawn by the 
National Bank of Moldova , and another has had its license suspended after inspection revealed 
reasonable suspicion of violations of money laundering laws.47 The three remaining e -payments 
services providers in Moldova are Paymaster SRL, Paynet Services SRL, and 
QIWI -M SRL.48 Non-bank payment services (e.g., cash -in terminals, 
remittances) are provide d by I.S. Poșta Moldovei , Plată Online SRL, and 
MMPS COM SRL  (doing business as B -Pay).49   
Just as banking laws require banks to implement “know your customer” processes, so too under 
current e -payments laws, non -bank e -payment services providers are requi red to employ safeguards 
                                                
44 Stakeholder interviews , Paynet Services SRL (September 2018).  
45 See Law on Payment Services and Electronic Money, no. 114 of 18 May 2012, Official Monitor of the Republic of 
Moldova no. 193 -197/661 of 14.09.2012.  See also “Regulation on the Activity of Non -Bank Electronic Mone y Issuers and 
Non-Bank Payment Service Providers, approved by the DCA of the National Bank of Moldova no. 123 of June 27, 2013, 
Official Monitor of the Republic of Moldova no. 173 -176, of 09 August 2013, Article 1221 and Regulation on Payment 
Cards, approv ed by the DCA of the National Bank of Moldova no. 157 of August 1, 2013, Official Monitor of the Republic 
of Moldova no. 191 -197, of 6 September, 2013, Article 1370 . 
46 Seefor example, Chet Kamat, “P2P Payments and the Way Forward for Financial Institutions , International Banker 
(September 21, 2017) (also citing ISO 20022 standard on P2P payments), available at 
https://internationalbanker.com/technolog y/p2p -payments -way-forward -financial -institutions/ .  
47 See, Decision of the Executive Committee of the National Bank no. 62 of 04.04.2018NBM (April 4, 2018) (withdrawing 
the license of IMF "Microinvest" SRL) and National Bank of Moldova press release. The National Bank suspended the 
license of a non -bank payment service provider (August 9, 2018) (The decision was taken against Artosis SRL after 
inspection “revealed violations of the Law on the prevention and combating of money laundering and terrorist finan cing, 
the Law on payment services and electronic money, as well as of the NBM’s directions.”), available at 
http://www.bnm.md/ro/node/57481 . The suspended company has requested the National Bank to approve a name 
change to B -Pay and to lift the suspension. National Bank of Moldova press release, A suspended non -bank payment service 
provider is changing its name (September 7, 2018), available at https://www.bnm.md/en/content/suspended -non-bank-
payment -service -provider -changing -its-name .  
48 See National Bank of Moldova’s webpage “Register of Electronic Money Issuers” , available at 
www.bnm.md/en/content/register -electronic -money -institutions -0.  
49 See National Bank of Moldova’s webpage “Register of Payment Iinstitutions/Postal Operators” (September 25, 2018), 
available at www.bnm.md/en/content/register -payment -institutions -postal -operators -0.  •  Cash-in Terminal  
A terminal that 
facilitates digital 
transactions.   
37    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  against improper transactions. As the laws are currently formulated, this inhibits the ability of non -
banks to implement peer -to-peer payment services, such as cash transfer apps.   
Average bank fees for non -cash payments in Moldov a are shown in Table 3.3 : 
Operation 
type Minimum  Maximum  
Account 
opening  0 MDL  50 MDL  
Account 
closing  0 MDL  50 MDL  
Account 
handling  0 MDL  7 MDL/month  
Fees for 
payment 
transaction, 
within the 
same bank  1 
MDL/transaction  4 
MDL/transaction  
Fees for 
payment 
transaction, 
between 
banks  2 MDL  10 MDL  
Fees for 
money 
transfers, 
between 
banks  1.5 
EUR/transaction  56 
EUR/transaction  
Card 
issuance  0 MDL  50 MDL  
Annual card 
maintenance 
fee 36 MDL/year  90 MDL/year  
Internet 
banking  0 MDL  100 MDL/month  
ATM cash 
withdrawals  0 MDL  1 
MDL/transaction   
38    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  ATM cash 
withdrawals 
from other 
banks  1 
MDL/transaction  
 1.5 %, min 1 
EUR/ 
transaction  
Maximum 
daily 
withdrawal 
limit 4,000 MDL  Unlimited  
Payment by 
card at POS  0 MDL 5 MDL  
Acquiring 
bank 
payment 
gateway fee  0 MDL  0 MDL  
Interchange 
fees, 
between 
acquiring 
banks and 
issuing banks 
in Moldova  1.2%  2% 
Merchant 
service fees 
for card 
usage 
(domestic)  1.5% 
/transaction  3% / transaction  
Services fees 
for card 
usage 
(transborder)  4% / transaction  6% / transaction  
POS terminal 
lease 160 MDL/Month  240 MDL/month  
Source: Various  Moldova commercial bank websites  and September 2018 stakeholder interviews  
The biggest concern among merchants and sellers who would like to offer e -commerce solutions for 
consumers is the transaction fees they are required to pay to the bank who serves as the “acquiring 
bank” providing the payment gateway on their sites. The tra nsactions in a single e -commerce 
transaction using a credit card and the associated fees are shown in Figure 3.2.  
FIGURE 3.2: ANALYSIS OF CREDIT CARD TRANSACTIONS AND ASS OCIATED FEES   
39    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY   
Source:  Nathan Associates analysis; WalletHub  (https://wallethub.com/edu/credit -card-transaction/25511/ ). 
Interchange fees of 2 percent  charged  in Moldova  are quite high compared with those in Europe and 
other developed countries. Interchange fees between the cardholder’s bank and the retailer’s bank 
are recouped from the per -transaction merchant fees that bank s charge their merchant customers. 
Beginning in the early 2000s, the EU Competition Commission has issued a number of decisi ons to 
oblige Visa and MasterCard to reduce interchange fees sharply for transactions within the EU. In 
2015, the European Commission adopted Regulation (EU) 2015/751, which caps interchange fees at 
no more than 0.2 percent  of the transaction value for con sumer debit cards and 0.3  percent  for 
consumer credit cards.50 The Regulation also increases transparency on fees and enhances 
competition in the payment cards business by addressing licensing issues and other conditions that 
have restricted the freedom of choice of retailers.51    
Credit card fees charged to banks are also comparatively high  in Moldova. Reasons for th e high fees , 
according to Luecke, Pintea, and Giucci (2016) , may be : (1) the market power of the Visa and  
MasterCard organizations , whose fee s chedules are not subject to negotiation by the banks; ( 2) the 
relatively small size of the “acquiring” business in Moldova ; and (3) the fact that three major 
commercial banks each have active, full -line acquiring businesses, instead of using a single -service 
company, owned by all relevant stakeholders, that offers its services to all interested parties under 
transparent conditions.52  Credit card company fees (multilateral exchange fees, or MIFs) and 
interchange fees make it more expensive for merchants to p rocess card payments than to process 
cash.53 
POLITICAL ECONOMY  
                                                
50 See “ Regulation (EE) 2015/751 of the  European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on interchange fees for 
card-based payment transactions, ” Official Journal of the European Union L 123/1 (May 19, 2015), a vailable at https://eur -
lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32015R0751&from=EN .  
51 Id., at art. 7 (accounting separation), art. 9 (unblending merchant service charges), and art. 12 (line item invoicing).  
52 Id. 
53 See, GET Report, supra, at 11. World Bank, Report on a Credit in the amount of SRD 12.7 million (US USD 20 million 
equivalent)  to the Republic of Moldova for the Governance E -Transformation Project. Implementation Completion and 
Results  June 26, 2017. Page 23.   
53 Ibid. 
 
40    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  High-level corruption in the banking and finance sector derailed Moldova ’s path to reform in 2014.  
In August  of that year , the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project found that Moldova’s 
banks and judiciary played major roles in a vast money -laundering scheme, named the Russian 
Laundromat.  In this scheme, Russian criminals and politicians moved possibly as much as  USD 20 
billion via Moldindconbank  into Europe, the United States, and elsewhere.  Owners of Moldovan 
banks used layered , opaque corporate structures and proxy owners, making it difficult to determine 
their identity .   
In November  2014, USD 1 billion , a figure equal to 1 2 percent  of GDP , disappeared from three of  
the country’s banks. This led to massive protests and to the government having to provide from the 
budget over  USD 800 million  to reimburse depleted savings accounts, assisted by emergency 
assistance  from the IMF. The central bank was also implicated for not enforc ing banking regulations  
(Foxall 2017) . 
As summarized in the Moldova Structural Reform Project’s Rapid Review of Moldova’s financial 
sector, submitted in July 2018, the country’s climb out of  the conditions that led to its bank crisis 
“has necessitated many remedies and ref orms, in particular as a condition for future support from 
outside donors and multilateral institutions.”54 As detailed in a 2017 IMF s taff report , key reforms 
since 2015 include the following:   
• International standards and best practices are being introduced into law.  
• Comprehensive bank diagnostics, including full onsite inspections, are underway, already 
resulting in recommendations for improved governance, risk management, and internal 
audits and controls.  
• The National Bank of Moldova’s governance, legal protection, a nd independence has been 
strengthened  (IMF 2017, 13 –14).55 
In October 2018, as another step toward  more transparent , reliable systems of banking, the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, together with two private equity investment 
funds —Horizon Capital  from Ukraine and the Latvia -based  AB Invalda INVL  fund— agreed to buy a 
41 percent  stake in Moldova -Agroindbank  (MAIB) , the country’s largest bank. T hat stake had 
previously been confiscated from “non -transparent shareholders” by the central bank.   
                                                
54 USAID/Moldova Structural Reform Program, A Rapid Review of Moldova’s Financial Sector  
Conditions, Constraint s, and Opportunities. July 2019.  
55 International Monetary Fund (IMF), Staff Report for the 2017 Article IV Consultation and Second Reviews 
Under the Extended Fund Fac ility and Extended Credit Facility Arrangements, December 6, 2017, (IMF 2017,  
13-14).   
41    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  CHAPTER 4 : TRADE LOGISTICS  
Order fulfillment for the delivery of physical goods in international e -commer ce depends on cross -
border trade facilitation and trade logistics. Fulfilment of orders is a key consumer concern , 
considering that any product ordered over the internet must be delivered  unlike transactions for 
digital content ( e.g., music, video, and sof tware downloads ) or intangible services that can be 
conducted online.  
The cost, reliability , and delivery times of air and road freight services offered by courier companies 
and Moldova’s p ostal service have a direct effect on e -commerce order fulfillment.  Customs 
infrastructure, procedures, and processing times at border crossings and inspection stations likewise 
effect shipment cost and times. The cost and complexity of compliance with customs rules and 
regulations is also an important factor in evaluatin g the extent to which trade logistics constitutes a 
barrier to e -commerce. Additionally, channels for “last mile” delivery to customers and processes 
for the return of orders effects customer confidence and trust in e -commerce sellers.  
The elements of the  supply chain for order fulfillment are shown in Figure 4.I. 
 
FIGURE 4.I: SUPPLY CHAIN FOR E -COMMERCE ORDER FULF ILLMENT  
 
The representatives of businesses, business associations, and competitiveness -related , donor -funded 
projects interviewed in Moldova voiced the unanimous view that e -commerce represents an 
opportunity for business expansion and increased trade in Moldova. But p rogress toward realizing 
this opportunity has been slowed by constraints in c urren t trade logistics in Moldova that pose a 
barrier to  e-commerce .  
Indeed, the Employer’s Association  in Light Industr y, the European Business Association, and other 
members of the Economic Council to the Prime Minister have identified the need to address 
constraints in trade logistics as a critical initiative needed to stimulate e -commerce  growth . In its 
2018 annual list of planned initiatives, the Economic Council announced plans to address transborder 
customs procedures and financial transfers in the coming year aiming to remove barriers to 
increased e -commerce. The Council concluded that “the comp lexity of customs procedures [and] 
 
42    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  the complicated aspects of transferring and receiving money from other countries [are] major 
impediments to the development of cross -border e -commerce” in Moldova.56 
POLICY AND LEGAL FOUNDATION S 
In general, unless otherwis e prohibited for reasons of state security, public order, 
environmental concerns, or other WTO -compliant reasons, Moldovan law permits any 
kind of goods and means of transport to enter and leave the country’s territory without 
restriction.  Moldova has been  a WTO member since 2001 and a member of the World Customs 
Organization (WCO) since 1994. The national Customs La w57 provides for both definitive (import 
and export) and suspensive (transit, bonded warehouse, inward processing relief, processing under 
custo ms control, temporary admission, and outward processing relief) customs regimes.  
Traders among small and medium enterprises in Moldova who use e -commerce report 
numerous trade logistics problems that make order fulfillment costlier and more time -
consuming . These include gaps in the legal and regulatory framework, deficiencies in information 
technology systems employed by Customs, improper behavior by individual customs officers, and the 
lack of bilateral arrangements with Romania and other major trading pa rtners that would permit the 
exchange of information before shipment.58  
Moldova is obligated by the EU–Moldova Association Agreement to harmonize its 
customs and other trade legislation with relevant EU acquis communautaire59 and other 
subsidiary legislation  in order to implement the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade 
Area  (DCFTA) established  by the treaty .60 A new customs code implementing this obligation 
was submitted for public consultation in February 2018, then transferred to Parliament in October  
2018.  Assuming its enactment , some of provisions will be enforced in 2019 with the remaining 
provisions taking full effect in January 2020.61 Under the terms  of the draft law , Moldova Customs is 
                                                
56 See [Moldova] Economic Council Secretariat (ECS), On -going Initiatives 2018, item 2.7 (Sept. 20, 2018), available at 
https://docs.g oogle.com/spreadsheets/d/1K7zBrhPF7Qb -
IQ1lGwvfHP3JZQ7LmaMi6MEcmS9b600/edit#gid=699574333 .  
57 Law No. 2000 -18, as amended  
58 See for example,“Internet Vendors of Goods Require Facilitating Bureaucratic Procedures in their Trade,” Press release 
of the Economi c Council to the Prime Minister, Working Group 4 (July 6, 2018), available at 
consecon.gov.md/ 2018/07/05/vanzatorii -de-bunuri -prin-internet -cer-facilitarea -procedurilor -birocratice -in-
comertul -pe-care-il-efectueaza/ .  
59 The acquis communautaire  is a very important concept in the European Union. It refers to the body of law and obligations 
that are binding on all the EU member states.  
60 See “Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their 
Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part, OJ L 260/4, August 30, 2014, p. 4–738, at 
Art. 193” (“legislation and procedures”) and Art. 201 (“approximation of customs legislation”) (hereafter,  EU-Moldova 
DCFTA)  available at https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/legal -
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:22014A0830(01)&from=en .  
61 See also “Memorandum of Understanding between the EU and the Republic of Moldova  and the National Bank of 
Moldova as the Beneficiary's Financial Agent: Macro -Financial Assist ance to the Republic of Moldova: Grant and Loan from 
the European Union of up to EUR 100 Million,” at 7 -8 (Action 10: The Parliament will adopt the new Customs Service Law. 
The Law will provide the necessary tools to strengthen the human resources and admi nistrative capacity of the Customs 
Service, helping it implement its responsibilities under the Association Agreement and, in particular, the DCFTA, while at 
the same time ensuring higher standards of integrity and good practice), and at 11 (Action 27: In line with the 
commitments under the DCFTA, Parliament will adopt a new Customs Code consistent with the European Union's 
Customs Code [citation omitted], available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/economy -finance/20171123_ -
_mou_eu_ -_moldova_ -_signed_eu_version.pdf .  
  
43    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  expressly permitted to adopt simplified procedures and streamlined processes that would apply to 
e-commerce.62  
Until the new law becomes effective , customs rules 
and procedures in force in Moldova63 are those 
contained in the  secondary legislation enacted 
under the existing Customs Co de, which dates 
from 2000.64 Its delegated authority under the 
existing 2000 law arguably permits the Customs 
Service to promulgate interim regulations to set 
higher de minimis  value thresholds for small 
shipments, below which traders  would be exempt 
from t he requirement to file a full, long -form 
customs declaration . Instead, qualifying shippers 
could use a n abbreviated, short -form or “simple ” 
declaration.   
As of 2018 , declaration requirements apply to 
natural persons for shipments valued at greater 
than EUR 300 (goods value plus freight) for road 
transport and EUR 430 (goods value plus freight 
charges) for air and to all shipments by legal 
entities. Since the entry int o force of the EU –
Moldova DCFTA, several  projects for the modernization of Moldova customs rules and processes 
have been initiated, but have languished in part owing to the IT issues explained below.   
                                                
62 Article 86 of the new Customs Code on Simplification states:  
(1) Upon request, the Customs Service may authorize the determination of the following amounts on the basis of specific 
criteria, if they are not quantified at the time of acceptance of the customs declaration:  
a) the amounts to be included in the customs value in accordance with Article 81 paragr aph 2; and  
b) the amounts referred to in Articles 83 and 84.  
Article 87 of the new Customs Code on Granting Simplification states:  
(1) The authorization referred to in Article 86 may be granted if the following conditions are fulfilled:  
a) the application of the procedure referred to in Article 181 would in these circumstances constitute disproportionate 
administrative costs;  
b) the determined customs value shall not be significantly different from that determined without an authorization.  
(2) To be granted  authorization, the applicant shall fulfill the following criteria:  
a) meets the criterion set out in Article 45(I);  
b) uses an accounting system that is consistent with the generally accepted accounting principles applied in the Republic of 
Moldova, and w hich shall facilitate customs controls through audit. The accounting system shall maintain a historical record 
of the data that provides an audit trail from the moment when the data is entered into the dossier;  
c) it has an administrative organization that  corresponds to the type and size of the enterprise and which is adapted to the 
management of the flow of goods, as well as an internal control system that allows the detection of illegal or defective 
transactions.  
63 Customs rules and administration are pr omulgated and enacted under the Moldova Customs Code and the regulations 
and orders promulgated thereunder. See Law of the Republic of Moldova No. 1149 -XIV of July 20, 2000, as amended, 
available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTCUSTOMPOLICYANDADMIN/Resources/615371 -
1134156797950/Customs_Code_of_RM.pdf .   
64 Customs tariffs are governed by the Law on Customs Tariffs. See Law of the Republic of Moldova No. 1380 -XII from 
November 20, 1997, available at www.wto.org/english/thew to_e/acc_e/mol_e/WTACCMOL36A1_LEG_1.pdf . see 
also 
 
A maxi -taxi prepares for a trip.   
44    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  CORE INSTITUTIONS AN D OTHER STAKEHOLDERS  
Moldova’s  Finance  and Economy ministries , national bank, customs service, and postal service  are 
the key government institutions with policy and regulatory jurisdiction for the sectors that involve 
trade logistics. Moreover, t he Moldovan  state chancellery is responsible for policy oversight and 
direction of the country’s e-govern ance programs. Each entity is aware of the importance of e -
commerce and the extent to which supply chain constraints can pose barriers to the growth of 
trade opportunities  through the digital economy.  This section focuses on those institutions most 
empowered to make a difference where it concerns the ability for Moldova -based enterprises to 
export their goods into the vast market beyond their borders.  
Customs.  The Customs Service administers the customs laws for Moldova’s external trade, which 
in 2017 totaled  USD 2.4 billion in exports and  USD 4.8 billion in imports.65 The agency’s 1,500 
employees  delivered more than  MDL 20 billion  (about USD 1.2 billion)  in collected revenue  to the 
state budget  in 2017 .  This was  up 3 billion from 2016, an increase of 17 percent.   
The ICT systems and customs software that comprise Moldova’s customs administration system is 
out of date and incapable of performing several administrative key functions that Customs deems as 
necessary preconditions before measures can be introduced to speed  up and facilitate order 
fulfillment for transborder e -commerce.  The main gap is in the prearrival declaratio n capacity of the 
current ASYCUDA version, 66 67 which will not support e -filing of a simple declaration form for small 
and lower -value shipments.68  
This, in turn, precludes Customs from performing prearrival risk assessment and selectivity reviews 
for such shipments. Additionally, the current risk management module in ASYCUDA would also 
need to be upgraded in parallel. To date, Customs has been unwilling to consider instituting 
simplified declarations and higher de minimis limits for small shipments. They ha ve stated that these 
needed reforms should be put on hold until the upgraded ASYCUDA functionality enable s electronic 
filing and automated risk assessment. Customs will more easily and effectively receive data and 
perform risk assessments on smaller shipme nts after the IT system upgrade is installed. The question 
remains whether interim solutions that will decrease the burdens on small shippers can be found.  
                                                
65 WTO Trade Statistics, Moldova Country Profile, available at 
http://stat.wto.org/CountryProfile/WSDBCountryPF View.aspx?Country=MD&Language=F .  
66 ASYCUDA (Automated System for Customs Data ) was designed by the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development to administer a country's customs.  
67 Moldova Customs uses the ASYCUDA World/TIR system. There are three g enerations of ASYCUDA in use: 
ASYCUDA version 2.7, ASYCUDA++ [1] , and ASYCUDA World. See 
https://www.asycuda.org/dispcountry.asp?name=Moldova . Moldova is running the original, 12 -year old  version of 
ASYCUDA World, which was installed in 2006. Since then, ASYCUDA World has been significantly updated and enhanced, 
but Moldova’s system never been upgraded. Thus, for example, Moldova does not have the functionality to implement the 
New Common Transit System to replace the current TIR ( transports internationaux routiers ) system now in place, which has 
delayed the EU and UNDP -sponsored project to implement the EU common transport system, among others.  
68 Documentary requirements for customs cleara nce are limited to the customs declaration, commercial invoice, the sale -
purchase contract agreement , and transport documents. Additional documents are required for products that pose 
unacceptable risks to consumer safety, the environment , and animal healt h. For such products, traders are expected to 
provide one, or several, of the following documents: Export/import permits and licenses; quality certificate; phytosanitary 
certificate (for plant and products of plant origin); veterinary certificates (for liv estock and products of animal origin); and 
certificate of conformity for exports, also referred to as the certificate of inoffensitivity,  if requested by the importer. Traders 
are also required to submit the certificate of origin, if required by the export  country. See UNECE (2017, 36).   
45    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  TABLE 4.1 Moldova’s trade logistics performance, as compared to its neighbors , 2018  
Country  LPI 
Rank  LPI 
Score  Customs  Infrastru
cture  Internation
al 
shipments  Logistics 
competence  Tracking 
& 
tracing  Timelines  
Moldova  116 2.46 2.25 2.02 2.69 2.3 2.21 3.17 
Romania  48 3.12 2.58 2.91 3.18 3.07 3.26 3.68 
Ukraine  66 2.83 2.49 2.22 2.83 2.84 3.11 3.42 
Source: World Bank Trade Logistics Index, https://lpi.worldbank.org/international/global .   
The World Bank’s Logistics Performance (LPI) indicators are subjective, based on a worldwide survey o f 
operators on the ground (global freight forwarders and express carriers), providing feedback on the logistics 
“friendliness” of the countries where they operate and trade. Higher scores are better, up to a maximum of 5.   
Even if the Customs I CT system w ere fully capable of handling preclearance filings for small 
shipments in e -commerce, only brokers and traders who apply and are certified by Customs are 
issued an access code  and permitted to use the ASYCUDA system . The basis for the certification 
require ment is a prudential policy overseen by  Customs  that parties given access to its IT systems 
must have a reputation for honesty and trustworthiness .  The policy is intended to prevent tax and 
duty evasion and transborder shipments of contraband .  The policy  appears in  several orders 
enacted under the Customs Code, including regulations on simplified procedures that took effect in 
2013.69 Under the rules, Customs reviews an application for certification from a trader , and it 
conducts a background check to evaluate the history and financial viability of the applicant, among 
other consideration s.70 Upon completion, the trader is registered as being eligible to use the 
simplified procedures and given access to the ASYCUDA system.  
Customs brokers and large trad ers who wish to maintain an in -house brokerage function for their 
own account use the system. For natural persons, who are not entitled to obtain certification, and 
smaller companies whose trade volumes do not justify establishing their own in -house cleara nce 
function, the only way to comply with customs rules and procedures is to use the services of a 
registered , certified customs broker to manage the declaration process for their e -commerce 
shipments. As explained above, however, even registered , certifie d brokers and traders are unable 
to submit preclearance information or to use a simplified declaration since these functions are not 
yet part of the customs ASYCUDA system.  
These rules are outmoded and require updating to be fully consistent with Moldova’s  obligations 
under WCO treaties and its bilateral trade agreements with the EU and other countries.  Moldova 
Customs is considering whether , potentially , measures can be taken with respect to e -commerce 
shipments in advance of the ASYCUDA upgrade. At meetin gs in Chișinău, officials stated they were 
                                                
69 See for example , “Regulations on the Simplified Procedure for Customs Clearance, ” Order of Customs Service of the 
Republic of Moldova of December 10, 2012 No. 521.  
70 See for example, WCO (2018), which examines the WCO Cross -Border E -Commerce Framework of Standards.  
  
46    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  reviewing the processes now in use in Slovenia71 and Romania to examine if these might be models 
for simplified procedures in Moldova. They have also stated that funding for the design and 
implementation of an inte rim IT solution pending the more comprehensive ASYCUDA upgrade is a 
critical factor ; moreover, they suggested the process could take up to a year.  
If undertaken, such an initiative would be consistent with the recent standards framework adopted 
by the WCO  and the obligation to harmonize its legislation and regime with that in the EU.72  
In fact, the WCO Framework of Standards on Cross -Border E -Commerce states  that customs 
administrations, working in coordination with other relevant government agencies as appropriate, 
should establish and maintain simplified clearance formalities  and procedures utilizing prearrival  
processing and risk assessment of cross -border e-commerce shipments, and procedures for 
immediate release of low -risk shipments on a rrival or departure. Simplified clearance procedures, or 
formalities , should include  an account -based system for collecting duties or taxes and for handling 
return shipments , as appropriate .73 
The WCO Framework  also provides global baseline standards to ass ist Customs and other relevant 
government agencies in developing e-commerce strategic and operational frameworks. The 
standards are based on the following eight guiding policy principles for cross -border e-commerce 
agreed to by the WCO in its 2017 Luxor De claration:  
• Advance electronic data and risk management  
• Facilitation and simplification of procedures  
• Safety and security  
• Revenue collection  
• Measurement and analysis  
• Partnerships  
• Public awareness /outreach and capacity building  
• Legislative frameworks74 
                                                
71 Under the simplified customs procedures, traders may submit incomplete, or simplified customs declarations , and place 
their goods under customs procedure s at their own premises (or at other designated or approved places). The 
authorization process to use the procedures requires a demonstration by the trader of its ( 1) customs compliance, ( 2) 
satisfactory record keeping (including, if appropriate, transport  records) to enable customs controls, and ( 3) proven 
financial solvency.  See Slovenia Ministry of Finance, Simplified Customs Procedures, Version 1, February 2015, available at 
www.fu.gov.si/fileadmin/Internet/Carina/Poslovanje_z_nami/Poenostavljeni_postopki/Opis/EN_podrobnejsi_opi
s_1_izdaja_Simplified_customs_procedures.pdf . 
72 The legal  basis for simplified procedures is provided for in Article 76 Council [of Europe] Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92 
of 12 October 1992 establishing the Community Customs Code (hereinafter: CC; OJ L 302, 19 October 1992), Articles 
253 to 289 and Articles 372 to 408 Commission Regulation (EEC) No 2454/93 of 2 July 1993 laying down provisions for 
the implementation of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2913/92 establishing the Community Customs Code (hereinafter: CC 
Implementing provisions; OJ L 253, 11 October 1993).  
73 See, WCO, Resolution of the Policy Commission of the World Customs Organization on the Guiding Principles for 
Cross -Border E -Commerce (Luxor, December 2017), available at www.wcoomd.org/ -
/media/wco/public/global/pdf/about -us/legal -instruments/resolution s/policy -commission -resolution -on-
cross_border -ecommerce_en.pdf?db=web . See also WCO, Study Report on  Cross -Border E -Commerce (March 
2017), available at www.wcoomd.org/ -/media/wco/public/global/pdf/topics/facilitation/activities -and-
programmes/ecommerce/wco -study -report -on-e_commerce.pdf?la=en . 
74 Id. 
  
47    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Critical to achieving this objective, the literature suggests, is the advanced exchange of electronic 
data between the relevant e -commerce stakeholders and the Customs administrations in a timely 
manner for effective risk management (e.g., prear rival exchange for general risk assessment and 
Customs clearance and pre -loading exchange for security risk assessment). To this end , national 
electronic interfaces that use common messaging standards and a harmonized , standardized dataset 
must be in place  (such as the single window).  Still, the ASYCUDA system in use at Moldova Customs 
will not permit these exchanges until a comprehensive upgrade is installed. Although i nterim IT 
solutions for e -commerce shipments may be available , clearance data may have t o be stored 
separately from the ASYCUDA database until the upgrade is complete. Thus, the necessary 
streamlining and simplification of customs requirements (applicable to e -commerce ) that all 
stakeholders agree should be adopted are tied up by the complexi ty and expense that have delayed 
these systemwide IT reforms .  
In stakeholder interviews , the consultant team also heard anecdotal reports that rent -seeking 
behavior, including solicitation of grease payments by customs agents, and inefficiencies at border  
crossing points lead to longer clearance times for transborder shipments in e -commerce.75 
Additionally, some traders report that customs agents have advised them that they must use the 
services of customs brokers for shipments, when technically , this is no t a legal requirement since 
many couriers have access to the IT system  at Customs .   
Self-dealing public agencies and officials.  It is impossible to conclusively determine the incidence 
of customs corruption that currently effects e -commerce trade. The recent World Bank ’s Doing 
Business in 2018 reports that 5 percent  of 2017 survey respondents stated that they pay extra 
monies to customs agents to facilitate their shipments. The Global Enabling Trade Report 2016 , co-
published by the World Economic Forum and the Global Alliance for Trade Facilitation , found (1) a 
high risk of corruption in Moldova’s customs administratio n and (2) burdensome import procedures 
and tariffs th at maintain impediments to international trade across Moldovan borders . Such 
corrupti on at the border, where irregular payments and bribes to customs officials are perceived as 
commonplace ; moreover , nontransparent customs processes significantly interfer e with business 
operations.76 Based on 2015 data, out of 136 countries studied, Moldova  ranked 74th with respect 
to the efficiency and transparency of its border administration and 111th with respect to the 
frequency with which irregular payments and bribes are required for imports and exports.77 
Additionally,  during the clearance process for  imports, customs agents frequently will use reference 
prices obtained from internet  research and other sources to challenge the declared value of e -
commerce import shipments, even when they are accompanied by facially valid commercial invoices 
showing a l ower value. Th e result of higher values being assigned is that higher duties are assessed 
                                                
75 See World Bank (2017, 3 9-40) (About 5% [of  survey respondents] said they paid bribes to facilitate customs procedures) 
and (“Nearly every second respondent was dissatisfied with the practice of customs inspectors in using indicative prices for 
the imported goods. One third of respondents identifie d the corruption in customs as a serious problem. About 40% 
consider that customs procedures take too long.”) .  
76 See World Economic Forum and Global Alliance for Trade Facilitation (GETR), The Global Enabling Trade Report 2016, 
available at http://reports.weforum.org/global -enabling -trade -report -2016/ . Based on 2015 data, out of 136 countries 
studied Moldova ranked 74th with respect to the efficiency and transparency of its borde r administration and 111th with 
respect to the frequency with which irregular payments and bribes are required for imports and exports.  
77 See id., at Moldova Profile, available at http://reports.weforum.org/pdf/eti -
2016/WEF_ETI_2016_Profile_MDA.pdf ,  and Enabling Trade Rankings, item 3.11 (frequency of irregular payments), 
available at http://reports.weforum.org/global -enabling -trade -report -2016/enabling -trade -
rankings/#series=EOSQ147 . 
  
48    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  and collected on these shipments , which reduces already slim margins for sellers . It is not clear how 
widespread this behavior is , or whether it is motivated by customs policy to increase agency 
revenues or by the desire of individual agents to create interaction s where improper payment s might 
be offered to forego by using higher reference value s.78 It is clear, however, that the Customs 
Service  measures itself by its contribution of revenues to the state budget , that the percentage share 
of the total state budget represented by such customs revenues is substantial  (over 50% of total 
government revenue in 2017) , and that existing macroecon omic factors create a powerful 
motivation for Customs to maximize revenue and collect “every last lei.”79 
Inefficiencies . Moldova ratified the Trade Facilitation Agreement (Protocol Amending the 
Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization)  (TFA) in June 2016. The TFA 
obligates Moldova to si mplify cross -border procedures and modernize the techniques and 
instruments it employs for customs clearance and control.80 A National Trade Facilitation 
Committee has been established to coordinate TFA im plementation. Because implementation of 
TFA commitments requires substantial resources and technical capabilities, many of initiatives to 
implement the TFA commitments have gotten off to a slow start. The lack of a full range of  
capabilities in its IT syst em and “overreliance on paper -based customs systems and the Ministry of 
Finance’s unwillingness to embrace a modern customs risk management approach have also held 
back some customs mo dernization initiatives.”81 Additionally, for road transport, “significan t and 
time consuming delays  [of up to three days on some cases] at Border Control Posts (BCPs) … are a 
large and growing problem, and they are becoming a key constraining factor to trade.”82 These 
inefficiencies have a particularly deleterious effect on e -commerce order fulfillment where timeliness 
is key .  
The EU –Moldova DCFTA and other free trade agreements in place between Moldova and its major 
trading partners, such as the Commonwealth of Independent States and Turkey, provide for 
cooperation among customs agencies. However, there is still no effective preclearance information 
                                                
78 See, e.g., Crime Moldova, Five customs brokers and a customs officer are suspected of passive corruption (May 2, 2017)  
(five customs brokers and a customs officer arrested on suspicion of passive corruption, including allegations of accepting 
facilitation payments to speed up customs procedures and threatening to classify goods in higher categories so as to 
impose onerous  tariffs on the importers), available at https://en.crimemoldova.com/news/corruption/five -customs -
brokers -and-a-customs-officer -are-suspected -of-passive -corruption/ .  
79 See, e.g., Moldova Customs Service, Strategic Programme 2020 (VAMA 2020), at 22 (approved by Customs Service 
Order Nr. 126 -O from 06.04.2017) (“Customs revenues constitute a significant part of the state  budget” and a key 
performance indicator for the strategic initiative to enhance the management of customs revenues through evaluation, 
collection and record -keeping will be maintaining or increasing “the share of customs revenues collected to the state 
budget”), available at http://www.customs.gov.md/files/Proiecte/pds_2017 -2020_eng.pdf .  
80 Id., at 10 -12. See also, Publika, Moldova to Enhance Regulatory Framework of Business Activities, (April 13, 2018) 
(initiatives set forth in the Regulatory Reform Strategy of Business Activity for 2013 – 2020 calling for simplification and 
uniformity of c ustoms clearance procedures, the digital transit system, and deployment of a one -stop-shop at the border 
are approved for implementation by 2020), available at https://en.publika.md/moldova -to-enhance -regulatory -
framework -of-business -activities -_2647872.html#ixzz5Rx3c9dJc ; Roadmap for Improving the Competitiveness of 
the Republic of Moldova, available at 
https://mei.gov.md/sites/default/files/document/eng_roadmap_on_competitiveness_final -approved_by_gom.pdf ; 
Small and Medium Enterprise Sector Development Str ategy for 2012 – 2020, available at 
https://www.etf.europa.eu/sites/default/files/m/C3B5E5CCD6AF7AEEC1257AC3005250A3_M oldova%20SME%
20Strategy%202012 -2020.pdf ; and National Strategy for Attracting Investments and Promoting Exports for 2016 - 2020, 
available at https://mei.gov.md/sites/default/f iles/snaipe_2016 -2020_eng.pdf . 
81 See Section 1.2, Support to the Moldovan Customs Service, in USAID (2016, 12 ).  
82 See Nathan Associates publication for USAID (undated, 2) on Moldova’s trade cor ridor assessment, citing National 
Bureau of Statistics of the  Republic of Moldova statistics.  
  
49    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  exchange between Moldova Customs and the customs administrations of Moldova’s major trading 
partners that would speed up clearance times.83 “Delays are found in all directions, b ut are more 
likely to be encountered (and are longer) when crossing the Romanian border to enter the EU,” 
where the average waiting time to enter the EU at the Moldovan border with Romania is almost 18 
hours.84 At the border with Romania , there is no system  in place for prearrival notification and other 
vehicle management techniques. According to the Customs Service, the inadequacies of the 
preclearance information exchange results , in significant part , from the  deficit in the software 
application identified  above as well as the slow pace of negotiations with trading partners.  
Road transport and logistics.  Moldova has made significant progress in harmonizing its legislative 
framework with international and regional requirements for transport.85 But traders are  still not able 
to count on an efficient , extensive infrastructure for multimodal transportation for e -commerce 
shipments. According to the Trade Corridor Assessment conducted by the Moldova Structural 
Reform Project, the overall condition of much of Moldo va’s transport infrastru cture is poor and in 
urgent need of rehabilitation as shown in Table 4.2, below.86 
 
Source: World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index, 2016 -2017 and 2017 -2018 
edition s. 
Road, rail, and air freight services  are widely available, but owing  to high costs tend generally be 
avoided by the small and medium -size enterprises that employ e-commerce channels since these 
traders’ shipments tend to be smaller.  
                                                
83 Interview with DHL Moldova, September 7, 2018. Moldova has signed free trade agreements with 43 countries, among 
them member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEF TA), 
and Turkey.  
84 See USAID/Moldova Structural Reform Program, Moldova’s Trade Corridor Assessment  (2018).    
85 See UNECE (2017)  (Moldova has ratified 20 of UNECE’s transport conventions and agreements).  
86 See USAID (undated,  11). See also UNECE (2017, 3 0). (87 percent of reported Moldovan exports are transported by 
road).   
TABLE 4. 2: TRANSPORT INFRASTRUC TURE COMPETITIVENESS  2016 –2017  
50    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Maxi -taxis  are an alternative option for both 
inbound and outbound road transport. This is a 
workaround of choice for Moldovan s shipping goods 
and transferring cash across the border. This system 
is well oiled, reliable, and entirely informal. Maxi -
taxis depart and arrive daily from many European 
cities, including Bucharest, Rome, and London.   
On outbound transport, they o ffer rates that 
average about EUR 2 per kilogram for package 
shipments to major cities in Europe. This is about 
half the price of sending packages by Maldova  Post, 
and much , much cheaper than using an international 
air express delivery service, like DHL or TNT. With 
a few exceptions, m axi-taxis do not offer last -mile 
delivery ; thus, senders must bring their shipments to 
the departure termin al and arrange with the 
recipients to arrange package pickup, either from the 
driver or a possible maxi-taxi local office. Such 
shipments, whether they are under the de minimis threshold value and exempt from customs 
requirements, generally tend to be not accompanied  by customs documents.  
Maxi-taxis are also used for inbound transport. Consumers in Chișinău are accustomed to using 
them to delivery orders from foreign sites like Amazon, Sports Direct, and Laredoute. They do this 
to avoid high shipping charges and possible customs duties  on inbound shipments . The way the 
workaround works is to ask a trusted friend or relative livin g among the diaspora in the EU to 
accept initial delivery of ordered goods. This person will bring the box to the maxi-taxi stop, indicate 
contact information for the recipient in Moldova, and pay a shipping charge that is about half the 
price of postage.   
Maxi-taxis are especially used by microentrepreneurs, notably women, to ship cultural handicrafts to 
the diaspora. Maxi -taxis may also be used to transfer sums of cash between people.  
 
Air transport and logistics for smal l packages . Air freight is the most expensive shipping modality 
in Moldova. Using Air Moldova freight services  DHL and other air transport couriers fly shipments 
to EU countries to Bucharest once a day where they are cleared and processed for onward 
shipme nt. For DHL, shipment documentation requirements for imports of goods classified as 
nondocument  need to be accompanied by an invoice (and in some cases, such as if excise taxes apply, 
additional customs documentation ). About 30 types of shipment are classi fied as document  where 
only a DHL Waybill is required for completion.  
DHL and other couriers report a general increase in the number of import shipments in e -
commerce in 2017 and 2018. For example, DHL reports the most popular suppliers being the online 
sellers Sorts Direct and Asos. Asos charges GBP 2.17 for standard delive ry by post with a delivery 
time of 15 days and GBP 10.13 for express delivery by air with a delivery time of three days. For 
transborder sales in e -commerce from Moldova to other countries, the most widely used order 
fulfillment channel is the postal service. 
The postal service and t rade logistics.  Delivery of physical goods is a key consumer concern in e -
commerce since a product ordered online must be delivered. For small shipments including parcels 
Maxi -taxis: A common resource for micro -
enterprises.   
51    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  and packages, the Moldova n postal service is a delivery option for transborder e -commerce sellers in 
Moldova, although some of the smallest traders reported using the maxi-taxi option described 
above. For domestic e -commerce in Moldova, the last mile of order fulfillment is handled somewhat 
differently. Postal service and local courier delivery is used fo r order fulfillment in many cases, but 
other nonautomated channels are also widely used, particularly where traders only offer online 
shopping and ordering only. These channels for online order completion include, for example:  
• The c ustomer s pick up at reta il location . 
• Payment in cash is made using cash -in terminals . 
• Retailer driver s deliver package s and collect cash or credit /debit card payments , using a 
handheld point -of-sale (POS) device.  
While the postal service is used for order 
fulfillment of domestic e -commerce, its services 
do not include delivery of packages and parcels 
to the home. Home delivery is limited to letters 
and parcels weighing below 300 k ilogram , over 
which Moldova Post  has a monopoly. Inst ead, it 
has established delivery points in several 
locations in Chișinău where stacked lockers are 
used to deliver packages and parcels for 
customer pickup. Couriers, which are more 
expensive , do deliver to the home.  
The Moldova Post  does not have a respon sive, 
capable system in place to accept, sort, and ship 
parcels internationally. The prevailing 
understanding among city dwellers is that 
parcels for international shipment must be sent 
from Moldova Post Office Branch 2000, located 
by Chișinău ’s central t rain station.   
When the consulting team asked the director 
general  of the Moldova Post  why this was so, he 
underscored the point that all post offices may , 
in theory,  accept international parcels. 
Furthermore, he added, if the postal clerk says otherwise then “you must insist they take it!” It is 
clear that p ostal employees require additional training to fully understand and allow the public use all 
The Central Post Office, Chisinau   
52    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  the services that Moldova Post can provide. The Director acknowledged this and stated that a  lack 
of funding keep s that from happening.  
 
At the train station branch, a customs officer is on hand to i nspect and clear packages for mailing 
abroad. While the branch is open until 6:00 p.m., it will only accept packages for international 
shipment until 5:00 p.m. because the customs officer is on a different time shift.87 For this and other 
reasons , the offic e carries poor reviews according to comments on the Google Maps location 
description.88   
It is unclear why a customs official must be present at the post office when accepting packages to 
ship. All international packages are sent to the central sorting facility where  a complement of 200 
postal sorters and 6 customs officers work two shifts per day. Indeed, packages are being cleared 
twice. All international letters and packages handled by Moldova Post are sent by air carrier, even to 
nearby Romania, according to the director general.   
A customs official is , in the abstract , useful to recipients picking up parcels from the post office as 
any applicable duties can be paid on the spot. But this can lead to overzealous collection practices as 
well. Prime Minister  Filip recently publicly reprimanded the Customs Service after receiving a 
complaint from a citizen who was forced to pay a custo ms duty for a gift of clothes, despite the fact 
that customs duties are not imposed on goods brought into Moldova for personal use.  A Google 
                                                
87 A Google review of Chișinău post office comments revealed how upsetting this process could be. One respondent said 
that “to send a parcel, you can wait for 40 -50 minutes for a customs officer, even if you are the first one in line, even if you 
have a child in your arms. The clerk disappears from the room. Second, the working hours are unti l 18.00, and if you come 
at 17:05, you cannot send the parcel because the customs officers only work until 17 :00.” Another commented that he 
drove through rush hour traffic to make the 18:00 hours closing time, only to find out he could  not send the packag e 
because the customs officer had left for the day.  https://www.google.com/maps/place/Oficiul+Po%C5%9Ftal+MD -
2000/@47.0130264,28.8571758,16.75z/data=!4m10!1m2!2m1!1schisinau+post+office!3m6!1s0x0:0x5621c956b
6272da3!8m2!3d47.0129653!4d28.8588685!9m1!1b1?hl=en&authuser=0   
88 Ibid. 
 
Post Office Branch 2000, located by Chișinău’s central train station .   
53    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  reviewer of the MD -2000 Post Office made a similar complaint and refused a package when the 
customs officer demande d a duty payment equal to or exceeding the value of the items inside.  
Moldova’s postal service is eligible for reduced terminal fees.89 These are the fees a post office pays a 
foreign mail service to take packages from the port they land at to the final recipient. Under the 
rules of the Universal Postal Union, developing countries pay less for the final local delivery of their 
international mail than developed countries. China uses its status as a transition country to great 
effect in promoting high  volumes of low -value goods to US and European customers, using AliBaba 
and Wish. This has caused some consternation among US producers of similar goods, as they say it 
provides Chinese firms with an unfair advantage.90 As a middle -income country, Moldovan e-
commerce firms are well positioned to use Moldova Post ’s reduced terminal fee status when sending 
packages to foreign destinations —but only if some crucial changes could be made to the system.   
Multi -stakeholder efforts to address trade logistics and the  digital economy . As noted at 
the outset of this report, in early October 2018, the Office of the Coordinator of the OECD 
convened a four -day, multi -stakeholder workshop in Chisinau that reviewed the challenges facing 
cross -border traders in the digital ec onomy .  Some of the conference’s findings include the following:  
 
• The growing volume of small -value consignments is a great challenge for Moldova 
Customs and needs new solutions and partnerships.  
• Moldova’s Post, express operators and MCS are currently not oriented towards 
mastering the high volume of low -value consignments associated with cross -border e -
commerce.  
• Information about procedures and formalities is often not readily available online.  
• Currently, information in postal shipments moves together with the parcel. To enhance 
data quality, reduce costs and the times needed for clearance, pre -loading and pre -arrival 
information exchange is a necessity.  
• There is willingness to raise the level of  communication and cooperation between 
Moldova Post and Customs Service with regard to data exchange and interfacing of IT 
systems.  
• Service fees for customs brokers are in many cases higher than the value of the goods 
traded in e -commerce. They constitute  an obstacle particularly for domestic micro and 
small sized enterprises. Simplified procedures could be a way to reduce this burden.  
 
The conference concluded with a number of recommendations, several of which are echoed in this 
report. For instance, it r ecommended that Moldova Customs Service, Moldova Post, and other 
operators should focus on enhancing online information about procedures and formalities, in order 
                                                
89 Terminal fees are based on whether a country is a target country or a transition country. High -income economies such 
as the U.S. and Germany are classified as target countries and receive the lowest terminal dues, while lower -income 
countries such as C hina and India are classified as transition countries and pay reduced terminal due rates.  The UPU 
Country Classification categorizes countries within four groups to determine terminal dues, with Group 1.1 comprising the 
highest -income countries. Categoriz ation is made on basis of a Postal Development Indicator (PDI) score, a composite of 
gross national income (GNI) per capita and the normal letter unit cost (link to methodology).  With a PDI score of 0.032, 
Moldova falls within the category of Group 4 coun tries, i.e., those applying the transitional terminal dues system for the 
2018–2021.  The current nomenclature follows the World Bank’s country classification by GNI per capita. Low -income 
countries are defined as those with a GNI per capita of USD 995 or less; lower middle -income economies are those with a 
GNI per capita between USD 996 and USD 3,895; upper middle -income economies are those with a GNI per capita 
between USD 3,896 and USD 12,055; high -income economies are those with a GNI per capita of USD 12,056 or more.  
Moldova qualifies as a lower -middle income economy, with a GNI of USD 2140 in 2016.  
90 https://www.economist.com /business/2018/09/08/the -trump -administration -takes -on-the-international -
postal -system   
  
54    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  to reduce the opportunity cost for small domestic exporters and boost exports; this is an obv ious 
target for reform (practical online information is almost completely absent) and is included here.  
 
One noteworthy recommendation was that Moldova explore the possibility of implementing an 
ISMIT system.  ISMIT – Integrated System for MSME Trade – is a UNECE / UNCTAD sponsored set 
of systems for MSMEs. 91  This appears interesting in principle, but it would be a cross -cutting “one 
stop shop” type of interface .  It may be hard to sell one of these in Moldova at this time , as there 
have been several donor -led initiatives of this sort in recent years, and Moldovan stakeholders may 
be suffering from “one stop shop” fatigue.  
POLITICAL ECONOMY   
At the highest levels, the Ministry of 
Economy agencies under its jurisdiction 
use customs and tax audits to discipline, 
handicap, or punish businesses  competing 
with fa vored firms .92 There is reportedly 
widespread smuggling of foodstuffs, 
alcohol, and cigarettes. Sex trafficking is 
also a major problem.  Trade 
misinvoicing occurs, meaning inaccurately 
represented contents of shipping 
containers is used as a means of 
laund ering money.  
One fundamental problem is  the 
government’s  need for revenue. The 
government pressures Customs t o make 
up for tax shortfalls by enhancing 
collections. “As a result of this 
disproportionality, businesses have 
suffered from extensive paper docum ent 
requests that cost time and money and 
bog down the entire trade process”  
(USAID 2016).    
Grandstanding by politicians to demonstrate action and to undercut rivals is the norm. Prime 
Minister  Filip’s move to fire customs officials for poor , corrupt serv ice might be seen as an example 
(see box). Having been active in customs matters , in August , the prime minister  sent a letter to 
Romanian Prime Minister Viorica Dancila , requesting reduced processing times at the border, 
following a USAID -funded study that found that the average time required to cross a Romanian 
border is 380.4 minutes compared to just 23.8 minutes at other (non -Romanian) EU border 
crossings .93 
CHAPTER 5: CASE STUDIES  
                                                
91 See https://unctad.org/meetings/en/Presentation/dtl_eWeek2018p45_JacobNinan_en.pdf  
92 The Structure of Corruption in Moldova, https://carnegieendowment.org/files/10_Moldova_Full_Web1.pdf   
93 http://www.moldova.org/en/wp -content/uploads/sites/2/2018/07/MSRP -TCA-Summary -EN.pdf  
 Prime Minister Pavel Filip Demands Action at 
Moldova -Romania Customs Border  
In August 2018, Prime Minister Filip called for the 
resignation of Head of the Customs Service Iurie 
Maximov and the Head of the Leuseni Border Police 
Andrei Toderiţă, following a surprise visit to the 
Leuseni Customs Post at the border with Romania 
the pr evious month. Both officials were dismissed 
the following day.  
According to news reports, d uring Filip’s visit  to the 
Leuseni Customs Post in July, he observed that an 
excessive number of passengers were forced to 
undergo physical inspection (e.g. tourists  on buses 
and their luggage) and requested that Customs 
officials adopt a more selective approach to risk 
management.  
However, video surveillance revealed that practices 
did not change in the following weeks, prompting 
the prime minister to demand the res ignations and 
call for a more respectful attitude toward travelers.   
55    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  In undertaking this study , the consulting team visited a sampling of Moldovan firms , most located in 
Chișinău. In a number of cases, owners or managers imparted important insights into the current 
state of Moldova’s enabling environment for th e digital  economy  and agreed to have their stories 
shared in this report.        
VASCONI  
Vasconi is a n apparel  manufacturer and retailer 
established in 1995. The firm aims i ts products the 
Moldovan market for wom en over age 35 and 
position s itself as a cache of quality. Vasconi is a 
vertically integrated business, in that it manufactures 
and then retails its apparel through its own a chain of 
20 shops  (16 in Chișinău and four elsewhere in 
Moldova ). The firm’s offices and production facility are 
located in the industrial belt of Chișinău.   
On e -commerce:   Vasconi  Director Constantin 
Cojacari, who took over the business from his 
mother , said that the company is interested in 
engaging 
in e-commerce but that he  feels that it’s not yet 
worthwhile undertaking within the Moldovan market  
alone . “People prefer to shop retail. They like to see 
the product, touch it, and maybe try it on,” he said.  He 
added his perception that c ustomers in rural areas do 
not use the internet  in particular because they would 
have to pay for delivery by couriers, and they worry 
about the ability to exchange  product s or get refunds .  
Vasconi plans to sell its garments online once the firm 
enters the Romanian market.  Cojacari emphasize d, 
however, this stage must take place in concert with a 
careful advertising campaign so that the firm reaches 
the right customers and burnishes Vascon i as a quality 
product.  
On c ustoms issues : As of 2018, Vasconi does  not 
export its products . Moreover, s ince the firm imports 
its textiles from Turkey, exporting apparel to the EU would invoke a 35 -percent  tariff. As a potential 
workaround to the tariff, the firm could establish a Romanian company and use it to import Turkish 
cloth into the EU, and from there , it could re-export to Moldova for assembly. The final product 
could  then enter the EU duty -free. Cojacari mentioned that customs officers ar e widely perceived as 
“sticklers ” and use any excuse to impose higher -than-expected fees.   
On p ayments : In Moldova, o nline shopping domestically takes place using cash on delivery . In 
addition , there is a typical MDL 35–50 delivery for items, including for food and clothing 
products.  Moldovans would prefer to save their money and not pay a fee , according to Cojacari.  
Vasconi retail outlet in Chisina u Constantin Cojacari in the Vasconi workshop   
56    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  On internet advertising : Vasconi advertise its wares  on Facebook . Accoding to  Cojacari , the firm 
pays roughly  USD 600 per month for digital advertising in either Google or Facebook platforms. 
Digital analytics provide proof that the expense is justified  – that advertisements directly result in 
higher revenues.  In contrast, Vasconi’s past use of fliers had no stimulating effect on sales . 
On b anking services : Vasconi maintains accounts at three banks , in effect challenging them to 
compete for the firm’s business. “Banks will only negotiate when you open an account, they won’t 
reduce prices afterwards ,” he said.   Cojacari said he’s gotten the banks to furnish point-of-sale 
devices free of charge.  
VITALIE BURLACU     
Vitalie Burlacu is owner and director of the firm 
of the same name, which  manufactur es quality 
leather goods, including purses, briefcases, and 
wallets. Mr. Burlacu started the company around 
2008, starting with sales of smaller leather items 
such as wallets and phone cases. The firm 
imports Italian leather for its products. Like 
Vasconi, the firm is a vertically integrated 
business, where it manufactures an d then retails 
its wares through a chain of six shops in 
Chișinău.   
 
On e -commerce : The firm’s website allows for 
online orders for domestic consumers. But currently , it does not accept card payments ; so payment 
for online orders is made on delivery with cash or by credit  card. Sales average about 20 pieces per 
month, then delivered by courier for a fee in Moldovan currency .  
On logistics : To better engage the foreign market, 
Burlacu foresees the need to open a warehouse in 
Romania. The cost of transport and customs 
requirements makes selling from a warehouse outside 
Moldova the better value proposition.  
On IT services:   Like Vasconi, Burlacu would like to 
expand to the Romanian market. But before doing so, 
the firm must work out electronic management of its 
website ordering system, inventory system, and 
accounting software. (He wants to be sure customers 
can be alerted if a desired item is out of stock before 
ordering.)   
On internet advertising : Burlacu uses Facebook to 
advertise , spending about EUR 150 per month. The 
firm also offers five -percent  discount cards for valued 
customers.    
Mr. Vitalie Burcu  
Figure 2  VB outlet store in central Chisinau   
57    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  SALESZONE.PRO  
Saleszone.pro is a for -profit 
training platform that provides a 
practical sales course to help 
entrepreneurs build a successful 
online business.  
 
Iulian Alexa , the owner, shares 
his insights with students on 
buying wholesale and selling 
retail on Amazon while also 
working around the difficulties 
Moldovan firms encountered 
with receiving payments, paying 
customs duties, and handling trade logistics . Alexa shows that it is possible to avoid a Moldovan 
physical presence entirely by scouting the internet for lot sizes of goods, shipping and consign ing 
them to an Amazon warehouse located in the EU, and then selling goods through the Amazon portal 
to individual buyers .   
 
On the training platform :  Students meet online once a week for two months, for a total of eight 
classes  (recorded sessions along with live Q&A sessions ). The trainings are  offered in Moldova at a 
rate of EUR 400 . Course topics include insurance  and setting up on the Amazon platform . 
On e -commerce : The firm’s website allows students to purchase the course online by credit card.    
On foreign sales : The firm also sells its courses through a UK portal, https://sa leszone.online/ . The 
price is higher than the course taught for Moldovans , around 1100 EUR.  
On c ommunity support : Saleszone.pro , in partnership with the Business Peoples’ Association of 
Moldova (AOAM) , held an e -commerce forum at the USAID -sponsored Tekwill Center on June 22, 
2017. A recording , showing a standing -room -only crowd with government leaders also in 
attendance , can be found on YouTube  at  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bTIHSrL1TC0 .  
 
 
  
Figure 3 Saleszone website   
58    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  HERMINA FABRICAT   
Sergiu Malai is an e -commerce merchant with a mission: create the 
Amazon of Moldova. His team has been  beta testing a website 
hosting product lines targeted at Moldova’s diaspora  (as of fall 2018) .   
Sergiu entered the fray in 2009 as an apparel manufacturer named 
Hermina . Based in an 
industrial building on the 
outskirts of Chișinău, 
Hermin a houses a 
workshop with industrious textile workers, mostly wome, 
assembling garments.  
Hermina once exclusively worked under contract, often for 
midscale and even upscale name brands.  But one day, while 
browsing through a local Benett on shop at a  large local  
shopping center called “MallDova ,” Sergio noticed one of 
his own garments for sale under the Benetton label.  This 
sparked his enthusiasm , and in 2012 , he began selling locally 
produced knitwear for 
the domestic market.  
On logistics :  For now, 
merchandise is shipped 
abroad by international express mail carrier. Several times , 
Sergiu shipped with the Moldova Post, but to expedite and keep 
the fees low, packages were shipped with a physical person as 
the sender.  
On p ayments:   The firm  does not use banks , noting Paynet 
holds funds seven days before disbursing. There are n o problems 
with local transactions.  
 
 
  
Mr. Sergiu Malai  
Figure 4  Hermina workshop, 
interior   
59    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOM MENDATIONS  
Moldova has numerous strengths that bode well for the development of e-commerce  systems into a 
thriving , successful digital economy. The country has a relatively well -educated workforce, numerous 
programs dedicated to promoting entrepreneurship and ICT learning, a vibrant civil society featuring 
a host of associations engaged in advocacy , and government institutions that aim to harmonize 
Moldova’s legal environment with that of the EU .  
One area w here Moldova could transform its strengths into genuine de livery of systems that will 
allow microenterprises and SMEs to connect with markets beyond the border is the following: 
improving public and private awareness of constraints hampering e -commerce and the SME sector. 
Government institutions appear to have th eir own reform goals in mind, but like trains running on 
parallel tracks, they do not converge together to aim for an optimal outcome. Reformers must bear 
in mind the number of informal workarounds that entrepreneurs are willing to undertake , such as  
• Using  informal “maxi-taxis” instead of regulated shipping companies in order to avoid 
international express mail charges.  
• Avoiding customs broker charges by having a natural person mail parcels at the Post Office.  
• Not bothering to register a firm due to the hassle. 
• Opening wholly owned subsidiaries and warehouses in adjoining countries, like Romania, to get 
around customs and shipping problems.  
• Preferring cash payment to avoid taxes . 
Opportunities for action are 
available . Proposed refo rms are 
set forth below with respect to 
SME preparedness, digital 
financial services, and trade 
logistics.  
SME PREPAREDNESS  
There is a vast stakeholder 
community in Moldova that can 
contribute to the strengthening 
of SME preparedness to take 
advantage of t he digital 
economy. These include, of 
course, “top down” authorities 
such as the Ministry of 
Economy, Moldova’s Economic 
Council, ODIMM, and national 
institutions that set educational 
policy , and even the country’s 
largest business associations 
(both domes tic and 
international) . The community 
also incorporates a range of 
supporting institutions that can 
help SMEs move quickly to gain Moving forward: What do SMEs need to take advantage 
of the digital economy?  
Firm-level 
capabilities  • Device to connect to internet  
• Technical knowledge and skills  
• Business knowledge and skills  
• Language skills  
• Ability to create a secure online 
presence  
Immediate 
business 
environment  • Affordable access to Internet  
• Access to registration as vendors on 
online e -commerce platforms  
• Access to skilled labor market  
National 
environment  • Simple business registration process 
with the local authorities  
• Easy Intellectual Property registration 
and policies addressing IP infringement  
• Solid ICT and electricity infrastructure  
• Successful implementation of e -
signature and e -contracts laws  
• National strategies for e -commerce 
growth  
Source: International Trade Center (2016).   
60    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  the benefits of efficiency, improved knowledge -building opportunities, expanded markets, and 
growth in sales. Beyond a suppor tive donor community, these include smaller associations of 
enterprises, private business support services specializing in ICT, business incubators, an active and 
motivated diaspora, private investors, and more. Tangible ideas for next steps include the fo llowing:  
• Strengthen data concerning the level of SME engagement in Moldova’s digital economy. In 
particular, the government should help Moldova’s National Bureau of Statistics establish a 
capability to use its annual industrial structure surveys to capture data in line with 
EUROSTAT and the U.S. National Science Foundation IRIS statistical reporting system.  
Specifically, data should be captured on the annual volumes and on the value of domestic and 
transborder e -commerce sales . Data should be disaggr egated by sex, so that differences in 
the digital economy experiences between men and women may be observed and addressed 
as appropriate.  
• Working with public or private -sector partners in the educational sector, create a “digital 
literacy” curriculum tail ored for Moldovan enterprises. Ensure that web -based curriculum 
connects Moldovan entrepreneurs to online resources that will serve their needs (including 
through language adaptability) in getting up to speed on how to bring a small company 
online, includi ng through social media, e -commerce platforms, and their own websites.  
• Through ODIMM, various business incubators, and donor programs, encourage the 
development of small enterprises that specialize in services. Companies that use the internet 
chiefly to market their services and, in some cases, to receive payment often have a stronger 
chance of achieving domestically. For example, such service -providers as hotels, transport 
services, ICT support services, househo ld support services, and others do not face the 
rigorous challenges of transporting their goods across borders. Moreover, they can 
themselves contribute to a more vibrant, dynamic economy which includes the electronic 
transfer of knowledge and creative wor ks, which in the end can strengthen Moldova’s 
position as an international trading partner.  
• Support the National Bank of Moldova or the Ministry of Economy , or both,  to consider the 
viability and cost of fiscal incentives to promote the use of e -commerce  (e.g., VAT 
reductions or exemptions for e -commerce sales).  
• Investigate ways of enabling the smallest of microentrepreneurs to more easily and cheaply 
register their business status.  The elimination of the entrepreneurial patent will require 
some kind of su itable replacement, which could take many different forms, including a pass -
through LLC.  
• Train experienced SMEs in the “what’s next” of doing business online,  including instruction 
on cybersecurity, data privacy, use of online platforms, use of digital fi nancial services, 
streamlined importing, and so forth.   
• For the purposes of educating small enterprises on opportunities associated with the digital 
economy, consider reviving the Consultative Council  for SMEs.94 This group appears to have 
fizzled since la unching in 2017. Although conventional wisdom holds that economic policy -
making must necessarily go through the Economic Council – which itself includes SME 
representation – this group’s potential impact can go much deeper. In particular, it could 
strive t o achieve impact in the well -connected communities beyond Chisinau and focus on 
building up the digital awareness and skills of small firms that supply jobs far beyond the 
council.   
                                                
94 IMF Country Report No. 17/103 , Republic of Moldova, Economic Development Document (Washington, D.C.: IMF, May 
2017).   
61    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • Examine the provision of online dispute resolution to handle disputes ari sing out of business -
to-consumer (B2C) online transactions.  This type of dispute resolution  uses technology to 
facilitate the resolution of disputes and could involve negotiation, mediation , or arbitration . 
It can apply  innovative techniques and online technologies  to automate certain functions of 
the dispute resolution process while also enabling a resolution of e-commerce disputes 
when parties are located far from one another.  
• Create a series of short YouTube videos, aimed at micro - and small -size enterprises, 
describing the different steps and procedures necessary to engage in cross -border e -
commerce.  These videos could be linked to websites maintained by Customs and Moldova 
Post. Issues that need to be covered are methods of legitimately transf erring funds from 
abroad, using the postal service  for shipments, complet ion of  various frequently used forms, 
and the best method to work with e-commerce  platforms like eBay and Amazon.    
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SE RVICES  
Although the fundamentals for 
digital financial services are in 
place in Moldova , there are a 
number of ways to broaden the 
use of these services by 
consumers and merchants alike. 
They include:  
 
• Encourage a “whole system 
approach” to facilitating a 
transition of Moldovan 
business cultu re and 
practices from cash -based to 
digital payments. The more 
people use the tools of 
digital payment, the more 
trust grows in these services, 
and the more efficient trade 
in goods and services 
becomes. Such an approach 
can include:  
o Continued 
integration of 
digital payment 
options through 
e-government;  
o Campaigns sponsored by business associations, emphasizing the link between the 
integration of digital payment systems and company growth that can arise through 
greater export opportunities and easier access to services;  
o Creation of web -based resources that show Moldovan enterprises how to take 
advantage of digital payment systems;  
o Bank-sponsored products that encourage enterprises to integrate digital payment 
systems into their websites and business processes;  
o Local training for business to take advantage of the sharing economy – including ride 
shares and home -shares – that integrates the use of digital payments.  What do  SMEs need to engage digital fi nancial services?  
Firm-level 
capabilities  • Bank account and online banking  
• Sign-up for encryption solutions, e.g. 
SSL certificate  
• Knowledge of e -payment solutions  
Immediate 
business 
environment  • Availability of third -party e -payment 
services provider  
• Linked third -party e -payment services 
provider and local banks for local 
withdrawals  
National 
environment  • Functional financial market in line with 
international standards  
• Foreign exchange system allowing free 
convertibility of currency and 
regula tions on the free flow of 
currency (current account)  
• Adoption of internationally recognized 
standards  
• Regulations on prevention of online 
fraud and combating cybercrime  
Source: International Trade Center (2016).   
62    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • Develop proposed regulations for interchange rates  and to address the imbalance in marke t 
power between bank and non -bank providers of non -cash payment and other digital financial 
services.  
• Transpose the EU’s revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2)  to Moldova.  
• Initiate a consultative process — between the NBM and bank and non -bank providers of non -cash 
payment and other digital financial services —to design and develop a service bureau for card 
processing in Moldova, 
membership that would be 
open to all digital financial 
services providers on 
transparent terms and 
conditions.   
• Conduct a market definition 
and competitive analysis of 
the non -cash payments 
segment of the bank and 
non-bank financial services 
sector to determine 
whether : (1) the market is 
concentrated ; and (2) 
interchange rates between 
banks for card transactions 
can or should be regulated, 
that is, whether those rates 
should be capped in line with 
the EU legislation on the 
subject.   
• Ensure that structures are in 
place – inclusive both of the 
banking community and  of 
interested stakeholders – 
that ensure the compatibility 
of cybersecurity restrictions 
and fluidity of digital payment 
systems. Build in regular 
check ups to determine 
whether Moldovan systems 
are able to keep pace with 
best practice upgrades in 
develop ed economies.  
• Evaluate whether the partial 
privatization of the e -government e -payments platform, MPay, could capture an y efficiencies and 
create synergy that would lower the costs and possibly speed up implementation of the initiative.  
TRADE LOGISTICS    
While Customs  has laid out a plan for making modifications to ASYCUDA, it is unclear whether 
those changes suffice in serving the needs of MSMEs engaging in cross -border  e-commerce . Changes 
are warranted in the short -term as well as in the medium -term to effectively enable MSMEs to What do SMEs need to engage in cross -border trade in 
goods?  
Firm-level 
capabilities  • Effective warehouse organization  
• Secure packaging for delivery of goods  
Capacity to handle surges in sales 
during peak periods  
Immediate 
business 
environment  • Access to postal and express delivery 
services with tracking ability  
• Access to warehouses and delivery 
services at destination  
National 
environment  • Increased transparency on cross -
border e -commerce -related customs 
procedures and rules on the 
application of duties and taxes  
• Application of simplified customs 
procedures and expedited c ustoms 
clearance for small parcels  
• Increased de minimis threshold for 
import duty exemption to reduce the 
burden on the customs authorities  
• Mechanisms to ensure freedom and 
security of cross -border data flows  
• Increased efficiency for connectivity 
infrastru cture (for delivery of goods: 
road, air transport; for delivery of 
services: encryption technology, 
Internet bandwidth)  
• Modernized national postal services to 
increase efficiency of delivery  
Source: International Trade Center (2016).   
63    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  submit on their own behalf —without using customs brokers —customs declarations for low value e-
commerce  consignments.   
MOLDOVA CUSTOMS  
Short -Term Recommendations  
• Make c ustoms rules, procedures, and forms readily available online. They should be published in 
an interactive format that permits customs forms (and postal forms , if applicable) to be 
completed and filed online.   If this is not possible, they should at least be  in the form of fillable / 
printable .pdfs.  
• Continue efforts at developing an interim solution for e-commerce  MSMEs pending the 
implementation of a full ASYCUDA system upgrade. This needs to be done in a way that will 
enable (1) online access to , and elect ronic filing of , the proposed simplified declaration and (2) the 
retention of data in a format that will allow its future integration into ASYCUDA. These efforts 
should continue without delay and not be conditioned on the successful completion of the 
propo sed upgrade to ASYCUDA.  
• The eventual ASYCUDA upgrade should include  a module for automating the risk assessment 
processes with regard to small -value consignments.  
• Connect the Postal Service to the consultative process to develop a simplified declaration a nd 
streamlined procedures, including the use of an electronic version of the Universal Postal Union’s 
Postal Customs Declaration (Form CN 22/23).95  
• Establish alternative consultative stakeholder process to develop a simplified declaration and 
streamlined procedures. Engage in s eparate discussions with each stakeholder group in order to 
draw out specific concerns that may not be voiced in a group stakeholder set ting.  Discussions at 
a minimum should be held with Moldova Post, customs brokers, international express mail 
carriers, and MSMEs —especially those considering creating satellite operations in Romania.   
• Improve simplified declaration , so that it is a short  form with fewer data entry fields. It should be 
made available to all firms for shipments that meet the qualifying thresholds. The form should 
have the ability to be filled out and submitted online without using a customs broker or having a 
permit to ente r data into the ASYCUDA system.  
• Consider a somewhat higher de minimis limit for Customs declarations .  This is a complex issue, 
and this report is not recommending a dramatic increase in the current de minimis limit; 
however, an increase of 50% to 100% wo uld probably have a net positive effect, with revenue 
loss and increased competition to brick -and-mortar sellers offset by a sharp expansion in e -
commerce.  
• Improve awareness of  these  issues with smaller traders  who use  Customs , Moldova Post , and 
other stak eholders .  
Medium  to Long -Term Recommendation s 
• Once a solid institutional foundation has been established at Customs,  the agency should consider 
undertaking steps toward developing and deploying a single-submission portal for MSMEs .  
                                                
95 See UNCTAD’s “Cross -Border e -Commerce Facilitation - Challenges & Proposed Solutions:  ASYCUDA Postal 
Customs Declaration (ASYPCD),” presented in Geneva on March 19, 2018, available at 
https://unctad.org/meetings/en/Presentation/dtl_eWeek2018p50_ConstantinCiuta_en.pdf .  
  
64    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • As conceived by t he United Nations Centre for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business  
(UNECE) , Moldova should investigate the possibility of  developing a comprehensive e -service 
platform : an integrated,  end-to-end e -commerce trade services platform for MSMEs seeking to 
trade across borders  – an ISMIT.96 For reasons of political economy, this recommendation only 
extends to “investigate and possible develop technical specifications”.  An ISMIT would be a 
complex, cross -cutting multi -agency interface similar to a one stop shop . Moldova has seen 
several of those in recent years , and there may not be much enthusiasm at this time for another 
one unless it can show a revenue stream and/or very clear benefits.  
MOLDOVA POST  
Moldova Post  needs to play a stronger supporting role in the expansion of high - volume, low -value 
consignments associated with cross -border e-commerce . The postal service  will be unable to serve 
the business community effectively until it adopts  a mission of being the “go -to” e-commerce shipper 
for small -size packages. In the short, medium, and long -term, a variety of changes are warranted.  
Short -Term Recommendations  
• Make a ll postal and customs forms necessary for sending commercial parcels through the mail to foreign 
destinations available online and interactive.  Instructions on the proper forms to be used for 
different situations should be clearly spelled out on a designated section of its website.   
• Include M oldova Post  in the con sultative 
process to develop a simplified declaration 
and streamlined procedures,  including the 
use of an electronic version of the UPU 
Postal Customs Declaration (Form CN 
22/23).97  
• Continue Moldova P ost’s tentative but 
successful steps at innovation.  The rollout of 
self-service kiosks proves that revenues 
can grow while simultaneously enhancing 
productivity and promoting customer 
convenience . The implementation of a 
simplified declaration process , according 
to this report’s specifications , can be a 
revenue driver at a time when snail, or 
postal,  mail business volume declines.  
• Develop a Memorandum of Understanding 
between Moldova Post and the Customs 
Service  concerning principles and responsibilities with regard to information exchange and 
processing of postal consignments.    
 
 
                                                
96 ISMIT  stands for Integrated Services f or MSMEs in International Trade.  
97 See UNCTAD’s “Cross -Border e -Commerce Facilitation - Challenges & Proposed Solutions:  ASYCUDA Postal 
Customs Declaration (ASYPCD),” presented in Geneva on March 19, 2018, available at 
https://unctad.org/meetings/en/Presen tation/dtl_eWeek2018p50_ConstantinCiuta_en.pdf .  
 Sample Online US Postal Service Customs 
Declaration   
65    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Medium -Term  Recommendations   
• Develop a communications campaign a s part of the implementation of the simplified declaration process 
by Customs . Highlight  Moldova’s enhanced competitiveness in cross -border shipment services.  
• Halt intrusive outbound package inspection , with certain exceptions . The deployment of customs 
personnel to inspect all outbound  parcels at postal stations and at the main sorting facility should 
be reexamined. This appears to be a holdover practice from the Soviet era when communications 
were tightly controlled by the authorities. Customs officials should refocus their efforts on 
monitoring inbound parcels, where import duties may apply  and require payment by recipients. 
Package s creening is still likely so long as all international mail is shipped by airplane.  
• Explore innovations in postal operation efficiency as volumes increase.  For example, some o r all of the 
sorting now done by hand at the main postal sorting facility could be automated.  
• Explore methods of improving collection and delivery of items from major online platforms,  like Amazon 
and eBay. The Moldova Structural Reform Program could initi ate a dialogue between the postal 
agency and such platforms, if none exists yet.  
Long -Term  Recommendations  
• Create a one-stop global shipping program , in which  Moldova Post (or some for -profit firm ) would 
undertake on behalf of customers to manage the inter national shipping and customs process. 
eBay’s Global Shipping Program, available to online sellers in the US (also in the UK) is one such 
example.98 Under the eBay program, the seller sends a parcel for foreign delivery to the eBay 
service center in Kentuck y, where eBay performs the necessary steps of completing and filing all 
necessary documentation for export. For a nother example, Singapore SingPost aims to be a one -
stop, full service, end -to-end e-commerce  logistics solution to brands and retailers that w ant to 
export or tran sship via Singapore to other markets in the Asia -Pacific.  
  
                                                
98 See eBay’s customer service webpage “Global Shipping Program, ” at https://www.ebay. com/help/selling/shipping -
items/setting -shipping -options/global -shipping -program?id=4646 .   
66    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  REFERENCES  
Całus, Kamil. 2018. “Moldova’s Political Theatre: The Balance of Forces in an Election Year.” OSW 
Commentary 258, January 31. https://www.osw.waw.pl/sites/default/f iles/commentary_258.pdf  
Chayes, Sarah. 2016. “The Structure of Corruption in Moldova.” Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, Washington, DC. (Fact sheet based on Chayes, Sarah. 2016. The Structure of 
Corruption: A Systemic Analysis Using Eurasian Cases . Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 
Washington, DC.) https://carnegieendowment.org/files/10_Moldova_Full_Web1.pdf   
ETF (European Training Foundation). 2017 . Torino Process 2016 –17: Republic of Moldova.  Turin: 
European Training Foundation.  
Foxall, Andrew. 2017. “A ‘Captured State’: Moldova Between Russia and the West.” Research Paper 
No. 14 (2017). The Henry Jackson Society, London.  
GOM (Government of Moldova ). 2012. Moldova 2020: National Development Strategy: Solutions 
for Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction. Chi șinău: Government of Moldova.  
http://particip.gov.md/public/files/Moldov a_2020_ENG1.pdf  
——— . 2016. DIASPORA 2025. Chi șinău: Government of Moldova. 
https://brd.gov.md/sites/default/files/sn_diaspora_2025_web.pdf  
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 20 17. Republic of Moldova:  Article IV Consultation and Second 
Reviews Under the Extended Fund Facility and Extended Credit Facility Arrangements.  Country Staff Report 
No. 17/398 Washington, DC: IMF.  
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2017/12/21/Republic -of-Moldova -Article -IV-
Consultation -and-Second -Reviews -under -the-Extended -Fund-45507  
International Trade Center. 2016.  Bringing SMEs onto the E -Commerce Highway. ITC. Geneva. 
http://www.intracen.org/uploadedFiles/intracenorg/Content/Publications/Bringing%20SMEs%20onto%
20the%20e -Commerce%20Highway_final_250516_Low -res.pdf   
Luecke, Matthias, Dumitru Pintea, and Ricardo Giucci. 2016. “The Limited Use of Non -Cash 
Payments in Moldova: Diagnosis and Policy Options.” Policy Paper Series [PP/02/2016]. German 
Economic Team Moldo va (GET Moldova). www.get -moldau.de/wordpress/wp -
content/uploads/2016/06/PP_02_2016_en.pdf  
Mosneaga, Valeriu. 2014. “Republic of Moldova: Diaspora and Diaspora Policy.” Slovak Journal of 
Political Sciences 14 (2): 149. DOI: 10.2478/sjps -2014-0007 
Necsutu, Madalin. 2018. “Moldova Delays Parliamentary Elections Until 2019.” BalkanInsight,  July 27. 
http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/article/moldovan -parliament -rescheduled -the-parliamentary -
elections -for-2019 -07-27-2018  
Office of the Co -ordinator of the Organization for Economic Cooperat ion and Development 
(OECD), Summary Document of the Workshop “Trade Facilitation for E -Commerce in the Republic 
of Moldova,” 1 -4 October 2018, Chisinau.  
Rutkowski, Jan, Victoria Levin, and Ali Bargu. 2017.  “’Missing Skills’ Results of the Skills Module of  
the Moldovan Labor Market Forecast Survey.” World Bank, Washington, DC.   
67    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  http://documents.world bank.org/curated/en/524971511793797679/pdf/121666 -WP-P154573 -
PUBLIC -Missing -Skills-Moldova -Rutkowski -Bargu -2017-09-21.pdf  
USAID (United States Agency for International Development). Undated. “ Moldova’s Trade Corridor  
Assessment  Summary .” Produced by Nathan  Associates for USAID. Washington, DC: USAID.  
http://www.moldova.org/en/wp -content/uploads/sites/2/2018/07/MSRP -TCA-Summary -EN.pdf  
USAID (United States Agency for International Development). 201 6. Business Regulatory, Investment, 
and Trade Environment Program Final Report. Washington, DC: USAID. 
http s://www.chemonics.com/wp -content/uploads/2017/10/Moldova -BRITE -Final -report.pdf  
UNECE ( United Nations Economic Commission for Europe ). 2017. Regulatory and Procedural Barriers 
to Trade in the Republic of Moldova : Needs Assessment.  ECE/TRADE/433, New York/G eneva: UNECE.  
www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/trade/Publications/ECE_TRADE_433E.pdf  
Watkins, James. 2018. “Acumen: Why This Poor Country Has the World’s Best Internet.”  OZY 
(online news magazine) February 28.  
WCO ( World Customs Organization ). 2018. “WCO Cross -Border E -Commerce Framework of 
Standards.” Brussels: WCO. www.wcoomd.org/ -
/media/wco/public/global/pdf/topics/facilitation/acti vities -and-programmes/ecommerce/wco -
framework -of-standards -on-crossborder -ecommerce_en.pdf?la=en  
World Bank. 2017. “Moldova - Cost of Doing Business 2017: Survey (English).” (Developed by NGO 
Rural Economic Development Center PROMO -TERRA.) World Bank Group , Washington, DC.  
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/244881519155464763/Moldova -Cost -of-doing -
business -2017 -survey  
   
68    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  SAF-DE CHECKLIST: SME PREPA REDNESS  
Section A: Definition, Scope, and Gender Overview  
Definition.  This section pertains to conditions for small and medium -sized enterprises (SMEs) – 
as defined in the country/economy to which the SAF -DE is being applied – to safel y, reliably, and 
competitively participate in the digital economy.  
Scope. This inquiry covers the preparedness of SMEs to participate in the digital economy, both 
in the Business -to-Business (B2B) and Business -to-Consumer (B2C) markets. In addition to 
addressing SMEs generally, this section incorporates issues of relevance to SMEs owned by 
women or other groups that have traditionally experienced economic marginalization. This inquiry 
does not apply to microenterprises (again, as defined in the country/ec onomy to which the SAF -
DE is being applied), although an economy’s microenterprises may indeed benefit from 
opportunities they find in the digital economy.  
Gender overview. Worldwide, women-owned  enterprises are typically smaller and grow more 
slowly tha n their male -owned counterparts. The digital economy presents a powerful opportunity 
to narrow this gap.  Although women-owned  SMEs are concentrated in certain lower -value 
sectors (handicrafts, boutique tourism services, personal products, fashion and design, etc.), these 
areas often lend themselves to digital commerce as a source of expanded markets and innovation.   
Section B: Policy Objectives  
1. SMEs can access the Internet to a degree that enables meaningful participation in the 
digital economy.  
2. The business enabling environment supports and encourages the robust and inclusive 
participation of SMEs in the digital economy.  
3. SMEs have access to a  diverse pool of workers who understand the technical 
requirements and business opportunities associated with the digital economy.  
4. Online platforms that facilitate Internet -based sales are widely accessible to SMEs. Among 
the services they offer are finan cing options ; shipping, delivery and logistics solutions ; legal 
and financial advisory services ; market information and analysis ; and other services . 
5. Necessary, practical information and affordable services relating to online payment 
systems, consumer pro tection, digital security, and risk management are generally 
accessible to SMEs.  
6. Customs and other border agencies have established and routinely update e -commerce 
policies that take into account the particular needs and priorities of SMEs . 
7. Opportunities  for SME service -providers to participate in the digital economy are robust.  
Section C: Legal Foundations  
1. The overall legal and regulatory environment for SMEs is efficient, accessible, and simple 
to implement.   
2. Without undue burden, the legal system permits all SMEs to market their products via 
online platforms, websites, and social media.  
3. Regulation of the participation of SMEs in  the digital economy – including in such areas as 
payment systems, consumer prote ction, data protection, and dispute resolution – is clear, 
accessible, inclusive, and without undue burden . 
4. Requirements for e -commerce -related sales tax and import duties are accessible, 
affordable, and clear, with fulfillment  of these requirements in line with the capacities and 
resources of most SMEs.    
69    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  5. Laws and regulations pertaining to postal and delivery services do not unreasonably  drive 
up the costs of SME participation in the digital economy.  
6. The legal framework provides for stakeholder participation in the development of rules 
and standards for e-commerce, with measures for incorporating the perspectives of all 
types of SMEs bui lt into the process .  
Section D: Core Institutions  
1. Central government agenc (ies) charged with supporting SMEs promot e SME engagement 
in the digital economy , including among SMEs owned by traditionally disadvantaged 
groups.  
2. Sub-regional and local agencies charged with supporting SMEs promot e SME engagement 
in the digital economy , including among SMEs owned by traditionally disadvantaged 
groups.  
3. Government agencies charged with supporting women’s empowerment promote and 
support the engagement of wo man-owned enterprises in the digital economy.  
4. Authorities charged with oversight and regulation of ICT Infrastructure incorporate the 
interests and priorities of SMEs in their policy -making and implementation.  
5. Banks and other financial institutions offe r e-commerce services that are accessible, 
affordable, and responsive to the needs of SMEs.  
6. Domestic postal and express delivery services are reasonably affordable and efficient and 
offer tracking ability as well as the ability for SMEs to access to ware houses and delivery 
services at their destinations.  
7. Public and private services efficiently and affordably support the resolution of disputes that 
arise through transactions undertaken via e -commerce.  
Section E: Additional Stakeholders  
1. Trade or 
sectoral 
associations  • Do trade or sectoral associations have a seat at the table with 
respect to the development and implementation of digital  policy,  
and do they represent the interests of all SMEs?  
• Do trade or sectoral associations help SMEs access the 
information and services they need to successfully engage in e-
commerce ? 
• Do trade or sectoral associations advocate on behalf of SMEs to 
government agencies that oversee, regulate, and provide services 
related to e-commerce , including telecommunications providers, 
financial regulators, and customs authorities?  
2. E-Commerce/ 
Trade Service 
Providers  • Are private or non -profit training or consulting services available 
to SMEs that help them understand, launch, and maintain online 
sales?  
• Are digital payment services readily accessible? Do they 
efficiently and affordably serve the needs of SMEs?  
• Are there services available to SMEs that help them manage data, 
including with respect to data protection, integrity, and 
communication, as necessary , with Customs and other border 
agencies?  
3. Credit 
suppliers  
 • Do SMEs have access to reliable, affordable online lenders and 
other forms of digital credit?  
• Are credit card services generally available, accessible, and 
affordable to SMEs?  
4. Educational 
and training 
institutions  • Are general numeracy and computer skills taught in schools?  
• Are there fast options for learning how to start/run an online 
business?   
70    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • Are there sufficient management and professional services 
available to SMEs?  
• Are digi tal training centers, whether for -profit or non -profit, 
accessible for adults who may be seeking a better job or career 
change?  
5. Women’s 
business 
associations  • What are the major associations for women’s enterprises? To 
what extent are they accessible to women-owned  SMEs via the 
Internet?  
• Do women’s business associations support woman -owned SMEs 
that would like to engage in e-commerce ? How do they do that?  
• How strong are networks between and among women’s business 
associations, and their international counterparts?  
• What kinds of services do the women’s business associations 
provide that relate to the digital economy? How can these be 
strengthened?  
6. Civil society 
advocates for 
economic 
inclusiveness  
 • To what extent and in what ways is there  advocacy on behalf of 
SME engagement in e-commerce ?  
• How successful or influential are these efforts? What are their 
outcomes?  
Section F: Political Economy Analysis  
Core PEA Question (1):  
Core PEA Question (2):  
1. Who has an interest in preserving the status quo? Why?  
2. Who has an interest in change, reform, etc.? Why?  
3. In terms of reform, what can be done? (What is politically feasible)?  
4. Who should make the changes – and why?  
Section G: Unresolved Policy Areas  
• N/A 
Section H: Economy Performance Indicators  
• World Bank - Doing Business Indicators   
• SME Finance Forum – MSME Country Indicators Database   
 
 
   
71    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  SAF-DE CHECKLIST: DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES  
Section A: Definition, Scope, and Gender Overview  
Definition.  For the purposes of this tool:  
• Digital Financial Services (DFS) encompasses all branchless banking services that are 
enabled via electronic channels. Services can be accessed using a variety of electronic 
instruments, including mobile phones, Point of Sale devices, electronic cards, and 
computers.  
• Digital Payments  (or “e-payments”) are financial transactions that are facilitated by 
digital technologies. The vehicles for transactions may include credit card s, direct deposit 
and direct debit payments, wire transfers, electronic bill payments, and electronic 
currencies  (such as bitcoin) . Digital payments are wholly initiated, processed, and received 
electronically.  
• Digital Payment Providers  may include traditional financial firms, such as banks and 
credit card companies, as well as non-banking institutions operating on th e Internet or via 
mobile device s that are associated with a payment card or bank account s, whether  
directly or indirectly.  
Scope. The E -SAF Digital Financial Services inquiry focuses primarily on digital payments , with 
additional coverage of other digita l financial tools that  may support domestic and cross -border e -
commerce .  
Gender overview. Access to and facility with digital financial services can strengthen women’s 
economic participation in their own countries and across the global economy. Payment p latforms 
and other  digital financ ial services  can increase opportunity and productivity for women as 
employees, consumers, and entrepreneurs.  
Section B: Policy Objectives  
1. Businesses and consumers have access to a variety of safe, accessible, and reli able digital 
payment systems, including account -based systems (credit cards, debit cards, mobile 
payment systems, and facilitated services such as PayPal) and electronic currency (such as 
prepaid cards or digital currencies).  
2. There is interoperability of  digital payment systems between service providers. To 
facilitate payments from buyers located abroad, sellers can access third -party e -payment 
service providers, which are linked to domestic banks.  
3. There is fair competition between domestic and foreign p roviders of digital financial 
services.   
4. Informed by international best practice and trends, domestic regulators of financial 
services employ agile and iterative systems of regulation, in a way that facilitates 
innovation while also guarding against priva cy abuses and undue risk to consumers.  
5. Regulators may access consumer financial information only to a clearly defined, limited 
extent and must be accountable for any access.   
6. The range of available digital financial services includes safe and enhanced access to credit 
for producers, retailers, and consumers.  
7. The availability of digital financial services enhances economic opportunities for women 
and other traditionally excluded or underserved communities.  
 
September 2018 
   
72    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  Section C: Legal Foundations  
1. Within a fully articulated “National Digital Strategy” that aligns with international best 
practices, the government sets forth the national agenda for development  of digital 
financial services on a non -discriminatory basis.  
2. The legal f ramework clearly delineates the jurisdiction and responsibilities of agencies and 
authorities charged with regulating digital financial services and resolving disputes between 
regulators and digital financial service providers. At the same time, regulators  are 
prepared to be agile when responding to ongoing technology innovations.   
3. The legal framework provides for transparency and stakeholder participation in the 
development of rules and standards for digital financial services. Stakeholder engagement 
takes place not only during the rule -making process,  but also through “feedback loops,” 
once a rule is in place.  
4. With respect to emerging technologies, t he legal framework is not so strict as to 
discourage innovation in digital financial services, nor so amo rphous or lenient as to place 
users at risk.  
5. While allowing for both interoperability of systems and innovation, the legal framework 
clearly articulates core principles and requirements for payment security, data encryption 
and data privacy.  
6. The legal framework follows international best practices and standards for anti -money 
laundering and counter -terrorist  finance (AML/CFT) safeguards.  
7. The legal framework ensures principles of non -discrimination against foreign digital 
financial service providers and guards all providers related to e -commerce  against 
nationalization or expropriation.  
8. The legal framework allows for flexibility and innovation with respect to access to digital 
financial services, in some cases allowing informal pla yers to assume a role (such as 
through flexible rules on who can serve as an agent for cash -in-cash-out networks).  
Section D: Core Institutions  
1. There is an institutional mechanism or framework for “whole of government” engagement 
and input into the dev elopment and oversight of policy and regu lation of digital financial 
services.  
2. Within the national legislature, there are appropriate administrative frameworks and 
technical resources for digital financial services -related legislative development, dialogue, 
drafting, harmonization, and amendment  over time.  
3. Robust and well -resourced authorities exist for the transparent , agile, and accountable 
oversight of digital financial services.   
4. Financial regulators are trained and willing to co nsider the impact of regulation of digital 
financial services on underserved communities as part of the balance among other 
considerations, such as financial system stability, consumer interests, and macroeconomic 
policy.  
5. Additional institutions, includi ng but not limited to regulators of telecommunications, 
competition, and consumer protection, are prepared to assume new regulatory duties 
within their traditional areas of oversight.  
6. The courts are regarded as an appropriate and effective institution for resolving disputes 
regarding digital financial services, where administrative mechanisms or other approaches, 
including alternative dispute resolution, are unsuccessful.  
7. Risk-sensitiv e authorities exist to combat money -laundering and terrorist financing 
(AML/CFT) across digital financial services.  
Section E: Additional Stakeholders   
73    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  1. Digital Financial 
Service Providers  • Who are the banks, third party  payment providers, and other 
agents involved in digital financial services? What products and 
services do they offer?  
• How are non -financial firms that wish to provide DFS treated? 
Do they need to be registered or licensed, or to establish a 
separate lega l entity to seek registration or a license to operate?  
• Are the investments made by providers of digital financial 
services sufficient to realize the benefits of scale, such that fixed 
costs are outweighed by revenues, thereby allowing for 
sustainability?  
• In what ways are providers taking advantage of existing ICT 
Infrastructure?  
• Are service providers accessing and using ICT Infrastructure to 
its fullest capacity? If not, what is holding them back?  
• Do service providers readily embrace disruptive technologie s to 
strengthen their competitive advantage?  
• Are providers’ services interoperable?  
• Do providers engage with regulators in a way that allows for 
free-flow of information, innovation, and agility of regulation?  
• How are non -financial firms that wish to prov ide DFS treated? 
Do they need to be registered or licensed, or to establish a 
separate legal entity to seek registration or a license to operate?  
2. Trade or sectoral 
associations  
 • With respect to digital financial services , what are the major 
trade or secto ral associations? Who are their members? How 
effective are these organizations perceived to be in terms of 
representing the interests of their constituencies?   
• Are there associations specifically focused on digital financial 
service s issues?  
• How do these associations perceive the policy, legal, and 
regulatory environment for digital financial services?   
• How do these associations perceive the capacity, transparency, 
and accountability of the key regulatory authorities?  
• How are these associations perce ived by the government, 
business customers, and consumers in terms of their own 
capacity, transparency, and accountability?  
• Are these associations regarded as inclusive, transparent, and 
accountable by their own membership and the economy at large?  
3. Consum er 
organizations and 
advocates  • What are the major consumer organizations and/or advocates? 
Who do they represent?  
• What type of financial services do consumers generally use (e.g. 
bank accounts, mobile phones)?  
• Do consumer advocates trust the security of ex isting payment 
systems to the extent that future uptake in usage is likely?  
• What is the extent of user capability to understand and use 
electronic payments?  
4. Business End -Users  
 
 • With respect to digital financial services supporting the digital 
economy, who are the primary business end -users?  Where are 
they located?  
• How do these users perceive the domestic policy, legal, and 
regulatory environment for digital financial services tha t support 
the digital economy?  Are they able to advocate for progress or 
change?  
• How do these business users perceive the capacity, transparency, 
and accountability of the key regulatory authorities?   
74    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • How are these business users perceived by the governmen t, 
digital financial service providers, and consumers?  
5. SMEs  
 • To what extent, and in what ways, do SMEs use digital financial 
services?  
• What do SMEs like about the existing digital financial services 
regime? Do they support multiple providers or harmoni zed 
services controlled by select actors?  
• Do SMEs perceive themselves as having a seat at the table with 
respect to the development and implementation of digital 
financial services regulation?  
• To what extent does the current digital financial services regi me 
link SMEs to global supply chains? What more can be done?  
• To what extent do SMEs have access to online lenders and other 
forms of digital credit?  
6. Educational and 
training institutions  
 • Is there sufficient human capital developed to utilize digital 
financial services supporting the digital economy?  
• Do university faculties offer a foundation of knowledge to 
students sufficient to participate in the design and operation of 
the digital financial services – domestically?  Internationally?  
• Are edu cation and training institutions sufficiently resourced to 
deliver the level of knowledge that is necessary to support a 
robust system of digital financial services?  
• Do regulators of digital financial services have access to 
appropriate training?  
• What mech anisms exist to improve financial literacy on issues of 
DFS? Are there programs to increase regular use of DFS 
products?  
6. Advocates for 
economic 
inclusiveness  
 
 
 • To what extent, and in what ways, do women, rural 
communities, and disadvantaged groups use  digital financial 
services to participate in e -commerce ? Nationally? 
Internationally?  
•  Do women, rural communities, and disadvantaged groups 
perceive themselves as having a seat at the table with respect to 
the development and implementation of digital financial services’ 
policy?  
Section F: Political Economy Analysis  
Core PEA Question (1):  
Core PEA Question (2):  
1. Who has an interest in preserving the status quo? Why?  
2. Who has an interest in change, reform, etc.? Why?  
3. In terms of reform, what can be done? (What is politically feasible)?  
4. Who should make the changes – and why? 
Section G: Unresolved Policy Areas  
• What kind of regulatory and statutory policies should governments adopt with respect to 
blockchain technology, bitcoin, and other sources of e -currency to address challenges 
related to trust, consumer protection, a nd money laundering?   
75    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • According to a McKinsey & Company 2016 report, financial regulators in developing 
countries face two options in developing digital financial services: a) “restrictive approach 
initially and then incrementally loosen regulation in orde r to avoid stifling innovation” or 
b) “hands -off approach initially and then tighten to reduce systemic and consumer -
protection risks.” Are both approaches to be encouraged by governments  and 
international bodies? If not, which approach presents more benef icial gains for the 
domestic economy and foreign firms and consumers?  
Section H: Economy Performance Indicators  
• World Bank - Global Findex database  
• Capgemini/BNP Paribas - World Payments Report  
   
76    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  SAF-DE CHECKLIST: TRADE LO GISTICS  
 
Section A: Definition, Scope, and Gender Overview  
Definition.  For the purposes of this tool, the term “Trade Logistics” refers to the various phases 
of cross -border delivery of goods purchased through digital transactions. These phases include 
transport and shipping; crossing the border/clearing Customs; delivery to  the end -user; and 
facilitating product returns.  
Scope. Trade Logistics stem from a multi-faceted, public -private sector system that relies on 
both government interventions, including Customs, regulation and infrastructure, and private -
sector capacities, such as the ability to properly identify, package, and transport products. 
Emphasis in this section is placed on efficient transport, clearance, and delivery of small shipments, 
which ar e characteristic of expanded e -commerce systems.  
Gender overview. This section incorporates and applies to the experiences of women engaged 
in e-commerce and the digital economy, in particular as entrepreneurs, workers in the transport 
or logistics arena,  and consumers.  
Section B: Policy Objectives  
1. Among key stakeholders, there is awareness of the impact of e -commerce on traditional 
methods of cross -border trade, including the emerging demand for transport and customs 
systems that accommodate higher volu mes of smaller, often expedited and/or low value, 
parcels. Both the public and private sectors recognize that efficient and interoperable 
customs processes and procedures can be a competitive advantage and prepare for these 
changes through updates in polic y, practice, and public outreach.  
2. Traders may count on efficient, solid, and extensive infrastructure – that, as appropriate, 
allows for multimodal transportation – within their borders. Where infrastructure is 
lacking, there is a credible domestic strat egy for prioritizing, funding, and undertaking 
improvements.  
3. The regulatory environment for private transport services promotes competition and 
safety, and may include incentives for maintaining and upgrading aging fleets. The 
government encourages FDI as one means of improving shipping and delivery services.  
4. As the volume of lower -value transactions increases, border authorities strive for greater 
speed and efficiencies in clearance processes, for both incoming pa rcels and returns. They 
integrate new systems of risk management and data analytics in response to changes 
brought about by e -commerce  supply chains. Establishment of commercially relevant or 
useful  de minimis value levels that are applied equal ly to all operators can contribute to 
efficient entry of lower valued parcels.  
5. Policies and practice encourage the safe and secure electronic exchange of data among 
all parties involved in the international supply chain, including advance information 
shared by e-traders with border agencies.  
6. Border agencies strive for excellence in data management with respect to their e -
commerce -related functions, including consistency in data collection processes and 
accuracy and adequacy of the data they collect. The y use the data to evaluate their own 
performance and inform improvements in their own systems.  
7. Domestic rules on the application of duties and taxes are accessible, clear, consistently 
applied, and aligned with international commitments (such as regional trade agreements 
and membership in the WTO). Customs duties are not levied on digital products.  
   
77    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  8. Trade , transport, and border policies and practices are responsive to the needs of 
woman-owned enterprises and women traders, including through steps that pr ovide for 
their access to information and resources and that address their personal safety issues.  
9. Public and private -sector trade logistics systems  use risk management systems to  guard 
against criminal and terrorist activity  while facilitating low risk trade,  including through 
regular review and adaptation to prevent new threats.  
10. The government regularly engages in consultations with international trading partners for 
the purposes of building consistency, clarity, predictabi lity, and integrity of cross -border e -
commerce trade logistics systems.  
Section C: Legal Foundations  
1. The legal framework provides for modern and transparent customs administration and 
border procedures based on risk management, paperless entry, and incentives for 
compliance. Streamlined, simplified procedures, including timely clearance, and 
commercially relevant or useful de minimis  levels are promoted.  
2. Integrity safeg uards, including enforcement provisions, are integrated throughout the legal 
framework as it pertains to Trade Logistics underlying e -commerce and the digital 
economy.  
3. Requirements for safe and lawful wareh ousing and packaging of goods, including perishable 
goods, take into account the special considerations of e -commerce, such as the 
traceability of smaller packages and the need for safe, speedy delivery.  
4. The legal framework pertaining to e -commerce -related transport and infrastructure is 
clear; regularly reviewed and updated through an inclusive, multi -stakeholder process; and 
transparently administered.  
5. The legal framework ensur es that traders have advance knowledge of the full costs of 
international do or-to-door shipping; applicable VAT charges and customs duties; required 
export documents; and other key information.  
6. The legal framework supports efficient and timely border operations related to e -
commerce, with minimal restrictions on transport services (i.e., avoiding cabotage, 
warehousing restrictions, or intolerance of “extra” payments).  
7. Legislation prevents application of customs tariffs on  digital goods.  
8. Regulation and practice support efficient and effective communication, including through 
ICT means, between national customs and other authorities across borders to facilitate 
trade.  
9. The legal framework ensures principles of non -discrimination against all  supply chain 
operators, whether public/private or domestic/foreign , and guards foreign operators and 
investors in services related to Trade Logistics against nationalization or expropriation.  
10. The regime for civil and criminal enforcement of trade violato rs is clear and intended to 
motivate compliance by e -commerce marketers, carriers, freight forwarders, and brokers.  
Section D: Core Institutions  
1. There is an institutional mechanism or framework for “whole of government” engagement 
and input into the de velopment and oversight of policy and regulation of services 
supporting transport and logistics services. Across institutions, Trade Logistics is 
recognized as an integral part of the digital economy.  
2. Within the national legislature, there are appropriate administrative frameworks and 
technical resources to support logistics, customs, and transport -related developments 
related to e -commerce, along with public dialogue, legislative drafting, legal harmon ization, 
and amendment over time. There is an appreciation of the case for applying the same 
rules with respect to parcels to both private operators and government carriers (i.e., 
postal administrations).   
78    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  3. Border agencies, with Customs as their lead, commi t to adopting e -commerce standards 
based on trade facilitation, simplification, safety, and security, including through advanced 
technology for data -based risk -management.  
4. Border agencies engage in public outreach and education for the purpose of informi ng e-
commerce stakeholders about their cross -border opportunities, rights, and 
responsibilities.  
5. Border agencies strive for excellence in data management, including consistency in data 
collection processes and accuracy and adequacy of the data they collec t. They use the 
data to evaluate their own performance and inform improvements in their own systems.  
6. Agencies charged with promoting commerce, trade, and investment are committed to 
connecting traditionally disenfranchised groups – which may include women , minority 
groups, or rural entrepreneurs – to critical Trade Logistics information and guidance.  
7. The investment authority appropriately and effectively oversees domestic and foreign 
investments into services that support logistics and transport services . 
8. Additional institutions – such as statistics, health, and environmental agencies, and others 
– are prepared to assume new oversight and regulatory duties within their traditional 
areas of oversight , including in the constructions of single windows  mechanisms.  
9. The courts are regarded as an appropriate and effective institution for resolving disputes 
regarding services supporting the logistics and transport sectors, where administrative 
mechanisms or  other approaches, including alternative dispute resolution, are 
unsuccessful.  
Section E: Additional Stakeholders  
1. Investors in 
services 
supporting 
logistics 
(foreign and 
domestic)  • With respect to logistics and transport, who are the major 
investors? Does the government or a local incumbent have a 
major role in providing some or all of these services? Are ports 
run by the government or is management provided by third 
parties?  
• How do these investors perceive the policy, legal, and regulatory 
environment for logistics?  
• How do these investors perceive the capacity, transparency, and 
accountability of the key regulatory authorities? Is the regulator 
sufficiently independent? Are too many  services regulated?  
• How are these investors perceived by the government, business 
customers, and consumers in terms of their own capacity, 
transparency, and accountability?  
• Are there any additional investors that the government or the 
business community s eek to enter the domestic market?  
2. Trade or 
sectoral 
associations  
 • With respect to trade logistics, what are the major trade or 
sectoral associations? Who are their members? How effective 
are these organizations perceived to be in terms of representing 
the interests of their constituencies?   
• Are there associations specifically focused on  digital economy 
issues? Is logistics part of their interests?  
• How do these associations perceive the policy, legal, and 
regulatory environment for logistics and transport?  
• How do these associations perceive the capacity, transparency, 
and accountability of t he key regulatory authorities? Do they see 
the regulato r as sufficiently independent? Are too many services 
regulated?  
• How are these associations perceived by the government, 
business customers, and consumers in terms of their own 
capacity, transparency, and accountability?   
79    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  • Are these associations regarded as inclusive, transparent, and 
accountable by their own membership and the economy at large?  
3. Consumer 
organizat ions and 
advocates  • With respect to services in transport and logistics, what are the 
major consumer organizations and/or advocates? Who do they 
represent?  
• Is the logistics/transport market seen as well -regulated and fairly 
priced?   
• Do consumer advocates t rust existing infrastructure to the 
extent that future uptake in e -commerce trade is likely?  
4. Logistics Service 
Providers  
 • Are d omestic postal and express delivery services affordable and 
efficient ? Do they offer tracking ability and the ability for SME s to 
access to warehouses and delivery services at their destinations ? 
• In what ways are transport and logistics providers taking 
advantage of existing the ICT Infrastructure  for cross -border 
transactions ? 
• Are these service providers accessing and using ICT 
Infrastructure to its fullest capacity? If not, what is holding them 
back?  
• Do service providers readily embrace disruptive technologies to 
strengthen their competitive advantage?  
• Do postal services have the necessary mechanisms to exchange 
inform ation electronically to Customs, including advanced 
shipment data? 
• Are private and public operators treated similarly with respect 
to customs formalities and taxes?  
5. SMEs  
 • To what extent, and in what ways, do SMEs use the logistics and  
transport services available? Are transport and logistics services 
priced competitively for SMEs?  
• What do SMEs like about the existing transport and logistics 
regime? Do they support further liberalization?  
• Do SMEs perceive themselves as having a seat at the table with 
respect to the development and implementation of transport and 
logistics needs and regulation?  
• To what extent does the current logistics regime enable SMEs to 
link to global supply chains? What more can be done?  
• Are there appropriately scale d and affordable systems for storing 
and warehousing products intended for sale through e -
commerce?  Do sellers have a ccess to suitable warehousing 
technologies, including scanning devices, inventory software, 
warehouse management systems,  and cold storage,  as necessary?  
• Do sellers have access to packaging materials that are affordable, 
practical, and sustainable, and which ensure that the items they 
sell remain intact during shipping and delivery, inclu ding across 
very long distances?  
6. Educational and 
training institutions  
 • Is there sufficient human resources capacity to meet the 
country’s needs with respect to the development and 
implementation of logistics services supporting the digital 
economy? What policies are being shaped to anticipate the 
potential  replacement of trad itional logistics jobs by automation?  
• Do university faculties offer a foundation of knowledge to 
students sufficient to participate in the design and operation of 
the services – domestically? Internationally?   
80    |    MOLDOVA’S ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DOING BUSINESS IN THE DIGITAL ECONO MY  7. Advocates for 
economic 
inclusiveness  
 • To w hat extent, and in what ways, do women, rural 
communities, and disadvantaged groups consume or provide 
digitally -enabled services? Nationally? Internationally? Is there 
insufficient access to transport and logistics services?  
•  Do women, rural communities, and disadvantaged groups 
perceive themselves as having a seat at the table with respect to 
the development and implementation of transport and logistics 
regulation and infrastructure needs?  
Section F: Political Economy Analysis  
Core PEA Question (1):  
Core PEA Question (2):  
1. Who has an interest in preserving the status quo? Why?  
2. Who has an interest in change, reform, etc.? Why?  
3. In terms of reform, what can be done? (What is politically feasible)?  
4. Who should make the changes – and why?  
Section G: Unresolved Policy Areas  
• Given the exponential increase in e -commerce volumes in the past decade, especially 
smaller value shipments, how should countries address de minimis levels? What is the 
appropriate balance between higher de minimis levels to increa se the flow of goods and 
the potential disincentive of non -compliance (e.g. undervaluation or misdeclaration of 
goods to avoid payments)? What is an appropriate de minimis  level for developing 
economies?  
• There is always a tension between security and trade facilitation. Modern risk 
management tools, including intelligence collection, and a robust, targeted policy 
framework can help governments to combat terrorism and fraud while facilitating low -risk 
trade. The good policy framework and political will of a government is vital to ensure that 
security is not a mask for trade protectionism.  
Section H: Economy Performance Indicators  
• World Bank - Logistics Performance Index   
• World Bank - Trade in Services Database (199 countries)   
  
 
 