1Money, Mobile Money and Rituals 
in Western Kenya: The Contingency Fund and the Thirteenth Cow
Sibel Kusimba
Abstract: This article, based on fieldwork in Western Kenya from 2012 to 2016, describes how life cycle rituals collect and distribute different forms of money, including land, property, personhood, animals, cash, and digital moneys. It specif-
ically examines a ritual coming of age for adolescent boys. By organizing multiple 
forms of money relative to the phases of a human life, the past, and the future, these rituals serve to manage and transfer wealth across generations and to give these transfers social and moral dimensions. The study provokes a critique of 
financial initiatives in the Global South that often assume that the financial goals of 
the poor are short-term.
Résumé: Basé sur des recherches de terrain dans l’ouest du Kenya de 2012 à 
2016, cet article décrit comment des rites du cycle de vie sont mobilisés pour 
collecter et distribuer différentes formes d’objets de valeur, y compris la terre,  
la propriété, la personnalité, les animaux, l’argent comptant et l’argent numérique. 
Spécifiquement, nous examinons un rite de puberté pour des adolescents.  
En organisant plusieurs formes d’argent relatives aux phases d’une vie humaine, 
le passé et le futur, ces rites aident à gérer et transférer la richesse à travers les 
générations et donnent à ces transferts des dimensions sociales et morales. L’étude amène vers une critique des nouvelles initiatives financières introduites dans les pays du Sud qui souvent estiment que les objectifs des pauvres ne sont qu’à court terme.
Keywords: money; circumcision; funerals; mobile money; rituals; gender
African Studies Review, (2018), page 1 of 25
Sibel Kusimba is an anthropologist at American University in Washington, DC, who 
has published scholarly works on both archaeological and anthropological topics 
in Kenya. She is currently interested in digital technology and digital finance in 
sub-Saharan Africa. E-mail: skusimba@american.edu
© African Studies Association, 2018
doi:10.1017/asr.2017.145
2 African Studies Review
Introduction
In August 2010, thirteen-year old Peter “braved the knife” by undergoing a 
ritual circumcision. Peter’s ritual transformation to adulthood elicited gifts of cash, foodstuffs, livestock, labor, and mobile money from hundreds of people, especially his father, grandfather, and older brothers; his father’s age mates (the bakoki); and his paternal aunt, who gave him a mobile phone in lieu of her traditionally stipulated gift, which was a goat. Peter’s brother in Sudan sent him an e-money gift of 5,000 Kenyan shillings. In a 2012 interview, Peter proudly listed his many gifts, finishing with, “After all the process of celebrations, my M-Pesa account was loaded with 84,000 Kenya shillings” (USD840 in 2010) in mobile money gifts, enough for about two years of secondary school fees.
Throughout sub-Saharan Africa, life cycle rituals continue to involve 
large numbers of people and collect surprising amounts of money (Ferguson 2013). These rituals include celebrations of births, coming of age rituals, weddings, and funerals, all of which mark stages of the life course and the passage of time, in the process facilitating resource transfers across genera-tions (De Wolf 1983; Beidelman 1991; Riesman 1986).
In contemporary Africa, these rituals are taking on new importance. For 
people now living in highly mobile and ethnically diverse societies, these rit-uals reinvigorate an idea of home that has emotional and political dimen-sions (Geschiere 2005; Jindra & Noret 2011; Ferguson 2013; Smith 2004). Life cycle rituals act as displays of success and prestige, create opportunities for entrepreneurism and gain, and help to coordinate plans for education, migration, and family investments. They also provide an opportunity to dis-pute and challenge the social order and recognize new identities and solidar -
ities (Lee 2011; McIntosh 2001; Njue, Voeten, & Remes 2009; Pype 2015).
Another function of these rituals is to collect and distribute diverse 
resources. This article will examine the relationship between time and money as it plays out in such rituals among the Bukusu Luhya people of Bungoma County, Kenya. Money here is broadly defined as an “idea of. . .a measure of value” (Ingham 2004:7) that may also be material. These rituals may be viewed as a means of organizing transfers of money across space and time at various rates.
In Kenya, commonly used forms of money now include mobile-phone-
based digital money, or mobile money, Safaricom’s M-Pesa service being the most commonly used. Mobile money can provide a savings place or wallet on the user’s mobile phone money account, as well as a way of trans-ferring money to a friend or relative (Maurer 2012). The mobile money services do not require a smartphone or access to the internet. They are supported by a network of more than 100,000 agents, who provide cash in/cash out services all over Kenya. According to the World Bank, 90 percent of Kenyans have used these services, and more than 80 percent of house -
holds are connected through mobile money sending (World Bank Group 2015). Kenya’s mobile money has attracted great interest as a development Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 3
imperative and commercial opportunity for poverty alleviation through 
financial inclusion––the effort to provide financial products to the poor and the unbanked (Johnson 2012, 2016). As its role in ritual has not yet been examined, mobile money will be a special focus of this description of moneys and their importance in the ritual.
These rituals involve diverse kinds of money transfers, from fast money, 
such as mobile money, cash, and savings group circulations, to slower money such as animals with different rates of reproduction, which are intended for school fees and bridewealth. Other forms of money transfer include people (who become more valuable over time) and enduring assets called “investments” (land, businesses, and homes).
Elders use their moral leadership in these rituals to endorse the impor -
tance of long-term and often collective investments, assets, and inheritances. Other participants in the rituals, including entrepreneurs, urban migrants, and women, may by contrast prioritize short-term moneys. The diverse moneys involved in these ritual exchanges offer a critique of the assump-tion that short-term, fast money is the only form of money needed to finan-cially include the poor in sub-Saharan Africa.
Setting and Method
This study of money in life cycle rituals is based on fieldwork conducted from 
2012 to 2016 in Bungoma County, Western Kenya, among Luhya-speaking Bukusu people (Wandibba 1997; Heald 1998; Nasimiyu 1997), focusing on a maturity ritual called sikhebo for adolescent males (Nangendo 1998; Egesah 2009; Mbachi & Likoko 2013). This ritual took place in 2014 and 2016, when our research team studied forty-six families with several visits, inter -
views, and observations at specific phases of the ritual (Table 1) in 2014, and follow-up in 2016. Our methodologies included semi-structured interviews, supplemented by observations and inventories at various phases of the ritual.
Bungoma County is predominantly agricultural, but trading and wage 
labor are also prevalent, and urban centers are growing rapidly. In-country migration to other parts of Kenya is widespread. Families are now geo-graphically dispersed and mobile; consequently, mobile money and mobile communication are important means of maintaining social ties and sharing funds among siblings, friends, and community members (Johnson 2014; Kusimba, Yang, & Chawla 2016). While middle-class status and consump-tion habits such as shopping at supermarkets are new ideals and practices in urban and rural East Africa (Green 2015; Neubert 2016; Spronk 2014), poverty rates remain high and wage work scarce in Bungoma County.
The Coming of Age Ritual Today
The sikhebo ritual was first described by Wagner in 1939. As he described it, 
sikhebo functioned to detach an adolescent boy from his maternal relatives 
and mark his entry into his father’s patrilineage. Similar male coming of 4 African Studies Review
Table 1. Timing of activities of fathers, mothers, and Initiates in the Sikhebo Coming of Age Ritual, Bungoma County, Kenya, 2014.
Time Initiate (Ego) Agnates (Fathers) Mother
Great-grandfathers  
(100 years) ++
(100(100 -75 years +)Tends, distributes bridewealth cattle and ancestral land
Grandfather (50 years) Tends cattle, plants trees, buys land, generates income
Father (25 years) Tends cattle, plants trees, buys land, generates income
Ego’s lifetime Sees older brothers going  
through the ritualPlants trees, purchased land and cattle; generates income
Invites bakoki to his wedding and introduces spouse to  
social networkMarries; maintains contact with her natal  
home; creates social network; joins  savings groups; generates income;  tends bridewealth cattle
1 Year Receives a calling; tells his  
parents he is readyConsiders how he will pay for the ritualInforms bakoki of son’s impending coming of age  
ceremonyInquires, calls about 13
th cow; fundraises  
with cash, mobile money for 13th cow;
Sends her son to visit her brother to  
inform him of his readiness
6 months Insists against his parents’  
doubts that he is readyMakes a budget for the ritual; Sells a cow or a tree,  
or asks boss or bakoki, brothers for a “loan”;  
“recovers debts”Inquires, calls about 13th cow; sends son  
to visit her brother
3 months Learns songs and dances Asks wife for small loan or her savings group payoutInvites bakoki and asks for some financial support
Sends son to bakoki, agnatesExpands house, replants compound to deter witchcraftInquires, calls, fundraises for 13
th cow
Requests payouts from savings group for  
feast;
Applies for permit for beer brewingMoney, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 5
Time Initiate (Ego) Agnates (Fathers) Mother
2 weeks Dons bells; begins visiting;  
collects gifts of cash, eggs,  
livestockCalls, seeks donations
Prepares special beer and reception space for bakoki;  
may rent tent, chairs, sound system, transportation,  video servicesCalls, seeks donations for 13
th cow, feast
Purchases and borrows beer pots, serving  
ware, foodstuffs, visits hairstylist
1 day Enters liminal phase, visits  
khocha; or prepares to visit  
hospital with agnateCalls, seeks donations; cashes out contingency fund Seeks donations; cashes out contingency  
fund; brews beer
The River at Dawn or The Hospital
+1 day Enters seclusion hut or  
returns home; receives giftsFeasts bakoki Feasts the assembled guests and visitors
+ 3 months Passes out; collects the cattle/  
goats of school feesFeasts bakoki Feasts assembled guests and visitors
+ four years Graduates high school using  
cattle of school feesAttends, donates to rituals of sons of his bakoki
+25 years Ego’s  
child is bornInforms bakoki of his son’s  
birthTable 1. Continued6 African Studies Review
age rituals are well-known throughout sub-Saharan Africa for imparting 
important cultural ideas about personhood, gender, fertility, wealth, and sexuality (De Wolf 1983; Marck 1997; Silverman 2004).
Sikhebo has several phases, beginning with a visiting phase which takes 
place in August and ending with the “coming out” phase in December (Table 1). Our study found that there are two forms of the ritual, called the traditional form, which is more expensive, and the Christian form. The traditional form involves a moon-dance or khuminya, often attended by several hundred people, who feast on a sacrificial bull and busaa millet beer. The moon-dance ushers in a river-bank circumcision at dawn (Egesah 2009). In our study, this traditional option cost parents between 20,000 and 40,000 Kenya Shillings (USD200 to 400), with a laundry list of expenses including the ingredients for millet beer and the purchase of a slaughter -
ing bull to feed guests (Table 2). Conversely, the Christian version shuns the beer and moon-dance and opts for a hospital circumcision, sometimes followed by a meal of tea and store-bought meat. Among the families in our study, the Christian celebration cost anywhere from 1,000 to over 25,000 Kenya Shillings (USD10 to 250). In addition to the cost to the family for hosting the event, guests also spend money purchasing gifts for the initiate, which may include school books, new clothes, and livestock. Gifts of money frequently take the form of mobile money.
The Christian and traditional forms of this ritual are in fact points on a 
continuum of investment. There are social class dimensions to the choice of which form to use (Heald 1998), which is often reflected in local elites along with some of the poorest families opting for the more expensive tra-ditional ritual. Sometimes the same family will have different ceremonies for two sons; the oldest son in a family is most likely to have a traditional event. Many families hope for a traditional event but end up having a Christian substitute when income, loans, or help from the social network fail to appear. By the same token, a Christian fete sometimes includes a last-minute purchase of the shunned maize liquor or changaa for surprise guests—especially agnates who drop by and want to thank the ancestors. Whether opting for a Christian or traditional ritual, all the forty-six families we followed enacted the visiting phase at the beginning of the ritual and the coming-out phase at the end of the ritual in December (Table 1). At the passing out, boys were given new clothes and presented back to their com-munity as adults with a series of instructive sermons by elders and religious leaders.
Money and Space-Time
Time and space are “wrapped up in the workings of money” (Pryke & Allen 
2000:282). Money “allow(s) social relations to be extended across space and time” (Leyshon & Thrift 1997:23). It connects the past to the future as a form of memory (Hart 2000), as a credit relationship, or as a financial contract. Money relations can shape our experience of time; in turn, our Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 7
Table 2. Costs incurred by father James during the coming of age ceremony held for his son, and assistance and gifts 
that friends and family provided to him. James earns 6,000 shillings (USD60) per month as a farm laborer. One hundred Kenyan Shillings (KS) equals 1 US dollar. Bungoma County, Kenya, 2014.
James’ Expenditures Amount in Kenyan Shillings Assistance and Gifts James and His Son Received
Live cow for feast 10,000 Loan of 20,000 Kenyan Shillings from his boss
Ugali, Rice, Milk, Tea, Cabbage 6,500 Thirteenth Cow for initiate from mother’s brother
Maize and millet for beer 5,200 Loan of generator and fuel from a friend
Contingency Fund (beer savings) on Mobile  
Money Account1,500 1,500 Shillings for truck rental to parade the Thirteenth 
Cow from a friend
Mattress 800 1,050 Shillings for contingency fund from several age mates
Bells and headdress 300 Seats, Tents, and cooking utensils from friends
Bangles 100 Foodstuffs for feast from neighbors
Whistle 100 Sheets for initiate from paternal aunt
Transport for 2 circumcisers 700 Clothing for initiate from a friend
Service Charge for 2 circumcisers 700 Advice and guidance to the boy from a great uncle
Cock to feast two circumcisers 400 Blessings from family, friends, community members
Total Costs 26,3008 African Studies Review
own understandings of time shape our behavior with money. For example, 
debt may be reckoned by regular units of calendar time, but calculating by seasons or other markers may make much more sense to subsistence farmers (Shipton 1995, 2010).
This article demonstrates that life cycle rituals compose an ecology 
of moneys with different space/time qualities (Guyer & Belinga 1995; Maurer 2010), and that the moneys of the ritual form a hierarchy (Figure 1). In many societies, the hierarchy of money separates the sphere of long-term collective value from that of short-term individual goals and gain (Parry & Bloch 1989:2) or, as Guyer puts it, “different moral economies of fairness (in the short run) and transcendence (in the long run)” (Guyer 2011:2214). In reality, the long- and short-term spheres of money are interdependent (Parry & Bloch 1989:2). In the context of the ritual, exchanges and conver -
sions between different moneys are used to measure the “temporal reach of. . . wealth; over the short run, the lifespan, intergenerational succession, and in perpetuity” (Guyer 2011:2214).
At the level of the most constant form of money, the family home is an 
enduring space-time and is the ultimate wealth to which the other forms of value in the ritual are related. Masculine personhood, livestock, cash, and mobile money come into play at lower levels of the hierarchy, in shortened cycles and heightened velocities of money as the rituals play out (Table 1). Through life cycle rituals, the elders and others endorse the moral impor -
tance of collective and long-term interests, the superalternate money value (Gregory 1997:8). By contrast, for urban migrants, women, and youth, short-term money may be the more important money. Mobile money is the most rapid form of money associated with the ritual. Through its unique 
Figure 1. Hierarchy of money in life cycle rituals, from the most enduring form 
of money, the land, at the top of the figure, to the shortest and fastest money, mobile money, at the bottom of the figure.Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 9
manipulations of space and time, digital money can create more pathways to 
other kinds of moneys collected during these rituals.
Family Land: Enduring Space and Time
The forms of money involved in this ritual form a hierarchy, which can be 
summarized as follows, beginning at the top with the most enduring form, the land. In many East African societies that employ age sets as social divisions, time is marked as generations move through the life cycle, from one social role to another. “When a new class of Fathers is endowed with authority, the preceding and the following classes reach new positions” (Peatrik 2005:285). This movement of generations through social roles divides experience into units of structural time (Evans-Pritchard 1940:104). Rituals observed at birth, coming of age, death, and so on mark stages in the passage of structural time (Leach 1961). Structural time also incorporates the ancestors, the unborn, and notions of eternal time or of the universe (Booth 1975; Mbiti 1971; Megeressa & Kassam 2005).
This eternal time is materialized in the family home. In Western Kenya, the 
rural home is the common repository of origin and identity; it is a place of ancestral rest, genealogical ties, and family belonging and obligation (Atieno-Odhiambo & Cohen 1989; Cattell 2005; Shipton 2009:91; Wandibba 1997). For the Luo family, life is “the experience and memory of intersubjective time, time of intimacy with a grandchild and time of interlinked biographies of chil-dren, affines, and children’s children” (Whyte & Whyte 2004). The connection between home, identity, and social group is also at the origin of concepts of property, value, and money in many other societies as well. Keith Hart’s theory of money as memory begins with the idea of the family land as a collec-tive memory. The family land is “durable . . . (and) embodies the desires and wealth of all the other members of society” (Hart 2000:259). The collective memory that creates community is the origin of money: “Property must endure in order to be property and that depends on memory” (Hart 2000:258).
Among the Bukusu, land is the most important economic asset and goal 
for almost everyone we spoke with, if not individually then through a savings group or through one of the many pooling schemes. Land value is expected to increase over time; it should be “developed” with rental houses, a business, farming, trees, and animals. Urbanites and emigrants build homes in their vil-lages of origin which are visited only during ritual time. During the 2014 sikhebo, many visitors returned home across space-time. One single mother sought a “Christian” hospital circumcision for her son, paying for his transportation home from Mombasa so that his paternal grandfather could accompany him to the local hospital. The space-time of the family home is also enacted during the visiting phase of sikhebo (Table 1), when boys still visit relatives’ homes in a cycle of dancing, singing, and gift-giving. The movement through structural space-time involves visiting the elders—“right up to the doorstep,” they insist—who, when visited, present initiates with livestock, money, and eggs (a symbol of fertility). These gifts shape a reciprocal bond across generational time.10 African Studies Review
The sikhebo ritual is a time of collective memory. The family home 
shapes engagement with the past and present and with the community, 
through memory and storytelling, “implicit in daily life but motivated in ritual” (Cole 1998, 2006). In the weeks before sikhebo, the fathers we visited told stories of family wealth and abundance in the past and narrated their family histories. They showed us ancestral graves, reminders of an “immanent past” (Birth 2006) of deceased loved ones, and places on the landscape where they listed names of agnatic ancestors and their affiliation to the ten Bukusu age sets that rotate through structural time. They spoke of agnates who “farmed this whole area here up to the horizon together with his brothers” or “gained title to 87 acres after land adjudication,” or “had such a large farm he needed eight wives.” In preparation for the ritual, families reoriented ancestral graves to discourage witchcraft or curses from unhappy ancestors, to which initiates are vulnerable. At ritual beer-drinkings the ancestors are made real, invited to join the celebrants under a sun-shield made of maize husks.
These narratives of increasing poverty, land fragmentation, and delo-
calization also keep alive an ideal of enduring wealth in the land. People took care to explain when their land came to them as inheritance from an agnatic kinsman as opposed to having been purchased, and such bequeathed land is still said to bring blessings if it is cared for into the future. The sale of land was forbidden by ancestral curses, the fathers explained, and today suggestions or threats to sell such land, even purchased land, will invite a family conference or a visit from relatives, who may initiate rumors of witch-craft or corrupt title designed to drive away buyers.
Space-time and land relationships in Kenya are also shaped by polit-
ical ethnicity, and by political claims to land. In 2014, the political benefits of such ethnic marking of space and time were not lost on Bungoma County’s governor, Ken Lusaka, a major supporter of continuing this ritual despite opposition from missions and churches. In Bungoma’s main soccer stadium, he staged displays of dancing by boys who were top scorers on the national exams, a key point of contention for resource and oppor -
tunity rationing and held a hygiene seminar for circumcisers which offered a certificate of completion. Such political endorsement of the ritual appeal to a sense of the land as the collective wealth of Bukusu people.
Masculine Personhood
The Lubukusu word kimiandu—meaning wealth—is also closely related to 
kumuandu—the word for the circumcised penis. As these cognates suggest, the male person is a form of wealth and a metaphor for wealth. At sikhebo, the initiate begins to gradually accumulate masculine personhood in his body until he reaches the maximum of personhood in old age (Nangendo 1998).
The bookend to sikhebo is an event during the funeral rituals (kumuse) 
called khukhala kimikoye, which takes place two to three years after a death Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 11
and formally transforms the deceased elder into an ancestor. At khukhala 
kimikoye (which means “to cut the rope” that ties the deceased to his descen-dants), the deceased’s sister’s son must climb his roof and detach a wooden rod called sisuli, known to be a phallic symbol, that protrudes from the center pole (Wagner 1949:536). At this juncture, the deceased’s wealth is also divided up and distributed to his heirs.
During the “coming out” phase, the elders direct long homilies at initiates, 
instructing them in proper moral behaviors. In 2014, the initiates were told to be responsible with their sexuality and to make “wise investments,” espe-cially in their educations. Through the growth and transfer of masculine personhood across generational time, the Bukusu distribute value from the old to the young. They “organize transfer of output (from older to younger generations) (by giving) the old some item, it need not be material, which they can trade to the younger generation” (Walsh 1983:647). Effectively, the old trade their masculinity to the young over time in return for labor, care, and deference.
The timeframe of a lifespan is often at the forefront of men’s economic 
thinking. During sikhebo the age-mates share their aspirations and plan for the recognition of their achievements: “People will come to my funeral to see what kind of man I am. They will see what I have made of myself.” In Bungoma today, brothers and age mates are pressed to pool their resources to purchase land plots or put up rental houses, each contributing to part of a project such as electricity or fencing. These ambitious ventures may jeop-ardize day-to-day imperatives and divert resources from education and food, but they are pursued as part of a gendered ideal of wealth, even through failures. Deborah James has found a similar relationship between men and long-term investments in South Africa:
From men’s . . . point of view, ceremonial expenditures and investments in 
the long-term future remain of key importance, but the fact that they are often unaffordable has made for a deep-seated sense of failure and of psy-
chic, social and cognitive dissonance. (James 2015:25)
In one case, a father gave 20,000 shillings (USD200) to an electrician to 
wire up a rental house, which was supposed to be the man’s contribution to 
a project shared by his brothers. The electrician absconded with the money, leaving the family without school fees for the term. The boy’s mother then began cobbling together fees from her savings group, brother, and others. Such gendered frictions between short- and long-term planning are often left to women as household managers to resolve.
Livestock
Cattle have long been an important form of wealth among Bukusu, 
where men inherited their father’s cattle—“the cattle of the yard” (Wagner 1949:79)—and with women having claims to a separate circuit of bridewealth 12 African Studies Review
cattle, which they could raise, trade, and bequeath (see also Oboler 1996). 
At funerals, cattle were sacrificed for blessings and apportioned to sons and relatives by birth order and seniority.
A day before the circumcision, the boy visits his maternal uncle (khocha), 
who gives him “the thirteenth cow” or cow of lixoni (Wagner 1949:131),  
a symbolic return of the bridewealth cattle (which in the past was twelve cows) that his sister’s marriage brought to him. Other livestock gifts may be given to the boy after his hospital visit or riverside circumcision and again at the passing out in December (Table 1). These livestock will be cared for by the boys’ fathers and are widely viewed as an investment towards their school fees and near future. Let’s call them “the cattle of the school fees” (after Hutchinson 1992). Fathers explained the rates of reproduction and expected increase rates for cattle, sheep, and goats over the coming years. Livestock’s varying rates of reproduction were related to the boys’ immanent and even-tual needs for school fees, brideweath, money to start a business, and so on.
That these livestock are today usually purchased, for around 15,000 
Kenya Shillings or USD150, seems to give them greater meaning and value (Maurer 2006). The thirteenth cow is especially important to women; a father will know little about any plans for a gift from his in-laws in the weeks before the ritual, waving at his wife and saying, “The boy’s mother will talk to her people.” Mothers say that their families’ blessings flow to them through the animal; it is a sign that they have not been forgotten in marriage. Women ask their fathers, brothers, cousins, and others, sending their sons to visit wearing school uniforms and carrying their exam certificates and results.
Promises or pledges of school fees may be given instead of livestock or 
money; these will be reiterated several times at various stages of sikhebo in response to the parents’ repeated requests and references to education. If no thirteenth cow is forthcoming, plans may quickly change to hold a joint party with a neighbor or cousin who has secured the thirteenth cow, or to shift from a traditional to a more modest Christian event to lessen the embarrassment to the family.
Often the boy, the thirteenth cow, and their entourage will form a col-
orful parade on the way home from khocha, the boy dancing with his bells and smeared with millet to mark his liminal status (Figure 2) and the thirteenth cow adorned with a patterned cloth and flowers in its horns. Some fathers hire a truck to carry the entourage and the thirteenth cow home in style (Table 2). Local elites stage extravagant parades, driving bridewealth cattle through a crowded marketplace, which is captured on video cameras and smartphones and uploaded to social media. Such displays increase the cow’s social value and, by extension, its value as a long-term, informal sav-ings mechanism (Shipton 1990). There are several meanings attached to the thirteenth cow, which has been said to express the solidarity of the pat-riline, its generosity and wealth, the marital harmony of the parents, and their good in-law relations. The thirteenth cow also evokes respect for the ancestors, or the virtue of the elders, who graciously cede social power and resources to the next generation with the passage of time.Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 13
The Celebration Economy
David Parkin’s Palms, Wine, and Witnesses (Parkin 1972) examined the 
impact of market economies and money on rituals and beer feasts among the Giriama of Coastal Kenya in the late 1960s. New entrepreneurs have sought to extricate themselves from the ritual demands of elders, especially the required contributions to expensive ritual beer feasts. By converting to Islam, the entrepreneurs could eschew beer, but they still paid witnesses to be their proxies at the parties, in effect buying the elders’ tolerance.
Indeed, elder power is still fearful of social change, as elaborated below. 
But in today’s Kenya everyone is an entrepreneur. Aspirations to lifestyles that center around wage employment, travel, leisure, and shopping are widespread, even in rural East Africa (Green 2015). In Bungoma, a thriving celebration economy (Ifejika 2014) has formed to serve life cycle rituals. The local market sells and rents tents, chairs, and sound systems (which will be played at deafening levels) to accommodate the legion of guests. There is germinated millet for beer (busaa), homemade maize liquor (changaa), cook-ing pots, beer pots, cows, goats, and chickens to be given as gifts or prepared as food. Other goods and services include clothing, tailoring, household goods, food, vans and buses for hire, food catering, beauty and hair, home improvement, and photography and video. Women entrepreneurs are especially active, preparing and selling foodstuffs, especially millet beer and maize liquor, which are important enterprises for women throughout East Africa (Green 1999).Figure 2. Parade of the thirteenth cow through Chwele marketplace, Kenya, 
August 2014. Note the initiate in his liminal phase, smeared with millet flour.
14 African Studies Review
The celebration economy sets an accelerated, shortened space-time of 
cash money, a means of exchange, in preparation for the event. In the 
months before the moon-dance, the father may set up a budget and visit his age mates (the bakoki) to solicit assistance. As Mzee Nathan, who has circum-cised nine sons, put it, “To show his love for his son, a father has to spend.” Table 2 shows the source of funds and costs of father James’ ritual for his second son in 2014. James earns 6,000 shillings a month as a farm laborer.
For most families, preparing for the ritual requires sincere effort. 
Fathers are likely to liquefy a significant asset to fund the feast, such as a cow or a tree. Some fathers sought assistance from relatives or a loan from a boss, savings group, or SACCO at the local sugar company, and had amassed between 5,000 and 15,000 shillings in a bank or mobile money account. Others had begun preparations such as cleaning up the household or extending a house to accommodate the drinking party of the bakoki (age mates). Preparation and planning meant readying animals from the herd as gifts or sacrifice, debating locations, or purchasing livestock before the market price increased in anticipation of the event.
In the weeks before the ritual, families set cash in motion by accessing 
their social networks, variously calling and asking for assistance, seeking loans, recovering debts, or soliciting contributions. Mothers planned to time their savings group payouts to this period so they might secure the thirteenth cow or have enough money to prepare the millet beer, which brings the ancestors and requires advance purchase of a government per -
mit, as well as money for foodstuffs and home preparations (Table 1).
When fast money is scarce, parents may attempt to slow time, stalling the 
boy, their relatives, elders, and age mates’ inquiries about plans and details. Their creditors and friends stall them in return, assenting and promising repeatedly but only giving at the last minute if at all. Families without cash wait as unanswered questions stall the preparations. What would be the role of khocha? Would the thirteenth cow be given? Would the sacred beer be 
brewed? Would the child visit the hospital, or would there be a traditional ritual expert who would conduct the ritual by the river as dawn approached? Will a well-off relative finally step in and offer to host the party? The weeks and days before the ritual have a temporality of waiting, of stalling, of making promises, and of increasing anxiety for parents. Men will be chided if there is not enough beer and meat for the bakoki. Women are anxious to prepare a bountiful feast, to brew the ritual beer (Holtzman 2011), and to present a pleasing homestead which will demonstrate their family’s generosity and respect.
Digital Money: Micro-coordination in Rapid Space-Time
Basic and feature phones were by far the most common type of phone used in 
Western Kenya in 2014. These phones offer talk and text, a clock, a calculator, and a flashlight. Some models can receive text-based versions of the internet in addition to taking photographs. Even a basic phone can allow a person to tell the time of day, add numbers, and illuminate the dark. Like flashlights, radios, Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 15
and kerosene lamps introduced in East Africa in the 1960s, mobile phones have 
greatly changed daily life in rural African settings along with the personal and social identities of users. As microtechnologies, their “diminutive appearance often belies their great importance and salience” (Robbins & Kilbride 1987:245).
Digital money adds another function to the mobile device. Mobile money 
has a changeable materiality, a “creative instability” (Maurer 2012:591), as it can shift from text message to stored value, to airtime, and back again to talk and text, or to cash through a mobile money agent. In the context of the ritual, mobile money represented two kinds of money—first a means of rapid exchange and circulation through text message, and second a store of value on the mobile money account held in anticipation of short-term needs (see other evidence of a short-term reserve of value in Johnson 2012). Money as information, as language, as digital text message can be transferred within seconds even on a global scale, stored, and sent or divided. It is used as a form of communication, shaped by the context of text and talk of which it is a part. Its spaces can be personal and private (Katz & Aakhus 2002); it is a money of intimacies (Hjorth 2011; Pertierra 2005); networks (Ilahiane & Sherry 2012); circulations and micro-coordination (Ling & Yttri 2002). It implies perpetual contact, but also hints at exclusion and secrecy (Ling & Campbell 2010; Ling 2008; Gergen 2002). In many settings in the Global South, mobile phones may be dangerously empowering and morally suspect (Anderson 2013; Archambault 2013; Garcia-Montes 2006; Hijazi-Omari & Ribak 2008; McIntosh 2010). These private digital circuits, as subalternate money (Gregory 1997:8) represent a store of value in the mobile wallet and through exchange, a conduit to higher levels of the money hierarchy.
During the visiting phase of sikhebo, all forty-six families under consid-
eration used mobile phones to invite some of their friends and relatives to the party in lieu of the traditional visiting. It was common to invite fifty or more people using phone calls, widening the ritual’s catchment area from Western Kenya to embrace international migrants, some of whom sent gift remittances via mobile accounts.
Mobile phones were also widely used to pool and collect money for the 
ritual from the participants’ social networks. In the hours before the feast, last-minute donations are often received via mobile phones, after the fam-ilies have endured days of promises and waiting; one mother received 1,800 shillings from five women friends the day before the feast, enough for her to purchase the necessary millet and begin brewing. Fathers spoke hesi-tantly of impending recovery of “debts” through mobile money from long-lost friends and age mates. Many women drew payouts from their savings groups of between 6,000 and 10,000 shillings on their mobile phones.
Much phone-mediated communication assisted women searching for 
the thirteenth cow from one of their relatives, and through mobile devices they were able to conceal their considerable efforts to fundraise and cobble together this gift. The thirteenth cow and its parade make visible women’s ties to the homes of their birth and their claims to brideweath cattle. Similarly, a household’s feast, as testament to its moral, spiritual, and 16 African Studies Review
material worthiness, often comes together through micro-coordination in 
the last two to three days before the event, with mobile communication being an indispensable tool in preparing the feast and arranging for loca-tion and donations. As such, phones conceal the gendered flows and con-tradictions of mobile money circulations, in which the elaborate public feast and testament to a man’s success as a father and provider is often sup-ported through the greater social capital of his wife (see also Ainslie 2014).
Finally, the mobile wallet as a private, short-term, and personal savings 
device became a store of value in the hours and days before the feast. The stored value was used by women to save money needed for preparing the feast; mothers saved their son’s mobile money gifts on their digital accounts; and men stored money for the circumciser and the beer feast.
“I mainly activate this M-Pesa account for purposes regarding this cere-
mony…. It is the mother of the household who bears the shame, insults and all abuse (if there is not enough beer or food). . . I have set aside 
something (on my phone) for emergency.”
“The guests do not care how much ready the home is….they come to get a 
share of the ceremony. There are under-estimations always. In such a situ-
ation, there are rumblings and tumults. . . I have set aside foods and brew 
with a neighbor in a secret place. . . . and I can still buy more from what I have saved on the phone to heal the situation.”
“I have saved 600 on my wife’s phone for the circumciser. . . so I will not be 
embarrassed.”
Father James (Table 2) referred to the money on his phone using the 
tongue-in-cheek phrase, “contingency fund.” He received 1,050 shillings in 
donations from bakoki before the beer party; at an agent a few days before the feast, he loaded this cash onto his phone. He also remarked that at the time he had not yet received a 20,000-shilling loan from his boss which was to purchase the cow for the feast and to rent a truck to parade the thirteenth cow. His other sources for the beer party included a payout of 6,000 Kenya Shillings (USD60) from his wife’s savings group. The morning after the event, his younger brother told us that the contingency fund had come in handy; when the age mates finished the traditional busaa, Father James was able to purchase some of the local changaa to keep the party going.
Although mobile phones and mobile money are widely used, their disrup-
tive potential presents social dilemmas of use and interpretation, particularly from the elders’ point of view. In a ritual where public display “asserts the fun-damental health and wholeness of society and nature” (Turner 1975:16), the personal and private nature of mobile money may insinuate infidelity, mistrust, witchcraft, and deception. The elders told us that women are unfaithful and youth deceptive “because of the phone.” They insist on personal connections, on being visited “up to the doorstep.” Mobile phones truncate the important obligations of intergenerational space-time. As one elder told us:Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 17
When we (elders) inherited this (ritual of sikhebo) from our forefathers, 
they were sending us with bells up to the doorstep . . . (then the elders) 
would give you an animal. A four-legged animal. . . . You will also be hon-
ored when it is your turn. And when you call (an elder) on the phone he 
will just tell you, I am not a kid to be called on the phone.
Another area of ambiguity surrounding mobile money gifts concerns 
money sent in from migrants to the cities. Hundreds or even thousands of 
people send money donations via mobile phones for family rituals, especially funerals, which are intended as gifts for initiates or families or to help sup-port the costs of festivities. This money sending is, however, an ambiguous 
relational work (Zelizer 2012). On the one hand, digital money broadens 
ritual space-time, linking in urban and even international migrants in the collection and distribution of the ritual’s benefit. Nearly all Kenyans contrib-
ute to life cycle rituals regularly, especially funerals, where they are often 
involved in bundling and fundraising. These digital money gifts have an emo-tional quality of “condoling” people or “offering them comfort,” “sending 
because I could not be there,” or “showing my concern;” they function as 
a substitute for their senders. But by making the substitution of self for sending so easy, mobile money sets up a cruel math. If an absentee adds the cost of his or her travel to a donation instead of attending, the money sent 
home will be more than if the relative had attended in person and possibly 
more appreciated at home. Either choice brings the inevitable bane of every urban migrant: critical gossip or backbiting (see also Smith 2004).
Some migrants see an opportunity for gain in the juggling of digital 
space-time. Wafula, a fifty-year old Nairobi resident and wage-earner, explained that at his point in life, he is reaching a high point of remittance 
demands, as nieces and nephews seek school fees and job placement, and 
as elderly folk continue to need support. He has a “system,” as he calls it, for dealing with “celebrations back home.” He explained how it worked during 
the 2012 circumcision of his nephew (who would refer to him as “father”):
As the day approached I refused my brother’s calls and those of my sister 
in law. I just kept quiet. I missed the whole thing. But then during the 
passing out . . . I called my sister-in-law . . . . I asked her to prepare a shop-
ping list of everything that would be needed. . . She sent me an SMS with the list that came to 6,000 shillings. I sent her that (via M-Pesa). So there 
was a big feast and that 6,000 paid for everything. My brother called me to 
say thank you.
Wafula estimates he saved around 20,000 Kenya shillings by staying 
home, avoiding the cost of travel, and ignoring numerous requests for assis-
tance before and during the event, which was attended by several hundred 
people. He would have been expected to give money to older women for their “sugar”; help people with travel expenses; and to assist the church and the family with last-minute expenses, food, and the boy’s medical costs. 18 African Studies Review
Initiating the call during the passing out and allowing his sister-in-law to set 
the price of the remittance makes him appear infinitely generous, even as his own estimates, he explained, would have ended up being too high for the actual cost of groceries in the rural areas.
Another method of strategizing with e-money was demonstrated by 
Michael, who works as a security guard in Nairobi and maintains a close friendship with his bakoki in Bungoma, regularly sending him money to look after his farm and his ritual obligations in the village. Michael will usu-ally send his parents and other elders to this age-mate for their regular needs rather than taking his rural relatives’ calls directly. He puts money aside regularly using the mobile banking and credit service M-Shwari (which means to smooth, as in income smoothing), and explains that his rural relatives’ 
constant requests “interfered with my savings targets.” Michael plans to pur -
chase a plot in his village, and will add his age-mate to the title for a share of the purchase price. Both Michael and Wafula perform their social and familial obligations but divert smaller payments homeward through less intimate and socially lower-ranking social ties. Through such creative rela-tional work, not unlike Parkin’s (1972) Islamic entrepreneurs, they seek to balance family obligation, on the one hand, with new associations of oppor -
tunity, friendship, and choice on the other (Hart 1988).
Yet they may run afoul of the elders; as Mzee Nathan put it, the mobile 
phone may be used to “deny me a bull.” The elders say that urban migrants and in-laws (the mother’s brother especially) are the people most likely to substitute cash via mobile for something more tangible—to send some amount over the phone as a poor substitute for an animal gift, to find ways to hide or divert resources from the ritual home. Some elders argued that such a substitution could be deemed acceptable if the cash offered was a larger amount of money than specified gift would cost. Clearly then, the elders undervalue digital money and are suspicious of its repertoires. In 
other African settings, new moneys have similarly been viewed as morally dubious. Among the Luo, money gained from selling land or from illegal activities was thought to be dangerous, and called “bitter money” (Shipton 1989); in Burkina Faso “hot money” comes from the sale of cotton and other lucrative crops, and must be cooled by the elders, who also take a portion of the amount for themselves (Somé 2013).
In Bungoma, the new digital money is not identified as bitter or hot. 
Content to voice their disapproval of the new mobile phones, the elders instead stake their commitments to the existing hierarchy of ritual money and to the enduring value of land, cattle, and other assets. On the other hand, they may also send text message solicitations of their own—in one case to several grandchildren reminding them that a worn-out sweater would not serve as a comfortable funeral shroud. A subtle intimation of curses from beyond the grave was enough to inspire informal money pool-ing to purchase grandfather’s new clothes—“Did you get the text message about the sweater?” The elders too seek the benefits of digital money circu-lations, leveraging their position of advantage in structural time.Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 19
Finance, Rituals, Money, and Time
Contemporary life cycle rituals in Kenya amass substantial amounts of value 
using diverse kinds of money, including the new digital money available over 
mobile phones. In a coming of age ritual in 2014 in Western Kenya, the mobile 
phone was used for coordinating, planning, setting aside a reserve, gift-giving, and fundraising. The ritual also perpetuated ideas and practices surrounding gender, generation, lineage, and reproduction. Life cycle rituals prioritize the long-term asset as part of the prestige of elder masculinity. Additionally, the 
rituals provide women and youth with opportunities to claim bridewealth 
cattle, pay school fees, brew the beer that brings ancestral blessings, or pursue enterprise. Digital money is complementary, as private, fast money, to the public and the slower forms of money generated by the ritual such as the thir -
teenth cow. Digital money opens up new pathways to “manage, negotiate, and 
move better between different currencies, on a daily basis” (Iazzolino & 
Wasike 2015:230), to divert or stay the movement of e-value through the often private spaces of mobile technology. Women, youth, migrants, and the elders themselves take advantage of these affordances.
The excitement around mobile money as development intervention has 
focused on its ability to transfer money to remote, poor households and to 
support their daily needs. Mobile money’s cultural roles that go beyond 
household economics, however, are often poorly understood. The impor -
tance of using money transfer for life cycle rituals, especially funerals, has been noted by development and finance interests. A widely-cited industry research project tracked household economic flows every two weeks among 
low-income Kenyans for one year (FSD Kenya 2014). Not surprisingly, the 
study found that households in the study received abundant money gifts as funeral donations. One of the vignettes from the diary study reads as follows:
Shortly before Christmas, Isaac’s wife became ill and had trouble swallow-
ing. After review, the hospital informed her that she had a tumor in her throat that would need to be removed. It would cost KSh23,000 . . . . they could not raise the full KSh23,000 fast enough and his wife died. 
Immediately, Isaac was flooded with contributions in cash and in-kind 
worth more than KSh33,000. The social network worked but, in this case, too late to save a life. (FSD Kenya 2014:29)
The diary’s authors felt that Isaac’s fundraising fell short of its goal; its 
“slowness” was a “flaw” (CGAP 2014). The authors further suggested that 
although “cultural norms” might make funeral collections “efficient,” that 
“faster-acting financial devices” needed to be developed, which would somehow compel people to donate “in time” (FSD Kenya 2014:30). The diary project recommended a faster form of money that would accelerate funeral donations into something its authors deemed more rational—
medical care that would save the life in question. Unfortunately, the push 
to accelerate money has meant a trail of failed banking and finance efforts in 20 African Studies Review
East Africa, such as attempts to financialize farmers’ assets through mort-
gages (Johnson 2004; Shipton 2010).
This ethnographic study suggests that a faster monetary technology will 
not necessarily transform a funeral donation into a medical donation. Rather, the widespread use of mobile money in Kenya to participate in funerals, weddings, and coming of age rituals is part of a financial system, which, like every financial system, manages wealth through the life course and across generations. Bukusu finance is grounded “in the temporal arc of a human life” (Guyer 2012:491):
. . . we will all die sooner or later, albeit not just yet, and perhaps cross our 
fingers . . . . each generation must bow out with dignity, after shouldering its responsibilities as well as possible. We should know this, and we should 
prepare ourselves accordingly during life. The long term is not something 
that will arrive later, when we are all dead. It arrives all the time, or rather, from time to time, whenever the time comes for each one of us to do our duty. This is the first thing we must all know if we want to live responsibly. 
(Amato & Fantacci 2012:55)
The above morbid exhortation could have come straight from the 
didactic lectures of Mzee Nathan and the other elders; in fact, it is from a 
sociological critique of contemporary finance and its manipulations of tem-porality. The Bukusu clearly know when their time will be up, and they plan for it as best as they can. Their finance is a long-term investment in person-hood, a value that begins gradually in youth, increasing to its final, maximum extent. For the Bukusu, digital money is not the next development interven-tion or poverty alleviation promise. The elders don’t trust it entirely, and with good reason, for it reveals and even furthers the waning of their social power. Nor is it marked as “hot” (Somé 2013) or “bitter” (Shipton 1989). It is the bottom of the hierarchy, but it is welcomed as another conduit to wealth (kimiandu)—that chance to touch eternity.
Acknowledgments
This article was funded by grants for field research in Kenya from the  
Institute for Money, Technology and Financial Inclusion (IMTFI), University  
of California, Irvine in 2012, 2014, and 2015. Mr. Alex Wanyama, Dr. Chap 
Kusimba and Mr. Gabriel Kunyu were invaluable research partners who found families willing to share their experiences and recorded and translated Lubukusu interviews. I would like to thank Bill Maurer, Ursula Dalinghaus, Jenny Fan, Maia Green, Gianluca Iazzolini, Susan Johnson, Dolores Koenig,  
Katrien Pype, Ivan Small, and Mrinalini Tankha for their advice and comments on this work in various phases. I would also like to thank Chap Kusimba for his support in the field and comments on previous drafts. Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the research participants for all that they taught me, of which a small part is represented here.Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 21
References
Ainslie, Andrew. 2014. “Harnessing the Ancestors: Mutuality, Uncertainty, and Ritual 
Practice in the Eastern Cape Province, South Africa.” Africa 84 (4): 530–52.
Amato, Massimo, and Luca Fantacci. 2012. The End of Finance. Malden, MA: Polity 
Press.
Anderson, Barbara. 2013. “Tricks, Lies and Mobile Phones: ‘Phone Friend’ Stories 
in Papua New Guinea.” Culture, Theory and Critique 54 (3): 318–34.
Archambault, Julie Soleil. 2013. “Cruising through Uncertainty: Cell Phones and 
the Politics of Display and Disguise in Inhambane, Mozambique.” American 
Ethnologist 40 (1): 88–101.
Atieno-Odhiambo, E. S., and William Cohen. 1989. Siaya: The Historical Anthropology 
of an African Landscape. London: James Currey.
Beidelman, T. O. 1991. “Containing Time: Rites of Passage and Moral Space or 
Bachelard among the Kaguru, 1957–1966.” Anthropos 86: 443–61.
Birth, Kevin. 2006. “The Immanent Past: Culture and Psyche at the Juncture of 
Memory and History.” Ethos 34 (2): 169–91.
Booth, N. S. 1975. “Time and Change in African Traditional Thought.” Journal of 
Religion in Africa 7 (2): 81–91.
Cattell, Maria. 2005. “African Reinventions: Home, Place, and Kinship among the 
Abaluyia of Kenya.” In Home: And Identity in Late Life: International Perspectives, edited by Graham D. Rowles and Habib Chaudhury, 219–36. New York: Springer.
Cole, Jennifer. 1998. “The Work of Memory in Madagascar.” American Ethnologist  
25 (4): 610–33.
———. 2006. “Conceptions of Memory:Politics and the Study of Memory.” Ethos  
34 (2): 211–43.
Egesah, Omar. 2009. Male Circumcision in Africa: Ethnographic Evidence from the 
Bukusu, Kenya. Saarbrucken, Germany: Verlag Dr. Muller Acktiengesellschaft and Co. KG.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood and 
Political Institutions of a Nilotic People. New York and Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Ferguson, James. 2013. “How to Do Things with Land: A Distributive Perspective on 
Rural Livelihoods in Southern Africa.” Journal of Agrarian Change 13 (1): 166–74.
Financial Sector Deepening. 2014. “Kenya Financial Diaries: Shilingi Kwa Shilingi: 
Financial Lives of the Poor.” Nairobi: Financial Sector Deepening.
Gergen, Kenneth. 2002. “The Challenge of Absent Presence.” In Perpetual Contact, 
edited by J. E. Katz and M. Aakhus, 227–41. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Geschiere, Peter. 2005. “Funerals and Belonging: Different Patterns in South 
Cameroon.” African Studies Review 48 (2): 45–64.
Green, Maia. 1999. “Trading on Inequality: Gender and the Drinks Trade in Southern 
Tanzania.” Africa 69 (3): 404–25.
———. 2015. “Making Africa Middle Class: From Poverty Reduction to the 
Production of Inequality in Tanzania.” Economic Anthropology 2: 295–309.
Gregory, Christopher. 1997. Savage Money. London: Harwood.Guyer, Jane. 2011. “Soft Currencies, Cash Economies, New Monies: Past and Present.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 (7): 2214–21.22 African Studies Review
———. 2012. “Obligation, Binding, Debt and Responsibility: Provocations about 
Temporality from Two New Sources.” Social Anthropology 20 (4): 491–501.
Guyer, Jane, and Samuel Belinga. 1995. “Wealth in People as Wealth in Knowledge: 
Accumulation and Composition in Equatorial Africa.” Journal of African History 
36 (1): 91–120.
Hart, Keith. 1988. “Kinship, Contract and Trust: The Economic Organization of 
Migrants in an African City Slum.” In Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations, edited by Diego Gambetta, 176–93. New York: Basil Blackwell.
———. 2000. Money in an Unequal World. London: Profile Books.Heald, Suzette. 1998. Casting out Anger: The Anthropology of Bagisu Violence. Columbus, 
Ohio: Ohio University Press.
Hijazi-Omari, Hiyam, and Rivka Ribak. 2008. “Playing with Fire: On the Domestication 
of the Mobile Phone among Palestinian Teenage Girls.” Information, Communication, and Society 11 (2): 149–66.
Hjorth, Larissa. 2011. “Mobile Specters of Intimacy: Marginal Youth and Mobile 
Phones in Beijing.” In Mobile Communication: Bringing Us Together and Tearing Us Apart, edited by Richard Ling and Scott W Campbell, 37–60. New Brunswick, 
New Jersey: Transaction Publishers.
Holtzman, Jon. 2011. “The Food of Elders, the ‘Ration’ of Women: Brewing, Gender, 
and Domestic Processes among the Samburu of Northern Kenya.” American 
Anthropologist 103 (4): 1041–58.
Hutchinson, Sharon. 1992. “The Cattle of Money and the Cattle of Girls among the 
Nuer, 1930-1986.” American Ethnologist 19 (294–316).
Iazzolino, Gianluca, and Nambuwani Wasike. 2015. “The Unbearable Lightness of 
Digital Money.” Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems 9 (3): 229–40.
Ifejika, Nkem. 2014. “We Like to Party.” Msafiri: Kenya Airways In-Flight Magazine. 
http://www.msafirimag.com/business/we-like-to-party/.
Ilahiane, Hsain, and JW Sherry. 2012. “The Problematics of the ‘Bottom of the 
Pyramid’ Approach to International Development: The Case of Micro-Entrepreneurs’ Use of Mobile Phones in Morocco.” Information Technology in International Development 8 (1): 13–26.
Ingham, Geoffrey. 2004. The Nature of Money. London: Polity Press.
James, Deborah. 2015. Money from Nothing: Indebtedness and Aspiration in South Africa. 
Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Jindra, Michael, and Joel Noret. 2011. “African Funerals and Sociocultural Change: 
A Review of Momentous Transformations across a Continent.” In Funerals in 
Africa: Explorations of a Social, 11–35. New York: Berghan Books.
Johnson, Susan. 2004. “Milking the Elephant: Financial Markets as Real Markets in 
Kenya.” Development and Change 35 (2): 249–75.
———. 2012. “The Search for Inclusion in Kenya’s Financial Landscape: The Rift 
Revealed.” Bath, UK and Nairobi, Kenya: Financial Sector Deepening.
———. 2014. Informal Financial Practices and Social Networks: Transaction Geneologies. 
Nairobi, Kenya: Financial Sector Deepening.
———. 2016. “Competing Visions of Financial Inclusion in Kenya: The Rift 
Revealed by Money Transfer.” Canadian Journal of Development Studies   
37 (1): 83–100.
Katz, James E., and Mark A. Aakhus. 2002. “Introduction: Framing the Issues.” In 
Perpetual Contact: Mobile Communication, Private Talk, Public Performance, edited 
by James E. Katz and Mark A. Aakhus, 1–13. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 23
Kusimba, Sibel, Yang Yang, and Nitesh Chawla. 2016. “Hearthholds of Mobile 
Money in Western Kenya.” Economic Anthropology 3: 266–79.
Leach, Edmund R. 1961. “Two Essays Concerning the Symbolic Representation of 
Time.” In Rethinking Anthropology, 124–36. London: The Athlone Press.
Lee, Rebekah. 2011. “Death on the Move: Funerals, Entrepreneurs, and the Rural-
Urban Nexus in South Africa.” Africa 81 (2): 226–47.
Leyshon, Andrew, and Nigel Thrift. 1997. Money/Space: Geographies of Monetary 
Transformation. London: Routledge.
Ling, R. 2008. New Tech, New Ties: How Mobile Communication Is Reshaping Social 
Cohesion. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Ling, R., and S. W. Campbell. 2010. “Introduction: The Reconstruction of Space 
and Time through Mobile Communication Practices.” In The Reconstruction of 
Space and Time: Mobile Communication Practices, edited by Rich Ling and Scott W Campbell, 39:1–13. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers.
Ling, Richard, and Brigitte Yttri. 2002. “Hyper-Coordination via Mobile Phones in 
Norway.” In Perpetual Contact, edited by James E. Katz and Mark A. Aakhus, 139–69. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Marck, J. 1997. “Aspects of Male Circumcision in Subequatorial African Culture 
History.” Health Transition Review 7 (1997): 337–60.
Maurer, Bill. 2006. “The Anthropology of Money.” Annual Review of Anthropology  
35 (1): 15–36.
———. 2010. “First Annual Report Design Principles.” Institute for Money, Technology 
and Financial Inclusion, University of California, Irvine, CA.
———. 2012. “Mobile Money: Communication, Consumption and Change in the 
Payments Space.” Journal of Development Studies 48 (3): 1–16.
Mbachi, F., and S. Likoko. 2013. “Traditional Male Circumcision and Its Implications 
on the Socioeconomic and Psychosocial Life of the Bukusu Community in Kenya.” Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences 3 (1): 218–24.
Mbiti, John. 1971. New Testament Eschatology in an African Background. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
McIntosh, Janet. 2001. “"Tradition and Threat: Women’s Obscenity in Giriama 
Funerary Rituals.” In Gender in Cross-Cultural Perspective, edited by Caroline Brettell 
and Carolyn Sargent, 409–22. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
———. 2010. “Mobile Phones and Mipoho’s Prophecy: The Powers and Dangers of 
Flying Language.” American Ethnologist 37 (2): 337–53.
Megeressa, Gemetchu, and Aneesa Kassam. 2005. “The ‘Rounds’ of Time: Time, 
History, and Society in Borana Oromo.” In The Qualities of Time: Anthropological 
Approaches, 251–65. New York: Berg.
Nangendo, Steven. 1998. “The Heartbeat and Rhythm of Life: The Cardinal Points 
in the Socio-Cultural Construction of Bukusu Personhood.” Nordic Journal of African Studies 7 (2): 39–62.
Nasimiyu, Ruth. 1997. “Changing Women’s Rights over Property in Western Kenya.” 
In African Families and the Crisis of Social Change, edited by Thomas Wiesner, 
Candace Bradley, and Philip Kilbride, 283–98. Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey.
Neubert, Dieter. 2016. “Kenya - An Unconscious Middle Class? Between Regional-
Ethnic Political Mobilization and Middle Class Lifestyles.” In The Rise of Africa’s 
Middle Class: Myths, Realities and Critical Engagements, edited by Henning Melber, 
110–28. London: Zed Books.
Njue, Carolyne, Helene Voeten, and Pieter Remes. 2009. “Disco Funerals, A Risk 
Situation for HIV Among Youth in Kisumu, Kenya.” AIDS 23 (4): 505–9.24 African Studies Review
Oboler, Regina Smith. 1996. “Whose Cows Are They, Anyway?: Ideology and Behavior 
in Nandi Cattle ‘ownership’ and Control.” Human Ecology 24 (2): 255–72.
Parkin, David. 1972. Palms, Wine, and Witnesses. San Francisco: Chandler.
Parry, Jonathan, and Maurice Bloch. 1989. “Introduction: Money and the Morality 
of Exchange.” In Money and the Morality of Exchange, edited by Jonathan Parry and Maurice Bloch, 1–32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peatrik, Anne-Marie. 2005. “Old System New Conflicts: Age, Generation and Discord 
among the Meru, Kenya.”In The Qualities of Time: Anthropological Approaches, 285–300. New York: Berg.
Pertierra, Raul. 2005. “Mobile Phones, Identity and Discursive Intimacy.” Human 
Technology: An Interdisciplinary Journal on Humans in ICT. 1 (1): 23–44.
Pryke, Michael, and John Allen. 2000. “Monetized Time-Space: Derivatives – 
Money’s ‘New Imaginary’?” Economy and Society 29 (2): 264–84.
Pype, Katrien. 2015. “Funerary Comedies in Contemporary Kinshasa: Social 
Difference, Urban Communities and the Emergence of a Cultural Form.” Africa  
85 (3): 457–77.
Riesman, Paul. 1986. “The Person and the Life Cycle in African Social Life and 
Thought.” African Studies Review 29 (2): 71–138.
Robbins, Michael, and Philip Kilbride. 1987. “Microtechnology in Rural Buganda.” 
In Technology and Social Change, edited by H. Russel Bernard and Pertti Pelto, 
Second Edition, 243–68. Prospect Heights, Illinois: Waveland Press.
Shipton, Parker. 1989. Bitter Money: Cultural Economy and Some African Meanings  
of Forbidden Commodities. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association.
———. 1990. “African Famines and Food Security: Anthropological Perspectives.” 
Annual Review of Anthropology 19: 353–94.
———. 1995. “Luo Entrustment: Foreign Finance and the Soil of the Spirits in 
Kenya.” Africa: Journal of the International African Institute 65 (2): 165–96.
———. 2009. Mortgaging the Ancestors: Ideologies of Attachment in Africa. New Haven: 
Yale University Press.
———. 2010. Credit Between Cultures. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Silverman, Eric K. 2004. “Anthropology and Circumcision.” Annual Review of 
Anthropology 33: 419–45.
Singh, Supriya, and Yazo Najarada. 2011. “School Fees, Beer and Meri: Gender, 
Cash and the Mobile in the Morobe Province of Papua New Guinea.” IMTFI 
Working Papers. Irvine, CA. http://www.imtfi.uci.edu/files/blog_working_papers/working_paper_singh.pdf.
Smith, Daniel J. 2004. “Burials and Belonging in Nigeria: Rural-Urban Relations 
and Social Inequality in a Contemporary African Ritual.” American Anthropologist 106 (3): 569–79.
Somé, Batamaka. 2013. “‘Hot Money’: Gender and the Politics of Negotiation 
and Control Over Income in West African Smallholder Households.” Africa  
83 (2): 251–69.
Spronk, Rachel. 2014. “Exploring the Middle Classes in Nairobi: From Modes  
of Production to Modes of Sophistication.” African Studies Review 57 (1): 93–114.
Turner, Victor. 1975. Revelation and Divination in Ndembu Ritual. Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press.
Wagner, Gunter. 1939. “Intiation Rites among the Bantu of Kavirondo.” Man  
65–7:72–74.Money, Mobile Money and Rituals in Western Kenya 25
———. 1949. The Bantu of North Kavirondo, Volume 1. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Walsh, Carl E. 1983. “Saving in Primitive Economies.” American Anthropologist   
85 (3): 643–49.
Wandibba, Simiyu. 1997. “Changing Roles in the Bukusu Family.” In African Families and 
the Crisis of Social Change, edited by T. S. Wiesner, C. Bradley, and Philip Kilbride, 
332–40. Westport, CT: Bergen and Garvey.
Whyte, Susan Reynolds, and Michael A. Whyte. 2004. “Children’s Children: Time and 
Relatedness in Eastern Uganda.” Africa 74 (1): 76–94.
Wolf, Jan Jacob de. 1983. “Circumcision and Initiation in Western Kenya and Eastern 
Uganda: Historical Reconstructions and Ethnographic Evidence.”Anthropos, no. 78: 369–410.
World Bank Group. 2015. The Little Data Book on Financial Inclusion. Washington, DC: 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Zelizer, Viviana. 2012. “How I Became a Relational Economic Sociologist and What 
Does That Mean?” Politics & Society 40 (2): 145–74.