 
6 March 2018  
This report  was produced by Deloitte Consulting LLP for review by the United States Agency for 
International Development. Its contents are the sole responsibility of Deloitte Consulting LLP and 
do not necessarily  reflect the views of USAID or the United States Government.  NEPAL FINAL MISSION 
REPORT  
FINANCING GROWTH WORK ORDER #25, 
NEPAL AGRICULTURAL L ENDING    
 NEPAL FINAL MISSION 
REPORT  
FINANCING GROWTH WORK ORDER #25, NEPAL AGRICULTURAL LENDING  
 
   USAID FINANCING GROW TH TASK ORDER  
CONTRACT NUMBER:  AID-OAA -BC-14-00030 
DELOITTE CONSULTING LLP  
USAID | OFFICE OF PR IVATE CAPITAL AND 
MICROENTERPRISE 
 
6 MARCH 2018  
DISCLAIMER : 
This report is made possible by t he support of the American People through the  United States Agency 
for International Development (USAID). The contents of this  report are the sole responsibility of 
Deloitte Consulting LLP and do not necessarily  reflect the views of USAID or the United States 
Government. 
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  1 
Nepal Final Mission Report  1.0 INTRODUCTION  
The mission objective was to introduce bankers to the methodology of the USAID Toolkit and to provide 
technical assistance to the bankers to meet their needs  in di fferent applicable areas of the tool kit including 
value chain finance concepts and tools . The main focus areas were: new product development, risk 
management, value chain analysis including financial analysis  of the size of different agricultural markets1 
technical sheets, creation of agricultural lending units and strategy development.  To accomplish this the 
consultant  i. identified  banks interested in the program, ii. Carried  out brief diagnostics and field visits to 
branches and clients iii. Visited USAID Nepal projects in the Feed the Future Program and some other key 
projects (see list below) iv. Integrated  other programs working with the banks to ensure an exit strategy.  
The field mission took place from June 30th to December 1 5th  2017with close collaboration with Ms.  Mahat of 
the USAID Nepal Agricultural unit and her colleagues. A briefing and debriefing were conducted for the USAID 
Nepal agriculture unit.  Ms. Mahat ’s assistance and insights were invaluable to the mission. Regular meetings 
and phone conversations were car ried out with Ms. Mahat  who was instrumental in organizing visits to key 
projects and who participating in several meetings with project and bank managers. Anita participated in 
multiple capacity building sessions with the staff of Laxmi Bank.  
During the first week, meetings were conducted with several USAID projects: Nepal Seed and Fertilizer Project, International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), Knowledge -based Integ rated Sustainable 
Agriculture and Nutrition (KISAN) Project, PAHAL -Mercy Corps, Sustainable Action for Resilience and Food 
Security (Sabal), and other donor projects in particular Nepal Market Development Project -SAMARTH, and 
Access to finance - Sakchyam (D FID projects), Digital Finance Asia (United Nations Capital Development Fund 
(UNCDF), PACT including the  Nepal Agribusiness Innovation Center ( NABIC ) a World Bank (WB) project. These 
meetings, contacts and the active participation from staff were of criti cal importance to the success of the 
mission. They:  
 Created/reinforc ed critical market linkages for bankers  
 Provided critical insights and technical information on Nepalese agricultural value chains,  
 Provided introductions to p otential clients for banks’  prospection  visits and  
 Participated actively in capacity building sessions . 
The mission included carrying out the following key activities.   
 Prospection and engagement of new partners  in the program.  
 Provision of train ing  
 Provision of technical assistance  
2.0 PROSPECTION AND ENGA GEMENT OF 
NEW PARTNERS  
Since an understanding already existed with Laxmi , the consultant was able to engage directly and start with 
the field visit . Prospection meetings were undertaken with six (6) banks: Century B ank, Civil Bank, Muktinath 
Bikas Bank Ltd. “A class B”, Mega Bank, Prabu Bank and Global IME Bank . Of the six (6 ) banks prospected 
three; Century, Civil, and Muktinath Bi kas Bank Ltd indicated an interest in the program  and were willing to 
cover cost related to the weeklong capacity building sessions .  
After selecting and engaging with Laxmi Bank and Century Bank during the first mission. The consultant 
conducted prospection of , Muktinath Bikas  Bank Ltd  and Civil Bank  during the second mission,    an initial  
decision was made, in conjunction with Ms. Mahat , to engage a third bank, Muktinath Bikas Bank Ltd. The 
feeling was that engaging a 4th bank would dilute the program ’s impact and not provide enough time to 
provide ca pacity building  of a core group in each bank along with targeted TA in areas such as new product 
development, strategic planning, and development of an agricultural unit . When some challenges arose with 
                                                      
1 This analysis was carried out by Deloitte prior to the consultant’s mission and proved to be useful to the banks in assessing  
the size of potential markets.   
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  2 
Nepal Final Mission Report  Muktinath Bikas  Bank Ltd (willingness  to engage in th e week long training)  a decision was made, in conjunction 
with Ms. Mahat, to engage Civil Bank to ensure adequate program impact.  
Of the three banks who were not interested in the program, there were different reasons for the bank’s non -
participation. In t he case of Mega Bank, the prospection missions were conducted just before the end of the 
Nepalese financial year. Due to the lack of budget to cover the cost of management and staff in TA and 
capacity building activities they were not willing to participat e unless this was to be covered by the project.  
Prabhu Bank and Global IME Bank were not interested in the short -term. The primary reason for this was  the 
Nepalese central bank’s requirement for banks to increase capital . To meet capital requirements both banks 
purchase a number of development banks. Due to the limited capacity of these development banks, senior management’s priority in the short -term was to bring  new personnel up to speed and to integrate their 
branches and personnel into  their systems including processes, procedures and products.  The bad flooding 
caused by the monsoon during this period also caused additional challenges for the banks.  
RESULTS  
 The target was three potential partners identified and engaged. This target was achieved and 
surpassed (133%)  
3.0 CAPACITY BUILDING & TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE (TA).  
Loans which are in the pipeline or which are approved are,  for the most part, a direct result of the 
mission.  While some may have been in the pipeline, such as a hatchery loan for  Laxmi, the 
TA/coaching allowed the person to feel comfortable with the business e.g. the risk assessment.  In the 
case of the sugar cane companies the training proved exposure to new loan products which could be 
used as well as a framework for analyzing the risk. Loans also resulted from client visits during the 
mission prior to the training, during the training and with follow on coaching and TA. In this case, a 
better understanding of the clients ’ individual and overall value chains and risk assisted in better 
analysis of the potential risks and how they could be mitigated.  
3.1 LAXMI BANK  
An initial field visit ( 4 day ) was carried out with the focus person for agriculture followed by a two (2)  day field 
visit. The purpose of the field visits was i. To see bran ch operations and exchange with branch managers and 
staff about what they were doing in agricultural finance, including future plans and ii. To expose them to  
Toolkit and the value chain  approach and new value chains through client prospection visits. These client 
prospection visits to over twenty eight  (28) different business in (8) value chains contacts were provided by the 
projects visited in the first week.  
 
District  No. of agro  
clients visited  Agro sector  
Bardiya  3 Pig slaughter house, Solar pump irrigation equipment, Fishery  
Dang  6 Feed, Forage  seeds, Cattle rearing, Hatchery, Cold Storage, 
Fishery, Vegetable farming  
Rupandehi  2 Dairy Cooperative, Agri equipment  
Kavre  9 Fodder, Agro -vets, Coffee, Poultry, Dairy, Cooperative  
Katmandu  8 Various including equipment suppliers (machines and irrigation 
equipment, and seed producers, Dairy processors, coffee 
plantation/company  
This was a TA/coaching opportunity for the agricultural focus person in the mid -market department (SME) and 
branch managers. Each of the businesses was written up and provided leads for new business and assisted  
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  3 
Nepal Final Mission Report  participants in credit analysis/underwriting  and business and strategic development in different value chains2. 
This allowed the consultant to better understand the current agricultural sector in Nepal and to have practical 
examples to share with bank staff in the week long technical training sessio n in the USAID toolkit/value chain 
methodology following the client prospection visits  
The following week long technical training was conducted in the USAID Toolkit methodology and value chain 
concepts was conducted for twenty five (25) staff from branches and headquarters( micro, mid markets, 
corporate, risk, credit underwriting). The subjects covered base on the SME Toolkit and other resources 
include d: The value chain approach and concepts, risk management, new product development, development 
of an agricultural finance unit,  and presentation of two value chains, fisheries and dairy. The 4th day involved 
client visits, by small teams , in different value chains . Each team  presented their analysis  (power point) the 
following day.  
Results.  
 Capacity building to ( 25) staff members which created a core team of personnel at HQ and at 
selected branches with a clear understanding of the value chain approach and process and 
key elements from the USAID SME Toolkit. These persons are key resource persons withi n 
the bank which can provide capacity building to other staff and HQ and the branches. 
Amongst this group Laxmi will chose key resource/leaders to work with the agricultural 
finance unit  
 Laxmi selected two staff members to work full time in the agricultural unit  supervised by the 
head of “mid markets” . 
 Development of a “pipeline” of potential clients. In the fisheries, cereal and veg. crops, dairy, 
seed value chain vegetable & forage, poultry value, input supply and equipment value chains. 
The pipeline, inc ludes 94 potential clients and an amount of $ 1.25 million .  
 The total of loans approved following the work shop & TA is $11.847 million . 
 Pipe Line and Approved loans  
The loans that have been approved in this FY starting from Mid July 2017 are tabulated below. However, the small size loans (<=NPR 5 Mio) has not been tabulated.  
Figure 1: Pipeline clients (Laxmi)   
 
  
 
Figure 2. Approved loans  
Type of Business  Value chain  Loan amounts approved (NPR)  
Sugar *  Sugarcane  1.1 Bio  
Slaughter house  Meat  40 Mio  
Hatchery  Poultry  23.5 Mio  
Nursery and fishery  Fishery  24 Mio  
Rice mill  Crops  16.9 Mio  
Fruit Processing Unit  Fruit  8 Mio  
Dairy/ Cheese/ Ice cream processing  Dairy  20 Mio  
                                                      
2 Value chains included: Dairy (processing and milk production), fisheries, forage seed production, equipment supplier, input 
suppliers (seeds pesticides small equipment, feed industry, poultry, vegetable production.  Value Chain  Tentative amount (NPR)  
Poultry  70 Mio  
Dairy  20 Mio  
Other (Food processing, Vegetable)  40 Mio  
Total (USD)  1.25 million   
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  4 
Nepal Final Mission Report  Total (USD)   $11.847 million  
*Corporate Loan  
 Access to technical sheets for two value chains dairy and fisheries.  Work underway on 11 
other technical sheets.  
 Thanks to the consultant’s relationship with the Samarth program, Laxmi gained access to all 
of their technical market analysis.  
 TA in strategy development, and structuring a potential agricultural finance unit  and credit 
prospection and underwriting.  Technical assistance to 8 persons at Laxmi bank  branch and 
HQ. 
 Creating and reinforcing key partnerships for the banks  
3.2 CENTURY BANK  
An interesting difference between Century and Laxmi is that Century has a dedicated manager for agricultural 
finance and new product research and development. A brief 1 day diagnostic was carried out at the HQ level. 
The consultant was not able to do the field client prospection and branch visits due to the severe flooding 
caused by the monsoon.  
A week long technical training on toolkit/value chain mythology  session was conducted with ( 20) staff 
members from Century Bank  (branch staff, SME department, corporate, agricultural finance unit, risk 
management) . Field level TA could not be prov ided due to the extensive flooding caused by the monsoon. 
Capacity building sessions similar to those carried out in the Laxmi training were conducted. The 4th day of 
capacity building involved six (6) client  prospection visits in small groups in different  value chains and group 
presentations (power point) the following day.  During the 2nd mission sites/potential client visits were 
conducted to KISAN and a number of potential clients including a company involved in green houses and drip 
irrigation infrastru cture.  
Results  
 Capacity building to ( 20) staff members which created a core team of personnel at HQ and at selected 
branches with a clear understanding of the value chain approach and process and key elements from 
the USAID SME Toolkit  and other Nepal specific value chain information. These pers ons are key 
resource persons within the bank which can provide capacity building to other staff and HQ and the branches
3. 
 Coaching & TA visits with (3) staff to potential clients and projects (KISAN).  
 
 Creating and reinforcing key partnerships for the banks . They are working on relationships with the 
Kisan and CIMMYT which will lead to new products.  
 
 Pipeline. Loan to 12,000 sugar cane farmers using an invoice receipt product presented during the training dairy company and a greenhouse/irrigation company . Amount $ 1.2 million (estimate)  
3.3 CIVIL BANK 
Field visit s were undertaken in Pokhara  and a three day capacity building program  was undertaken with 
Muktinath Bikas Bank Ltd  for (11 participants4) however , after discussion with Ms. Mahat , a decision was taken 
to engage Civil Bank to ensure better impact for  the program.  
The consultant knew the Head of Microfinance & Agricultural Finance of Civil Bank from work done with him in 
new product development during the USAI D NEAT  Project. At Civil Bank  (22) part icipants  took part in the 
technical training on the USAID toolkit/value chain methodology  from different departments, branches, and 
                                                      
3 One of the trainees who was a recent recruit from another bank was name the head of the agric. unit following the training.  
4 Primarily  from HQ.   
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  5 
Nepal Final Mission Report  HQ. The consultant comped some days to make this possible by working a seven day work week for several  
weeks.   
The results with Civil Bank are positive:   
 Civil B ank is in the process of signing a MOU with K ISAN  which covers a variety of different pro ducts 
including:  I nput supply credits , solar credits including pumps and others  and is also working with 
Sakchyam on  new product development .  
 Civil Bank is exploring a partnership with CIMYTT in the area of new product development for cereal 
seed companies and their out growers  and will also will be talking with International Development 
Enterprises (IDE) . 
 The head of the microfinance department which includes agricultural finance,  is discussing with senior 
management the creation of a “ technical consultant pool ” in agricultural finance to reinforce their 
capacity and allow them to develop a new strategy to expand their  portfolio.  
 Civil Banks agricultural finance pipeline and loans approved since the training are $94,107 and 
$538,591 (67 loans ) respectively  see table 1 below.  
 
Table I Civil Bank Portfolio (NR)  
Value chain  Outstanding 
before 
December 1st  Outstanding as 
on 15th Feb  Pipeline 
amount Loan amounts 
approved   No. of 
clients  
Poultry  549,057,437.85  554,013,763.02  4,300,000.00  4,956,325.17  7 
Bee Keeping  1,446,447.15  1,406,211.15  - - - 
Fishery  1,263,542.00  5,355,193.31  - 4,091,651.31  5 
Vegetable 
Farming  2,302,563.00  13,610,026.20  1,950,000.00  11,307,463.20  16 
Animal 
Husbandry  1,953,687.00  13,896,105.08  3,540,000.00  11,942,418.08  13 
Agro Processors 
(Mills)  270,545,718.55  268,442,067.55  - - - 
Cold Store  99,462,242.72  97,629,592.72  - - - 
Ostrich  151,620,711.98  149,668,342.98  - - - 
Fruits & Flower  758,471.07  663,110.07  - - - 
Other 
Agricultural and 
Agro Services  929,581,865.24  959,337,990.24  - 29,756,125.00  26 
Total  2,007,992,686.56  2,064,022,402.32  9,790,000.00  56,029,715.76  67 
 
4.0 Nepalese Banking Context & Primary Challenges  
This mission is about “change management”. C hange management takes time. The Nepalese Central 
bank is extremely prescription and has plenty of rules that do not encourage agricultural lending 
including value chain lending. A good number of CEOs and top management are tradition al “Standard 
Charter type Bankers” who do not generally have a lot of time for agriculture finance. To bring about 
the change that has occur red in several of the banks who have participated in the program notable 
Laxmi Bank could easily take two years or more. Top management at Laxmi bank started their careers 
at Standard Charter.  
In the past, b anks have been involved in agricultural finance however,  this has been done mainly by 
whole sale lending to MFIs and Cooperatives. In recent years, and particularly in the past year, due to 
the increased capital requirements Class “A” banks have been purchasing developm ent banks and  
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  6 
Nepal Final Mission Report  MFIs all of who are involved in agricultural finance.  The banks now face pressure to make loans directly 
in the agric. sector.  
Most of the agricultural finance is primary at the micro level although there are loans to SME and mid-
market and s ome corporate players such as mills in the feed business primarily (poultry although this 
is expanding to other animals and fresh water fisheries).  
The reader will be happy to note that there is a significant mid- market/corporate loan to a large ostrich 
farm for which Civil Bank one of our partner banks is the lead.  
4.1 Central Bank Agricultural Finance Challenges  
 Nepali Central Bank is highly prescriptive and does not have a clear idea of what the value 
chain implies. While they include primary processing in addition to production agriculture they 
do not include Agrovets (input suppliers in the definition of agricultural loans)  - Agrovets are 
being supported by the USAID KISAN Project. Having a strong input supply chain is 
fundamental to developing sustaina ble agriculture value chains.  
 
 Government subsidy programs are not always feasible and do not incentivize banks to take 
additional risks in agricultural finance. The Nepali government’s current program at 10% (5% 
bank /5% Nepali gov.) is below almost all of the class “A” bank’s cost of funds. Thus they are 
being asked to make the agric. loans at a loss.  
 
 When a client request a loans above 1,000,000 NPR and does not have land collateral, the banks have to provision the loan.  
 
 Tax regime. Inconsistences in the tax regime mean that a tractor may come in duty free but the 
spare parts may have a duty of 180%. A company manufacturing drip irrigation equipment in 
Nepal is paying duty on raw materials for the manufacturing process while India and Chinese 
companies  bring in the final product (drip irrigation systems duty free).  
 
 Infrastructure, is weak particularly in the hill region. In past years there has been major load shedding which makes it almost impossible for Nepalese processing companies to compete. 
This year there has been almost no load shedding which means that there can be more loans 
in sme and corporate processing in particular financing  of supply chains for cooperatives in things like chilling stations, transportation and micro/sme dairies.  
 
 High le vels of migration (external and to urban areas), among young people, have led to 
significant skilled labor shortages in rural areas. On the reverse side the high levels of migration 
mean that people in the value chain to not have problems gaining access to  larger amounts of 
leased land.  
 
 Insurance products. Insurance products for cattle and buffalo and livestock work reasonably 
well although clients complain about the cost. In fisheries and other VCs it does not work as well. 
 
 Nepalese companies face strong competition from their two large neighbors particularly in 
vegetables, rice, sugar cane and other value chains.  
4.2    Exit Strategy & Way Forward  
The exit strategy used for this program was  integrated into the program from the start. The exit strategy 
is based upon two key points:  
 Building a core nucleus/critical mass of branch managers and staff as well as HQ managers 
who have been exposed to the new system, through client visits and the technical workshop.   
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  7 
Nepal Final Mission Report   Including key resource people in the workshop (including “ lead actors ” in value chains as well 
as key resource people from different projects).  
A lead actor - such as a successful hatcheries entrepreneur can be used by the bank staff as an entry 
point into the fisheries value chain. Key resource people from various projects work ing in value chain 
finance were included such as:  
 Sri Jana Rana (SAMART) Nepal Market development program, Provide access to key VC 
actors and to technical materials on value chain which can be used to develop VC tech sheets 
for banks.  
 Nirmal Dahal, and Rajus Sherestra (Sakchyam) - Acess to finance new product development 
in VCs and using branchless technologies, they presented four different VC products which 
have already been used by Nepalese banks.  
 Dr Dutiman Choudhary and Doctor Khanal (USAID CIMMYT P roject cereal and vegetable 
seeds), they are provide TA to seed companies and out growers and have a program to support banks via TA to the Seed companies in biz development to lend to out growers and seed 
companies via customized, tripartite products.  
 USAID’s Kisan project Phillip Charles Broughton, Harish Chandra Devkota and Michael Kimes 
and Dr. Deva Bhakta Shakya, Support to Agrovets
5. Laxmi, Century and Civil Bank have 
already been linked with them and initial discussions have taken place. In the case of Century 
Bank,  the consultant assisted in the development of a questionnaire for the Agrovets and in 
structuring a product for the Agrovets.  
 USAID project with Luke Colavito and Komal Pradhan (IDE) working with farmer collection 
centers and vegetable pro duction-  using green houses and drip irrigation and agricultural 
production packages for loans,  
 Bushan Shah, (NABC) WB PACT innovation center providing TA to start -ups and small SMEs  
The importance of establishing strategic partnerships with the private and public sector was one of the 
key messages in the workshop. Several successful collaborations have been developed with a number of these projects allowing the banks to get access to key technical information about the different value 
chain players and va lue chains and key contacts and visits leading to pipe line and loans.  
4.21 Bank Approaches  
Building  a core nucleus the Laxmi Bank E xample.  In the case of Laxmi Bank the Deputy CEO, the 
Head of Mid- Market and the person who was taking care of midmarket agr ic. loans were there as well 
as branch staff, corporate staff, micro finance/retail, and risk management.  
The result was that top management made a decision to  
 Create an agricultural unit  
 Add additional staff   
 Reevaluate their strategy and  
 Define the f unction of the new unit (All toolkit subjects ) and  
 Create VC technical sheets.  
The Century Bank Case, they already had someone in charge of agricultural finance as part of his 
other responsibilities, along with a junior staff. They were primarily involve in agric. microfinance loans 
of less than a million NPR. Starting before I left, Century lost their CEO which they have replaced.  They 
aggressively added new staff because of their rapid expansion to meet new capital requirements.  
When I came back the per son in charge of agric. was replace by someone who had been in the 
workshop. The person in charge of overseeing agric. as part of her work shifted to corporate. The 
                                                      
5 There are 2,000 Agrovets in the country. USAID’s Kisan I is worked with 250 from their first phase.  They will be increasing this 
number by at least 80%.   
USAID Financing Growth Task Order  8 
Nepal Final Mission Report  person in charge of overseeing SMS and retail departments was replace and was made responsi ble for 
overseeing the agric . unit. Luckily three people from the SME department were in the work shop. 
Because this core nucleus existed I was able to get the new agric. unit to see that they needed to involve 
the SME department in agricultural value chain finance deals. As a result the SME department is 
involved in a potential Agrovet product in conjunction with K ISAN  and their new overall boss is on board.  
The Civil Bank  Case following the 1st three days of training the Head of Microfinance and the de facto 
agric. person sent a memo to his CEO that he wanted to create a pool of resource people to help them 
to further develop their agricultural value chain finance including tech sheets and new products. Their 
CEO has agreed to this proposal and they are working on the list of resource persons all of whom will 
be paid.  
4.22 Client Visits  (Pre-workshop, workshop and post workshop TA ).During client visits, management 
and staff identify, analyze and customized existing products or developing new products for new types 
of value chain clients. For example, with Laxmi they are financing individual fisheries, but not the top 
clients in larger more established fishery associations6, hatcheries, nurseries, fisheries Agrovets or 
buyers.  
The pre- workshop agric. client visits were done with L axmi and with Muktinath Bank. Client visits were 
done during training with Century Bank and Civil Bank. The pre- workshop trainings were not done with 
Century due to Monsoon Flooding and in the case of Civil Bank due to lack of time however client visits 
were conducted during the workshop and afterwards .  
4.23 Exit strategy  
Based upon the strategy indicated above, each bank will be moving forward with their selected partners 
and resources people.  The consultant will be providing some “ pro bono”  work as needed. This will 
primarily be done with Laxmi on technical sheets, organization of the agric . unit and new products.
                                                      
6 In one case,  their clients is a member in a well- established association with 150 members who are  linked to an Indian f eed mill and other 
technical partners.   
  
USAID Financing Growth Project   
Implemented by Deloitte Consulting LLP   