 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Papua New Guinea  
Financial Consumer Protection Diagnostic 2018  
 
Papua New Guinea  
Financial Consumer Protection Diagn  
  
 
 
  
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized 
ii  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer  
 
This publication has been funded by the Australian Government through the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
and the New Zealand Government through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. This Diagnostic Review is a product 
of the staff of the Inte rnational Finance Corporation and the World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions 
expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank Group or the 
governments they represent.   
iii Papua New Guinea  
Diagnostic Review of Financial Consumer Protection  
 
Contents  
ABBREVIATIONS  AND ACRONYMS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  1 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  5 
EXECUTIVE SUMM ARY ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  6 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 16 
I. CONTEXT FOR FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA  ................................ .. 16 
II. LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  ................................ ................................ ............................  23 
III. FCP SUPERVISION AND CAPACITY  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  33 
IV. TRANSPARENCY AND FAIR TREATMENT  ................................ ................................ .............................  39 
V. CONSUMER COMPLAINTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  59 
 
ANNEXES  
Annex 1: Possible options for new FCP legal and regulatory framework  ................................ ............  69 
Annex 2: List of Consulted Institutions  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 73 
Annex 3: Key FCP Laws and Regulations  ................................ ................................ ...............................  75 
 
TABLES  
Table 1:  Key Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  9 
Table 2: Overview of the PNG Financial Sector as of December 31, 2016  ................................ ...........  21 
Table 3: Overview of fina ncial sector assets and deposits as of December 31, 2016  ..........................  22 
BOXES  
Box 1: “BIMA” Branded “Family Life” Life Insurance and “Hausik” Hospitalization Insurance  ............  19 
Box 2: International Examples of Financial Consumer Protection Supervisory Arrangements  ...........  33 
Box 3: Key Facts Statements  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  40 
Box 4: Models of Alternative Dispute Resolution Schemes  ................................ ................................ . 68  
  
  1 
 ABBREVIATIONS  AND ACRONYMS  
 
 Agent Regulation  draft Regulation on Agents 2017  
 APR  Annual Percentage Rate  
 ASF Authorized Superannuation Fund  
 ASIC  Australian Securities & Investment Commission  
 ATM  Automat ed Teller Machine  
 BPNG  Bank of Papua New Guinea  
 BPNG Act  Central Banking Act 2000  
 CA Act  Commercial Advertisement (Protection of the Public) Act 
1976  
 CCF Review  Consumer & Competition  Framework Review —Public Report 
(February 2017)  
 CEFI  Center for Excellence in Financial Inclusion  
 CGAP  Consultative Group to Assist the Poor  
 EDR External Dispute Resolution  
 EFT Regulation  draft Regulation on Electronic Funds Transfer 2017  
 EIR Effective Interest Rate 
 FCP Financial Consumer Protection  
 FSDS  Financial Sector Development Strategy 2018 -2030  
 F&M  World Bank Group’s Finance & Markets Global Practice  
 FI Financial Institution  
 Findex  World Bank Global Financial Inclusion Database (2014)  
 FT Act  Fairness of Transactions Act 1993   
2  GICs  General Insurance Companies  
 Gov PNG  Government of Papua New Guinea  
 HP Act  Hire -Purchase Act 1966  
 HP Regulations  Hire -Purchase Regulations 1968  
 ICCC  Independent Consumer and Competition Commission  
 ICCC Act  Independent Consumer and Competition Commission Act 
2002  
 Insurance Act  Insurance Act 2000  
 IDR Internal Dispute Resolution  
 IFC International Finance Corporation  (of the World Bank Group)  
 IPA Investment Promotion Authority  
 KATS  Kina Automated Transfer System  
 KFS Key Facts Statement  
 LI Act  Life Insurance Act 2000  
 LICs Life Insurance Companies  
 LIBs Life Insurance Brokers  
 MFB  Microfinance Bank  
 MFI Microfinance Institution  
 MMO  Mobile Money Operator  
 Mobile Banking PS  Mobile Banking and Mobile Payments Services 2011 
(Prudential Standard MBPS 1.2011)  
 MoU  Memorandum of Understanding  
 MPOS  Mobile Point of Sale  
 NEC National Executive Council   
3  NBFI  Non -Bank Financial Institution  
 NFIS  National Financial Inclusion Strategy , 2016 -2020  
 NPS National Payment System  
 PNG  Papua New Guinea  
 PNG Securities 
Commission  Securities Commission of Papua New Guinea  
 POS Point of Sale  
 PR Act  Prices Regulation Act 2009  
 Payments Act  National Payments System Act 2013  
 PSP Payment Service Provider  
 RAC  Regulators Advisory Committee  
 Retail Payments 
Guidelines  draft General Guidelines on Retail Payment Instruments 2017  
 Oversight 
Regulation  draft Oversight Regulation  2017  
 S&LS  Savings and Loan Society  
 S&LS Act 1961  Savings and Loan Societies Act 1961  
 S&LS Act 19 95 Savings and Loan Societies (Amendment) Act 1995  
 S&LS Act 2015  Savings and Loan Societies Act 2015  
 SMS  Short Messaging Service  
 TTC Total Cost of  Credit  
 USD  United States Dollar  
 WB World Bank  
 WBG  World Bank Group  
 
  
4  
 
Currency Equivalents  
(Exchange Rate effective December 10, 2017 ) 
US$1  =  3.25 PNG Kina  
  
5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
 
This report  contains the findings from a n International Finance Corporation ( IFC) diagnostic r eview of 
the financial consumer p rotecti on (FCP) laws, institutions , and practices  in Papua New Guinea ( PNG ). 
IFC is a sister organization of the World Bank  (WB) and a member of the World Bank Group ( WBG ). 
The review primarily  took place during a mission to PNG from October 9 to 17, 2017 . The bank , non -
bank financial institutions  (including limited consideration of credit reporting arrangements) , 
insurance , and payment s sectors  were considered. The superannuation sector was also considered at 
a high level.   
 
The diagnostic review was undertaken  by a joint IFC and WB team of the Finance, Competitiveness 
and Innovation (FCI) Global Practice  team  led by Philippa Roberts  (Financial Sector Special ist) and 
including  Gian Boeddu  (Senio r Financial Sector Specialist), Ros Grady (Senior Consultant)  and Dominic 
Sikakau (Financial Sector  Specialist ). Operational support  was provided by Junita Wamirao Yehirai 
(Program Assistant) and Jeffrey Rodney Mavu (Team Assistant ) from the  World  Bank Country Office 
in PNG , with research support provided by Shakti Nambiar (Consultant) . Oversight of the project was 
provided by Jennifer Isern (Practice Manager  for East Asia and Pacific , FCI Global Practice ). The team 
is thankful to John Vivian (IFC Resident Representative in PNG), Jonathan Kirkby (former Acting IFC 
Resident Representative in PNG) and Patricia Veevers -Carter  (WB Country Manager  for PNG ), for their 
advice and support.  
 
The team expresses its gratitude  to the PNG  authorities , including the Bank of Papua New Guinea 
(BPNG ), for their strong support and assistance in relation to the mission. The team also thanks the 
government, industry , and civil society stakeholders with whom they met for their cooperation and 
collaboration .  
The review was conducted as an interim step to inform planning of future WBG technical assistance 
as part of  the pre -implementation phase of the IFC’s PNG Consumer Protection Project. At the macro 
level , the project is expected to reinforce efforts to expand financial inclusion and strengthen the 
stability and integrity of the PNG financial sector. The IFC is grateful to the Department of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade in Australia  and the Ministry of Foreign Affair s and Trade in New Zealand  for the 
support provided to the project .  
 
    
6 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
The Gove rnment of Papua New Guinea (Gov PNG) made  a commendable commitment to financial 
consumer protection  (FCP) . This is demonstrated by the inclusion of FCP as a key priority area in both 
the final draft of the Financi al Sector Development Strategy 2018 –20301 (FSDS ) and the National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020  (NFIS )2, and by other initiatives. This commitment is against 
the background of relatively low levels of financial inclusion, with only 36.96  percent of adults  
reported as  having an account at a formal financial institution as of June  2016.3 Importantly, 85  
percent  of the low -income population is reported as having no access to formal financial services, 
with women and rural adults being especially excluded.4 
 
The objective of the diagnostic r eview of FCP in PNG was  to assess the FCP legal and  regulatory 
framework  and industry practices  relevant to key parts of the  regulated PNG  financial sector. The 
aim has been to develop prioritized and tailored recommendations  to support  the Bank of Papua New 
Guinea ( BPNG ) to enhance the FCP framework. Implementation support for key recommendations 
will be provided consistently with the Action Plan to be agreed with BPNG. Specific consideration has 
been given to  the banking, non -bank financial institution s (NBFI ), insurance , and payments sectors . 
Preliminary consideration has also been given to the superannuation sector, with the intent of 
providing a more detailed assessment at  a later stage.  
 
Only those parts of the financial sector regulated by BPNG are covered in this review.  Specifically, 
the securities  and investments  sector s are not within the scope of this review.  This exclusion includes, 
for example, debt and equity investments, land trust schemes5, and investment schemes (some of 
which are potentially fraudulent) such as the pyramid or multilevel marketing schemes , which are 
reportedly widespread in PNG.6  The informal lending sector is also not within the scope of this review,  
except to the extent noted in some specific findings. Further consideration might be giv en to these 
issues at a later stage, as recommended below.  
 
The review was conducted based on the revised and enhanced  2017  World Bank Good Practices for 
Financial Consumer Protection7 as well as the G20 High -Level Principles o n Financial Consumer 
                                                           
1 National Financial Sector Development Strategy 2018 -2030, page 6 and section 3.4.1. The Strategy is awaiting final 
approval from the National Executive Council.  
2 The National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020 identifies Financial Consumer Protection  as a Priority Area, with 
the Strategic Objective being “ To introduce and implement a consumer protection framework for regulated financial 
institutions ” (Part II, section 4).  
3 G20 Financial Inclusion Indicators .  
4 https://www.bankpng.gov.pg/financial -inclusion/  . 
5 It is understood land trusts, which are not supervised by BPNG, are growing and approaching a similar size to 
superannuation funds.  
6 See, for  example, the media report at http://www.thenational.com.pg/glimpse -world -pyramid -schemes/  . 
7 In the interest of brevity, specific sections of the Good Practices are not cited. I nstead , reference is made more broadly 
to international good practice. Details of the  new 2017  Good Practices  are available here : 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28996  . For country reports , see: 
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/diagnostic -reviews  .   
7 Protection8 and Digital Financial Inclusion .9 The Better than  Cash Alliance Responsible Digital 
Payments Guidelines  has also been considered .10 The following  topics have been covered: (i) legal and 
regulatory framework;  (ii) FCP supervision  and capacity ; (iii) transparency and fair treatment ; and (iv) 
consumer complaints . A broad variety of stakeholders w ere consulted for the purposes of this 
diagnostic review, including government entities and regulators, representatives of the banking, NBFI, 
insurance and payments sectors and industry associations.11 The report reflects findings from a n IFC  
mission to PNG fr om October 9 to 17, 2017 , and additional background research .  
 
Key features of PNG’s  regulated  retail financial sector are as follows . There is a concentrated 
commercial banking sector with one bank having over 50  percent  of assets; a very small NBFI sector; 
a nascent insurance industry; a payments sector , which is predominantly “cash based” (whil e noting 
that significant efforts have been made in recent years to develop the payments infrastructure  and 
increase the usage of electronic instruments ); and superannuation funds , which account for around 
25 percent  of PNG ’s financial sector assets (second only to commercial banks).12 Further details are in 
the remainder of this report.  
 
A significant proportion of lending to individuals in PNG is also provided by unregulated money 
lenders  at very high rates of interest . Lenders include individuals and incorporated “finance 
companies”, along with relatives and wantoks13, who are also importa nt source s of credit. A key part 
of the unregulated market includes payday lenders providing loans to government —and some private  
sector —employees, with repayments deducted from  salaries. It is estimated that there are around 
280 businesses providing such loans , of which only a small number are finance companies or banks 
licensed by BPNG.  Further , there is a thriving unregulated money lending sector in PNG operating 
outside the payday lending market. These money lenders also provide loans at extremely high rates 
of interest. While personal loan and payday lending rates from banks and finance companies in the 
formal sec tor range from 30–36 percent  per year to 3.5  percent  per fortnight (91  percent  per year ), 
unregulated lending at 20-50 percent  per fortnight (i.e. 520 –1,560  percent  per year ) has been 
reported.14 
The FCP legal and regulatory framework is extremely limited, with significant gaps  as compared to 
international best practice . For example , there are no disclosure requiremen ts for credit or debit 
products , including those which might facilitate product comparisons ; rules on unfair treatment are 
                                                           
8 http://www.fsb.org/2011/11/cos_11 1104a/  . 
9 https://www.gpfi.org/news/new -g20-high -level -principles -digital -financial -inclusion  . 
10 https://www.betterthancash.org/tools -research/case -studies/responsible -digital -payments -guidelines  . 
11 A list of all stakeholders consulted is include d in Annex I to this report.  
12 National Financial Sector Development Strategy 2018 -2030, section 2.1. 
13 The term  wantok , meaning “one talk” in Tok Pisin, is related to a powerful cultural social bond that  links people of 
the same ethnic group who speak the same language. The  wantok  system is a social traditional welfare system that 
emphasizes the responsibilities that group members have to care for each other and to  help each other with  food, 
shelter, clothing, monies, work, bereavement  etc. 
14 See, for example, Hartshorn J’s judgment —application for specific performance, in Finance Corporation Limited and 
others v The Independent State of Papua New Guinea WS (April 2, 2014) 3.   
8 extremely limited (f or example, there are no provisions for unfair contract terms, responsible lending 
or abusive debt collection practices); th ere is no law on general insurance contracts  or the protection 
of policyholder interests;  the current payments law does not cover payments -specific FCP issues; 
consumer complaints and recourse provisions are very limited and in some cases not implemented; 
and there are very limited rules relating to confidentiality of customer information. The short  to 
medium term approach recommended to deal with these gaps is to develop regulations or prudential 
standards under existing financial sector specific legislation, with priority to be given to the banking 
and NBFI (lending) sector. In the longer  term , an overarching FCP Law based on internat ional best 
practice could be developed.  
BPNG and the Independent Consumer and Competition Commission (ICCC)  have overlapping FCP 
supervisory mandates. BPNG has an implicit FCP mandate under the Central Banking Act 2000, and 
specific FCP -related functions under other Acts.  The ICCC also has an explicit FCP mandate. However, 
the ICCC has never had to deal with financial sector issues and does not consider that it has the 
capacity or resources to do so . The Insurance Commissioner has neither an explicit nor an implicit 
mandate covering consumer protection matters in relation to its general insurance function.  For 
completeness, it is also noted that the Centre for Excellence in Financial Inclusion ( CEFI ), has 
important financial inclusion functions but does not  have a regulatory or supervisory role. It is 
recommend ed that BPNG should be solely responsible for supervision of the FCP legal and regulatory 
framework  for the banking, NBFI, insurance, payments , and superannuation sectors . It is our view 
that BPNG is t he only regulator who could realistically be responsible for FCP in the relevant sectors, 
as it is the regulator for all of them (other than general insurance, which is proposed to be transferred 
to BPNG).  
BPNG’s FCP supervisory capacity and resources wil l need considerable enhancement if it is to 
supervise a new FCP legal and regulatory framework. Given the limited FCP provisions at present, 
BPNG has understandably focussed on prudential regulation and supervision. At present , there is no  
separate FCP supervisory unit or department within BPNG, and there is no focus on the specialist  
supervisory tools, processes , and procedures that are required to supervise for an FCP legal and 
regulatory framework. These gaps will need to be urgently addr essed as the FCP framework is 
developed.  
There are only limited requirements regarding internal complaints handling processes and 
procedures for financial service providers. Even where there are existing requirements for certain 
provider types, they are i nsufficiently rigorous to ensure adequate complaints handling and contain 
significant gaps in coverage. As also discussed below, complaints  handling approaches by financial 
institution s vary significantly and often appear to be slow and ineffective.  
There is no  comprehensive external dispute resolution (EDR) scheme , which can deal with  
unresolved disputes involving consumers and financial service providers outside the courts system.  
9 Although there is legislative provision for some sector -specific EDR schemes  (such as the Insurance 
Complaints Tribunal15 and the superannuation industry -funded complaints resolution mechanism16), 
they are not in place . Other sectors lack any scheme , which is  supported by a relevant legal or 
industry -based framework. The recommendation is that BPNG, given its financial sector expertise , 
should be designated as the interim EDR mechanism for consumers. In the longer term, options 
should be considered for an independent EDR  or Financial Ombudsman -type scheme.  
A summary o f the key recommendations is in Table 1 below.  Some of these recommendations may 
take more time to consider and implement than others. Hence, indicative timeframes (short, medium 
and long -term) and priority level (high, medium, low) have been assigned to e ach recommendation 
along  with institutional responsibilities. A more detailed im plementation roadmap will be separately 
prepared and agreed with BPNG , covering implementation of the recommendations , which are to be 
supported by the WBG under the PNG Consumer Protection Project.  It is also to be noted that 
although the BPNG is the primary agency responsible for implementation of the recommendations, 
the integration of consumer protection into the financial sector is a shared responsibility of all key 
public, private sector , and stakeholders, including the Gov PNG, other regulator s, industry bodies, 
financial service providers (formal and informal) , and NGOs promoting financial inclusion. A close 
consultation and coordination between all these stakeholde rs will be needed if the recommendations 
in this report are to be achieved.   
Table 1:  Key Recommendations  
 
RECOMMENDATION  RESPONSIBLE AGENCY  PRIORITY  TIMEFRAME 17 
Legal and Regulatory Framework  
FCP framework:  Develop 
regulations or prudential 
standards under key financial  
sector -specific legislation to 
cover FCP recommendations 
below , with an appropriate 
transition period for 
implementation (e.g. 6 –12 
months)  and consultation with 
stakeholders . BPNG  As indicated below  
for each 
recommendation, 
with the banking 
and NBFI ( lending ) 
sectors being  the 
highest priority . As indicated below  for 
each 
recommendation.  
Definition of a protected 
“consumer”:  Define  a 
“consumer ” as an individual or a 
small business.  BPNG  High  Short -term  
                                                           
15 Insurance Act 1995, Part IX.  
16 Superannuation (General Provision) Act 2000, s. 49B.  
17 Short -Term (1 year); Med ium-Term (2 years); Long -Term (3 years) .  
10 RECOMMENDATION  RESPONSIBLE AGENCY  PRIORITY  TIMEFRAME 17 
NBFIs (non -deposit takers):  
Require consumer lenders who 
do not take deposits to be 
licensed or more simply  
registered under the BFI Act , for 
consumer protection purposes.  BPNG  High  Short -term  
FCP license /registration 
condition:  Introduce a license / 
registration condition for all 
regulated financial institutions 
to comply with FCP Laws, 
regulations, standards or 
guidelines.  BPNG and Insurance 
Commissioner . High  Medium -term  
FCP and payments sector: 
Consider  FCP issue s, relevant to 
the payments sector , in the 
context of the regulations and 
guidelines currently being 
prepared for the purposes of 
the Payments Act.  BPNG  Medium  Medium -term  
FCP and s uperannuation  sector : 
Conduct a detailed FCP review 
of the superannuation  sector . BPNG  Medium  Medium -term  
FCP Law:  Develop an 
overarching “activities based” 
FCP Law , which applies to all 
financial sector participants and 
is based on international best 
practice.  Treasury, BPNG, 
Insurance 
Commission er, PNG 
Securities Commission . Medium  Long -term  
FCP and securities sector:  
Consider a review of FCP issues 
concerning the securities sector 
(including debt and equity 
investments, land trust 
schemes , and investment scams 
such as pyramid/multilevel 
marketing schemes).  Treasury, PNG 
Securities Commission .  Medium  Long -term  
Hire -Purchase contracts:  
Consider continued relevance of 
the Hire -Purchase Act  1966 , 
based on an assessment of 
market practices . Treasury  Low  Long -term  
FCP Supervision and Capacity  
BPNG FCP institutional 
arrangements : Develop options 
for creating an independent BPNG  High  Short -term, with 
preferred option to be 
gradually  
11 RECOMMENDATION  RESPONSIBLE AGENCY  PRIORITY  TIMEFRAME 17 
BPNG department with specific 
responsibility for supervision of 
the FCP legal and regulatory 
framework, and with capacity to 
oversee innovations in 
consumer financial services.  implemented over the 
short  to medium 
term . 
FCP supervisory mandate : 
Designate BPNG as being solely 
responsible for supervision of 
the FCP legal and regulatory 
framework relating to the 
banking, NBFI,  insurance, 
payments , and superannuation 
sectors. This would require 
consequential amendments to 
the ICCC Act and the Insurance 
Act.  Treasury, BPNG, 
Insurance 
Commissioner  and 
ICCC . High  Medium -term 
BPNG FCP supervisory capacity:  
Build BPNG capacity for  FCP 
supervision and related process 
and procedures , including the 
development of an FCP 
supervisory strategy and FCP 
manuals and tools; and 
consideration of international 
best practice in FCP supervisory 
arrangements.   BPNG  High  Medium -term  
BPNG FCP mandate:  Provide 
BPNG with an explicit FCP 
mandate in the Central Banking 
Act, 2000.  Treasury, BPNG  Medium  Long -term  
FCP regulatory consultations:  
Build consultation and 
collaboration mechanisms 
between all regulators with FCP 
responsibilities, including 
through MoUs .  BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner, ICCC, 
PNG Securities 
Commission . Medium  Medium -term  
Transparency and Fair Treatment  
Key Facts Statements (KFSs):  
Require that a standardized , 
comparable  KFS be provided for 
common consumer credit 
products (such as fixed term 
loans); common insurance  
products  (such as motor vehicle 
and home contents insurance) ; BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner . High for fixed term 
credit and consumer 
insurance  and 
medium for other 
products . Short -term  for fixed 
term credit and 
consumer insurance .  
 
Medium -term  for 
other products .  
12 RECOMMENDATION  RESPONSIBLE AGENCY  PRIORITY  TIMEFRAME 17 
and common deposit/payments 
products (such as a transaction 
account with a debit card 
attached or an e -wallet 
account).  
Contractual disclosures:  
Require —for all consumer 
financial products and 
services — clear, simply 
expressed, upfront disclosures 
of key terms and conditions, 
interest rates , fees and charges , 
and advance notification to 
consumers when a provider 
makes key changes to these 
matters.  BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner . Medium  Short -term   
Account statements:  Mandate  
the provision of account 
statements for credit and 
deposit/payments products.  BPNG  Medium  Medium -term 
Price comparison website: 
Develop  a price comparison 
website to enable consumers to 
compare costs of  common  
consumer products (starting 
with fixed term credit), based on 
information to be provided by 
relevant F Is.  BPNG  Medium  Medium -term  
Transaction receipts:  Mandate  
minimum requirements for 
transaction receipts for credit 
and deposit/payments products.  BPNG  Medium  Medium -term 
Fair treatment principle:  
Introduce principles -based 
obligations requiring financial 
services providers to treat 
consumers fairly and take 
reasonable steps to ensure 
product suitability.  BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner . High  Short -term 
Key fair treatment issues:  
Introduce s pecific restrictions 
and requirements to target key 
fair treatment issues, including : 
• Making void unfair terms in 
standard consumer contracts  
(the respective regulators BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner . High  Short -term  
13 RECOMMENDATION  RESPONSIBLE AGENCY  PRIORITY  TIMEFRAME 17 
should also conduct a market 
review of a broad sample of 
credit and insurance product 
terms and conditions with a 
view to assess the type and 
prevalence of unfair terms ); 
• Prohibitions against unfair 
sales and marketing practices 
such as the sale  of unsuitable 
products , and misleading and 
deceptive advertisements; and  
• Responsibility and liability 
requirements for staff and 
agents  of providers.  
Insurance bundling and other 
unfair practices:  Prohibit  other  
specific types of unfair business 
conduct, including restrictions 
on anti -competitive credit  or 
insurance bundling , and tying 
arrangements.  BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner  Medium  Medium -term 
Banks/NBFIs — Responsible 
lending : Require  lenders to 
undertake sufficient 
affordability assessments . BPNG  High  Short -term  
Banks/NBFIs — Debt collection : 
Require bank and non -bank 
lenders and their debt collection 
agents to comply with 
restrictions and requirements to 
address abusive debt collection 
practices.  BPNG  High  Short -term  
Banks/NBFIs — Account 
switching : Restrict f ees and 
provider requirements that 
inhibit account or loan mobility . BPNG  Medium  Short -term  
Banks/NBFIs — Payroll 
deductions loans : Implement 
protections for consumers of 
such loans, including:  
• Requiring lenders to be 
licensed  or registered  as 
recommended above , 
before they can offer 
such loans;  BPNG , Gov PNG  High  Short -term   
14 RECOMMENDATION  RESPONSIBLE AGENCY  PRIORITY  TIMEFRAME 17 
• Deem ing unremitted 
payroll deductions for 
repayments to have 
been paid by the 
consumer (if not at 
fault)  and prohibiting 
debt collection action 
against the consumer in 
such circumstances . 
Insurance  — disclosures : 
Require that each potential 
policyholder be given a copy of 
his or her insurance policy, or 
have it explained to him or her 
in a recorded call, before  
insured takes up policy . BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner  High  Short -term  
Payments  — account 
statements : Require users of 
payments services to be given, 
or have access to, a periodic 
statement of account.  BPNG  High  Short -term  
Superannuation  — unremitted 
member contributions : Make it 
mandatory for an employer to 
pay interest in relation to 
unremitted mem ber 
contributions.  BPNG  High  Medium -term— 
consider in the 
context of the 
upcoming review of 
the Superannuation 
Act 
Superannuation  — annual 
statements : Require that 
members be provided with at 
least an annual record of their 
interest in an  Authorized 
Superannuation Fund ( ASF). BPNG  Medium  Medium -term— 
consider in the 
context of the 
upcoming review of 
the Superannuation 
Act 
Consumer Complaints  
Internal complaints handling:  
Develop consistent complaints 
handling regulations or 
standards applicable to all 
regulated FIs (starting with BFI 
Act regulated entities)  and 
including standards for 
reporting complaints data to 
regulators . BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner  High  Short -term  
License condition for 
complaints handling:  Include 
requirements for complaints BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner  Medium  Medium -term   
15 RECOMMENDATION  RESPONSIBLE AGENCY  PRIORITY  TIMEFRAME 17 
handling in license conditions 
for regulated entities.  
Publication of complaints data : 
Consider publishing complaints 
data by provider name and 
theme on regulators’ website.  BPNG, Insurance 
Commissioner . Low  Long -term  
Consequential amendments:  
Develop consequential 
amendments to sector -specific 
provisions concerning 
complaints handling.  Treasury, BPNG, 
Insurance 
Commissioner . Low  Long -term  
Interim EDR scheme: Designate 
BPNG as the interim EDR 
mechanism for consumers 
(pending selection of ongoing 
EDR option).  Treasury, BPNG, 
Insurance 
Commissioner . High  Short -term  
EDR/Financial Ombudsman:  
Develop options for a long -term 
PNG EDR/Financial Ombudsman  
mechanism with regard to 
international best practice and 
decide on preferred option.  Treasury, BPNG  High  Medium -term   
Consequential amendments:  
Depending on the preferred EDR 
scheme model, make 
consequential amendments to 
the sector -specific provisions 
dealing wi th EDR schemes.  Treasury, BPNG  Medium  Long -term—in context 
of review of relevant 
Acts  
Public awareness:  Conduct  
public awareness campaigns 
about available EDR scheme(s) 
(including BPNG as the initial 
EDR provider and then the 
preferred long -term EDR 
scheme). CEFI could potentially 
be leveraged to assist with such 
campaigns.  BPNG , Insurance 
Commissioner, CEFI   High  Short -term    
  
  16 
 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
I. CONTEXT FOR FINANCIAL CONSUMER PROTECTION IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA  
 
The Government of PNG  (Gov  PNG) has a commendable commitment to  financial consumer 
protection (FCP) . This is demonstrated by the inclusion of FCP as a key priority area in both the 
Financial Sector Development Strategy ( FSDS )18 and the National Financial  Inclusion Strategy 2016 –
2020  (NFIS),19 the establishment of the public and private sector Co nsumer Prote ction Working Group 
for the purposes of the NFIS, the activities of the Centre for Excellence in Financial Inclusion ( CEFI ), 
and by other initiatives . The FSDS describes the relevant priority as “ the strengthening of consumer 
protection in the financial sector ”.20 A key priority area of the NFIS , too, is  “to introduce and implement 
a consumer protection framework for regulated financial  institutions ”.21 Such a framework was 
described as one that promotes informed decision making through transparency, fair practices , and 
an effective complaint  handling mechanism. The aim is to build trust and competition in the formal 
financial sector, thu s helping PNG  achieve its financial inclusion goals .  
The Gov PNG ’s focus on FCP is consistent with the international approach.  As shown by the WBG 
2017 Global Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection (FICP) Survey ,22 a legal framework for FCP 
exists in 121 of 124 jurisdictions surveyed. The most common approach is to have consumer 
protection provisions within broader financial sector laws (e.g. a banking law; present in 94 
jurisdictions). The 2017 Global FICP Survey  also shows that jurisdiction s pursue  various institutional 
arrangement models for FCP. The most common approach is an Integrated Sectoral Financial Sector 
Authority model, reported by 55 responding jurisdictions (45  percent ). In this model, FCP supervision 
responsibilities fall under  multiple financial sector authorities, each responsible for all aspects of 
supervision (e.g., prudential and FCP) for F Is operating within a given financial subsector (e.g., 
banking). Eighty -six of the  relevant responding jurisdictions (75  percent ) report having a specialized 
unit—dedicated to FCP—within an institution that has a broader remit; 17 jurisdictions (21  percent ) 
report having established the unit since 2013.  However, a sound FCP framework and an overall 
macroeconomic and financial stabili ty are necessary precondition s for protecting consumer interests.  
FCP is especially important where there is potential for rapid innovation in financial services and 
their delivery channels in countries like PNG. The use of new delivery channels for financ ial services 
and FinTech can help fulfil important financial inclusion objectives . However,  these innovations may 
                                                           
18 Financial Sector Development Strategy, page 6 , section 3.4.1 . 
19 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020, Part II , section 4 . 
20 Financial Sector Development Strategy, page 6 . 
21 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020, page 4 . 
22 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28998  .  
17 add a further degree of complexity and risk  for consumers with low levels of financial literacy , who 
often do  not understand the products  bein g offered . This is especially likely where new product types 
are clustered  with other products such as with airtime products. Any new measures on FCP should 
therefore take these innovations into consideration.  
Key features of PNG’s  retail regulated financial sector are as follows : 
Banking and NBFIs (non -bank credit providers)  
The banking sector in PNG comprises four commercial banks, with Bank of South Pacific having by 
far the largest market share among the banks.23 The NBFI sector comprises licensed  financial 
institutions such as microbanks and finance companies, and savings & loan societies (S&LSs) . 
According to the PNG Federation of Savings and Loan Societies , following a significant period of 
consolidation, most S &LSs are based in Port Moresby and  were established by government or private 
sector organizations for the benefit of their employees . There are a lso a small number of societies  in 
provinces outside  Port Moresby , including some with rural membership.  
The main retail account and loan offerin gs by commercial banks and microbanks include transaction 
and savings accounts, term deposits, secured and unsecured personal loans (including auto loans) , 
and term loans for small enterprises . Commercial banks also offer home loans,  but these make up a 
small portion of their portfolio . Retail credit cards have very lim ited penetration, and are  offered only 
by one bank . The bulk of personal lending provided to individuals by licensed finance companies is by 
way of short -term loans to salaried employees , which are  repayable through direct salary deductions . 
They also offer longer -term personal loans as well as unsecured and secured business loans . The only 
deposit product that l icensed finance companies can offer to retail customers is a term deposit . S&LSs 
typically offer retail general and special purpose savings accounts, personal loans (secured wholly or 
at least partially by deposited savings ) and home loans . Credit facilities are also offered  by major 
retailers to their  customers , including in the form of payday loans.24  
The unregulated payday lending  sector in PNG  is significant , with repayments being deducted 
directly from the borrower’s salary . Licensed financial institutions are a source of credit for only a 
                                                           
23 As in its last annual report BSP reported a 55% share of total loa ns made by PNG banks —Bank of South Pacific Ltd 
Annual Report 2016, page 14. (ANZ is reportedly second as of March 2017, at around 26% - 
www.businessadvantagepn g.com/how -does -bsp-measure -up-to-australian -banks/ ). In 2016 , BSP also reported holding a 
53% share of total banking assets in PNG.  
24 http://homecentres.brianbellonline.com/customer -credit/  and see also http://www.courts.com.pg/services/  . The 
Review team was able to interview only one of these lenders, and their application form refers to the credit they provide 
as being ‘consumer credit/hire -purchase’. However, the accompanying documentation that was made available for 
review seems to document the credit as a loan secured by a chattel mortgage. The provider staff interviewed could not 
otherwise confirm whether and how they comply with hire -purchase statutory requirements in their processes and 
documentation.   
18 small portion of bor rowing undertaken by individuals in PNG,25 with a significant proportion being 
provided by unlicensed money lenders (both individuals and incorporated “finance companies”), with 
relatives and wantoks also being an important source of credit.26 It was identif ied some years ago that 
one quarter of PNG individuals obtained credit from unlicensed moneylenders.27 Official statistics are 
not available, but the mission team were told that the unregulated lending sector may range from 
40–50 to approximately  280 registered businesses that offer short -term (payday) loans to 
government employees and to some private sector employees. These loans are repaid through 
deductions made directly by the employer from the borrower’s salary. For government employees, a 
fee of approximately  5 percent  of the repayment amount is apparently payable to the relevant 
government ministry , and passed on to the borrower . As noted previously, while personal or payday 
lending rates in the formal sector appear to be in the range of 30-91 percent  per year , unregulated 
lending at 20 –50 percent  per fortnight (i.e. 520 –1,560  percent  per year ) has been reported.  
There is also a widespread unregulated moneylending practice in PNG at extremely high rates of 
interest , which is not part of the a bovementioned payday lending sector . For example, the mission 
team were told that it is common in Port Moresby for individuals (e.g. sole traders) to provide short 
term loans to the public at extremely high rates and fees .  
Insurance  
The life and general insurance marke ts are in their infancy in PNG, with available figur es indicating 
extremely low levels of coverage .28 The types of products offered to consumers include life insurance 
as well as loan protection, home and contents, motor vehicle, funeral cove r, and medical insurance. 
There are four  life insurance companies in PNG  and 12–13 general insurers , although there are reports 
of only three  being active and one being the subject of a winding up petition . One of the strategic 
objectives of the NFIS is that microinsurance should reach 1.5 million people.29 Developments in the 
microinsurance sector, with  family life and hospital cover  microinsurance product s being offered 
through mobile phones by Capital  Life Insurance  Limited , in partnership with BIMA and  Digicel , are o f 
interest .30 Payments are made using Digicel prepaid airtime credit . Also, since 2015, the Life Insurance 
Corporation (PNG) Limited has been offering a microinsurance product to customers of the Women’s 
Micro Bank Limited.31  
                                                           
25 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 -2020,  pages 16-17. 
26 Typically , persons  having a close social bond with the borrower.  
27 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 -2020, pages 16 -17. 
28 Current statistics for life and general insurance were not available but the final draft of the PNG Financial Sector 
Regulatory Strategy Report indicates that the life insurance sector had assets of 437 million Kina (US$182 million) as of 
December  31, 2014 (1.2% of financial sector assets) and the general insurance sector had assets of 963.3Kina (US$371 
million) as of 2011 (2.5% of financial sector assets).   
29 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020, page 4 . 
30 https://www.familylifepng.com/  . 
31 http://ntilic.com.pg/meri -laip-insurans -plan/  .  
19 Box 1: “BIMA” Branded “Family Life” Life Insurance and “Hausik” Hospitalization Insurance  
 
The BIMA Family Life product w as launched in PNG in July 2014, and the “Hausik” product in March  2015.  
The Family Life policy offers three different tiers of cover, and  provides both life and permanent disability 
cover. The Hausik policy also has three tiers of cover, and provides a fixed amount of money for each night 
spent in hospital. Details of the policies, and the terms and conditions, are available at 
https://www.familylifepng.com/  . The target market is low-income clients, with around 90  percent of clients 
never having used insurance before.  
As of October  17, 2017 , approximately 500,000 BIMA branded policies had been issue d, with approximately 
215,000 policyholders and 350,000 active polices . The premium income at the time for both polic ies was 
around 15M Kina with a claims payout ratio of around 50  percent  per year (as advised by the insurer).   
The policies a re distributed through three channels: field agents , a call centre that  is reportedly one of the 
largest in PNG, and via a USSD menu on mobile phones. There are around 86 field agents and around 80 at 
the BIMA  call cent er as of October  17, 2018.  
Both polic y types are renewable monthly, and paid for through Digicel mobile phone pre -paid or post -paid 
airtime in 20 monthly instalments, or one monthly deduction with a post -paid account in the case of the 
Hausik policy.  
 Source: https://www.familylifepng.com/about -us and BIMA and Capital Insurance interviews.  
 
Another potentially unregulated area relates to the life “insurance” offered by at least one finance 
company under a self -insurance arrangement . This cover is not underwritten by a licensed life 
insurer. A direction was also issued in November 2000 by BPNG to S&LSs , prohibiting unlicensed 
insurance activities that were being carried on by some S&LSs.32 It is, however, unclear if —and to 
what extent —these activities are still taking place .  
Payments  
Although the PNG retail payments sector is still largely  based on paper instruments (cash and 
cheques) , a range of alternatives and facilities are available in  the urban  and peri -urban  centers .33 
The country  is developing an extended network of  EFTPOS and ATM machines, which allow the usage 
of payment instruments like debit cards and a limited number of credit cards . Access to bank accounts 
is now also available through mobile phone applications (mobile banking), internet banking  and 
telephone banking,  while national remittance services  are provided by banks, PostPNG , and other 
providers.  Mobile banking is being used as a key mechanism to allow the financial inclu sion of PNG’s 
                                                           
32 Direction 03/2000 Insurance Activity.  
33 See BPNG description of the PNG Payments System at https://www.bankpng.gov.pg/payment -system/payment -
system -in-png/  .  
20 underbanked and unbanked  population . Currently , there are  limited e-wallet type services  provided 
by mobile network operators ( MNOs ). However,  this may change  in the future  as trust in the use of 
non-banks for payments purposes grows ; the required Internet and telecommunications 
infrastructure develops ; and agent networks can be realistically established with appropriate liquidity 
arrangements and other safeguards.34                            
The availability of retail payments service s may be expected to develop in the future , given the 
significant developments in PNG’s retail payments system infrastructure and regulatory 
framework . These developments have included the passage of the National Payments System Act 
2013 , the ongoing development of related regulations, and the introduction of interbank electronic 
clearing and settlement of payments offered via the  Kina Automated Transfer System (KATS) . 
Additionally, the authorities have  progress ed in shifting government payments on to an electronic 
basis and, most importantly, the BPNG  has started develop ing a retail electronic payments system  to 
facilitate interoperability among card networks and allow banks to be fully interoperable with other 
payment service providers and their custo mers.35 
Superannuation  
As indicated in the FSDS, superannuation funds comprise a significant proportion of PNG’s financial 
sector, with total assets under management being over 25  percent of financial sector assets.36 The 
two main funds —Nambawan  Super Limited (NSL) and Nasfund —are reported as having over 90  
percent  of all superannuation funds un der management. Contributions are compulsory for both 
employers and employees in firms of over 15 employees, with employers being required to contribute 
8.4 percent  and employees 6  percent  of the employee’s pay .3738 
Credit reporting  
PNG’s commercial banks and licensed finance companies, as well as various microbanks and S&Ls, 
particip ate in a ‘Credit & Data Bureau’ . The bureau also provides access to credit reports to other 
entities offering goods or services on credit, such as utility companies and telecommunications 
providers. The bureau’s consumer credit reports cover matters such as personal details, including 
those relating  to employment, credit applications , and credit defaults . The c redit providers met are 
generally of the view that the bureau arrangements have been working well from a lender perspective 
                                                           
34 The leading example is  the Digicel Cellmoni product , although this product seems to be available mainly to electronic 
resellers – see https://www.digicelgroup.com/pg/en/mob ile/plans -services/services/cellmoni.html  . 
35 Financial Sector Development Strategy, section 3.3 . 
36 Financial Sector Development Strategy, section 2.1.3 . 
37 Superannuation (General Provisions) Act, 2002, sections 76 and 77.  
38 Although this Report does not cover land trusts (which are not regulated by BPNG or any other financial sector 
regulator), it is worth noting that the Financial Sector Development Strategy indicates that they are growing in 
importance to the point where t heir assets under management have potential to be similar in size to those of 
superannuation funds and suggests that prudent management of the funds is essential (section 2.1.3, paragraph 26) .  
21 and have contributed to a reduction in loan defaults . The contractual  Code of Conduct , which applies 
to the bureau and its members , is discussed in section II.  
Tables 2 and 3 below provide a n overview of the  regulated  financial sector in PNG  and related key 
laws .  
Table 2: Overview of the PNG  Financial Sector  as of December 31, 2016  
INSTITUTION TYPE  NUMBER  REGULATOR / MINISTRY  KEY LAWS  
Commercial banks  4 BPNG/Treasury  Banking and Financial 
Institutions Act  
Licensed financial 
institutions including 
microbanks and finance 
companies (LFIs)  12 BPNG/Treasury  Banking and Financial 
Institutions Act  
Savings & Loan Societies  2239 
 BPNG/Treasury  Savings and Loan Society 
(Amendment) Act 1995  
Savings & Loan Society 
Act 2015 ( not yet in 
force ) 
Authorised Trustees 
(ATs) 4 BPNG/Treasury  Superannuation 
(General Provisi ons) Act 
2000 
Licensed investment 
managers (LIMs)  5 BPNG/Treasury  Superannuation 
(General Provisions) Act 
2000  
Licensed  superannuation 
fund administrators 
(LFAs)  3 BPNG/Treasury  Superannuation 
(General Provisions) Act 
2000  
Life insurance companies 
(LICs) 4 BPNG/Treasury  Life insurance Act 200  
Life insurance brokers 
(LIBs)  4 BPNG/Treasury  Life insurance Act 200  
Authorised money 
changers  9 BPNG/Treasury  Central Bank ing Act 2000   
Money remitter s 1 BPNG/Treasury  Central Bank ing Act 2000  
Foreign exchange  
dealers (AFEDs)  2 BPNG/Treasury  Central Bank Act  
Authorised mobile 
network operator  1 BPNG/Treasury  Mobile Banking and 
Mobile Payments 
Services Regulation 2011  
                                                           
39 The mission team w as advised that as of October 10 , 2017 , there were 21 licensed savings & loan societies, of wh ich 
17 were operative.   
22 General insurance 
companies (GICs)  12-1340  Insurance Act 1995  
General insurance 
brokers  6 -7  Insurance Act 1995  
 Source –all FIs other than general insurers: BPNG Annual Report 2016 —The Financial System Table, p . 21  
Source –data on general insurers: Insurance Commission   
 
Table 3 : Overview of Financial Sector Assets and Deposits as of December 31, 2016  
Total assets (K billion)  47.9  
Banking industry (%)  76%  
Authorised Trustees (%)  23.3%  
LICs (%) 0.8%  
  
Total deposits (K billion)  27.9  
Commercial banks (%)  94.9  
LICs (%)  2.1 
SLSs (%)  2.4 
Microbanks  0.7 
Total loans outstanding (K billion)  17.5  
Source –all FIs other than general insurers: BPNG Annual Report 2016 —The Financial System Table, page 21 . 
Data on general insurance assets not available.   
 
  
                                                           
40 One general insurer is the subject of a winding up petition by the Insurance Commission. There are also anecdotal 
reports that only three  general insurers are really active in PNG , with QBE being the largest.   
23 II. LEGAL AND  REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  
 
Context  
Good practice suggests  that either a stand -alone legal framework for financial consumer protection  
(FCP) or FCP-specific provisions in the general legal framework, are necessary to effectively address 
consumer protection issues specific to the financial sector. Although  there is no one -size-fits-all 
approach, and some countries continue to adopt only a general consumer protection law, a stand -
alone FCP legal framework or specific FCP provisions in broader laws or regulations allow flexibility to 
address issues specific t o the financial sector. This approach also facilitates complementarity with 
other regulatory measures that typically apply to the financial sector, such as prudential regulation.  
 
The legal and regulatory framework should cover key consumer protection prin ciples. There should 
be a focus on issues such as transparency and disclosure, business conduct, data protection , and 
recourse mechanisms. Further, there should be provisions addressing issues specific to different types 
of consumer products. They should i nclude responsible lending requirements for credit products and 
provisions addressing the risks with payments products . These include the need to safeguard 
customer funds held in e -wallets issued by non -banks and to deal with agent -related risks , and 
unaut horized and mistaken transactions. The scope of the framework’s application should also be 
clear (for example, the term “consumer” should be clearly defined).  
 
Ideally , the legal and regulatory framework should apply to all FIs on a “level playing field” 
(activities) basis , rather than with reference to the type of institution . Such an approach can 
minimize the risk of regulatory arbitrage, and provide consistency and ea se of compliance , and 
understanding by industry and consumers alike.  Where protections for consumers are found in 
multiple laws (e.g. covering different sub -sectors) , regulators should ensure they are comprehensive 
enough to cover all relevant consumer pro tection issues and harmonize their provisions to the 
greatest extent possible. This is so that consumers using different types of financial service pro ducts  
are protected based on  similar consumer protection principles as far as appropriate.  
 
Key Findings   
Although important financial sector reforms have been made, or are proposed for PNG, the overall 
legal and regulatory framework for FCP requires significant attention given its fragmentation and 
significant gaps and overlaps. There are scattered  consu mer protection provisions in various financial 
sector laws, which are summarized in Annex 3. The key laws are described below.  
Banking and NBFIs (n on-bank credit providers )  
24 The Banking and Financial Institutions Act 2000  (BFI Act ) contains provisions concerning deposit 
advertisements;  misleading advertising  about banking business ; false inducements to make deposits; 
secrecy of protected documents and information ; and the use of the word “bank ” and related terms . 
However, even these limited provisions w ould not cover the informal lending sector described above 
as they do not take deposits.  
The new Savings and Loans Act 2015  (S&LS Act  2015 ), the commencement date for which has not 
yet been fixed, will replace the 1961 Savings and Loan Societies Act (S&LS Act 1961 ) as amended by 
the Savings and Loan Societies (Amendment) Act 1995 . The new Act, similar to the current Act, will 
contain  some  similar pro visions as those in the BFI Act, but will also have more detailed provisions 
dealing with the business o f S&LSs , including their dealing s with consumers in relation to deposits and 
loans . The new Act will also introduce some significant changes to the operation of S&LSs, including 
imposing stricter prudential requirements, while allowing them greater flexibi lity with regard to 
product offerings and administration (such as the ability to set their own interest rates ) and allocating 
the registration function currently undertaken by BPNG to the Investment Promotion Authority (IPA) . 
However , BPNG will retain its supervisory responsibilities for S&LSs . 
The Hire -Purchase Act 1966 (H P Act) also contains important provisions relating to disclosure, terms 
charges, statutory rebates, repossessions, the reopening of inequitable transactions , and impl ied 
warranties  and conditions . However, it is not clear who is responsible for the supervision of 
compliance with this Act, which is silent on the subject. Though r eference to a “Minister”  has been 
made , it is not clear as to which Minister is  being referred to . Further, it is understood that there are 
two providers of credit for retail purchases in PNG . While the review team was able to meet one of 
these lenders, the staff interviewed could not confirm whether and how they comply with the HP A ct 
requirements in their processes and documentation . The provider’s application form refers to the 
credit it provide s as being ‘consumer credit/hire purchase’ . However, the accompanying 
documentation that was made available for review seems to document th e credit as a loan  secured 
by a chattel mortgage and the team was not provided with, for example, a hire-purchase 
agreement/documentation comprising a summary of financial obligations as contemplated under the 
HP Act. I t, therefore , could not be assess ed whether they are in fact providing hire -purchase 
arrangements and, if so, the extent to which they comply with the HP  Act. More generally, industry 
participants suggested that offerings of hire-purchase arrangements , such as in relation to vehicle  
finance , have declined significantly (e.g. replaced by chattel mortgage arrangements).  
The abovementioned entities that  provide consumer credit products in PNG , but do not  take 
deposits , are not subject to any financial sector licensing or FCP requirements . These  lenders are 
subject only to company and business name registration requirements with the IPA and the 
abovementioned legislation of general application such as the CA Act, the FT Act and the PC Act. In 
practice, however, this has not resulted in any substa ntive scrutiny of their activities.   
25 Credit reporting  
Credit reporting in PNG is also unregulated, although a contractual code of conduct applies. There 
is currently no PNG law covering the bureau or the handling of credit reporting information by the 
burea u or its members. However, there is a contractually binding Code of Conduct , which covers some 
of the matters suggested by international best practice for legislation. Examples include provisions 
requiring a borrower’s consent to a member obtaining a credi t report and provisions providing a 
consumer with some access and correction rights. The code also provides for a ‘Complaints 
Committee’ to decide on alleged breaches of the Code of Conduct , which can be accessed by 
individual complainants as well as bureau members . The code specifies timeframes and escalation 
arrangements for the committee and provides for the Chairman to have a casting vote . However, the 
Complaints Committee has apparently never been convened . It was further noted in discussions with 
institutions that when consumers raise d issues of inaccura te information , they were generally 
referred to the institution that purportedly provided th e information to get it rectified . By way of 
example, one institution noted that it receives several complaints a year from consumers regarding 
the accuracy of their credit files and that it always refers them to the relevant third -party  institution. 
Importantly, the code does not contain r estrictions on credit providers concerning the use and 
disclosure of the information provided by the bureau . The contractual nature of the code also means 
that consumers do not have any direct legal rights to enforce it .  
Insurance  
The Life Insurance Act 2000 (LI Act) includes the protection of policyholders in its statement of 
purposes and contains various provisions relating to FCP matters. They include provisions concerning 
licensing, disclosures, statutory funds, responsibility f or agents, insurable interests, the duty of 
disclosure, a 14 -day cooling off period, secrecy of protected documents and information , and use of 
words related to “ life insurance ”41. It is understood that the LI Act will be reviewed in 2018, although 
the stat us of the review is not known .  
The Insurance Act 1995 (Insurance Act) makes provision for the licensing of businesses , which provide 
“general insurance ”. However, unlike the LI Act, the Insurance Act does not contain any statement of 
purpose, or a particu lar focus on the interests of policyholders. There is almost a complete lack of 
provisions designed to protect policyholders (for example , requiring that policy terms be provided in 
advance or concerning insurance contracts and there is no provision for a policyholder protection 
fund). There is provision for the establishment of an Insurance Complaints Tribunal, but it has never 
                                                           
41 Life Insurance Act 2000, see especially Parts III, XI and XV.   
26 been established.42 Further, the policy framework provided for by the Act has never been 
promulgated by the Head of State.43 
The Financial  Services  Development Strategy proposes that responsibility for the supervision of the 
general insurance industry be transferred to BPNG.44 It is also understood that the Insurance Act was 
reviewed  and draft  amendments  and a final report were provi ded under a  2015  World Bank project  
for Technical Assistance to PNG concerning the Financial Services Development Strategy . It is unclear 
as to when, or if  at all , these amendments will be introduced.  
The Insurance Act review was undertaken following reco mmendations in the 2010 PNG FSP and in 
a 2007 ICCC review of the insurance industry.  It focused on the I nsurance Commissioner ’s functions 
and powers and prudential issues rather than matters of concern to policyholders (such as disclosures, 
claims management , and insurance contracts) . Given the very small size of the  general insurance 
market, s uch issues were not considered a priority  at the time . Nevertheless, it is suggested that this 
approach should be reconsidered with a holistic review of the I nsurance Act undertaken , which covers 
FCP issues as well as prudential matters.  
There are also some gaps in the regulation of insurance activities. The mission team was made aware 
of: 
• Loan protection insurance products provided at the risk of the lender r ather than being 
underwritten by a licensed insurer;  
• Medical and hospital insurance , which is simply regulated as “general insurance”; and  
• Hospital cover being provided under a life insurance licence rather than a general insurance 
licence. It is understood that there is some ambiguity regarding the definitions of “life 
insurance” in the LI Act and “insurance” in the Insurance Acts, which can create confusion  as 
to which is applicable.  
Payments  
The N ational Payments System Act 2013  (Payments Act ), does not itself contain FCP provisions , but 
provide s for BPNG to  formulate general or specific rules or guidelines for the purposes of ensuring 
that users of payment services and instruments are treated fairly and transparently .45 There is also 
provision for BPNG to make orders, guidelines , and take other relevant measures to protect users of 
                                                           
42 Insurance Act 1995, Part IX.  
43 Insurance Act 1995, s. 26.  
44 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2018 –2030, paragraph 70 . 
45 National Payments System Act 2013 , s. 3 .  
27 electronic payment instruments.46 Much of the proposed Payments Act  consumer protection 
framework is contained in th e draft General Guidelines on Retail Payment Instruments  (2017) .  
Retail Payments Guidelines ; the draft Oversight Regulation (2017)  (Oversight Regulation ); the draft 
Regulation on Electronic Funds Transfer (2017)  (EFT Regulation ); and the draft Regulation on Agents 
(2017)  (Agents Regulation ). It is understood that these regulations are close to finalization.  
Also, relevant to  the payments context , is the Mobile Banking and Mobile Payments Services 2011 
(Prudential Standard MBPS 1.2011),  which was issued un der s. 27 of the BFI Act ( Mobile Banking PS ). 
Importantly, the purpose of the Mobile Banking PS is stated to include “ consumer protection ”, and 
Boards of relevant banks and non -banks must have policies and procedures for consumer protec tion 
covering specif ied topics.47  However, there are no requirements as to the detail that must be in place 
in these policies and procedures e.g. as to exactly the nature, timing, content , and format of the 
disclosures which must be made , how the information must be protected; or standardized complaints 
procedures. There are also no requirements relating to payments specific matters such as 
unauthorised and mistaken transactions or electronic contracts and disclosures. However, non -banks 
are required to match any e -money in circulation with an amount in a trust account with a comme rcial 
bank.48 It should be noted that the Mobile Banking PS may be superseded by the abovementioned 
draft Guidelines and Regulations.  
Superannuation  
The Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2000  (Superannuation Act) includes the protection of 
policyholders in its statement of purposes and contains various provisions relating to FCP matters ( like 
the approach in the LI Act). The Act includes provisions on licensing; the responsibilities of t rustees; 
statutory covenants; annual disclosures as to the performance of an ASF; investments; member 
contributions and the rights of members; secrecy of protected documents and information , and the 
use of words related to a “ superannuation fund ”.49 There is also provision for the establishment of an 
industry complaints scheme, but it is understood that it has not been established.50 The policy 
framework for the Superannuation Act is to be reviewed by a Task Force, with recommendations to 
be provided by no later than end -2019. 51 
Other laws  and codes relevant to consumer protection  
                                                           
46 National Payments System Act 2013, s. 26 . 
47 Mobile Banking and Mobile Payments Services 2011 (Prudential Standard MBPS 1.2011), Part II, ss. 1 and 3 and Part 
III(1)(d) . 
48 Mobile Banking and Mobile Payments Services 2011 (Prudential Standard MBPS 1.2011), Part III, s. 2(d)).  
49 Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2000, Parts 8,9 and 14 –16.  
50 Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2000, s.  49B.  
51 National Sector Development Strategy 2018 – 2030, paragraphs 81 – 83.  
28 There are also other laws of general application, which  have the potential to overlap with any FCP 
provisions that  are in financial sector laws . They include :  
• The Independent Consumer and Competition Commission Act 2002 (ICCC Act ), which  
provides  the ICCC with  broad consumer protection functions in relation to “services”.52 The 
term “services” is broadly defined and specifically includes banking, credit , and insurance 
services .53 While there are only very limited specific consumer protection provisions applying 
to services, the ICCC Act provides for the declaration of entities to be “regulated” , which in 
turn can lead to the imposition of price controls and ser vice standards.  However, it is 
understood that these powers have not been exercised in relation to financial services . It is 
also understood that the ICCC is supportive of BPNG taking on responsibility for FCP.  
 
• The Personal Property Securities Act 2012, which came into force in May 2016. The Act 
primarily relates to the formation and enforcement of security interests and the priority of 
competing interests. The enforcement provisions on Part VIII are of specific relevan ce to 
consumers. For example, there is a requirement for the secured party to act in a commercially 
reasonable manner when disposing of collateral . Further, the rights and remedies of the 
secured party on default are specified.54 
 
• The Prices Regulation Act 2009 (PR Act)  provides for the setti ng of maximum prices of goods 
and services , which could include financial services.55 
 
• The Commercial Advertisement (Protection of the Public) Act 1976  (CA Act), which is of 
general application  and prohibits the publication of broadly defined “ unfair statements ”.56 
 
• The Fairness of Transactions Act 1993  (FT Act) , which is also of general application and 
provides for the review by the Court of “ unfair transactions ”.57 
There are some industry Codes of Conduct relevant to FCP , which  are primarily focussed on the 
industry in question rather than the relationship with customers . They include : 
• The Savings and Loans Code of Conduct for Directors and Committee  Members  developed 
by BPNG . 
 
                                                           
52 Independent Consumer and Com petition Commission Act 2002, ss. 6 and 106 . 
53 Independent Consumer and Competition Commission Act 2002, s. 44(1).  
54 Personal Property Securities Act 2012, ss. 100 and 96 respectively.  
55 Prices Regulation Act 2009, ss. 10 and 21.  
56 Commercial Advertisement (Protection of the Public) Act 1976, ss. 2 and 3.  
57 Fairness of Transactions Act 1993, s.  5  
29 • The Rules  of the PNG Association of Finance Companies Inc , which includes in its object ives 
the promotion of ethical standards but does not provide f or any specific FCP provisions .  
 
• The contractual Code of Conduct for Credit and Data Bureau  Limited’s Operation in PNG , 
which also applies in PNG. The  code is discussed furthe r above .  
There is no overarching privacy or data protection law in PNG, although the Constitution protects 
the right to privacy .58 There are scattered provisions concerning confidentiality and security of 
information in various laws . They include provisions in the Mobile Banking PS requiring Boards to have 
processes to protect the secrecy and confidentiality of customers ’ accounts . The proposed regulations 
and guidelines to be made under the Payments Act  also cover these issues. Further, the common law 
applicable in PNG may require bankers to protect the confidentiality of customer information . 
There is a need for overarching data protection laws or regulations , which reflect international best 
practice and apply on a uniform basis to different parts of the financial sector.  This is especially 
important given that the volume, variety , and velocity of personal data , which is being co llected and 
processed for traditional and innovative digital financial services , is continuously increasing, with a 
commensurate rise in confidentiality and security risks. It is also important given the variability and 
frequently wide scope of privacy con sents and notifications currently included by institutions in PNG.  
Any new law or regulation  should cover issues such as the collection, use and disclosure of personal 
information; the need for informed consent when data is to be used for purposes other th an the 
original purpose of collection; access and correction rights; security standards; privacy policies and a 
prohibition on using data for discriminatory purposes .  
The details of PNG’s customary law  have not been considered for the purposes of this review . At 
independence, the Constitution directed Parliament to enact a legislation that would declare and 
provide for the development of the underlying law of Papua New Guinea. This was a mandate to 
esta blish rules for the development of PNG’s own common law.59 Section 20 of the Constitution gave 
customary laws a central role in the country’s legal system by making them part of the underlying law. 
The Underlying Law Act 2000 , in turn , provides for a hierar chy of laws, placing customary law above 
the common law. Further , the Act limits the common law that may be  used to the common law of 
England in force immediately before September 16, 1975 . The Act’s definition of customary law, on 
the other hand, is not s imilarly frozen in time and place.60  
                                                           
58 Constitution of Papua New Guinea, section 49.  
59 Ottley, Bruce L, " Reconciling Modernity and Tradition: PNG's Underlying Law Act " [2002] ALRCRefJl  5; (2002) 80 
Australian Law Reform Commission Reform Journal 22 . 
60 Underlying Law Act 2000, s. 6.   
30 Conclusion on legal and regulatory framework  
The abovementioned laws and codes in PNG do not provide complete coverage of the transparency 
and fair treatment, data protection , and consumer recourse provisions , which underpin 
international best practice . For example, there are no pre -contractual or contractual disclosure 
requiremen ts for credit or debit products;  there are very limited rules relating to confidentiality of 
customer info rmation; the consumer compl aints provisions are very limited and in some cases not 
implemented;  there are no controls over debt collection practices ; there is no law on general 
insurance contracts  or the protection of policyholder interests;  the current payments law does not 
cover either the general or payments -specific FCP issues; there is no provision requiring FIs  to take 
responsibility for their agents (other than in relation to life insurance), and there is no overarching 
law relating to data protection (although there are a fe w rules relating to confidentiality of customer 
information in the payments context) . Further details of these gaps are discussed in the sections 
below.   
Against this background, possible options for a new FCP legal and regulatory framework have been 
considered . These are set out in Annex 1.  
Recommendations  
Regulations or prudential standards should be developed by BPNG under key financial sector - 
specific legislation to co ver the FCP issues  identified in this report . Short -term p riority should be 
given to implementation of the recommendations concerning contractual disclosur es, unfair terms 
and complaints handling, with other recommendations to follow. Given the likely complexity of the 
new requirements, there should be an appropriate transition period before industry is required to 
comply with them (e.g. 6 –12 months).  There should also be consultation with relevant stakeholder 
groups as the new rules are developed. This should include the new Regulators Advisory  Committe e 
provided for by the NFIS.61 The RAC consists of representatives of BPNG, the Insurance Regulatory 
Authority,  the ICCC and the National Information and Communications Technology Authority. The 
recommendation that BPNG take the lead role in developing the F CP framework is consistent with 
the NFIS, which  states that BPNG  should  have this role.62 
FCP rules that are applicable to the banking and NBFI (lending) sectors  should be of immediate 
priority . The banking and NBFI sectors are considered to be the most importan t given the scale of 
these sectors, the number of consumers affected, the extent of concerns about market practices , and 
the current FCP laws and regulations , which are very limited .  
                                                           
61 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020, page 40.  
62 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020, page 42.   
31 For other sectors , key recommendations in this report should ideally be implemented through 
regulations made under the relevant Act, although the position is not entirely clear with the 
Insurance Act.  Further,   
• Insurance sector: The recommendations made in relation to  the life insurance sector should 
also be considered in the upcoming review of the Life Insurance Act, which is understood to 
be proposed for 2018. The Insurance Act was the subject of a 2015 -review of prudential 
provisions . It is suggested that when this review is reacti vated, it should also take  into account 
the FCP recommendations made in this report.  
 
• Payments sector:  FCP issues relevant to the payments sector should be considered in the 
context of the regulations and guidelines currently being prepared for the  purposes of the 
Payments Act. It  is understood that this is a high -priority exercise.  
 
• Superannuation sector:  The current review of the superannuation sector was a high -level one  
given  the time available  and a more  detailed  and overall review of FCP issues  is required . It is 
considered to be a short -term priority given the scale of the superannuation sector. The results 
of the review could then be considered in the context of the upcoming policy review of the 
Superannuation Act, as provided for in the FSDS.63  
New FCP regulations  and stan dards should apply in relation to a “consumer” who is either an 
individual or a small business. The term “small business” will need to be clearly defined. This is 
commonly done by reference to the assets or annual turnover or employees of the entity in que stion. 
It is considered that small businesses  (such as sole trader s and small partnership  microenterprises ) 
need to be covered on the basis that they are as likely as individuals engaging with FIs in a personal 
capacity to have an imbalance in bargaining power and information deficiencies compared to  an FI. 
Further, it is likely to be very difficult to distinguish between a personal and a business purpose of a 
financial facility as far as individuals and microbusinesses a re concerned.  
Consumer lenders who do not take deposits should be required to be licensed  or registered under 
the BFI Act . They should further be required to comply with any FCP provisions applicable to banks 
and finance companies , which take deposit s. As mentioned above, this may be within the ambit of  
the power to make regulations prescribing specified financial activities as “ banking business ” for the 
purposes of the Act (see para. (b) of the definition in s. 3(1)).   
A licence condition should also be  imposed on FIs providing services to consumers , which require 
compliance with any FCP laws, regulations, standards or guidelines.  This should allow BPNG to take 
                                                           
63 Financial Sector Development Strate gy 2018 –2030, paragraphs 81 – 83.  
32 action in relation to the licence if this condition was breached, without necessarily having t o take 
court action.  
In the longer term, development of an overarching  FCP law, which meets international best practice 
standards , should also be considered . Such a law should apply to all financial sector participants 
based on the activities they conduct (such as lending), rather than their institution type.  
Consideration should be given to conducting a review of FCP issues relevant to the securities 
industry . Only those parts of the financial sector regulated by BPNG are covered in this review . As 
such, the securities sector is not within the scope of this review. This exclusion includes, for example, 
debt and equity investments, land trust schemes64, and inve stment scams such as the 
pyramid/multilevel marketing schemes , which are reportedly widespread in PNG.65 This proposal is 
made with regard to the desirability of having a “level playing field” in the FCP legal and regulatory 
framework.  
 
In the longer term, consideration should be given to the continued relevance  of the  HP Act , based 
on an assessment of market practices . From the limited review undertaken for the purposes of this 
diagnostic, it is not entirely clear that hire -purchase products are still being offered in PNG ( although 
it may be the case that they are still being offered but inconsistently with the HP Act) . If the market 
assessment suggests that they are, then it is considered appropriate that there should be a r eview of 
the Act. In this context , consideration could be given to regulating retail providers of hire -purchase 
facilities in the same way as NBFIs which do not take deposits.   
 
 
  
                                                           
64 It is understood that land trusts, which are not supervised by BPNG, are growing and approaching a similar size to 
superannuation funds.  
65 See, for example, the media report at http://www.thenational.com.pg/glimpse -world -pyramid -schemes/  .  
33 III. FCP SUPERVISION  AND  CAPACITY  
 
Context  
The mandate of the relevant financial  consumer protection  (FCP) supervisory authority should be 
clear and there should not be any overlaps or inconsistencies between institutional mandates. 
Regardless of the institutional arrangements for FCP, it is important that a FCP supervisory authority 
has a clear legal mandate to supervise FCP—one which does not conflict or overlap with the mandate 
of other authorities.  Although in some countries , a general consumer protection agency  is responsible 
for FCP, this is not a recommended approach. Such an agency may lack the necessary resources, skills , 
and expertise to be able to focus effectively on the financial sector given the breadth of its 
responsibilities.  
 
Good practice suggests it is important to have either a specialized agency for FCP or a spec ialized 
unit within the overall financial industry supervisor . Regardless  of the model chosen, it is important 
that such a unit/agency is independent from the relevant prudential supervision unit/agency, while 
coordinating and communicating appropriately w ith each other regarding their respective activities. 
The need for independence is driven by concerns related to a potential conflict of interest between 
prudential and market conduct/ FCP oversight. Such a conflict may arise, for example, where measures 
to protect financial consumers could be detrimental to the profit of a financial institution or could 
potentially affect its soundness  indirectly . 
 
The consumer protection regulator’s enfor cement powers and tools , and the actions taken against 
FIs by the regulator, should create a credible threat of enforcement. In particular, the supervisor 
should have a wide range of civil and administrative enforcement powers, and supervisory tools, 
proce sses, and procedures specific to consumer protection.  
 
Box 2: International Examples of Financial Consumer Protection Supervisory Arrangements  
 
There is no single model of institutional arrangement for FCP supervision that is optimal in all 
countries.  Regardless of the model, it is important that there is a balanced allocation of resources 
between consumer protection and the prudential supervisory authorities (or respective 
departments, if these two functions are under the same authority).  
  
When a sin gle authority (e.g., a central bank) covers both consumer protection and prudential 
regulation and supervision, the two functions should be distinct and at similar hierarchical levels, 
with preferably different reporting lines.  These arrangements  can minimize potential conf licts of 
interest and imbalance in  decision  makin g and resource allocation, while also allow ing staff  
specialization for greater effectiveness. Such a structure has been adopted in many countries . Some 
examples are provided below:   
34 - Armenia: In Armenia, the Consumer Protection Department was initially established as a 
division within the Financial System Stability and Development Department but later it 
transitioned into being a separate department.66  
- Brazil:  The Central Bank of Brazil , when creating the Conduct Supervision Department in 2013, 
placed it at the same hierarchical level as the prudential supervision departments.  
- France: In 2010, the banking and insurance supervision authorit ies were merged into a single  
independent instit ution  within Banque de France, the Banking Commission. Within this 
institution , a separate department for supervision of business conduct was created , which was 
hierarchically equivalent  to the prudential sup ervision departments and report ed directly to the 
Secretary General of the Commission.67 
- Georgia:  In 2017 , a new Consumer Protection Department was created within the Central Bank 
of Georgia , reporting directly to the Governor so as to ensure its independence.68  
- Malaysia:   FCP is a policy priority of B ank Negara Malaysia (BNM) , as demonstrated by the 
establishment of a separate Consumer and Market Department within BNM.69 The department 
is responsible for the formulation of FCP policy and reg ulation, supervision of a wide range of 
financial institutions from an FCP perspective and consumer education activities. Consumer 
complaints are dealt with by the Ombudsman for Financial Services , which is a non -profit 
organization established by BNM .70  
- Peru:  In Peru, a Consumer Protection Unit was created in 2005 as an interna l unit  within a 
broader Department . However, it was legally structured as a “unit” and lacked the legal 
protections provided to deputy superintendencies within the Superintendence.71 Followin g 
increas ing concerns about conflicts of interests, the Consumer Protection Unit was re -
structured as deputy  superintendency at  the same organizational level as other s. 
- Philippines: The Financial Consumer Protection Department in Banko Sentral Ng Pilipinas  (BSP) 
reports to the Deputy  Governor responsible for the Supervision and E xamination Sector, and is 
separate  from the supervisory departments.72 The department’s core functions include policy 
initiation, market conduct regulation, complaints  handling , and financial education.73 
- Portugal:  In Portugal, the Banking Conduct Supervision unit was first created within the Banking 
Supervision Department in 2007 . Over time , the unit was provided with clear, specific functions , 
and responsibilities separate from prudential supervision. In addition, even though it was within 
the Banking Supervision Department, to avoid conflicts of interests, the deputy director of the 
Banking Conduct Supervision unit reported directly to the Vic e Governor of the Banco de 
Portugal, bypassing the director of the Banking Supervision Department. The unit became an 
                                                           
66 J. Chien, Establishing a Financial Consumer Protection Supervision Department —Key Observations and Lessons Learned 
in Five Case Study Countries , 2014.  
67 See Organigram, available at  https://acpr.banque -france.fr/fileadmin/user_upload/acp/L_ACP/Organisation/201703 -
Organigramme -acpr -fr.pdf . 
68 See Organigram, available at  https://www.nbg.gov.ge/uploads/structure/2014/2017/f/struktura_eng.pdf  . 
69 http://www.bnm.gov.my/documents/2017/BNM_Org_Structure_03102017_en.pdf  . 
70 http://www.ofs.org.my/en/  . 
71 J. Chien, Establishing a Financial Consumer Protection Supervision Department —Key Observations and Lessons Learned 
in Five Case Study Countries , 2014.  
72 http://www.bsp.gov.ph/about/org_ses.asp  . 
73 http://www.bsp.gov.ph/about/advocacies_fin_fcag.asp  .  
35 autonomous, stand -alone department in 2011 when the Supervision Department was split into 
Prudential Supervision and Banking Conduct Super vision.74 
 
Key Findings  
BPNG has an implicit consumer protection mandate under the Central Banking Act 2000 (CBA) as 
well as specific functions under other Acts. The objectives of BPNG under the CBA include, in 
summary, the formulation of financial regulation and prudential standards to ensure financial system 
stability and the promotion of an efficient national and international payments system.75 Under its 
related functions, BPNG may “ regulate banking, credit and other financial services as empowere d by 
this Act or any other law of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea ”.76 BPNG also has express 
functions  and powers  under specific laws, including the BFI Act77, the LI Act78, the Payments Act79, and 
the Superannuation Act80. It is considered that these provisions might be relied on for the purposes 
of BPNG supervising new FCP provisions. Further details of these provisions are in Annex 2.  
The Insurance Commissioner does not have either an implicit or explicit mandate covering FCP 
matters. Unlike the LI Act, the Insurance Act does not contain any statement of purpose, or indeed a 
focus  on the interests of policyholders. Further, the policy framework provided for by s. 26 has never 
been promulgated by the Head of State. Also, t here is almost a complete lack of FCP provisions 
designed to protect policyholders. Further details of this Act , which is under review as noted above, 
are in Annex 3.  
The Insurance Commissioner has very limited resources to supervise any new FCP framework , which 
might b e developed . They have only five active supervisory staff and on -site reviews have only 
commenced in the last few years. Although  it is understood that a capacity -building program was 
undertaken around 2014, it only related to prudential matters rather than policyholder concerns 
(given the small size of the market). Against this background, the FSDS recommends  for responsibility 
for the supervision of the general in surance industry to be transferred to BPNG.81 BPNG would thus 
become responsible for both the LI Act and the Insurance Act.  
                                                           
74 J. Chien, Establishing a Financial Consumer Protection Supervision Department —Key Observations and Lessons Learned 
in Five Case Study Countries , 2013.  
75 Central Banking Act 2000, s.  7. 
76 Central Banki ng Act 2000, s. 8(1)(c).  
77 Banking and Financial Institutions Act 2000, s.  5. 
78 Life Insurance Act 2000, s.  12. 
79 National Payments System Act 2013, s.  3. 
80 Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2000, s.  7. 
81 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2018 –2030, paragraph 70 .  
36 The ICCC also has a n FCP mandate , but limited capacity or resources to fulfil it . The ICCC Act provides 
for the ICCC to have consume r protection functions in relation to “ services ”. The term “ services ” is 
broadly defined and specifi cally includes banking, credit , and insurance services .82  The ICCC is the 
subject of the Consumer and Competition Framework Review: Public Report and Recommendations  
published in February 2017 for public comment ( CCF Review ). 83 Recommendation 53 of the CCF 
Review is to the effect that “ financial services ” should not be exempted from PNG’s general consumer 
protection laws. However, this approach is not c onsistent wit h aspects of the FSDS , which recognize 
the ICCC’s limited capacity to address issues specific to the financial sector. 84 Further, it is understood 
from mission meetings that the ICCC does not have the resources to handle FCP matters, especiall y 
given its very broad mandate under the ICCC Act.  
 
The role of the Centre for Excellence in Financial Inclusion (CEFI) is also mentioned for 
completeness. CEFI is an incorporated association described as “ the industry apex organization for 
coordinating, advocating and monitoring all financial inclusion activities in PNG ”.85 It was launched by 
the Prime Minister in 2013 and has been endorsed by NEC. It works in collaboration with BPNG, the 
Departments of Finance, Treasury and National Planning and Monitorin g, industry and technical , and 
development partners.  CEFI does not have an explicit regulatory or supervisory role, although it 
appears to be  involved in policy development . The FSDS further proposes that it plays  a role in 
channelling consumer complaints to the appropriate enforcement agencies (see below in Part IV).86 
 
If BPNG is to be responsible for supervision of a new FCP legal and regulatory framework , then its 
FCP capacity and resources will need to be enhanced . Further, an FCP-focussed supervisory 
structure and process should be developed. Given the limited  FCP provisions at present, BPNG has 
understandably focussed on prudential regulation and supervision. At present , there is no  separate 
FCP supervisory unit or department with in BPNG . Separation from prudential supervision is desirable 
because of the potential conflicts of interest between prudential and FCP supervisory functions. 
Further, consumer protection and prudential supervision require different types of supervisory 
profiles, skills and approaches, with the latter focusing more on quantitative skills and analysis of an 
institution’s financial soundness, and the former on qualitative skills and assessment of how an 
institution deals with consumers.  
 
Recommendations  
                                                           
82 Independent Consumer and Competition Commission Act 2002, ss. 6, 44 and 106.  
83 It is understood the final version of the CCF Review is under preparation and, when completed, will be submitted to 
the National Executive Council for approval. In the meantime, work is underway on the preparation of a National 
Competition Policy, with su pport from the Asian Development Bank.  
84 Financial Sector Development Strategy, paragraphs 5 and  54 
85 http://www.thecefi.org/about/overview  . 
86 See http://www.thecefi.org/about/stakeholders  .  
37 BPNG should be solely responsible for supervision of the FCP legal and regulatory framework 
relating to the banking, NBFI, insurance, payments and superannuation  sectors . If this 
recommendation is accepted, the ICCC Act should be amended in the longer term so t hat the 
consumer protection provisions do not apply to financial services.  Consequential amendments would 
also need to be made to the Insurance Act . These recommendations would make best use of BPNG’s 
financial sector expertise and minimize the risk of ove rlapping mandates and regulatory frameworks, 
with all the resulting inefficiencies and confusion for industry and consumers. They are also consistent 
with the NFIS , which  states that BPNG should take the lead in  developing the FCP framework .87 It is 
also to  be noted that BPNG is the only regulator , which could realistically be responsible for FCP in 
the relevant sectors, as it is the regulator for all of them (other than general insurance, which is 
proposed to be transferred to BPNG88). 
In the longer term , consideration should also be given  to amending the BPNG Act to provide BPNG 
with an explicit FCP mandate.  The amendment should make it clear that BPNG’s functions include 
the protection of both individual and small business consumers of all types of financi al products and 
services. This mandate should apply on a “level playing field” basis to all types of entities regulated by 
BPNG.  
BPNG’s expertise in relation to FCP supervision  should be deepened  along with developing the 
new FCP legal and regulatory fram ework.  Apart from well-developed supervisory manuals, there is 
also a need for staff to use many of  the specific tools relevant to this area (such as mystery 
shopping, customer focus groups and surveys, review of advertising materials and a systematic 
anal ysis of customer complaints).  
 
Options should be developed for creating a BPNG department with specific responsibility for 
supervision of the FCP legal and regulatory framework, and with capacity to oversee innovations in 
financial services provided to co nsumers.  It is beyond the scope of this report to consider all such 
options, but it is recommended that they be developed as a matter of high priority. In relation to 
innovations in the financial sector, it is noted that several regulators have introduced  formal  
“regulatory sandboxes” to help them work with industry, and especially on innovations in financial 
products and services , and their providers. Put simply, a regulatory sandbox is usually a “safe house” 
where pilots of specified types of innovative financial products and services can take place  with the 
support of financial sector regulators.89  
                                                           
87 National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2016 –2020, page 42.  
88 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2018 –2030, paragraph 70.  
89 Many countries have establish ed such sandboxes, with 2016 being an especially busy year. Relevant countries include 
Abu Dhabi, Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, the United Kingdom and the United States of America. 
The form and approach in each country varies but the re appears to be an international trend for regulators to establish 
rule-based “regulatory sandboxes” to support technological innovations.   
38 There should also be a mechanism for close consultation and collaboration between all relevant 
regulators on FCP related policy, regulatory , and supervisory m atters, such as an MoU . It is especially 
important that there be such arrangements between BPNG and ICCC whil e ICCC still has a statutory 
role in relation to consumer protection in the financial sector. An MoU between BPNG and the 
Insurance Commissioner is  also highly desirable, unless the general insurance supervision function is 
to be transferred to BPNG in the short term. Consideration might also be given to an MoU between 
BPNG and the  PNG Securities Commission. An MoU between relevant regulators should clearly state 
the respective roles and provide for regular  liaison meetings; consultation on shared policy and 
regulatory issues; sharing of information on matters of common interest (subject to obligations of 
confidentiality and security); cooperation in relation to compliance and enforcement matters as 
necessary , and exchange of information about systemic complaints issues and complaints data. There 
should also be provision for the establishment of joint task forces on appropriate matters and 
coordination  of operational matters such as on -site supervision visits and relevant media releases. 
The MoU should be regularly reviewed and amended as necessary. Such MoUs could exist in addition 
to the proposed Financial Services Council to be established under the FSDS.  
 
   
39 IV. TRANSPARENCY AND  FAIR TREATMENT   
 
Context  
Proportionate disclosure requirements can help foster a more informed consumer marketplace and 
facilitate financial inclusion. Disclosure requirements should focus both on provision of 
specific/individualized information at the pre -contractual, contractual , and post -contractual stages of 
a financial institution’s dealings with a consumer and on disclosures in sales and advertising materials. 
It is important that disclosure requirements a re proportionate in terms of reflecting the risks of the 
relevant activity, the literacy/capability level of the relevant consumers, and do not impose 
compliance costs that outweigh their intended benefits.  
 
Disclosures can also enable product comparisons and encourage competition . The focus should be 
on disclosures , which reflect key information, are easily understandable , and for pre -contractual 
disclosures, are comparable between providers. This is especially important for consumers with low 
levels of fi nancial capability and in relation to innovative financial services (such as mobile money).  
 
Potential differences in the nature and method of delivery of digital financial service s such  as 
payment products and services should also be considered in developing disclosure requirements . 
For example, there should be flexibility to allow for electronic contracts and disclosures . Disclosure 
requirements should allow for delivery of information to consumers through a variety of channels 
(such as mobile communications, websites, call cent ers, ATMs , and agents) while also ensuring that 
necessary information is still made available to consumers effectively. Further, there should be 
provision for app lications and supporting documents to be provided by consumers electronically and 
for contracts to be established  electronically .  
 
A further key consumer protection concern is that financial institutions  and their staff , and other 
intermediaries, do not engage in unfair business practices . The aim is to ensure that at all stages of 
the relationship with consumers, FIs treat consumers fairly and avoid abusive or otherwise 
inappropriate business conduct. Specific issues in this context include ensuring that FIs do not include  
unfair terms  in their contracts ; undertake proper training and screening of agents, retail sales officers 
and other intermediaries  so that they are competent to meet  FCP and fair business requirements ; do 
not engage in misleading and deceptive conduct , high -pressure sales and discrimination during the 
sales process  (including through their agents) ; appropriately address conflicts of interest that may 
arise in processes affecting consumers ; ensure that advice, recommendations or offerings of financial 
products to consumers are suitable for those consumers’ circumstances;  do not inap propriately limit 
consumers’ ability to cancel a financial product or switch to another financial product ; protect 
consumer s’ funds and other assets from risks of internal or external fraud and misuse and address  
40 such risks appropriately if they eventuate ; and do not engage in abusive o r unfair debt collection 
practices . 
 
There is also a need to ensure that features of specific types of products are considered  in 
developing fair treatment and business conduct standards.  For example, crucial consumer 
protection issues for credit products include ensuring that credit provider s engage in responsible 
lending and take reasonable measures to determine affordability of credit they offer to consumers ; 
that they do not make inappropriate unsolicited offers for credit  (such as by sending consumers direct 
marketing offers for ‘pre -appr oved’ credit or sending credit cards to consumers who have not 
requested them ); that they do not charge unfair fees, or unfairly retain interest, on early repayment 
of a loan ; and that they do not charge excessive default costs or engage in inappropriate e nforcement 
conduct when consumers go into arrears on their loans . For deposit  accounts, key concerns include 
ensuring that consumers are not in appropriately charged maintenance fees on inactive accounts ; that 
automatic overdraft facilities  (with associated  fees and charges ) are not applied to accounts without 
consumers’ agreement ; and that anti -competitive fees are not applied on account closures . For term 
deposits,  key issue s are that providers should not impose unfair fees or inappropriate restrictions on  
early withdrawal  and that consumers are  clearly  notified of the applicable interest rate on any roll -
over of the term deposit . For payment products and services , crucial consumer protection issues 
include  ensuring that there is interoperability between providers ; that consumers’  funds are 
safeguarded regardless  of whether a bank or a non -bank is providing the service and that there are 
fair rules for dealing with mistaken and unauthorized transactions. For insurance products, prompt 
processing of claims is a key concern  as is the need for fair rules on how and when a claim may be 
made. For superannuation products , access to the relevant fund  is critical.   
 
Box 3: Key Facts Statements  
A ‘key facts statement’ (KFS) refers to a standardized one or two -page document written in easy -
to-read print and plain language, which  describes key aspects of a financial product. A KFS does not 
replace the terms and conditions for a financial product or  service, but is rather required to be given 
to a consumer prior to starting a contractual relationship with a financial institution (e.g. opening 
an account or signing a loan agreement).  
 
A KFS should aim to help consumers better understand the key featu res, terms and conditions of 
the product or service . It should provide them with useful information in the process of acquiring a 
financial product, and during the life of the financial product. The standardization of the KFS across 
providers allows for co mparability of similar product offers from different providers.  
 
The KFS should clearly indicate all, or at least key  fees and charges related to a financial product,  
41 and inform consumers about their basic rights, including the resolution mechanisms avail able in 
the event of a complaint. For example, for consumer loans , a KFS should include: (1) total amount 
of the loan; (2) amounts of monthly payments; (3) final maturity of the loan; (4) total amount of 
payments to be made; (5) fees, including prepayment and overdue penalty fees, possible taxes for 
remittances, and any other charges that could be incurred; (6) any required deposits or advance 
payments; (7) if the interest rate is variable, the basis on which the rate varies; (8) any additional 
insurance that is required (such as personal mortgage insurance); (9) any prep ayment penalty; and 
(10) if the credit is used to finance a product, the cash price of the product without financing 
charges.  
 
In a jurisdiction lacking such disclosure, KFSs  could first be established for basic retail financial 
products such as personal l oans and basic savings accounts, and later for more complex products 
such as mortgage loans, life insurance policies, and collective investment funds . Development of  a 
KFS should include appropriate consultation and testing with industry and consumer stake holders . 
It is also important that KFSs be available at least in the language(s) most spoken in the location 
where the financial product is offered. Finally, it is important that adequate supervisory 
mechanisms (e.g., targeted visits, ad  hoc or systematic reviews, mystery shopping) are established 
to ensure that providers give and explain KFS to their customers at required stages.  
 
Several countries have implemented KFSs and equivalent documents . In the context of consumer 
credit these include, for example, Australia’s “Key Facts Sheets” for home loans and credit cards ; 
Peru’s “Hoja Resumen” (Summary Sheet) for consumer loans; the Philippines’ “Disclosure 
Statement” ; Rwanda’s “Key Facts Statement” f or fixed term consumer loans ; and South Africa’s 
“Pre -Agreement Disclosure” for consumer credit products .  
 
Key Findings  
Cross -cutting issues — transparency : 
There are currently few requirements to provide pre -contractual disclosures , such as  in the form of 
summary disclosure documents , to assist consumers to compare and assess financial products , 
including with regard to cost . The FT Act contemplates that a court can find a transaction to be unfair 
if it was not entered into on equal footing , and information that affect s the fairness of the transaction , 
was not disclosed to the disadvantaged party prior to the transaction or immediately after.90 
However, the Act does not provide any further detai l regarding the kinds of disclosures that may be 
relevant in a consumer context and does not appear to have driven any specific pre -contractual 
disclosure practices in the financial sector. While, as discussed below, there are some very limited 
                                                           
90 FT Act, s. 5.   
42 financial product -specific requirements to provide terms and  conditions , FIs are generally not subject 
to any financial sector -specific requirements to provide consumers with disclosures covering the costs 
and features of products that would facilitate assessment and comparison  of products prior to 
contracting with a provider . In a credit context, the only legislative requirements in this regard seem 
to be found in the HP Act , which  requires dealers to provide would -be hirers with a statement at least 
24 hours before entering in to an agreement  that summarizes the financial obligations under a 
proposed agreement .91  However, as discussed above, it is not clear  as to what extent the Act 
continues to be relevant to consumer credit activities in PNG  and whether it is being followed or 
enforced even in the context of such activity .  
 
There is also no available mechanism  through which  financial sector  consumers can compare the 
price of common financial services (such as a fixed term consumer loan). Apart from disclosure 
requir ements, regulators can assist consumers in comparing the price of products by developing price 
comparison websites, based on information to be provided by relevant FIs. These sites need to be 
carefully designed and are most effective when they enable consu mers to easily search and compare 
standard, commonly available  financial services . Various countries have such websites although in 
some cases they are provided by the private sector .92  
 
In the absence of regulatory requirements, FIs generally have not developed consistent practices to 
make available standardized summaries in relation to credit and non -credit financial products.  In 
discussions with FIs, they  consistently acknowledged the lack of uniform standards for pre -contractual 
disclosure , and expre ssed enthusiasm for introducing requirements for summary documents , viewing 
them as a way to increas e consumer understanding about products and their rights and obligations . 
Institutions repeatedly noted such a lack of understanding, as demonstrated by the frequent need for 
extensive explanations by staff and by the lack of awareness about product costs and features being 
a significant cause of consumer complaints. Such documents could also encourage consumers to  shop 
around , which does not appear to be a widespread practice at present.   
 
There also do not appear to be obligations on FIs requiring advance notification of changes to terms 
and conditions or fees and charges and interest rates.  One financial institution indicated that there 
were trade practice requirements of general applications requiring a month’s notice of changes to 
prices , but it is not clear which provisions they were refer ring to . In the absence of any detailed 
requirement s for advance notice of changes to product terms and pricing, FIs have adopted a rang e 
of approaches to making unilateral changes and generally do not seem to provide individual notice of 
such changes.  For example, institution s variously advised, and indicate d in their terms and conditions, 
that they may notify contractual changes through newspaper advertisements, by displaying notices 
                                                           
91 HP Act, s. 5 and Sch. 1, Form 1.  
92 They include Australia, Canada, Hungary, Ireland, Malaysia, Mex ico, Norway , and the United Kingdom.   
43 at branches , by post ing to consumers  or in other ways that they deem appropriate . For example, o ne 
bank’s terms and co nditions state that a notice of change is “deemed” to come to a consumer’s 
attention merely by being displayed in branches or advertised or notified in any other mode the bank 
deems fit.  Even terms and conditions referring to the provision of individual no tices sometimes 
reference this only as an option, rather than indicating that individual notice will , in fact , be provided 
for certain types of changes.  
 
There are very limited requirements for contracts or other documentation to be provided in 
languages other than English . Further, the industry practice is generally to make documents 
available only in English.  The HP Act gives hirers  the right to request that prescribed documents (such 
as hire-purchase agreements and various notices and statements required under the Act) be 
translated into a “prescribed language”, defined as “Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu”.93 Dealers must display 
conspicuous notices in those languages on their premises advising the pub lic regarding such 
translation rights .94 However, t here do not appear to be any equivalent legal requirements applying 
to other financial products and services . Bank and non -bank lenders , for example, generally indicated 
that their credit terms and conditions and related  documentation are prepared only in English , some 
suggesting that it is not necessary to do so in other languages because borrowers are usually educated 
and can read English.  While one  bank has translated its mobile money terms and co nditions into the 
other official languages , it has not yet done so for its credit products. Some industry representatives 
raised the potential difficulty of translating technical concepts into Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu95, but also 
acknowledged  the importance of being able to describe and communicate relevant concepts  
particularly  in Tok Pisin to facilitate  consumer understanding. One bank noted that its staff sometimes 
has to explain technical credit product  terms verbally to consumers  in part due to a lack of 
understanding in English . An MFI acknowledged that non -English speaking consumers acquiring credit 
and deposit products need a great deal of assistance in understanding product terms (including 
through church and community groups) .  
 
Sector -specific issues – transparency : 
 
Banking and NBFIs  
 
There are only limited legal requirements for provision of terms and conditions and copies of 
consumer agreements are not always provided automatically to consumers . The ICCC Act which, as 
                                                           
93 HP Act, s. 52.  
94 HP Regulations, rr. 4 and 6.  
95 This view is consistent with the World Bank’s experience with recent financial literacy surveys where there was  
difficulty in translating financial terms into Tok Pisin  and in particular in Hiri Motu by local linguistic experts due to lack 
of vocabulary in local languages.   A glossary of financial terms was developed to support the surveys. It would be useful 
to update this glossary to include  any new financial services/ products in PNG .   
44 discussed above, would seem to apply to financial services, provides that “[t]he State recognizes that 
consumers, in their capacity as consumers, have the …right to information”.96 However, it is 
understood that there has not been any practical enforcement of consumer protection aspects of the 
Act, such as this generic right to information, with regard to financial services . The only specific 
contractual disclosure  requirements  with regard to credit product s appear to be in the HP Act, which 
provides a hirer with the right to receive a copy of the agreement within 21 days of contract entry97 
(rather than in advance of contract formation) .98 Other than recent and forthcoming disclosure 
requirem ents in relation to payments products as discussed below, ther e do not currently appear to 
be any disclosure requirements that apply to deposit products. Only some FIs make terms and 
conditions for their credit and deposit products available before application  (some include these on 
application forms)  on their websites or in branches . Several credit providers indicated  that they 
provide copies of the final loan agreement, including terms and conditions, only on loan disbursement 
and some do so only on request . 
 
There are also limited obligations with r egard to clarity and transparency of consumer agreements.  
The only specific form and content requirements regarding  credit products are also found in the HP 
Act, which specifies reasonably comprehensive conten t requirements for the agreement, including 
the inclusion of certain key information in tabular form, as well as requiring a printed agreement and 
related documents to be in a minimum font size.99 Other than these requirements, there do not 
appear to be specific clarity or form and content requirements for terms and conditions . A sample of 
terms and conditions from various banks and finance companies suggests that credit and account 
terms and conditions tend to be difficult to read given factors such as small font sizes (often smaller 
than fonts in other  accompanying documents, such as in application forms)  and confusing layouts . For 
example, one bank’s terms and conditions are printed in a light red font, while a finance company’s 
terms and conditions are both printed in a small font and surrounded by de sign elements on the same 
page that further de -emphasize those terms  (e.g. multicolored graphics that promote the product) . 
 
Interest rates and fees frequently do not appear to be disclosed in advance to consumers  and there 
are currently no legal requirements to do so . For example, while a smaller bank displays rates and 
fees and charges for both credit and deposit products on its website , and indicated that it also does 
so in branches, a  larger bank displays only rates and fees for deposit products and advises consumers 
that loan fee details are available on application . A finance company  also noted that it does not 
generally advertise its rates and they advise consumers at the time of entering into the loan 
agreem ent. It was also suggested in discussions that the high interest rate environment in PNG is at 
                                                           
96 ICCC Act, s. 105(1)(d).  
97 HP Act, s. 10.  
98 HP Act, s. 7.  
99 HP Act, ss. 7 and 51.   
45 least in part due to a lack of adequate disclosure of such rates.  Although draft regulations under the 
new S&LS Act 2015 have not yet been made public, it is und erstood that they will contain specific 
requirements for S&LSs to publicize their interest rates  (unde r the new regime, S&LSs  will be 
permitted to apply market rates rather than being restricted to certain pre -approved rates).  Howev er, 
such requirements would obviously be confined to a small number of credit providers.  
 
With very limited exception s, there are also no requirements to disclose credit costs in a manner 
that would assist consumers to understand the cost of the credit , such  as through an effective 
interest rate (EIR)  or clear disclosures of interest and other charges . The HP Act  mandate s disclosure 
of details such as total charges and the difference between the cash price of  the goods and the total 
amount payable under the hire-purchase agreement .100 Credit providers are otherwise not subject to 
any specific disclosure requirements to inform consumers regarding the total cost of credit. It also 
does not appear to be consistent industry practice to disclose cost elements in a clear, easy to 
understand manner . For example, a major finance company discloses the loan amount and repayment 
amount without also disclosing itemized or total amounts for fees and interest charges .  
 
There are currently n o requirements requiring provision  of periodic statements of account , 
although the se are generally provided on request. Consumers appear to usually have a contractual 
right  (though not mandated by any legislation)  to receive statements on loans and accounts  free of 
charge , and fees are charged for additional copies . However, banks and finance companies  indicated 
that statements  tend to be provided only on request rather than giving consu mers an upfront choice 
as to  these being  delivered automatically  by mail or through electronic  channel s. Practical limitations 
of the PNG mail system were noted, including the lack of postal addresses for many individuals. 
Respondents also suggested that  while institutions agree to send statements  to certain places , in 
practice such statements are frequently not delivered.  
 
Also, currently there are no requirements for the provision  of receipts or their form and content . 
Although a small sample of receipts were provided by FIs—and these seem reasonably 
comprehensive —the sample was not sufficient to determine likely current practices.  
 
Insurance  
 
There is no requirement for prior disclosure of policy terms and conditions in relation to either life 
or general insurance, and it does not seem to be a market practice . The exception on  market practice 
is with regard to one provider of mobile phone -based microinsurance services , who  makes policy 
terms available on the USSD platform on the customer’s phone —or the internet —if the policyholder 
                                                           
100 HP Act ss. 5 and 7.   
46 has a smart phone (which is rare).  However , even then , it is not clear if policyholder s get the policy 
terms before they agree to take up the policy, which may be done via an agent or a call center. The 
only relevant requirement in the legal and regulatory framework is that general insuran ce policy 
terms must be issued within 30 days of inception of the insurance risk.101 The LI Act does not even 
have this requirement. This is a fundamental gap, as policyholders should be made aware of the terms 
of a policy, key exclusions , and the premium pa yable before they take up the policy. This is especially 
important in a market such as PNG’s where there is limited financial capacity and a very  small 
insurance market with a consequential need to build up trust in the use of such products.  
 
Payments  
 
The Payments A ct does not cover discl osure issues  but a detailed  regime is provided for in the draft 
EFT Regulation . The draft contains requirements relating to disclosure of terms and conditions  in an 
“appropriate manner in websites, brochures and registration forms ”. These terms and conditions must 
be provided before a transaction  occurs . Further, terms and conditions must not be amended ex cept 
by prior notice, although the notice period is not specified.  There is also provision for transaction 
receipts to be provided.102 The Mobile Banking PS also requires that a provider have policies in place 
that address mandatory disclosures of terms and conditions.  
 
The abovementioned disclosure requirements could be enhanced. For example, there are no 
requirements  for standardized forms of disclosure (such as Key Facts St atements); for disclosure of 
daily limits on transactions; for statements of account (although they may be provided on request and 
in some cases for a fee ); and guidance as to the langu age in which disclosure documents are  to be 
provide d.  
 
Superannuation  
 
In the time available, there was no  opportunity to undertake a full review of the FCP legal and 
regulatory framework applicable to superannuation products, or related unfair market practices.  
However, in a disclosure context, t here is no obligation —under the Superannuation Act—to provide 
members with periodic statements as to their interest in the relevant ASF. There is a requirement to 
provide members with an annual statement of the  financial and management performance of an ASF, 
but this does not extend to details of a member’s individual entitlements.103 However, it is understood 
that at least the two largest funds allow members to access their current balance via SMS. 
                                                           
101 Insurance Act, s. 31.  
102 Draft Regulation on Electronic Funds Transfer, s.  6 and Part V.  
103 Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2 000,  s. 56 .  
47 Nevertheless, it would be preferable if members were provided with at least an annual record that 
they could keep of their interest in an ASF.  
 
Cross -cutting issues — fair treatment:  
 
There are currently n o financial -sector specific fair treatment requirements and only  limited 
requirements under general law , which are not subject to current supervision.  The FT Act permits a 
court to reopen a transaction that was not genuinely mutual or was manifestly unfair to a party.  
Transactions deemed to be so include : where a party did not understand the transaction and no 
genuine effort was made to explain it to them ; a transaction where an ordinary person was not likely 
to exercise true freedom of choice ; or a transaction in certain circumstances where a party lacked  
information  affecting the fairness of the transaction; or where a person is affected by a significant 
mistake  or miscalculation for which he or she could not reasonably be held responsible .104 While 
allowing consumer recourse against a n FI through the court s in the event of such a transaction, the 
Act does not otherwise prohibit particular unfair conduct. It is also understood that the FT Act has not 
been subject to regulatory supervision in a financial sector context.  Although the ICCC Act contains 
some pro visions dealing with consumer protection, these generally concern matters related to goods 
and do not address fair treatment issues in the services context.  The CA Act prohibits unfair (defined 
as misleading or deceptive) statements but only in advertising.  
 
There is currently no specific restriction on unfair contract terms . Financial service providers seem 
to include terms in their agreement that could resu lt in significant unfairness to consumers. Examples 
of such terms include:  
• Imposition of n ew fees: Provisions allowing new fees to be imposed  as determined by the FI from 
time to time without any prior disclosure . 
 
• Unilateral c hanges: Unlimited  discretion to make unilateral changes to fees and rates without 
specifying any right for the  consumer to withdraw from the product without penalties that would 
otherwise apply (e.g., in the case of a loan, on early repayment) . As noted above, one bank’s terms 
and conditions also state that a notice of change is “deemed” to come to a consumer’s attention 
merely by being displayed in branches or advertised or notified in any other mode  the bank deems 
fit. 
 
• Exclusions of liability  and indemnities : Very broad  exclusions of liability, not expressly taking into 
account negligence or misconduct by the FI, and general indemnities for costs  incurred by the FI 
(e.g. in connection with lending) . 
                                                           
104 Fairness of Transactions Act ss. 4 and 5.   
48  
• Broad information consents: Examples include  providing that a n FI may disclose a customer’s 
information for any reason that it “may deem” to be reasonable or necessary  or provide general 
disclosure consent without sufficient details of circumstances in which it may occur . 
 
• Warranties as to understanding:  Requiring the consumer to warrant that they have not only read 
but also “understood” the terms and conditions . 
 
Other product -specific examples are described below.  It was also noted in industry discussions that 
there is a renewed focus by institutions in minimiz ing legal risk through terms and conditions in part 
due to increased litigiousness by consumers due to a deteriorating economy . This could lead to even 
more imbalance being introduced in standard terms and conditions . 
 
Product suitability requirements are lacking. Financial service providers generally do not appear to 
be subject to specific obligations to ensure suitability of financial product -related advice and 
recommendations or ensure the appropriateness of product o fferings. The necessity of such 
requirements varies depending on the complexity and risk of the products involved. Product -specific 
gaps are discussed below.  
There is currently no regulation of staff and agent remuneration or incentives to ensure these do 
not encourage inappropriate conduct , such as aggressive sales practices,  or give rise to conflicts of 
interest , such as promoting  unsuitable products . For example, i ncentives are paid to some loan 
referrers, such as car dealers, and to some private sector employers for the purposes of introducing 
credit business, such as payday loans . 
Some lenders, particularly, in the unregulated sector, charge  apparently  abusive int erest rates.  
While i nterest rates in PNG generally appear to be high , the disparity between rates on deposits and 
on loans was noted repeated ly in discussions.105 As noted above, rates on payday loans offered by 
banks and licensed finance companies rang e from 30 -91 percent per year . Further , it seems that 
informal lenders charge interest rates that are extremely high, with rates of up to 1,560  percent  per 
year having been noted.  
 
There are n o controls over debt collection practices and there are reports of extremely aggressive 
practices by unregulated lenders . Regulated institutions  repeatedly noted that informal lenders 
engage in extremely abusive practices, including making threats , engaging in physical violence against 
debtors and their familie s, and damaging their property. However, even in a regulated context, 
                                                           
105 Also see, for example, the discussion in National Research Institute, Issues Paper #13: Bank interest rate margins in 
Papua New Guinea  (March 2015).   
49 institutions  may engag e in unfair conduct. For example, while institutions offering payday loans 
claim ed that they would pursue the employer rather than the borrower for overdue payments —if 
they confirm that these are due to a failure to remit salary deductions —they also indicated that 
consumers may continue to be pursued. One credit provider said that a consumer will continue to 
receive SMS s when an amount is overdue . It is also not clear if in such circumstances , a consumer 
would not be default listed with the bureau .  
 
There are also no controls on the charging of excessive collection  or enforcement expenses and 
default charges to debtors . Several lenders’ terms and conditions include clauses giving them 
significant latitude to on -charge enforcement costs to debtors . Such costs are not limited to what is 
reasonable —for example, one bank provides for a full costs indemnity and a finance compa ny states 
simply that additional charges will be added to the account . In addition, lenders can charge significant 
default fees and interest . For example, o ne lender charg es a flat fee of K20 every fortnight a payday 
loan is overdue . There are other lenders who charg e default interest at  a 6 percent  margin above the 
standard rate on home loans or at 35  percent  per year on the amount overdue for payday loans.   
 
Sector -specific issues — fair treatment:  
 
Banking and NBFIs  
 
There are currently no responsible lending requirements other than prudential requirements.  
Regulated lenders indicated that they require various level s of documentation, such as pay slips and 
bank statements, to assess affordability and similar documentation and information in a business 
context . Assessing business income tends to be a more difficult exercise, particularly for cash -based 
small businesses . Some lenders make use of debt serviceability ratios but there do not appear to be 
uniform approaches in this regard. I n the context of salary -based lending, several lenders seemed to 
rely quite heavily on caps —the 50  percent  cap imposed by legislation for salary -based lending to 
government employees, and an equivalent cap applied internally by some lenders (usually also at 50  
percent ) for salary -based lending to private sector employees. Some lenders indicated that the 
internal cap could be overridden by lending staff  and s ome lenders noted that there is often a delay 
in government payrolls being updated with new salary deductions . Consequently,  the current payroll 
information does not necessarily reflect a consumer’s latest financial position and whether he or she 
will in fact be within the cap.  
 
The need for affordability requirements in relation to credit products is becoming more pronounced 
given increasing levels of indebtedness and propensity to take up additional credit.  Several 
institutions reported non -performing personal lending rates (reflecting the proportion of their 
portfolio that is overdue  by 90 days ) in the range of 7 –10 percent . One institution reported that 24 – 
50 25 percent  of its lending portfolio was overdue at least by 30 days. There may also be  an increasing 
need for responsible lending to take into account loan suitability for purpose. Several industry 
participants noted that credit demand and the propensity to borrow for daily living needs , and to 
meet tradit ional obligations  has increased significantly among the PNG public, while there  continues 
to be a lack of savings habits. A significant portion of consumer lending appears to be for living or 
family expenses, such as school fees, health -related costs, funeral costs , etc. While some loan 
products seem intended for specific purposes only, it is not clear if lenders more generally consider 
the suitability of lending arrangements for specified needs.  
 
Charging of significant fees in the event of loan prepayment seems to be a common practice in the 
market , potentially restricting mobility  and resulting in unfair consumer outcomes . Approaches 
vary, for example, from a bank charg ing a flat fee calculated as three  months’ worth of interest  to 
another institution prohibiting prepayment for the first six months of a loan term and then charging 
a flat fee of 2  percent  or 4 percent  of the outstanding balance, depending on the remaining term . 
Another example is of a major finance company requirin g payment of all outstanding interest unless 
the borrower is refinancing with the same lender, in which case they are charged 10  percent  of the 
remaining interest . Another  finance company reported that 80 percent  of its payday lending - 
customers refinance their existing loan with th e same lender.  
 
Payday loans repaid through salary deductions appear to be affected by a range of concerns. Some 
of these are also discussed to some extent elsewhere in the report . They include:  
• Employers ’ delay or fail ure to remit salary deduction payments to lenders,  including by prioritizing 
some lenders over others , which has potential to cause  consumers to go into default  and 
continued to be pursued by debt collection staff or agents .   
 
• Employer record s of existing deduction arrangements not being up -to-date, potentially causing 
lenders to approve new loans that exceed lending caps or, more generally, that are not affordable . 
 
• Employers —and employer payroll staff —receiving incentives associated with payday lending that 
may be conducive to inappropriate conduct  (such as prioritizing particular lenders’ deductions and  
allowing marketing of payday lending to staff) . 
 
Interest is calculated on a flat basis by some lenders rather than on a reducing balance  basis . A bank 
suggested that the market  practice tends to be for banks to charge interest on a reducing daily balance 
basis and for NBFIs to do so on a flat basis . However, it seems that at least one bank continues to 
charge interest on a flat basis in relation to its payday lending product.  
  
51 Unfair terms and conditions in credit and deposit account contracts also seem  to be common.  
Identified examples in the market include:  
• Restrictions on early repayment : Contractual restrictions on making early  repayments and 
interest rebates on early repayment being entirely at the discretion of the credit provider , with  
the consumer not having any entitlement to such rebates .  
 
• Broad e vents of default:  Onerous events of default, such as on a borrower’s temporary 
suspension  of employment , or resignation, regardless of whether repayments are still being made.  
 
• Broad loan recall and account closure rights:  A right to recall a loan at any time is the lender’s 
absolute discretion (in addition to already having broad events of default allowing termination for 
breach)  or a right to close an account with short notice at full discretion . 
 
• Assignment:  Unlimited  rights for a lender  to assign the consumer’s debt to a third party . 
 
• Set-off: Unlimited set-off rights  for an account provider . 
 
• Broad enforcement  rights : Purporting to give credit provider s unfetter ed consent to enter the 
borrower’s premises to repossess goods  and very broad contractual rights of seizure  and sale, and 
in legal proceedings . 
 
• Early withdrawal fees:  One institution noted that it charges both a flat administration fee and a  
variable break fee in the event of early withdrawal  of a term deposit,  but it is not clear whether 
this is confined to actual loss . 
 
There are currently no requirements governing the handling of inactive or dormant deposit 
accounts.  Periodic maintenance fees are typically charged on accounts . Respondents further 
expressed concerns that many accounts in PNG are inactive and balances can be eroded by fees 
continuing to be charged by account providers.  As a result, b alances may also go into  a negative  
amount . However, it is noted that some banks are moving away from maintenance fees to 
transaction -based fees.  
There do not currently appear to be any restrictions or rules relating to inappropriate direct 
marketing or unsolicited offering of credit . Institutions indicated, for example, that FIs advertise 
offers of payday loans through SMS blasts targeting individu al employers’ employees , with one 
finance company noting that 80  percent  of its payday lending -customers refinance their existing 
loan s. The CA Act does not address such issues.  Some terms and conditions for accounts also  
52 contemplate the provision of incidental overdrafts (fees may apply at the discretion of the 
institution) without this being brought clearly to the account  holder’s attention.  
Insurance  
 
There are major gaps in the regulation of unfair practices . They include lack of provisions for either 
general or life insurance , which cover unfair terms or product suitability; there are no provisions 
requiring general insurers to take responsibility for staff, agents , and other intermediaries (and there 
are acknowled ged problems with supervising agents in the field) and, in the case of general insurance, 
there are no provisions relating to insurance contracts.106 
 
There is also evidence of market practices that evoke  concern. Particular reference is made to 
potentially unfair terms in policies , such as the following :  
• Life claims : Require that a life claim be made within two months of death ( this seems a very short 
period given the need to obtain a death certificate as well as deal with funeral arrangements and 
figure  out how to make a claim) . 
 
• Hospital claims : Require a hospitalization claim to be made on the second night of admission to a 
hospital (again this seems an unreasonably short period) . 
 
• Changes : Allow policy terms to be changed without prior notice . 
 
• Acknowl edgment re garding  policy terms : Contain an acknowledgment that the policyholder has 
read the terms and conditions of the policy on application, though  it seems that they will not have 
received the policy at that time (if ever).  
 
• “Good health” : Include a confirmation that the insured is in “ good health ” at the time of 
registration without explaining what that term means.  
 
Payments  
 
The payments regulatory framework covers some, but not all  of the fair practices issues mentioned 
above.  In particular, there  is no provision for unfair terms in contracts (although the limited FT 
Transactions Act provisions would apply) or product suitability requirements.  
 
Superannuation  
 
                                                           
106 In contrast see Part XV of the Life Insurance Act.   
53 There is a major concern about employers not remitting superannuation contributions (made by 
either the employer or the employee) to the relevant superannuation fund.  It is an offence under 
the Superannuation Act for an employer not to remit these contribu tions and an ASF may (but is not 
obliged to) require the payment of penal interest at the prescribed rate on any outstanding interest.107 
It is understood that BPNG is taking this issue very seriously and has a team of four  officers seeking to 
address the is sues.   
 
Recommendations  
 
Cross -cutting recommendations — transparency:  
 
Short Term  
 
In the short term, specific disclosure requirements should be introduced, prioritizing the following :  
• Overarching format and manner of disclosure requirements:  These provisions should mandate 
legibility, simple and clear expression , and language requirements  for financial product -related 
documentation.  
 
• Pre-contractual disclosure : Standardized KFS requirements  and associated requirements , such as 
for disclosure  of EIRs, should be introduce d for common credit, deposit , and payments products 
to facilitate comparability. Priority should be given to products currently presenting the most 
pressing issues for consumers in the market, such as fixed term credit and certain consumer 
insurance  policies . These should cover content  (including local language requirements) , format, 
manner and timing of such disclosures, and related obligations to explain their contents. 
Development of KFSs should be supported by appropriat e consumer testing and industry 
consultations.  
 
• Contractual disclosures:  There should be requirements for disclosures  of key terms and 
conditions, interest rates , and fees and charges  for all consumer financial products and services  
as well as disclosure o f information about key product features  and risks  and dispute resolution 
mechanisms. Such disclosures should be made available in languages other than English as 
appropriate (e.g. both Tok Pisin and Hiri Motu). These disclosures would be in addition to th e KFSs 
recommended above . There should also be a requirement to ensure that the consumer is given a 
copy of the final  contract. Both pre -contractual and contractual disclosures  should, with 
appropriate agreement from the consumer, be permitted to be made electronically.  
Consideration should be given to additional product -specific disclosure requirements, targeting 
                                                           
107 Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2000, ss. 78 and 79.   
54 issues unique to certain products (such as further payments -specific disclosure requirements in 
the draft Regulations ). 
 
• Notices of change: Requ irements should be introduced mandating FIs to comply  with minimum 
notification requirements (with regard to timing and manner of change, including individual 
notice)  for existing customers when making unilateral changes to fees and charges and terms and 
conditions.   
 
Medium to Long Term  
 
The provision of statements of account for credit and deposit or transaction products should be 
mandated.  These should cover form, content , and timing of free periodic statements of account, 
together with requirements for account balances to be provided on request.  
 
Develop a price comparison website . This website should enable consumers to compare costs of 
common consumer products (starting with fixed term credit), based on information to be provided 
by relevant FIs . 
 
Mandate m inimum r eceipt requirements . Consideration should be given to development of 
minimum form and content requirement standards for transaction receipts.  These new rules should 
take into account the extent to which it may be  sufficient for information to be provided subsequently 
through a statement.  
 
Ensure electronic disclosures and contracts are valid . Given the development of digital financial 
services, provision should be made allowing for electronic disclosures and contracts. It is especially 
important that  required disclosure documents can be delivered electronically  with the consumer’s 
consent . Any such disclosure should, however, be in a form that the consumer can keep for future 
reference.  
 
 
Cross -cutting recommendations — fair treatment  
 
Short Term  
 
In the short  term , principles -based obligations should be introduced requiring that financial services 
providers treat consumers fairly and take reasonable steps to ensure product suitability. 
Specifically:   
55 • Fair treatment: The principles -based fair treatment requirement should reflect concepts such as 
ensuring that consumers are dealt  with fairly, honestly and without discrimination , and financial 
services are provided with due care, skill , and diligence.   
 
• Suitability: The product suitability requirement should be along the lines that FIs should take 
reasonable steps  (having regard to matters such as the complexity and risk of financial products)  
to ensure they only recommend financial products that are suitable for cons umer s, having regard 
to consumers’ financial circumstances , needs , and objectives.   
 
Specific  restrictions  and requirements to target key fair treatment issues  should also be 
implemented, including:  
• A prohibition against unfair terms in standard consumer contracts : Relevant provisions should 
define what is an “unfair term”  (and include exclusions where appropriate , such as in relation to 
pricing),  provide examples of terms , which are always considered to be unfair  or which are more 
likely to be unfair and  specify the consequences of a term being unfair, including what regulatory 
action may be taken.  
 
It is also recommended that in the short term, BPNG and other relevant regulators, such as the 
Insurance Commissioner , conduct a review of a broad sample of consumer contracts for financial 
products (including loan, account, payment , and insurance product terms and conditions ) with a 
view to assess the type and prevalence of unfair terms . Such a rev iew would inform the initial 
formulation of unfair terms provisions, including examples that may be included in those 
provisions, and of any guidance to be issued alongside them to clarify the requirements for 
industry.  A review of standard terms and condi tions for unfair terms should also be part of the 
ongoing  risk-based supervisory process and as part of any product approval process. Howeve r, it 
is not considered that BPNG  should always “ approve ” the terms of new products and services, or 
review all curr ent standard form contracts. This is because of BPNG ’s resource constraints, the 
possibility that this would be seen as implicit  approval of the product by BPNG and given the 
desirability of not stifling innovation , and with a view to not causing market distortions . 
 
• A prohibition against unfair sales and marketing practices: Such practices may include mis-
selling , misrepresentations , and aggressive high -pressure sales . These should be supplemented by 
requirements to have in place adequate, formal sales policies and procedures reflective of 
regulatory requirements, controls to ensure these are followed by staff and agents, and rules for 
direct marketing and restrictions on unsolicited product offers  to prevent practices such as 
consumer harassment and pressure selling , and inappropriate use of consumer information . 
  
56 • Responsibility and liability requirements for staff and agents:  These should include requirements 
to ensure that staff and agents that undertake any activities impacting consumers have 
appropriate competence to undertake their roles  and are appropriately trained (such as in relation 
to regulatory obligations  and internal procedures , pricing, risks and features  of products  and 
ability to a ssess suitability of products , and provide any necessary explanations to consumers ). 
They should also include specific requirements for FIs to have compensation policies for staff and 
agents that minimize conflicts of interest.  These are likely to need to be supplemented by 
regulatory guidance rather than prescriptive provisions , and developed , following more extensive 
review of existing compensation practices. Financial service providers should be clearly liable for 
the actions and omissions of their agent s as well as staff.  
 
Medium to Long Term  
 
In the medium term, additional restrictions on specific types of unfair business conduct should be 
introduced, including:  
• Additional specific requirements on product suitability. Product -specific rules may need to be 
developed , following further analysis by BPNG and other regulators as to existing practices, 
including with regard to investment advice and unsolicited product offers . 
 
• Restrictions on anti -competitive product bundling and tying arrangements.  General  restrictions 
could be included in the short term , but more targeted restrictions should reflect additional study 
by BPNG and other regulators as to existing practices . 
 
Sector -specific recommendations  — transparency and fair treatment : 
Banking/NBFI sectors   
In the short  term , requirement s should be introduced to make available standardized, comparable 
KFSs  for fixed term credit products  and deposit accounts . Consideration can then also be given in 
future to developing KFS s for continuing credit products, such as credit cards, particularly if they 
become more prevalent.  
 
Requirements should also be introduced requiring provisions of periodic statement of loan and 
deposit account s. Consumers should be given a choice as to  whether these should be provided by 
mail or electronically , or be made available for collection or download where this is not practical for 
the consumer.  The statement s should show details of all debits and credits to deposit accounts and 
repayments and lo an increases for credit accounts, as well as  any interest paid or received,  and fees 
charged.  
  
57 The l oan-related product suitability requirements recommended above should specifically require 
that lenders undertake affordability assessments.  These should c omprise reasonable inquiries and 
verification of information to facilitate an appropriate assessment that a loan will be affordable for a 
consumer so that they will be able to repay it without substantial hardship.  
 
Bank and non -bank lenders and their debt  collection agents should be required to comply with 
restrictions and requirements to address abusive debt collection practices . These should include, for 
example , prohibitions against making false statements  or engaging in conduct that harasses or 
embarrasses debtors when undertaking debt collecting ; requirements for credit providers to be 
responsible for the conduct of third party debt collectors as well as their own debt collection staff ; 
and ensuring that debtors’ personal information is kept confidential and not misused. Such measures 
will have greater impact if, as discussed above, they can be applied to the unregulated sector that 
appear to be engaging in the most egregious practices in this context.  
 
Measures should be implemented to prevent  consumer harm , specifically affecting borrowers of 
loans repaid through payroll deductions . Such measures include:    
• Lenders being prohibited  from provid ing credit repayable through payroll deductions unless they 
are appropriately licensed as recommended above and thus subject to FCP. 
• Lenders receiving repayments through payroll  deductions being prohibited from pursuing the 
debtor when a delay in repayments is due to the non -remittance of a salary deduction by the 
employer. Repayments deducted from the payroll  but unremitted by the employer , without the 
consumer  being at fault , should be deem ed to have been made by the consumer.  Lenders should 
be prohibited f rom undertaking any debt collection or enforcement action against the debtor or 
listing any default against the debtor with the bureau.  
 
Fees and provider requirements that inhibit account or loan mobility should be restricted. These 
include ensuring that consumers have the right to close an account or prepay a loan at any time, 
without being subject to unreasonable procedural requirements, and restricting fees payable on 
account closure or loan prepayment s to reasonable administrative costs and direct loss . 
 
The recommendations concerning other fair treatment issues are as stated in the Cross -cutting  
recommendations . It needs to be considered how these can be most effectively achieved with regard 
to credit and deposit products given the gaps in the existing  legal framework —relevant options are 
canvassed in Annex 1, with Option 3 potentially being the most realistic.  
 
Insurance   
58 In the short term, require that each potential policyholder be given a copy of the insurance policy 
before  he or she take s up the pro duct. In the case of policies applied for through a call center, this 
information could be explained orally, provided the call is recorded. The policy terms should include 
a clear statement of the risks covered, the premium, key exclusions, the term of th e cover,  how to 
make a claim , and how disputes are dealt with.  
 
Consideration should be given to also requiring that a Key Facts Statement for common insurance 
products (such as motor vehicle and home contents insurance) be provided  to potential 
policyholders  when a policy is issued . A Key Facts Statement should be short (1 –2 pages), simply 
expressed and standardized to enable comparability of products.  
 
Payments  
In the short term, requirements for a periodic statement of account should be introduced for 
payments products . At a minimum, consumers should be given access to such a statement , such as 
via email, website or SMS . The statement should show the details of all payment transactions in the 
relevant period , any interest paid o r received,  and any fees charged. This will provide a useful record 
of transactions for the consumer , enable the consumer to identify an y potentially fraudulent 
transactions , and be helpful in dealing with any complaints.  
 
It is also recommended that in the longer term there be a requirement to make available a 
standardized , comparable Key Facts Statement for common payments products  (such as a 
transaction account with a debit card attached ).  
 
The recommendations concerning other fair treatment issues  are as stated in the Cross -cutting  
recommendations . This might be achieved in the payments context by making rules under the 
Payments Act.  
 
Superannuation  
 
The following recommendations are made for consideration in the context of the upcoming review 
of the Superannuation Act:  
• Make it mandatory for interest to be paid by an employer in relation to unremitted member 
contributions; and  
• Require that members be  provided with at least an annual record that  they can keep of their 
interest in an ASF.  
 
   
59 V. CONSUMER COMPLAINTS   
 
Context  
 
Effective consumer redress through internal dispute resolution ( IDR) and EDR mechanisms is an 
essential element of an effective financial consumer protection (FCP) framework . Such systems 
should be transparent, accessible , and ideally free to the consumer. Effective redress assists in 
ensuring that substantive consumer protection measures are themselves effective (such as by 
resulting in mitigation and in compensation where appropriate and bringing about changes in 
behaviou r and industry practice). Once financial institutions’ IDR systems mature, ideally most 
financial consumer complaints would be successfully resolved without the need for recourse to an 
EDR scheme . Nevertheless, there remains a need for an independent EDR s cheme for those 
complaints that are not resolved through the IDR system. Hence, it is important to address both IDR 
and EDR as interrelated elements of an effective end -to-end dispute resolution framework for 
financial consumer complaints .  
  
Key Findings  — Internal Complaints Handling  
Cross -cutting  issues : 
 
There are only limited requirements regarding internal complaints handling processes and 
procedures for FIs. As discussed for specific sectors below, even where there are existing 
requirements  for certain provider types , they are insufficiently rigorous to ensure adequate 
complaints handling and contain significant gaps  in coverage . As also discussed below, complaints -
handling approaches by FIs vary significantly and often appear to be slow and  ineffective . 
 
BPNG requires quarterly reporting on internal complaints handling by regulated institutions but it 
is not clear that such information is being leveraged fully for supervision . BPNG’s report format does 
not mandate that financial institutions  provide extensive detail s about individual complaints no r does 
it seem to require data on standardized indicators, such as regarding  types of complaints. Such data 
could facilitate identification  by BPNG  of systemic complaints issues for supervisory purposes . BPNG 
indicated that  when there increases in reported complaints are observed  it raises these with 
institutions . It sometimes  also queries  the lack of resolution of an individual complaint based on 
reporting, such as where resolution appears to be  significantly slow . However,  such queries currently 
seem to be raised on a relatively ad hoc basis . For example, a major finance company noted that it 
reports its complaints as required but was not aware of BPNG having raised issues with it in the past 
because of  such reporting.  
 
  
60  
Sector -specific issues:  
 
Banking and NBFIs  
 
Neither banks and finance companies nor S&LSs appear to be currently subject to specific internal 
complaints handling rules , and current complaints handling practice appear inadequate in many 
cases. Several banks and finance companies confirmed having internal complaints handling policies 
and processes. However, the banks’ internal complaints handling processes , for example, were 
repeatedly noted  by industry p articipants as lacking clarity , being slow , and making it difficult for 
consumers to have their complaints resolved . A major bank noted that deficiencies in its complaint 
handling had, in fact , caused consumers to complain repeatedly, with some threatening  legal action 
due to a lack of resolution  after long periods . A financial capability survey in two provinces also 
suggests some consumers ’ reluctance to attempt to have their complaints resolved , which may in 
part , be due to a lack of trust or awareness of complaints handling processes .108 
 
Channels for receiving complaints also vary among institutions and it is not always clear to 
consumers how they can submit a complaint . For example, one institution indicated that complaints 
are accepted in writing submitted at branches . This practice could discourage some consumers from 
making a complaint , due to factors such as physical location or low literacy . Frequently , 
documentation does not provide clear information about ri ghts and processes for complaint 
submission.  
 
Payments  
 
Although t he Payments Act does not have any provisions concerning internal complaints handling, 
there are  high -level provisions in the  Mobile Banking PS , and in draft regulations and guidelines. 
However, these provisions do not cover all payments products and they differ between themselves . 
The Mobile Banking requires PSPs to have in place policies that address complaint redressal 
mechanisms, including a help desk and a complaint register and escalation procedures for lodging 
complaints.109 However, there is no guidance as to the detail that must be in those procedures and 
no requirements as to how a consumer is to be made aware of them . The draft EFT Regulations , in 
contrast , require customers t o be informed of information relating to complaints, investigation , and 
                                                           
108 Most participants in the survey that reported having had a dispute with an FI, indicated that they did not endeavour 
to resolve the issue with the financial institution and mostly did nothing to pursue it or only consulted family or 
friends —Financial Inclusion and Financial Capability in Morobe and Madang Provinces, Papua New Guinea  (June 2015) 
69. 
109 Mobile Banking and Mobile Payments Servic es Standard —MBPS 1/2011, Part III, 1(d) .  
61 resolution procedures in their terms and conditions110 and there are detailed provisions on the 
investigation and resolution procedure in Part VI . The draft ‘General Guidelines on Retail  Payments 
Regulations ’ simply require s an issuer to have general policies concerning complaints, refund 
demands and disputes , and to include details of how to lodge a complaint .111  
 
Insurance   
The Insurance Act contains useful provisions concerning internal  complaints procedures  for 
general insurers, but compliance is not being actively supervised . A licensed insurer, broker , and 
loss adjuster must have written policies and procedures approved by the Insurance Commissioner. 
Further, at the time of policy iss ue and renewal , the insurer or broker must make information 
available to the policyholder  as to how to lodge complaints and dis putes, details of the procedures 
requiring them to be resolved within a maximum of 30 days , and details of the Insurance Complaints 
Tribunal, which has not been established (see below).112 However, given the limited on -site 
supervision visits the Insurance Commission has been able to undertake, no data is available as to 
the extent of compliance.  
The Life Insurance Act  contains very limited provisions on members ’ complaints . There is a 
requirement that a licence holder (an insurer but not a broker) provide a policyholder, on request, 
with “ approved ” policies and procedures concerning complaints an d the resolution of disputes.113  
However , it is not clear who should approve these policies and procedures. Importantly, there are 
also no requirements as to the nature of the policies and procedures , which should be followed, or 
any requirement for reporti ng complaints statistics to BPNG. Ideally , a policyholder , too,  would be 
advised of complaints and disputes policies and procedures when they become a policyholder , and 
automatically , if they make a complaint or it is not resolved to their satisfaction.  
Superannuation  
The Superannuation Act provisions on members ’ complaints  are virtually identical to those in the 
LI Act .114 The same concerns , as mentioned above in relation to the LI Act , apply here.   
Recommendations  — Internal Complaints Handling   
In the short term , consistent IDR requirements should be developed that apply to all FIs, 
commencing with entities regulated under the BFI Act as discussed above . These requirements 
should  not only oblige institutions to have documented IDR procedures, but should also establish 
                                                           
110 Draft EFT Regulation, s. 21 (4)(f) . 
111 Guidelines on Retail Payments Procedures, s.  9.2 (a) and (b) and 9.4(d) . 
112 Insurance Act 1995, s. 47.  
113 Life Insurance Act 2000, s. 60 (3)(d) . 
114 Superannuation (General Provisions) Act 2000, s. 56(3)(d) .  
62 detailed minimum standards for such procedures . Standards should cover matters such as ensuring 
that FIs appropriately raise awareness among consumers of complaint r ights and processes ; facilitate 
lodgment of complaints through all relevant channels  (such as in writing, and via email, social media 
and telephone);  and have investigation and resolution processes that are free,  effective and timely , 
and keep consumers ad equately informed . FIs should also be required to retain adequate complaints 
records  to assist consideration of systemic complaints issues so that providers can use complaints 
data for their own internal risk-management  and improvement . There should also be requirements 
for FIs to provide periodic reports on complaints to the relevant supervisor.  
 
In the  medium to  longer term:  
• Requirements for having compliant IDR processes should be included in license conditions.  This 
would follow a similar approach to that already undertaken in relation to licensing  for general  
insurers ( although these are not currently enforced).  
 
• Standards should also be developed for more effective complaints reporting by FIs to BPNG (and 
other applicable regulators ) and BPNG should consider publishing complaints data on its 
website . There should be standardized reporting , which captures information that will be useful 
for BPNG’s and other regulators’ supervisory activities, including a ppropriate complaints 
classifications and indicators.  Complaints information published by the regulators could include 
aggregated statistics and related analyses on consumer complaints organized by theme or 
financial institution that could increase awarene ss among consumers and have a deterrent effect 
on providers.115  
 
• There may also be a need for consequential amendments to the abovementioned sector -specific 
provisions dealing with complaints  to ensure consistency with any new regulatory 
requirements.  These amendments might be considered in the context of the upcoming reviews 
of the relevant Acts, and in finalizing the draft payments related regulations and guidelines.  
 
Key Findings — External Dispute Resolution   
Cross -cutting  issues :  
Although provision has been made in legislation for some sector -specific EDR schemes, these are 
not in place and other sectors lack any scheme supported by a relevant legal or industry -based 
                                                           
115 Examples of regulators that have published such information include the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in 
the USA, the Central Bank of Brazil and Mexico’s Condusef .  
63 framework. As discussed below , the EDR schemes provided for in general insurance and 
superannuation laws , have not yet been implemented . 
Courts are not an effective EDR alternative  and consumers do not currently have any other 
realistic option from any of the regulators, industry associations or any civil society body. Industry 
participants noted that consumers have increasingly sought redress against FIs through court 
proceedings , with such proceedings incurring significant legal costs and taking a long time to be 
resolved.  
Some EDR options for PNG’s financial sector have been raised in previous  consultations between 
government, industry , and other stakeholders  but further analysis and consideration of possible 
options is needed before a long -term approach is selected . Entities that have been  identified as 
potentially undertaking an EDR -related  role include:  
• BPNG :  One option is a dedicated  financial consumer complaints department or ‘bureau’ to be 
established within BPNG . Potential advantages  of having BPNG take on a  more concrete  EDR role 
include  that it  already has  significant public visibility and trust ; is respected by financial 
institutions ; has internal financial sector expertise ; and is already acting as the default EDR avenue  
for some consumers . Potential concerns  with  the EDR functi on being housed within the regulator 
include  that resources could over time be  diverted away from supervisory activities  to complaints 
handling as complaint volumes grow ; potential internal conflicts may arise between complaints 
handling and supervisory fu nctions  and priorities ; and complaints handling requires certain 
dispute resolution skills and competencies that differ from the supervisory skill  set of existing  
BPNG staff . Although it has also been suggested in discussions that having BPNG undertake this 
function  could assist in leveraging complaints data for the purposes of supervision, the same result 
could be achieved through appropriate reporting lines between BPNG and any other designated 
EDR mechanism .  
 
• CEFI : It has also been proposed that CEFI act as a conduit and clearing -house  for consumer 
complaints  by receiving complaints from financial consumers that have not been successfully 
resolved by their  FI and referring them to the relevant regulator, such as BPNG, the PNG Se curities 
Commission , and the Insurance Commissioner , for resolution . This approach could  also work if 
CEFI were to refer complaints to a new EDR scheme rather than the regulators.  An additional 
proposal raised in discussion s was for CEFI to undertake an in itial level of complaints mediation 
and, if this fails, to then pass on complaints to a relevant EDR mechanism.  While CEFI is currently 
government -funded it is ultimately likely to be funded by the financial sector, although the 
proposed basis of this funding model does not yet seem to be confirmed. Potential advantages of 
CEFI undertaking this role include that it could combine its intended role of building public 
awareness of consu mer protection  rights and responsibilities with educating consumers about  
64 complaint rights and processes , and it could leverage its internal financial sector expertise. 
However, potential concerns with having CEFI undertake a complaints -taking —and even more so  
a complaints mediation —role include : that it may face resourcing constraints  in deal ing with 
complaints volumes  (including ensuring it has adequate number of staff skilled in individual 
dispute investigation and resolution) ; the potential complexit y for consumers in having CEFI 
undertake the initial capture and investigation of a complaint for this to be then follow ed up and 
investigated further by a regulator or a separate EDR mechanism;  lack of effective powers to 
resolve complaints ; and, particul arly, depending on how its industry and governance 
arrangements develop , a potential perception that it is not sufficiently independent . 
 
• Separate EDR mechanism: Another potential approach raised in discussions involved establish ing 
a new, separate entity, such as a financial sector ‘ombudsman’ , to deal with individual complaints. 
Key issues with this option include : how to ensure that the new mechanism has sufficient, clear 
powers to investigate and resolve complaints  and make bindi ng decisions; the possible need for a 
legislative framework , which may not be realistic in the near future  (although an appropriate legal 
underpinning would ultimately need to be ensured for any selected alternative) ; funding 
arrangements ; and the need for  the entity to be independent i n practice and also viewed as 
independent and impartial by the public and by financial institutions.  
 
Other EDR options that have been noted in discussions include :  
• ICCC: Having a complaints resolution unit within the ICCC . However,  the same limitations 
discussed with BPNG playing a similar role would apply  with the additional difficulty of the ICCC  
not having financial sector expertise . 
 
• ADR Centre: Leveraging the ‘National Court Alternative Dispute Resolution Centre’ that currently 
provides mediation services for court -ordered mediation. However, potential limitations with this 
option (given the current ADR Centre model ) include : the need for a court to order the A DR 
Centre’s involvement; that the ADR Centre would not be free for consumers; and that it is not 
clear the ADR Centre has the required financial sector expertise.  
 
Sector -specific issues:  
Banking and NBFIs  
 
There is no overall EDR scheme , which applies to banks and NBFIs.  BPNG has been dealing with 
complaints from banks and NBFIs on an ad  hoc basis, relying on its position as regulator and on moral 
suasion to seek  such complaints resolved. However, it does not have the power to make binding 
decisions in relation to complaints an d, if a complaint is not resolved , can only advise consumers to  
65 seek redress through the courts. BPNG also does not currently have dedicated complaint handling 
officers  and so must use supervisory resources. The Standard Rules under the S&LS Act 1995116 
indicate that disputes between its members and a n S&LS concerning the business of a n S&LS  shall be 
referred to the Registrar (currently the BPNG Governor) for a decision . The S&LS Act 2015  Act that is 
not yet in fo rce contains a similar provision .117 However, it seems to be understood under the current 
Act that such disputes  exclude complaints by members  relating to the products offered by an S&LS.  
 
Insurance  
The Insurance Act provides for an Insurance Complaints Tribunal  in relation to general insurance , 
but it has not been established . The statutory Insurance Complaints Tribunal is provided with 
functions “ to consider disputes and complaints referred to it by policyholders of general insurance 
policies and affect ed third parties .”118 The Tribunal can make binding decisions and it is an offence not 
to comply . A p arty to a dispute (other than a licensed insurer, broker or loss adjuster ) can app eal to 
the National Court . Whil e these provisions are potentially very useful, the Tribunal has never been 
established.  
There is no provision in the Life Insurance Act for an EDR scheme.  
Payments  
There is no overall EDR scheme , which applies in the payments context . However , the draft EFT 
Regulation requires the mandated complaints procedure to contain information relating to the 
customer’s right to refer a complaint to BPNG or a body authorized by BPNG, if the customer is not 
satisfied with the outcome of a complaint.119 BPNG does not have any power to make a binding 
decision on a complaint.  
 
Superannuation  
The Superannuation Act provides for the establishment of an industry complaints body, but it has 
not been established.  In this regard , section 49B briefly provides that “ All ASFs shall subscribe to an 
industry funded complaints resolution mechanism to the satisfaction of the Central Bank ”.120  Such a 
mechanism has not been established, and there do not seem to be any plans to do so.   
                                                           
116 Standard Rules for Sa vings and Loan Societies (S&LS Act 1995), s. 60.  
117 S&LS Act 2015, s. 44.  
118 Insurance Act 1995, Part IX and s. 53 as to functions.  
119 Regulation on Electronic Funds Transfer, s. 31(1)(b) . 
120 Superannuation (General Provision) Act 2000, s. 49B.   
66 Recommendations — External Dispute Resolu tion  
Cross -cutting  issues : 
Short Term  
BPNG should be designated as the interim EDR mechanism for consumers  through regulations and 
standards under sector -specific legislation  to the extent feasible . This should be only an interim 
arrangement to ensure that complaints are being addressed as adequately as practicable as soon as 
possible , while any final EDR mechanism (whether within or separate from BPNG) is planned and 
ultimately implemented. The legis lative basis for such implementation would be equivalent to that 
discussed above for implementing new FCP requirements. It will need to be considered carefully to 
what extent it will be possible to make complaints decisions legally binding on financial ins titutions  
(particularly in the absence of a statute providing it with relevant powers)  rather than BPNG having 
to rely on its regulatory status and moral suasion more generally  and accepting the potential 
limitations of such an approach . The potential issu es with BPNG undertaking this role canvassed in 
the findings above will need to be addressed . These include, importantly, the need for BPNG to build 
internal staff capacity and related processes and procedures. Other relevant matters include avoiding 
potential conflicts with supervisory functions . This issue could , in part , be addressed through physical 
separation  of the complaints team from the supervisory departments and by ensuring that 
supervisory resources are not diverted to the complaints functi on.  
 
There will also be a need to increase consumer awareness of the relevant complaints mechanism . 
BPNG could leverage CEFI for this purpose, for example , through CEFI undertaking public awareness 
campaigns and referring individual complaints  brought to their attention . However,  careful 
consideration will need to be given to CEFI’s role.   
 
Financial service providers should be required to publicize to consumers their rights to refer 
complaints to EDR. This should include both obligations to build awareness through disclosure 
documents and service channels generally as well as ensuring that the availability of EDR is highlighted 
through each institution’s IDR process.  
 
Longer Term   
The authorities shoul d develop options for a long -term EDR approach and then decide on  and 
implement the preferred option. Potential, realistic EDR  options, such as those noted above , should 
be assessed with  regard to international best practice s for financial sector EDR.  Once a decision is 
made on the preferred long -term EDR scheme, implementation should proceed with an appropriate 
transition from the interim EDR function .  
  
67 Regardless of the selected EDR schemes, a key aspect of its implementation will be ensuring 
adequate access for  consumers  in more remote areas of PNG. One suggestion made in this regard 
was to leverage existing government arrangements, such as allowing complaints to be received and 
forward ed by provincial government officials based in relevant ar eas. Full use should also be made of 
other channels to lodge complaints, where they are available (such as telephone, email, social media 
and via branches).  
 
In the longer term, and depending on the preferred EDR scheme model, there will be a need for 
consequential amendments to the sector -specific provisions dealing with external dispute 
resolution schemes. This includes amendments to the abovementioned provisions concerning the 
Insurance Complaints Tribunal and the proposed industry -funded superannuation  scheme. Again, 
these amendments might be considered in the context of the upcoming reviews of the relevant Acts.  
 
  
68 Box 4: Models of Alternative Dispute Resolution Schemes  
The following are three key examples of types of alternative dispute resolution schemes that have 
been implemented in other jurisdictions:  
- Financial ombudsman established by financial services association : Decisions by such an 
ombudsman may or may not be made binding under legislation but, if they are not, in order to 
be effective , their findings will be followed by financial institutions as part of a self -regulation 
model, such as by financial institutions committing contractually to be bound. In countrie s such 
as Germany , an industry -based ombudsman structure for each part of the financial sector has 
proven effective. In case of  taking th e approach  that the ombudsman structure is established 
by the industry, attention should be paid to ensure  that potential conflicts of interest are 
addressed  as well as providing the scheme with effective powers. Also, consumer mistrust or 
skepticism regarding impartiality and fairness may need to be addressed (in substance  as well 
as through appropriate infor mation dissemination) . 
- Statutory independent financial ombudsman : Such an ombudsman would have functions and 
powers  established under national laws , such as the power to make binding decisions . Its 
membership would be appointed by a relevant government aut hority. For example, the UK 
enacted legislation establishing an independent ombudsman institution, while Armenia legally 
requires financial institutions to join a central bank -approved ombudsman scheme with binding 
rules for all member institutions. A sing le statutory ombudsman would make it easier for 
consumers to identify to which agency they should submit their inquiries and complaints. While 
this model could have the advantage of allowing clearly defined objectives and legal mandate, 
it would require th e investment of sufficient public resources.  
- Complaints handling structures established within the regulatory or supervisory agency : A 
third model involves establishing of a complaints handling structure within a regulatory and 
supervisory agency. For example,  in the case of Spain , there are complaints departments in the 
three financial sector regulators. While this model has the advantage of leveraging existing 
institutional arrangements, the challenge is to ensure independence of the function within s uch 
a structure, avoid conflicts of interest, allocat e sufficient resources (without taking resources 
away from other supervisory functions, including with regard to consumer protection) and 
ensur e that the function has sufficient and appropriate powers to  deal with individual 
complaints effectively.   
       69 
 Annex 1 : Possible Options for New FCP Legal and Regulatory Framework  
OPTION  ADVANTAGES  POSSIBLE DISADVANTAGES  COMMENTS  
Option 1: An “activities based” 
overarching Financial Consumer 
Act (FCP Act), which meets 
international best practice  
standards . Such a law should apply 
to all financial sector participants 
based on the activities they conduct 
(such as lending), rather than their 
institution type.  
 
It would be important that the 
relevant supervisor (BPNG —see 
below) would have a clear FCP  
mandate , and adequate supervision 
and enforcement powers.  
 
Such a law could be framed on the 
basis that it states principles , which 
apply to all parts of the financial 
sector, with specific regulations 
applying as necessary to different 
products and services (e.g. deposits, 
credit, insurance and 
superannuation  products).   
 
 The key advantages of such a 
law would be:  
• Properly framed, it would  
provide a consistent, level 
playing field for all financial 
secto r participants, with 
consequential benefits for 
competition.  
• Having a single “ one-stop 
shop” for FCP legislation 
would provide clarity for 
supervisors, industry , and 
consumers as to the 
applicable law.  
• There is potential for lower 
compliance costs for 
industry if the same rules 
apply to all parts of the 
financial sector.  
• The law could be designed 
so that it is flexible enough 
to cover innovations in the 
financial sector.  
• The risks of regulatory 
arbitrage between different 
parts of the financial sector 
would be avoided.  Potential disadvantages are:  
 
• Time —an FCP Act would take 
considerable time to design  
and draft for the PNG context  
and would need to be the 
subject of an extensive 
consultation process. There 
could also be delays in the 
Parliamentary process.  
• This would be a “big bang” 
approach, rather than an 
incremental approach to deal 
with key issues, which might 
be more realistic.   
• BPNG might not have the 
capacity and resources to 
supervise an overarching FCP 
Act.  
 Although an FCP Act may 
be a long -term objective, it 
is probably not realistic in 
the short term.   
70 Option 2: Industry Code(s) of 
Conduct covering FCP issues . Such a 
code would be enforceable a s a 
matter of contract by  consumers 
and also by industry members in 
relation to each other , with regular 
compliance reports to BPNG.   • An industry code may build 
trust and confidence in the 
relevant part of the financial 
sector, especially if it is in 
some way “endorsed” by 
BPNG.  
 
• Speed: A code would not 
need to go through 
Parliament and is likely to be 
relatively quick to prepare.  
 
• A code can be used to 
inform consumers of  their 
rights and responsibilities  
and how to approach de aling 
with FIs.  
 
• There are numerous 
precedents , which could be 
referred to in the drafting 
process. They include, for 
example, Codes of Banking 
Practice in Australia, the 
Philippines, South Africa and 
Hong Kong.  
 
• There are also precedents 
for codes relating to Digital 
Financial Services, such as 
the GSMA Code of Conduct • A Code of Practice could only 
be enforced through the 
courts or a “naming and 
shaming” process.  
 
• Not all participants in an 
industry may agree to be 
bound by a code (e.g. 
unregulated lenders).  
 
• Financial sector industry 
associations are not well 
established in PNG, so they 
may not have the resources 
to undertake such a project.  
 
• Similarly, there does not 
appear to be a financial 
sector consumer association 
in PNG , which could be 
involved in the developm ent 
of a code  and be represented 
on its governing Board.  
 
• A code is not likely to cover 
the entire financial sector, so 
there would  be different rules 
applying to different parts.  
 This approach is not 
recommended at this stage.   
71 for Mobile Money 
Providers121 and the Better 
than  Cash Alliance 
Responsible Digital 
Payments Guidelines . 122 • Consumers may not , in fact , 
trust a code prepared by 
industry.  
Option 3: Prudential standards or 
regulations on FCP issues are 
developed under existing Acts on an 
incremental, prioritized , and 
consistent basis.  
 
For example, the BFI Act makes 
provision for prudential standards 
to be made by BPNG concerning the 
conduct of the affairs of an 
Authorized Institution “ with 
integrity, prudence and professional 
skill” (ss.3 and 27 ). 
 
The LI Act and the Superannuation 
Act also provide for regulations to 
be made concerning consumer 
protection matters (ss. 50 and 46 
respectively).  
 
The Insurance Act also has a general 
regulation making power, which 
might be relied on for FCP purposes • The highest priority FCP 
reforms could be 
implemented quickly (such 
as disclosures to consumer 
borrowers).  
 
• Consumers are more likely 
to trust reforms initiated by 
BPNG .  
  • There is a risk that this 
approach would lead to 
inconsistencies between the 
regulations applicable to 
different parts of the financial 
sector. However, if BPNG is 
the only regulator involved, it 
should be possible to 
minimize  this risk .  
• Local legal advic e would be 
needed as to the power to 
make the necessary FCP 
reforms using regulations and 
prudential standards under 
existing laws.  It is considered that this is 
the most realistic approach 
for the short term.  
                                                           
121 https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/mobile -money/policy -and-regulation/code -of-conduct  . 
122 https://www.betterthancash.org/tools -research/case -studies/responsible -digital -payments -guidelines  .  
72 (s. 75). However, this should be 
confirmed by local law advice.  
 
This approach could be supported 
by FCP related licence conditions, 
which could be required under s. 
10(7) of the BFI Act.  
 
A related aspect  of this option is to 
require all lenders, regardless of 
whether they take deposits, to be 
subject to a “ light touch ” 
registration or licensing scheme . 
This could be done by drafting 
regulations prescribing specified 
financial activities as “ banking 
business ” for purposes of the Act 
(see para. [b] of definition in s. 
3[1]). The current capital 
requirements applicable to banks 
and licensed financial institutions 
could potentially be modified for 
non-deposit taking institutions 
under s. 53 (see also ss. 12 and 
Schedule 3). However, these issues 
would need to be subject to local 
law advice.  
       73 
 Annex 2: List of Consulted Institutions  
Public Sector  
Bank of Papua New Guinea  
 Centre for Excellence in Financial Inclusion  
Consultative Implementati on and Monitoring Council  
Department of Treasury  
Independent Consumer and Competition Commission  
Insurance Commissioner  
Investment Promotion Authority  
Financial Services Providers  
ANZ Papua New Guinea  
Bank South Pacific  
BIMA PNG  
Capital Insurance Group  
Courts (PNG) Limited  
Credit and Data Burea u 
Fincorp Finance Corporation  
Kina Bank  
Moni Plus Ltd  
Nambawan  Super Ltd   
74 Nationwide Microbank (MiBank)  
PNG Microfinance Limited (PML)  
QBE Insurance (PNG) Limited  
Teachers Saving and Loan Society Limited  
Westpac Bank  
Mobile Network Operators  
Bemobile/Vodafone  
Industry Associations  
PNG Federation of Savings  and Loan Societies  
Other Institutions  
Allens Linklaters  
 
       75 
 Annex 3: Key FCP Laws  and Regulations  
Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
Constitution of Papua New Guinea  
  The Constitution protects the right to privacy (section 
49) but does not otherwise deal with matters relating 
to financial consumer protection ( FCP).  
General  
Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG)  Central Banking Act 2000 ( BPNG 
Act) BPNG  The objectives of BPNG include, in summary, the 
formulation of financial regulation and prudential 
standards to ensure financial system stability and the 
promotion of an efficient national and international 
payments system. (s.7). Under its related functio ns, 
BPNG may “ regulate banking, credit and other 
financial services as empowered by this Act or any 
other law of the Independent State of Papua New 
Guinea ”. (s. 8(1)(c)).  
Independent Consumer and 
Competition Commission (ICCC)  Independent Consumer and 
Competition Commission Act 2002 
(ICCC Act ). 
Note: The ICCC and the ICCC Act 
are the subject of the Consumer 
and Competition Framework 
Review: Public Report and 
Recommendations published in 
February 2017 for public comment. 
It is understood the final  versio n of 
the CCF Review is under ICCC  The ICCC  Act provides for the ICCC to have consumer 
protection functions in relation to “ services ” (ss.6 and 
106). The term “ services ” is broadly defined and 
specifically includes banking, credit and insurance 
services (s. 44(1)).  
 
The co nsumer protection provisions in the ICCC Act 
primarily relate to goods, although there are some 
provisions , which relate to services. All relevant 
provisions apply to a “ consumer ”. This term is defined 
to include any person who acquires goods or services  
76 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
preparation and, when completed, 
will be submitted to the National 
Executive Council for approval . In 
the meantime , work is underway 
on the preparation of a National 
Competition Policy, with support 
from the Asian Development B ank 
(ADB ).  for “personal, domestic or household use or 
consumption ” (s. 103).  
 
The ICCC Act FCP provisions , which relate to financial 
services , include those which provide a statement of 
consumer rights (s. 105) and which provide the ICCC 
with functions relating to price regulation, licensing 
and industry regulation, the protection of consumer’s 
interests and complaints (s. 6) . Importantly, the I CCC 
Act provides for the declaration of entities to be 
“regulated ”, which in turn can lead to the imposition 
of price controls and service standards.  
Fair transactions  Fairness of Transactions Act 1993 
(FT Act) Not known  This is an Act of general application , which provides for 
the review by the Court of “ unfair transactions ” (s. 5). 
The concept of  “fairness” under the Act is intended to 
be read liberally and relates to  “just and equitable 
distribution … of the rights, privileges, advantages, 
benef its and duties, obligations and disadvantages of 
the transaction in proportion and relative to a party’s 
standing in or contribution to the transaction, and 
according to business principles and practices  …” (s. 4)  
Commercial advertising  Commercial Adver tisement 
(Protection of the Public) Act 1976 
(CA Ac t) 
 
 ICCC  This is an Act of general application , which prohibits 
the publication of “ unfair statements ” (s.3). This term 
is broadly defined and includes (in summary), 
materially untrue, inaccurate, mislead ing or 
unreasonable statements or representations (s.2).   
77 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
Prices regulation  Prices Regulation Act 2009 ( PR 
Act) ICCC  The PR Act provide s for the setting of maximum prices 
of goods and services (as well as goods) , which could 
include financial services (ss. 10 and 21).  
Personal property securities  Personal Property Securities Act 
2012 (PPSA)  IPA The PPSA came into force in May 2016. The Act 
primarily relates to the formation and enforcement of 
security interests  and the priority of competing 
interests. The enforcement provisions are provisions of 
specific relevan ce to consumers (Part VIII). For 
example, there is a requirement for the secured party 
to act in a commercially reasonable manner when 
disposing of colla teral (s. 100) and the rights and 
remedies of the secured party on default are specified 
(s. 96).  
Banking  
Entities conducting “ banking 
business ” as defined in s. 3 of the 
Banks and Financial Institutions Act 
2000 (s.3). The definition is to the 
effect that the term means the 
business of taking money on deposit 
and using it to lend to others or to 
finance other activities of the 
business. The term also includes any 
other prescribed financial activities. 
Both traditional ba nks and deposit -
taking finance companies are 
covered.  Banks and Financial Institutions 
Act 2000 ( BFI Act)  BPNG  The purpose of the BFI Act is stated to include (in 
summary) the promotion of the general stability of the 
financial system, the regulation of A uthorized 
Institutions, the protection of depositors , the 
regulation of certain names and descriptions and 
related purposes (s.2). The functions of the Central 
Bank are also relevantly stated to include (in summary) 
the protection of depositors and sound p ractices by 
Authorized Institutions in relation to “ prudential 
matters ” (s.5).  
 
The BFI Act requires all entities that carry on “ banking 
business ” to be licensed, and the BPNG has broad  
78 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
powers to impose conditions and to revoke or suspend 
a licence (Part III).  
 
There are , however , only very limited provisions 
expressly relating to consumer protection matters 
(such as transparency, fair treatment , and consumer 
complaints). They include provisions concerning:  
 
• Deposit and banking business advertising (ss. 
49 to 51)  
• Restrictions on the use of “ protected 
information ” and “ protected documents ” (s.53)  
• Use of the word “ bank ” (or its derivatives) 
(s.63)  
 
BPNG might, however , be able to exercise its powers 
to make prudential standards in relation to FCP 
matters. This is because such standards can be made 
in relation to “ prudential matters ” (s.27). This term is 
very broadly defined to include matters , which relate 
to the conduc t of the affairs of an Authorized 
Institution in such a way “ not to cause or promote 
instability in the Papua New Guinea financial system ” 
and “ such that they are conducted with integrity, 
prudence and professional skill ” (s.3). It is also to be 
noted that  BPNG’s functions expressly include 
encouraging and promoting sound practices in relation 
to “prudential matters ” (s. 5 (3)(c)). There is also an  
79 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
express reference to the need for BPNG to “ promote, 
encourage and enforce proper standards of conduct 
and soun d and prudent business practices including by 
the issue of prudential standards ” and to “ suppress or 
aid in sup pressing illegal, dishonourable or improper 
practices ” (ss. 5($)(b) and (c)).  
 
Regulations can also be made under the BFI Act, which 
are required  or necessary or convenient for the 
purposes of the Act (amongst other things) (s.53). 
Monetary amounts specified in the Schedules may also 
be amended by regulation (s.55).  
Savings and Loan Societies  
 
 Savings and Loan Societies Act 
1961 as amended by 1995 Act.  
 
Savings and Loan Societies Act 
2015 (S&LSs Act 2015) is expected 
to commence soon by a 
commencement date  that has not 
yet been set . Regulations are 
currently being developed under 
the Act.  
 
Note: Section references are to the 
S&LSs Act 2015, given that it is 
expected to commence soon .  
 BPNG  Relevant provisions of the S&LSs Act 2015 are similar 
to those in the BFI Act, except in that they concern 
S&LSs and their members rather than banks and their 
depositors. See the provisions concerning BPNG  
functions (s 5); Licensing (Part III); deposit advertising 
(Part VII); secrecy (Part VIII) and the use of the name 
“savings and loan society ” or “ credit union ” (s. 46).  
 
  
80 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
Other Non -Bank Financial Institutions (NBFIs)  
NBFIs provid ing both credit and 
deposit products  BFI Act  As for BFI Act  As for BFI Act  
Credit providers who do not also 
take deposits  (including pay -day 
loans, informal money lending 
arrangements, providers of lease 
facilities and any other form of credit)  No regula tion  No regulation  No regulation  
Lease  and factoring products  No regulation  No regulation  No regulation  
Hire -purchase products  Hire -Purchase Act 1966 (HP Act)  Not clear —a 
reference to 
the “Minister” 
is made, but it 
is not clear 
which Minister 
is being 
referred to .  Although it does not contain any sort of licensing or 
registration requirements for providers of hire -
purchase products (HP products), the HP Act c ontain s 
important provisions relating to:  
-  Disclosure of a summary of financial obligati ons 
(s.5);  
- Limits on hire -purchase agreements (HPAs) 
relating to household equipment (s.6)  
- The contents of a n HPA (s. 8)  
- A statement of advice to hirers (s.10);  
- Warranties and conditions (s.11 and 12);  
- The documents to be provided to the hirer (ss.10 
and 13); 
- Early completion (s. 17)   
- Voluntary returns  (s. 18)  
- Repossessions (s 19 – 23) 
- Guarantees (ss. 24 and 25)  
- Insurance (ss. 26 -20)  
81 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
- Limits on terms charges (ss. 30 – 31) 
- Minimum deposits (ss. 32 - 36) 
- Reopening of inequitable transactions (s.37 )  
Payments  
Providers of  “payments services ” 
and “ payments instruments ”. 
The term “ payments instruments ” is 
broadly defined to include services 
enabling cash deposits and 
withdrawals; “ payment instruments ”, 
money remittances and any other 
functions relating to the transfer of 
money. The term “ payments 
instruments ” is also broadly defined 
and includes cheques, drafts, money 
orders, credit, debit and stored -value 
cards, travellers’ cheques , and any 
other instrument or device to make 
payments or transmit money) (s. 2).  National Payments System Act 
2013 ( Payments Act ) BPNG  BPNG’s functions relevantly include ensuring that 
“Users of payments services and instruments are 
treated fairly and transparently ” (s. 3(1)(b)).  
Payments service providers are also required to be 
licensed under the Payments Act , and the BPNG has 
broad powers to set licensing criteria and withdraw or 
suspend a licence (ss. 4 to 6). However, banks and 
other FIs providing payments services o r issuing 
payments instruments under the BFI Act do not need 
to be licensed (s. 4(5)).  
 
There are also separate licensing provisions for the 
issue of electronic money by any entity other than a 
bank within the meaning of the BFI Act (s. 28).  
 
The Payments Act  does not contain specific provisions 
concerning financial c onsumer protection matters 
(such as disclosure and transparency of terms and 
fees; safeguarding users’ funds; mistaken or 
unauthorised transactions; data protection or system 
security). There is, however, provision for orders, 
guidelines and other relevant  measures to be made by  
82 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
BPNG to protect users of electronic payment 
instruments (s.26).  
Payments Act  Regulations  Draft Payments Act  Regulations 
and Guidelines  BPNG  Much of the  proposed Payments Act  consumer 
protection framework is contained in the draft 
regulations listed below. It is understood that they are 
close to being finalized. They are:  
- Draft General Guidelines on Retail Payment 
Instrument (2017)  
- Draft Oversight Regulation (2017)  
- Draft Regulation on Electronic Funds Transfer 
(2017)  
- Draft Re gulation on Agents (2017)  
Providers of “ mobile banking ” 
services. The term “ mobile banking ” 
is defined, in summary, to cover the 
use of electronic equipment to 
transfer funds and the related term 
“mobile payment service ” covers the 
use of such equipment to make 
payments (Part I s.4).   Mobile Banking and Mobile 
Payments Services 2011 
(Prudential Standard MBPS 
1.2011) (Mobile Banking PS).  BPNG  The Mobile Banking PS is issued under s. 27 of the BFI 
Act. Importantly, the purpose of the Mobile Banking PS 
is stated to include “ consumer protection ” 
(Part I, s.2).  
 
There is also a requirement for the Board of a bank or 
a non -bank providing mobile banking or mobile 
payments services to develop polic ies and procedures 
for “ consumer protection ” (Part II, ss. 1 and  3). These 
policies and procedures are required to address 
customer identification; secrecy and confidentiality; 
mandatory disclosures of terms and conditions, risks 
and responsibilities; a help desk; and a complaints 
register (Part III(1)(d)) . However, th ere are no 
requirements as to the detail that must be in place in  
83 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
these policies and procedures e.g. as to exactly the 
nature, timing, content , and format of the disclosures , 
which must be made; how information must be 
protected; or standardized complaints  procedures. 
There are also no requirements relating to matters 
such as unauthorised and mistaken transactions.  
 
Non -banks are also required to maintain an amount at 
least equivalent to e -money in circulation in a trust 
account with a commercial bank ( Part III, s. 2(d)).  
 
Note: if the above mentioned Payments Act  guidelines 
and regulations are issued or made, then the Mobile 
Banking PS would need to be significantly amended, or 
repealed given the overlap in many areas.  
Life Insurance  
The term “ life insurance business ” is 
defined in the Life Insurance Act to 
refer, in broad terms, to the issuing 
and undertaking of liability under 
“life policies” (ss. 6 and the related 
definition of a “life policy” in s.3 of 
the Life Insurance Act 2000).  Life Insuranc e Act 2000 (LI Act).  
Note: The mission team was told 
that the LIA is to be reviewed in 
2018.  BPNG  The purposes of the LI Act include the prudent 
management of life insurers and life insurance agents 
(s.2). This focus on the interests of policyholders is 
reinforced by the statement of the functions of BPNG 
under the Act (s.12)).  
 
There is provision for the licensing of life insurers and 
brokers, and the BPNG has broad powers to impose 
conditions, revoke or suspend a licence (Part III). Life 
insurance agent s are not required to be licensed or 
registered, but an insurer is required to ensure that  
84 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
their agents meet fit and proper criteria, can perform 
their duties in a fit and proper manner, meet any 
prudential standards and have the necessary skill, 
experienc e, expertise and resources (s. 21).  
 
There are various provisions in the LIA relating to FCP 
matters. They include provisions concerning:  
 
• Annual disclosure of information about the insurer 
to policyholders (s.60);  
• Statutory funds, with obligations to manage such a 
fund  in the interests of policyholders (Part XII);  
• Life policies such as those concerning insurable 
interests; the insured’s duty of disclosure; interests 
on claims; a 14 -day cooling off period; disclosure  
of reasons for non -acceptance; forfeiture of 
policies and protection of the interests of the 
insured (Part XV);  
• Secrecy of protected documents and information 
(s. 137); and  
• The use of words related to “ life insurance ” (s. 
149).  
 
Importantly, regulations m ay be made concerning 
“trade practices, disclosure of information to 
policyholders, pricing or consumer protection matters ” 
to be complied with by licence holders or life insurance 
agents , amongst others (s. 50). BPNG also has power  
85 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
to issue prudential sta ndards in relation to “ prudential 
matters ”, which can include the conduct of business 
with “ integrity, prudence and professional skill ” (ss. 3 
and 48). There is also a general power to make 
regulations (ss. 143).  
 
The BPNG also has powers to issue notices  or 
directions and to obtain  information (Parts IV and V).  
General Insurance  
The term “general insurance ” is 
broadly defined as follows in the 
Insurance Act 1995 : 
““general insurance business” 
means — 
(a) the business of 
undertaking liability by way 
of insurance (including re -
insurance) in respect of any 
loss or damage, including 
liability to pay damages or 
compensation, contingent on 
the happening of a specified 
event; and  
(b) any business 
incidental to general 
insurance,  
but does not include — Insurance Act 1995  (Insurance 
Act). 
 
Note: it is understood the 
Insurance Act was recently 
reviewed and draft amendments 
have been prepared. However, the 
current status of these 
amendments is not known.  Insurance 
Commissioner 
(s.5)  
 
 Note: The 
Financial 
Sector 
Development 
Strategy 
proposes that 
responsibility 
for the 
supervision of 
the general 
insurance 
industry be The Insurance Act makes provision for the licensing of 
businesses , which provide “ general insurance ”. 
 
However , unlike the LI Act, the Insurance Act does not 
contain any statement of purpose, or indeed a 
particular focus on the interests of policyholders. 
Further, the policy framework provided for by s. 26 has 
never been promulgated by the Head of State. There is 
almost a complete lack of provisions designed to 
protect policyholders (for example requiring that 
policy terms be provided in advance; dealing with 
claims management ; and t he lack of p rovision for a 
policyholder protection fund). There is , however, a 
guar antee fund to be used for the purposes of 
discharging the  liabilities of a licensed insurer or 
broker (s. 27). There is provision for the establishment 
of internal complaints processes approved by the 
Commissioner and for the establishment of an  
86 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
(c) life insurance 
business; and  
(d) accident insurance 
business undertaken solely in 
connection with life insurance 
business; and  
(e) any prescribed 
insurance business . transferred to 
BPNG.123 Insurance Complaints Tribunal, but it has never been 
established (Part IX).  
 
A further complication is that the general insurance 
industry is supervised by the Office of the Insurance 
Commissioner within the Department of Treasury, 
rather  than by BPNG , which admini sters the LI Act. 
However, this may change under the proposal to 
transfer to BPNG responsibility for supervising the 
Insurance Act.  
Superannuation  
 Superannuation (General 
Provisions) Act 2000 
(Superannuation Act ). 
 
Note: The policy framework for the 
Superannuation Act is to be 
reviewed  by a Task Force, with 
recommendations to be provided 
by no later than end -2019.124  BPNG  The purpose of the Superannuation Act is stated to 
include to “ provide  for the protection of the interests 
of the members of superan nuation funds ”. This focus 
on the interests of members is reinforced by the 
statement of the functions of BPNG under the Act 
(s.7). They are stated to include “ promoting, 
encouraging and enforcing proper standards of 
conduct and sound and prudent business standards in 
the superannuation industry ” and also “ suppressing or 
aiding in the suppression of illegal or improper 
practices ” (s. 7(1)(e) and (g)) .  
 
There is provision for the licensing of trustees, 
investment managers and fund administrators, and 
                                                           
123 Financial Sector Development Strategy 2018 –2030, paragraph 70 . 
124 National Sect or Development Strategy 2018 –2030, paragraphs 81 –83.  
87 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
BPNG h as broad powers to impose conditions, revoke 
or suspend a licence (Part 3).  
 
 Note: There are no requirements in PNG for financial 
planners or investment advisers who advise on 
superannuation matters to be licensed or trained or to 
avoid conflicts of inter est.  
 
There are various provisions in the Superannuation Act 
relating to FCP matters. They include provisions 
concerning:  
 
• The responsibilities of trustees (Part 8);  
• The establishment of an industry funded 
complaints resolution mechanism (s. 49B)  Note: 
Such a mechanism has not yet been established ; 
• The duties and liabilities of directors of licence 
holders (Part 9);  
• Annual disclosures as to the performance of an 
ASF (s. 56);  
• Statutory covenants to be complied with by ASFs 
(s. 72)  
• Investments by an ASF ( including requirements for 
“arm’s length ” investments (s. 74)  
• Prohibitions on provisions which indemnify or limit 
the liability of trustees (s.73);   
88 Sector /Topic  Name of the Law/Regulations/ 
Framework/Guidelines  Responsible 
Institution  Topic s Covered  
• Restrictions on the activities of ASFs, including in 
relation to the lending of money (s. 75);  
• Member contri butions (Part 14);  
• ASF transfer entitlements (Part 15);  
• Rights of members in relation to matters such as 
withdrawal of their entitlements and protection of 
their contributions (Part 16)  
• Secrecy of protected documents and information 
(s. 104); and  
• The use of words related to “ superannuation fund ” 
(s. 149).  
 
Importantly, regulations may be made concerning 
“trade practices, disclosure of information to members, 
pricing or consumer protection matters ” to be 
complied with by ASFs or licence holders , amongst 
others (s. 45). BPNG may also issue investment 
guidelines (s. 46). BPNG also has power to issue 
prudential standards in relation to “ prudential 
matters ”, which can include the conduct of business 
with “ integrity, prudence and professional skill ” (ss. 3 
and 43). There is also a general power to make 
regulations (ss. 110).  
 
The BPNG also has powers to issue notices or 
directions and to obtain information (Parts 4 and 5) . 
 