Philippi nes
Digital Econom y
Report
2020 
A BETTER NORMAL UNDER COVID-19: 
DIGITALIZING THE PHILIPPINE ECONOMY NOW
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedA BETTER NORMAL UNDER COVID-19: 
DIGITALIZING THE PHILIPPINE
ECONOMY NOWA BETTER NORMAL UNDER COVID-19: 
DIGITALIZING THE PHILIPPINE
ECONOMY NOW
© 2020 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank 1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, 
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World 
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, 
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the 
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of 
such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its 
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full 
attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank 
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; 
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.A BETTER NORMAL UNDER COVID-19: 
DIGITALIZING THE PHILIPPINE ECONOMY NOW
SEPTEMBER 2020
Macroeconomics, Trade, and Investment Global Practice
Finance, Competitiveness, and Innovation Global Practice
East Asia and Pacific RegionPHILIPPINES DIGITAL ECONOMY REPORTACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Philippines Digital Economy Report is a publication prepared by a World Bank (WB) Philippines team 
in collaboration with the Philippines Digital Economy Steering Committee coordinated by the National 
Economic and Development Authority (NEDA).  The report assesses the state of the digital economy in 
the Philippines, and prescribes policy recommendations to increase digital adoption, decrease the digital 
divide, and address the new normal brought by the COVID-19 pandemic. The intended audience are 
Philippine policymakers, but the report may serve the needs of a wider audience including the private 
sector, academia and think tanks, development partners, and WB management and staff.
The report was undertaken with the guidance of the Philippines Digital Economy Steering Committee 
consisting of key government stakeholders including NEDA, Department of Finance (DOF), Department 
of Budget and Management (DBM), Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Department of Information 
and Communications Technology (DICT), Department of Science and Technology (DOST), Philippine 
Competition Commission (PCC), Philippine Statistics Authority, and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP).  
On the World Bank side, the report was undertaken with the guidance of Ndiame Diop (Country Director, 
Brunei, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand; and former Practice Manager, Macroeconomics, Trade and 
Investment Global Practice), Mara Warwick (former Country Director), Hassan Zaman (Regional Director, 
Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions, East Asia and Pacific), Achim Fock (Operations Manager; 
and Acting Country Director at report finalization), Cecile Thioro Niang (Practice Manager, Finance, 
Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice), Souleymane Coulibaly (Program Leader, Equitable 
Growth, Finance and Institutions) and Birgit Hansl (former Program Leader).
The study was conducted by a team from multiple Global Practices at the WB.  Kevin Chua (Task team 
leader, Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment Global Practice) and Andres Garcia (co-task team leader, 
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice) led the preparation of the report. The task 
team consisted of Natasha Beschorner (Digital Development Global Practice); Isaku Endo, Jin Lee, and 
Asya Akhlaque (Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice); Roberto Martin Galang 
(International Finance Corporation); Rong Qian, Kevin Thomas Cruz, Bradley Larson, Karen Annette Lazaro 
and Jessalaine Bacani (Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment Global Practice); and Grace Mirandilla-
Santos, Samuel Bautista, Jonathan Pemberton and Romulo Virola (Consultants). The graphic designer 
and layout artist were Gato Borrero and Emmanuel Rigunan (Consultants). The report was edited by Priya 
Susan Thomas (Knowledge Management Officer, Documentation and Communications Products).  Elysse 
Miranda, Reinaluz Ona and Maria Consuelo Sy provided excellent administrative support. The External 
Communications team, consisting of Clarissa Crisostomo David, David Llorico and Stephanie Anne 
Margallo, prepared the media release, dissemination plan and web-based multimedia presentation.
The report was peer-reviewed by Deepak Mishra (Practice Manager), Richard Record (Lead Economist), 
Doyle Gallegos (Lead Digital Development Specialist), Smita Kuriakose (Senior Economist), Ana Paula 
Cusolito (Senior Economist), Sailesh Tiwari (Senior Economist), and Jose Ramon Albert (Philippine Institute 
for Development Studies).  Four chapters of the report have separately undergone technical reviews under 
the respective Global Practices. The chapter on digital infrastructure was reviewed by Timothy Kelly (Lead 
Digital Development Specialist) and Doyle Gallegos. The chapter on digital payments was reviewed Harish 
Natarajan (Lead Financial Sector Specialist) and Marco Nicoli (Senior Financial Sector Specialist). The 
chapter on logistics of small parcel items was reviewed by Charles Kunaka (Lead Private Sector Specialist), 
Satya Prasad Sahu (Senior Trade Facilitation Specialist) and Tania Priscilla Gomez (Senior Economist). The 
chapter on the indirect taxation of cross-border e-commerce was reviewed by Sebastian James (Senior 
Economist) and Daniel Alvarez Estrada (Senior Public Sector Management Specialist).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 VABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
A4AI
AAB
ACH
ACOP
ACU
ADB
ADSL
AEC
AFM
AI
APEC
ARTA
ASEAN
ATM
B2B
B2C
BCDA
BDA
BEA
BEPS
BFAR
BIR
BOC
BPO
BRTI
BSP
BTS
BWA
CAB
CAMP
CAO
CATV
CDNAlliance for Affordable Internet
Authorized agent bank
Automated clearing house
Association of Off-Dock CY/CFS 
Operators of the Philippines
Aggregate capacity utilization
Asian Development Bank
Asymmetric digital subscriber lines
ASEAN Economic Community
Accounting and financial management
Artificial intelligence
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Anti-Red Tape Authority
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Automated teller machine
Business-to-business
Business-to-consumer
Bases Conversion and Development 
Authority
Basic deposit account
Bureau of Economic Analysis
Base Erosion and Profit Shifting 
Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Resources
Bureau of Internal Revenue
Bureau of Customs
Business process outsourcing
Indonesian Telecommunications 
Regulatory Authority
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
Base transceiver station
Broadband Wireless Access
Civil Aeronautics Board
COVID-19 Adjustment Measures 
Program
Customs administrative order
Cable TV
Content delivery networkCFS
CFW
CHED
CHIP
CICS
CMEC
CMO
CMTA
CMTS
COD
COVID-19
CPCN
CPMI
CSO
CY
DA
DAI
DBM
 
DDT
DE
DENR
DepEd
DFON
DICT
DIY
DO
DOF
DOH
DOJ
DOST
DOTCContainer freight station
Customs Facilities and Warehouses
Commission on Higher Education
Connect, Harness, Innovate, and Protect
Check Image Clearing System
Central Mail Exchange Center
Customs memorandum order
Customs Modernization and Tariff Act
Cellular mobile telephone system
Cash-on-delivery
Coronavirus disease 2019
Certificate of Public Convenience and 
Necessity
Committee on Payments and Market 
Infrastructures 
Clearing switch operator
Container yard
Department of Agriculture
Digital Adoption Index
Department of Budget and 
Management
Direct debit transfer
Digital Economy
Department of Environment and Natural 
Resources
Department of Education
Domestic fiber optic network
Department of Information and 
Communications Technology
Do-it-yourself
Department Order
Department of Finance
Department of Health
Department of Justice
Department of Science and Technology
Department of Transportation and 
Communications
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 viDOTr
DPWH
DTI
E&E
e-commerce
ECQ
EDP
EDS
EIU
EMI
EO
ERC
EU
FCL
FDI
FinTech
FMIS
FOBN
FRAND
FTTH
GDP
GEDI
GEM
GNI
GO
GSM
GST
GVA
HCI
HLURB
HRMIS
i3s
IAC
IAC-ICTDepartment of Transportation 
Department of Public Works and 
Highways
Department of Trade and Industry
Electronics and electrical
Electronic commerce
Enhanced Community Quarantine
Electronic distribution platform
Express delivery services
Economist Intelligence Unit
Electronic money issuer
Executive Order
Energy Regulatory Commission
European Union
Full-container load
Foreign direct investment
Financial Technology
Fiscal management information systems
Fiber optic backbone network
Fair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory 
Fiber to the home
Gross Domestic Product
Global Entrepreneurship & Development 
Institute
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor
Gross national income
Gross Output
Global System for Mobile 
Communications
General Sales Tax
Gross Value Added
Human Capital Index
Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board
Human resources management 
information system
Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy
Interagency Collaboration
Interagency Committee on ICT StatisticsiBPLS
ICT
IF
IFC
IMDA
IMF
IoT
IP
IPO
IPOPHL
IRR
ISP
IT
IT-BPO
ITC
ITU
IXP
KCC
KYC
LCL
LGU
LLDA
LMDS
LSP
LTE
LTFRB
LTO
Mbps
MC
MCMC
 Integrated Business Permits and 
Licensing System
Information and Communication 
Technology
Inclusive Framework
International Finance Corporation
Infocomm Media Development 
Authority
International Monetary Fund
Internet of Things
Intellectual property
Initial public offering
Intellectual Property Office of the 
Philippines
Implementing rules and regulations
Internet service provider
Information technology
Information Technology and Business 
Process Outsourcing
Independent tower company
International Telecommunication Union
Internet exchange point
Korea Communications Commission
Know your customer
Less-than-container load
Local government unit
Laguna Lake Development Authority
Last-mile delivery services
Logistics service provider
Long-term Evolution
Land Transportation Franchising and 
Regulatory Board
Land Transportation Office
Megabits per second
Memorandum Circular
Malaysian Communications and 
Multimedia CommissionABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 viiMDEC
MFI
MIAC
MNE
MO
MOA
MOOE
MRT
MSB
MSME
NBI
NBOSS
NBP
NBQB
NBTC
NCERT
NCP
NCR
NEA
NGA
NGCP
NGO
NICTEF
NPC
NPS
NRPS
NSW
NTC
OCC
OCFMalaysia Digital Economy Corporation
Microfinance institution
Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications
Multinational enterprise
Memorandum Order
Memorandum of Agreement
Maintenance and other operating 
expenses
Metro rail transit
Money service business
Micro, small, and medium enterprise
National Bureau of Investigation
National Business One Stop Shop
National Broadband Plan
Non-Bank Financial Institutions with 
Quasi-banking functions
National Broadcasting and 
Telecommunications
National Computer Emergency 
Response Team
Nutrition Center of the Philippines
National Capital Region
National Electrification Administration
National government agency
National Grid Corporation of the 
Philippines
Non-governmental organization
National ICT Ecosystem Framework
National Privacy Commission
National Payments System
National Retail Payments System
National single window
National Telecommunications 
Commission
Off-Dock CY/CFS
Off-Dock Customs FacilitiesOE
OECD
OWWA
P2P
PA
PCC
PCM
PCSD
PDDTS
PDP
PEMEDES
PFOCN
Philhealth
PhilPaSS
PHILRECA
PhilSys
PHLPost
PLCN
PMR
PNP 
POS
PPE
PPMI
PPP
Project- 
BASS
PSA
PSMB
PSNA
PSP
PTEOffices of exchange
Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development
Overseas Workers Welfare 
Administration
Person-to-person
Provisional Authority
Philippine Competition Commission
Price cost margin
Palawan Council for Sustainable 
Development
Philippine Domestic Dollar Transfer 
System
Philippine Development Plan
Private Express and/or Messengerial 
Delivery Service
Philippine Fiber Optic Cable Network
Philippine Health Insurance Corporation
Philippine Payment and Settlement 
System
Philippine Rural Electric Cooperatives 
Association
Philippine Identification System
Philippine Postal Corporation
Pacific Light Cable Network
Product market regulation
Philippine National Police
Point of sale
Personal protective equipment
Philippine Payments Management Inc. 
Purchasing power parity
Project Bandwidth and Signal Statistics
Public Service Act
Payment System Management Body
Philippine System of National Accounts
Payment service provider
Public telecommunications entityABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 ViiiR&D
RA
RAN
RIO
RPA
RRTS
RSA
RTC
SBOSS
RTGS
SEA
SEC
SME
SMS
SNA
SNDGO
SOE
SPARTA
SSS
STEM
STI
SUF
TAB
TELECPHIL
TESDA
TRC
TVET
UN
UNCTADResearch and development
Republic Act
Radio access networks
Reference Interconnection Offer
Robotic process automation
Roll-on/Roll-off Transport System
Remittance sub-agent
Remittance transfer company
Startup Business One Stop Shop
Real-time gross settlement
Southeast Asia
Securities and Exchange Commission
Small and medium-sized enterprise
Short message service
System of National Accounts
Smart Nation and Digital Government 
Office
State-owned enterprise
Smarter Philippine Through R&D, 
Training and Adoption
Social Security System
Science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics
Science, technology, and innovation
Spectrum User Fees
Trading Across Borders
Telecoms Infrastructure Corporation of 
the Philippines
Technical Education and Skills 
Development Authority
Telecommunication Regulator of 
Cambodia
Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training
United Nations
United Nations Conference on Trade 
and DevelopmentUnited Nations Development 
Programme
University of the Philippines System
United States Agency for International 
Development
United States Chamber of Commerce
Value-added service
Value-added tax
Venture capital and private equity
Very small aperture terminal
World Bank Group
World Customs Organization
World Economic Forum
World Intellectual Property Organization
Year-on-yearUNDP
UP System
USAID
USCC
VAS
VAT
VCPE
VSAT
WBG
WCO
WEF
WIPO
y-o-yABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 ixTABLE OF CONTENTS
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 xV
X 
XII
XIV
XIV
1
11
12
13
18
27
28
29
30
31
39
40
47
48
49
51
52
53
60
62
64
65
66
68Acknowledgments
Table of Contents
List of Figures
List of Tables
List of Boxes
Executive Summary
CHAPTER 1: OVERVIEW OF THE DIGITAL ECONOMY IN THE PHILIPPINES
The National Context
Why the Digital Economy?
State of the Digital Economy in the Philippines
Digitalization Momentum
References
CHAPTER 2: DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE - ACHIEVING FASTER, MORE 
AFFORDABLE INTERNET FOR ALL
Introduction
Market failures in the provision of digital infrastructure
Government initiatives to improve internet service and quality
Legal and Regulatory Challenges
Conclusions and Recommendations
References
Annex 1. DICT and NTC Policy and Regulatory Issuances Affecting 
Broadband Access, Quality and Affordability (2016-present)
CHAPTER 3: PROMOTING DIGITAL PAYMENTS
Introduction
Payment Systems Landscape in the Philippines
Recent Legal and Regulatory Development
Digital Payments for e-Commerce
Digital Payments for Government 
Constraints to Promoting Digital Payments
Policy Recommendations
ReferencesTABLE OF CONTENTS
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 xiCHAPTER 4: STATE OF LOGISTICS FOR SMALL PARCELS IN THE 
PHILIPPINES
Introduction and Context
The State of Logistics in the Philippines
Domestic Logistics
Policy Recommendations
References
CHAPTER 5: INDIRECT TAXATION OF CROSS-BORDER E-COMMERCE IN
THE PHILIPPINES
Introduction
Taxation of Low-Value Postal Consignments
Indirect Taxation of the Digital Economy
A Tax Compliance Strategy for Foreign Suppliers
Direct Taxation of the Digital Economy
Conclusions and Next Steps
References
CHAPTER 6: A CONDUCIVE AND COMPETITIVE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
Competition and regulatory constraints
Labor market
Skills
Access to Finance, including start-up finance
Innovation and internal firm constraints
Building trust and protecting consumers
Policy Recommendations
References
CHAPTER 7: THE ROLE OF PUBLIC POLICY AND THE WAY FORWARD
Leading by example
Promoting innovation and digital adoption
Whole-of-government approach
Digitalizing the new normal for a faster recovery
References
 69
70
72
80
82
84
85
86
87
90
91
93
94
95
96
97
99
99
101
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
111
114
118Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 XiiFigure I. The Philippines lags most regional peers in high-speed fixed and mobile broadband 
penetration
Figure II. Digital adoption in the Philippines lags its middle-income regional peers 
Figure III. Connecting to the internet is expensive in the Philippines, relative to peers
Figure IV. Only one tenth of Filipino adults use the internet to pay bills or shopping
Figure V.  Filipino firms face some of the highest logistics costs in the region
Figure VI. The current business environment leads to low competition in the Philippines
Figure VII. The skills of today’s workforce are above average, but not full ready for a digital future
Figure 1.1. Digital technologies promote development through three mechanisms 
Figure 1.2.  … but without investing in the analog complement, these mechanisms can bring risks
Figure 1.3. The CHIP framework shows the four ways to support digital transformation
Figure 1.4.  … and identify country priorities to support digital transformation.  all four elements of 
digital transformation.
Figure 1.5. The Philippines focuses on all four elements of digital transformation.
Figure 1.6. Statistical Framework for the Measurement of the Digital Economy in the Philippines
Figure 1.7. Digital adoption in the Philippines lags some of its regional peers
Figure 1.8. Overall digital adoption in the Philippines is about what income would predict
Figure 1.9.  Business adoption is higher than the average lower-middle income or ASEAN country, and 
slightly higher than income would predict
Figure 1.10. Adoption by people is higher than the average lower-middle income country and 
comparable to ASEAN average
Figure 1.11. Adoption by government is lower than the average ASEAN country and lower than income 
would predict
Figure 1.12. The Philippines has low innovation inputs relative to its innovation outputs
Figure 1.13. The Philippines lags regional peers in measures of firms’ ability to innovate and learn
Figure 2.1. How the Philippines Connects to the Internet
Figure 2.2. Fiber optic network and submarine cables in the Philippines
Figure 2.3.  Fixed and Mobile Broadband Market Share*
Figure 2.4. Number of Unique Cell Site IDs Detected (as of February 2020)
Figure 2.5. 4G Network Coverage (% of Population)
Figure 2.6. The Digital Divide - Unserved and Underserved Areas
Figure 2.7. Philippines cell site locations identified by the BASS app
Figure 2.8. Philippines cellular signal strength recorded by OpenSignal
Figure 2.9. Unique cell sites identified by BASS (Luzon)
Figure 2.10. Cellular signal strength measured by OpenSignal (Luzon)
Figure 2.11. Unique cell sites identified by BASS (Palawan, Visayas)
Figure 2.12. Cellular signal strength measured by OpenSignal (Palawan, Luzon)
Figure 2.13. Cellular signal strength measured by OpenSignal (Visayas)
Figure 2.14.  Broadband internet penetration in ASEAN member countries (% of population)
Figure 2.15. Mobile and Fixed Internet Download Speeds (August 2019)1
2
3
4
5
6
7
14
14
17
17
18
19
21
22
22
22
22
24
25
32
33
34
34
34
35
35
35
36
36
36
36
36
37
38LIST OF FIGURESPhilippines Digital Economy Report 2020 XiiiFigure 2.16.  Price of mobile broadband (1GB, prepaid) as % of GNI per capita
Figure 2.17. EIU Affordability Score, 2017-2019 Score of 0-100, higher score is better. 
Figure 3.1. Philippines National Payments System Architecture
Figure 3.2. NRPS Governance Framework
Figure 3.3. Philippine FinTech Landscape (2018)
Figure 3.4. Number of Branches and ATMs per 100,000 adults across the regions of the Philippines 
(June 2018).
Figure 3.5. Transaction Account Ownership among ASEAN Total Percentage of Adults (15+)
Figure 3.6.  E-Commerce payment processes
Figure 4.1.  A growing number of internet users are engaging in various e-commerce activities
Figure 4.2.  The Philippines’ e-Commerce revenue per user ranked lowest in SEA
Figure 4.3.  A number of SMEs are already realizing the benefits of going digital
Figure 4.4.  Visits to retail locations have dropped by over 80 percent
Figure 4.5.  People’s interest and desires have changed since the ECQ
Figure 4.6.  Logistic Costs as Percent of Sales in Manufacturing Firms
Figure 4.7. Logistics Players in the Philippines E-Commerce Landscape in 2016
Figure 4.8.  Retail logistics and e-commerce
Figure 4.9.  Distribution of total express market in the Philippines in 2012
Figure 4.10.  Most of the express deliveries were rendered through road transport
Figure 4.11.  Trade costs in the Philippines are some of the highest in the region
Figure 4.12.  Network of Top 5 Domestic Courier Services in the Philippines
Figure 6.1. Anti-competitive restrictions create multiple private sector barriers
Figure 6.2. It’s less bureaucratically fun to start a company in the Philippines
Figure 6.3. Labor regulations in the Philippines are more restrictive than in peers
Figure 6.4. Wage determination is also more restrictive in the Philippines compared with peers
Figure 6.5.  The skills needed to operate in the digital economy go beyond ICT technical  skills
Figure 6.6.  The skills of today are above average, but not fully ready for the future
Figure 6.7.  The level of domestic credit to the private sector is adequate relative to the country’s 
income level…
Figure 6.8.  …but relatively low compared with regional peers
Figure 6.9.  Venture capital deals in the Southeast Asian region, 2012-2017
Figure 6.10.  Constraints to Innovation activities – MSMEs vs. large firms
Figure 7.1.  Philippine firms lag in technology adoption
Figure 7.2.  Government programs supporting technology adoption only represent three percent of 
the overall resourcesLIST OF FIGURES
38
38
53
54
57
60
61
63
70
71
71
72
72
73
73
74
75
75
77
80
98
98
99
99
100
101
101
102
102
103
110
111Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 XIVTable I. Policy Recommendations
Table 1.1.  The DAI comprises representative indicators for digital adoption by business, people, and 
government
Table 1.2.  The Philippines entrepreneurship ecosystem lags most of its neighbors
Table 2.1.  Philippines vs. ASEAN penetration level and speed 
Table 2.2.  Licensing of ISPs Across Select Asia Pacific Countries
Table 2.3.  Reasons for the 8-month Long Process to Construct a Cell Site in the Philippines
Table 3.1.  Comparison of fund transfer methods in the Philippines
Table 3.2.  Philippines: Essential banking sector data
Table 3.3.  Comparison of Payment Instruments
Table 3.4.  Select Data on Financial Inclusion in the Philippines
Table 4.1.  Rank in World Bank’s Doing Business - Trading Across Borders Indicator
Table 4.2.  Comparative Import Duties and Taxes on a US$50.00 Handbag
Table 4.3.  Rates Comparison – PHLPost and other domestic logistics providers
Table 5.1.  Low-Value Consignment Exemptions in Selected Countries ($ equivalents) 
Table 6.1.  VCPE Country Attractiveness Index*
Table 7.1.  Policy Recommendations 
Box 1.1. The Analog Complements of the Digital Economy
Box 1.2.  Measuring the Size of the Digital Economy in the Philippines
Box 1.3. Digital Adoption Index
Box 2.1. Digital Infrastructure Components
Box 3.1. BSP vision for an inclusive financial system
Box 3.2.  Digital payments solutions in the COVID-19 pandemic
Box 3.3. Enhancements to the ACH to Support Authenticated e-Commerce Transactions
Box 3.4. Measuring Retail Payment Costs
Box 4.1. Trade Policy in the Philippines
Box 7.1. Whole of Government Approaches to Develop the Digital Economy8
23
25
30
41
43
55
55
57
59
73
77
82
89
102
115
15
19
23
31
58
62
64
67
78
112LIST OF TABLES
LIST OF BOXESThe COVID-19 pandemic underscores the 
importance of digitalization for economic 
and social resilience. COVID-19 is restricting 
mobility and economic activity around the 
world, and the Philippines is no exception. 
As mobility restrictions and social distancing 
measures limit face-to-face interactions and 
activities, the availability of affordable digital 
technologies has emerged as a key determinant 
of resilience. Indeed, digital technologies allow 
businesses, the government and schools to 
pursue operations online rather than completely 
shutting down. E-commerce and digital 
payments have permitted business transactions 
to continue and goods to be delivered; online 
communication platforms have facilitated 
home-based work, virtual meetings, and 
remote classes; and government agencies in 
many countries have used online processes to 
quickly deliver social assistance to vulnerable 
households. 
Unfortunately, not all countries have been able 
to leverage digital technologies to their full 
extent, because of poor access to high quality 
internet and long-held analog practices. In 
the Philippines, COVID-19 has accelerated 
the adoption and use of digital technologies. 
However, digitalization is largely constrained 
by the country’s low high-speed broadband 
penetration, which lags behind neighboring 
middle-income countries (Figure I). The 
digital divide in the Philippines is large with 
nearly 60 percent of households not having 
access to internet, and unable to reap the 
benefits of digitalization. As a result, face-to-
face interactions and analog practices largely 
dominate in the Philippines, making social 
distancing economically costly. For example, 
cash and cheques remain the dominant 
modes of payment while applying for permits 
and licenses typically requires exchange of 
documents in person. Gatherings of people 
waiting in lines are typical fixture for Filipinos to 
secure goods and services. Figure I. The Philippines lags most regional peers in high-speed
fixed and mobile broadband penetration
Source: Data from Telegeography and GSMA (2019)
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 11  The CHIP framework was developed by a select team of managers and senior specialists within the World Bank East Asia and Pacific Region unit in 2019.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report provides a thorough analysis of the 
obstacles to digitalization and identifies key 
reforms and policy measures that could help the 
Philippines harness the potential of the digital 
economy. It uses the CHIP (Connect, Harness, 
Innovate, Protect) conceptual framework to 
analyze the requirements to accelerate digital 
transformation.1 The framework focuses on 
four key drivers of digitalization: (i) Connect, 
which refers to a set measures to build the 
digital foundation and enablers such as digital 
infrastructure for participation in the digital 
economy; (ii) Harness, which points to needed 
investments in analog complements such as 
skills, regulations, and institutions to leverage 
the old economy; (iii) Innovate, which refers 
to expanding the new economy services, 
digital payments, digital entrepreneurship and 
e-government; and (iv) Protect, which focuses 
on mitigating the risks in the digital economy. 
The need to act on the digital economy is urgent.  
Reforms delivered now will help the government 
cushion the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, 
support the recovery in the medium term, and 
make the economy more inclusive, competitive, 
and resilient to similar shocks in the long term.MalaysiaChinaVietnamThailandPhilippinesIndonesia
4G (% of population) 3G (% of population) Fixed-broadband (per HH)Broadband Penetration, December 2018
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100Accelerating digitalization: 
connecting the Filipinos, 
harnessing the opportunities 
offered 
Despite the high internet usage, digital 
adoption in the Philippines generally trails 
behind many regional neighbors.  Use of 
internet has expanded rapidly in the Philippines 
over the past decade.  From 23 million in 2010, 
the number of Filipino internet users has more 
than tripled to 73 million in 2020.2 On average, 
every Filipino spends nearly 10 hours a day on 
the internet, the most worldwide, with over five 
hours on mobile internet, and nearly four hours 
on social media. In economic terms, the share 
of the value added of the Digital Economy to 
GDP, in constant prices, grew from 7 percent in 
2012 to over 10 percent in 2018. During the same 
period, the value added of the digital economy 
posted double-digit annual growth averaging 
over 13 percent. Still, the World Bank Digital 
Adoption Index (DAI) and its three sub-indices 
on people, government and business, reveal 
Figure II.  Digital adoption in the Philippines lags its
middle-income regional peers
Source:  World Bank (2018)
2  We are Social, 2020.  “Digital 2020: Global Digital Overview,” Accessible Online: https://wearesocial.com/digital-2020, February 8, 2020. 
3  Ookla, “Speedtest Global Index – Monthly comparisons of internet speeds from around the world.” Speedtest, August 2019. Accessible Online: https://www.speedtest.net/global-   
     index, 2019.
4  Opensignal, “The State of Mobile Network Experience: Benchmarking mobile on the even of the 5G revolution.” Accessible online: https://www.opensignal.com/sites/opensignal-  
     com/files/data/reports/global/data-2019-05/the_state_of_mobile_experience_may_2019_0.pdf, 2019.
5  ITU, “World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2017,” 2017.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 2that the Philippines falls behind regional peers 
when it comes to digital adoption (Figure II). The 
size of e-commerce exemplifies the low levels of 
digital adoption. While retail trade contributes 
to around 20 percent of GDP, e-commerce 
facilitates only 0.5 percent of sales. 
The relatively poor performance in digital 
adoption can be traced to a multitude of 
factors including the high cost and uneven 
quality of internet, limited adoption of digital 
payments, expensive logistics, and a business 
environment with low levels of competition. 
Increasing digital penetration in the Philippines 
requires (i) upgrading the country’s digital 
infrastructure as internet connection is a 
prerequisite to participation in the digital 
economy; (ii) harnessing market opportunities 
provided functioning digital payments and 
online platforms; (iii) improving the efficiency 
and effectiveness of the country’s logistics 
system and, finally; (iv) improving the business 
environment.   
Upgrading the Digital Infrastructure
The Philippines’ limited digital infrastructure 
has generated a digital divide, contributing 
to an unequal access to services delivered via 
the internet. In 2018, about 40 percent of the 
Philippines’ total population of 103 million and 
about 57 percent of the country’s 23 million 
households did not have internet access 
(United Nations Broadband Commission). 
The gaps vis-à-vis regional countries concern 
access, affordability and quality of internet 
service. Indeed, Filipino consumers experience 
slower download speeds and pay more than 
consumers in most Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries (Figure III). At 
16.76 Mbps, the country’s mobile broadband 
speed is much lower than the global average 
of 32.01 Mbps.3 In the region, the 3G/4G mobile 
average download speed stands at 13.26 Mbps 
compared to only 7 Mbps in the Philippines.4 
Moreover, at USD 6.30 per month for 500 MB 
of prepaid, handset-based mobile broadband, 
the Philippines has the fourth highest cost next -2-1.5-1-0.500.511.522.5
Myanmar
Lao PDR
Cambodia Indonesia
Philippines
Vietnam
Thailand
Brunei
Malaysia
SingaporeStandard deviation difference
Digital Adoption Index
Business sub-indexPeople sub-index
Government sub-indexto Singapore, Brunei, and Malaysia.5  Surprisingly, 
despite middling in terms of fixed broadband 
speed, the cost of a fixed broadband plan in the 
Philippines is close to the cost of similar plans in 
Singapore and Thailand, countries which have the 
fastest speeds in the region. 
Efforts to enhance digital infrastructure are 
hindered by low competition and regulatory 
constraints in the telecommunications market. 
Restrictions on investment and competition in 
the telecommunications market have hindered 
efforts to improve the digital infrastructure in the 
country. These restrictions included the public 
utility designation on telecommunications which 
limits foreign ownership and places a cap on the 
rate of return. The requirement for a Congressional 
franchise to build a “network” also disincentivizes 
small, regional or community-based players from 
participating in the broadband networks. Other 
countries in ASEAN only require licenses from the 
regulatory bodies to build and operate a network. 
Two other significant regulatory constraints 
involve the limits on spectrum allocation which 
is governed by an outdated Radio Control Law of 
1931, and the lack of open access policy, meant 
to level the playing field and ensure that market 
players compete based on services and innovation 
and not on exclusive ownership of networks. The Source:  EIU (2019)Figure III.  Connecting to the internet is expensive in the Philippines, 
relative to peers 
6  World Bank, Global Findex Database, Washington DC: The World Bank, 2017.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 3SGP MYS VNM THA PHL IDNEconomist Intelligence Unit (EIU)  Affordability Score
2017-2019  
Score of 0-100,  higher scores represent more affordability
PHL, 62.8IDN, 71.3VNM, 73.7MYS, 79.1SG P, 83.7THA, 85.5
5060708090100
2017 2018 2019multiple permits and licenses required to 
deploy networks in urban and rural areas, 
alongside the fees imposed by several national 
government agencies, local government units, 
and private property management such as 
homeowners’ associations, have hindered the 
speedier installations of towers and stations 
as well. As a result, the number of towers 
in the country is estimated to be less than 
20,000 in 2019 (DICT), far below Vietnam’s 
70,000 and Indonesia’s 90,000 towers. 
The government can reduce the digital divide 
by lowering regulatory constraints and 
barriers to market entry.  The recent passage 
of the Common Tower Policy to speed up the 
rollout of mobile network infrastructure is a 
step toward the right direction. Foreign direct 
investment and know-how could increase 
by reducing foreign direct investment (FDI) 
restriction through the passage of the Public 
Service Act (PSA). Furthermore, executive 
issuances can improve spectrum management 
and competition for frequencies that do not 
need legislation.
Promote Digital Payments
The Philippine economy is largely cash-based, 
with digital payments growing, but still in their 
infancy. Despite its handling and safekeeping 
costs, cash is the main medium of exchange in 
the Philippines, given its wide acceptance and 
its potential anonymity. For example, according 
to the Global Findex Database, almost all 
Filipinos prefer to use cash to pay their utility 
bills through bill payment services providers.6  
Only 5 percent pay utility bills through their 
bank accounts or mobile money accounts, 
compared to 22 percent in Indonesia and over 
80 percent in Malaysia. Similarly, nearly 60 
percent send or receive domestic remittances 
through over-the-counter services. Even seven 
out of ten Filipinos receive their wages in cash. 
The pervasiveness of cash is reflected even in 
e-commerce where orders and transactions 
are made digitally, but a majority of payments 
are still made in an analog fashion through 
cash on delivery.Low transaction account ownership, lack of a 
national ID, nascent payment infrastructure, 
and the perceived risk of digital transactions 
restrict the wider adoption of digital payments.  
First, the low level of Filipino’s bank account 
ownership is a key constraint (Figure IV). Only 34 
percent of Filipino adults had accounts in 2017, 
lagging behind most neighboring countries like 
Indonesia (49 percent), Malaysia (85 percent), 
and Thailand (82 percent). Moreover, 40 percent 
of banked Filipinos were not aware of electronic 
payments, showing the limits of digital financial 
literacy. Second, the lack of a national ID system 
makes reliably and uniquely identifying people 
challenging. As a result, consumers typically 
need to produce multiple IDs to interact with 
banks. Third, while the country has made 
significant progress in offering interoperable 
retail payments with Instapay and PESOnet, 
many banks have yet to join Instapay, and most 
rural and thrift banks remain outside of this 
payment infrastructure. Fourth, the availability 
of payment services is still underdeveloped 
under the National Retail Payment System. 
Lastly, despite the availability and awareness 
of digital payments, including mobile wallets, 
people are unwilling to use them due to 
perceived risks of online security and safety.7
The Government can promote digital 
payments through various means.  For 
instance, the government could lead by 
example by mandating its agencies to make 
and receive digital payments, including the 
delivery of emergency subsidies. Similarly, 
promoting the acceleration of QR code-enabler 
merchants can increase the acceptance of 
digital payments. This is especially important 
for the use of mobile initiated payments 
such as mobile money (e-money) and mobile 
banking. Lastly, the government can adjust 
the design of existing small and medium-
sized enterprises’ support policies and 
mechanisms to facilitate the adoption of digital 
technologies, which can increase the ability 
of merchants to connect with consumers.
7  BSP, Financial Inclusion Survey, Manila: BSP, 2017.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 4Figure IV.  Only one tenth of Filipino adults use the internet to pay bills 
or shopping
Source: World Bank (2017)VietnamThailandPhilippinesMalaysiaIndonesia
Bank Account Use internet to pay bills or shopping Fixed-broadband (per HH)Banking and Payment Behavior
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Reduce Logistics Costs
The high cost of logistics limits e-commerce 
growth in the Philippines. Filipino companies, 
from SMEs to giant corporations, complement 
their existing brick and mortar stores with 
e-commerce to broaden their consumer base 
and expand their market. Over the past decade, 
the last mile segment of the transportation 
and logistics industry has exploded with new 
options that include: technology companies like 
Grab, Mober, NinjaVan, and Transportify; and 
niche market delivery services like Foodpanda, 
and Lalafood. This trend accelerated during 
the COVID-19 ECQ. Nonetheless, companies 
face some of the highest costs in the region, 
limiting the potential growth of e-commerce. 
For example, according to IFC, logistics costs 
accounted for about 27 percent of sales 
of manufacturing firms in the Philippines, 
compared to Indonesia (21 percent), Vietnam (16 
percent), and Thailand (11 percent) (Figure V). 
The impact is greater on SMEs, which operate 
on a much smaller scale and usually face high 
shipping and delivery costs when importing 
and delivering smaller shipments.Legal and regulatory constraints have 
hampered competition in the logistics sector. 
The sector remains closed to foreign investment 
given the lack of legal clarity as to whether 
different logistics services are defined as public 
utilities, and therefore constitutionally limited 
to Filipino corporations only. Meanwhile,
in cross-border e-commerce transactions, 
shipping and fulfillment processes are getting 
more complicated given the disparity in 
regulations, including customs de minimis, 
valuation, clearance procedures for 
e-commerce, and new distribution processes. 
While the Philippines has taken great strides in 
adapting its basic legislation to support the rise 
of international parcels through the passage 
of the Customs Modernization and Tariff Act 
(CMTA), many of the provisions surrounding 
e-commerce have yet to be fully implemented. 
Lastly, the Philippine Postal Corporation remains 
fraught with issues concerning reliability and 
efficiency.
8  World Bank (2016). World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
9  World Bank (2018). Fostering Competition in the Philippines: The Challenge of Restrictive Regulations. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 5the WCO recommendations in its e-Commerce 
Package that includes the Framework of 
Standards, Technical Specifications, Immediate 
Release Guidelines, and other documents 
and tools supporting its implementation, can 
further enhance cross-border e-commerce 
of the Philippines. Lastly, the transition and 
transfer of oversight and control functions over 
postal service providers from the Department 
of Transportation and Communications 
(DOTC), PHLPost, National Telecommunications 
Commission (NTC), and now Department of 
Information and Communications Technology 
(DICT), must be reviewed and redefined to align 
with operational realities.
Fostering a more competitive business 
environment
The ability of the private sector to be part of 
the digital economy requires a conducive and 
competitive business environment.  As the 
World Bank’s 2016 World Development Report 
highlighted, without competitive pressure, 
market leaders have little incentive to invest 
in technologies new to the firm since they do 
not face competitive pressures to reduce their 
costs—while laggard firms are too far away from 
the frontier to bridge the cost gaps and enter 
the market.8 Those that do enter the market may 
instead use old production technologies and 
focus on local market niches to survive.
The current business environment in 
the Philippines is restricted by complex 
regulations, including those that protect 
incumbents. New firms are typically responsible 
for most nations’ net job growth. However, 
in 2018, only 300 new firms in the Philippines 
were registered per 1 million working-age 
people, compared to Thailand with 1,100 
and Malaysia with 2,300. Entrepreneurs are 
largely discouraged by the administrative 
burdens placed on startups, together with the 
complexity of regulatory procedures and the 
regulatory protection of incumbents (Figure 
VI). The resulting environment leads to low 
competition. A recent analysis by the World 
Bank Group9 confirms that a notable proportion 
of markets in transport, agriculture, wholesale 05.0%10.0%15.0%20.0%25.0%30.0%
Thailand Vietnam Indonesia PhilippinesFigure V.   Filipino firms face some of the highest logistics 
costs in the region
Source:  IFC (2020)
The government can reduce the logistic costs 
by lowering regulatory constraints and barriers 
to market entry.  As with digital infrastructure, 
the passing of the PSA can clarify the legal status 
of foreign ownership restrictions in the logistics 
sector and spur greater innovation in the sector. 
Moreover, the implementation of the CMTA 
provisions for e-commerce goods, adopting and retail, and manufacturing can be classified 
as highly concentrated.
Restrictions to investments affect the 
Philippines’ ability to attract foreign direct 
investment (FDI), which is key to local 
diffusion of technological know-how. Among 
the 62 countries included in the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development’s 
FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index, the 
Philippines is the most restrictive country in 
terms of FDI regulation. The country belongs to 
the top five most restricted countries in almost 
all sectors and is the top country in terms of 
equity restrictions. Restrictions on foreign 
investment are largely embedded in the 1987 
Philippine Constitution and reflected in the 11th 
Foreign Investment Negative List. There are 
restrictions in several industries typically open 
to FDI, including utilities, logistics, retail, and 
education.
In addition to regulatory limits to competition, 
high administrative burdens on start-ups 
make it costly for firms to enter the market. 
Numerous operating permits and licenses are 
required from unrelated agencies that need to 
be renewed annually, typically paper-based, 
and many times requiring travel to Manila (for 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 6Figure VI. The current business environment leads to low 
competition in the Philippines Business regulation indicators 
for select Southeast Asian economies
Source:  WEF, 2017 . World Competitiveness Report-30-20-1001020304050Burden of
government
regulationsHiring and ﬁring
practices CompetitionImpact of biz
rules on FDI
Indonesia Malaysia Philippines
Thailand Vietnamfirms based in other regions). For example, 
companies operating in the logistics sector are 
required to secure permits from the Maritime 
Industry Authority for their shipping assets and 
from the Land Transportation Franchising and 
Regulatory Board for their trucks, as well as a 
client profile registry from the Bureau of Customs 
and a sea freight forwarding accreditation from 
the Fair Trade and Enforcement Bureau. These 
are in addition to permits paid to local entities, 
such as the Mayor’s Business Permit; permits for 
passage from local government units (LGUs), 
economic zones, and ports.
A combination of administrative and 
regulatory reforms can support digitalization. 
The transition to a more digital government 
can facilitate recovery and promote social 
distancing.  Therefore, the government should 
require agencies to accept digital documents 
and digital payments as legal equivalents in the 
processing of all permits, licenses, and taxes. 
Similarly, the passing of the PSA amendment 
would allow for FDI and greater innovation in the 
sector. Lastly, the government should continue 
to implement the Philippine Competition Act 
to enable fair competition and increase the 
innovation needed to operate under the new 
normal.
To ride the waves of digital transformation, 
employers and workers need to know how to 
use digital technology, handle large volumes 
of information, and act with flexibility and 
creativity. While more productive firms tend to 
access the internet and use it more intensively, 
the successful use of digital technologies 
depends on firms’ complementary investments 
in skills and organizational restructuring. This 
entails that workers and entrepreneurs would 
need to possess foundational skills in addition 
to technical information and communications 
technology (ICT) skills. To maximize the 
potential benefits of the digital economy, three 
sets of skills are required: (1) cognitive, such as 
problem-solving and mental speed; (2) social 
and behavioral, such as socioemotional skills, 
decision-making ability, and interpersonal 
skills; and (3) technical, such as the use of 
various software, methods, materials, and 
tools. Moreover, digital technologies perform 10 Acosta, P. et al (2017). Developing Socioemotional Skills for the Philippines’ Labor Market. World Bank.routine tasks more quickly and less costly than 
humans. As a result, the demand for low-skill 
jobs declines and the need for high-skill workers 
that complement these technologies increases. 
This, in turn, motivates people to continuously 
learn new skills and upgrade existing ones 
through a lifelong process of learning.
Filipinos’ skills for today’s labor force are above 
regional average but the skills needed for the 
future workforce are below average. The WEF’s 
2016 Competitiveness report differentiates the 
skills of the current workforce with those needed 
by the future a  (Figure VII). Current workforce 
skills cover years of schooling, extent of staff 
training, quality of vocational training, skill sets 
of secondary education graduates, and skill sets 
of university graduates. In comparison, future 
workforce skills cover school life expectancy, 
quality of primary education, internet use 
in schools, and critical thinking in teaching. 
Using the skills of the current workforce, the 
Philippines is above regional peers’ average; 
however, in terms of the skills for the future 
workforce, the Philippines lags behind its 
regional neighboring countries. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 7skills in the curricula of the extended compulsory 
education from kindergarten to grade 12 by 
explicitly stating objectives and targets and by 
preparing the teachers for effective delivery of 
content.10 Moreover, COVID-19 has highlighted 
the importance of remote options to ensure 
the continuity of learning. Therefore, the 
government should prepare teachers and school 
leaders for multiple learning delivery modalities 
and learning resources, including minimum 
standards of digital literacy and remote learning 
capabilities. Lastly, encourage university and 
industry linkages to improve the curriculum 
relevance in STEM (science, technology, 
engineering, mathematics) disciplines. 
The role of government policy in 
the new normal
The digital economy can take root and grow 
anywhere if some elements are in place, 
but especially if government policies shape 
growth in the right direction. As discussed 
above, the foundation of the digital economy 
is fast, reliable, and affordable internet. 
Equally important are digital enablers such 
as digital finance and digital IDs together 
with the analog complements that include 
the business climate, skills, and institutions. 
Facilitating the dividends of growth, jobs, and 
services requires government policy to set up 
a sound regulatory environment and promote 
digital adoption. Mitigating the risks requires 
the creation and strong implementation of 
regulations that encourage competition, 
guarantee accountability, and protect 
consumers. The resulting ecosystem allows 
companies to leverage technology to increase 
their productivity and reach new markets of 
digitally-able consumers.
In a society-wide digital transformation led by 
the government, the government itself must 
lead by example. The government can serve as 
an example by taking the lead in fast-tracking 
their e-governance projects. Fast-tracking 
the adoption of digital identification will help 
promote inclusivity, improve efficiency, and 
enhance security. Given its multi-faceted 
nature, planning and implementing strategies The skills of the future workforce can be 
improved by fostering socioemotional skills 
and preparing for digital education and remote 
learning. A first step is to embed socioemotional Figure VII.  The skills of today’s workforce are above average, 
but not full ready for a digital future
Source: Adapted from WEF 2019.-30-20-100102030Skills of current
workforceSkills of future
workforceDifference to regional peers' average scores (%)
China Indonesia Malaysia
Philippines Thailand VietnamPhilippines Digital Economy Report 2020 8Time Horizon Policy Recommendations Responsible Agency
Immediate termDIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE
• Coordinate and fast track procurement of internet services for government 
 ofﬁces and critical facilities (for example, health centers,  hospitals). 
• Amend the Public Service Act (PSA) to lower barriers to entry for foreign 
 investments.
• Issue common infrastructure policies to speed up the rollout of mobile  
 network infrastructure.
• Issue executive directives on spectrum management and competition for 
 frequencies.All government agencies
Congress
DICT
DICT
Immediate term • Maximize the usage of payment system infrastructures and payment 
 services including private sector payment service providers in delivering 
 emergency subsidy payments digitally. 
• Establish a strong consumer protection framework including grievance 
 mechanisms, and a return and refund policy.
• Implement e-invoice and e-receipt to make transaction digital from 
 end to end.
• Mandate government agencies to make and receive payments digitally to 
 the extent possible.DOF, DTI, DSWD, BSP, 
DICT
DTI
DTI, BIR, DICT 
NEDA, DOF, DBM, ARTA, 
BTr, BIR, COA
BSP
BSP
PSA
BSP, all government 
agenciesDIGITAL PAYMENTS
Short to medium
term• Expand the ﬁnancial literacy program in partnership with other
 stakeholders, covering digital ﬁnancial services and digital literacy.
• Accelerate QR Code-enabled merchants for wider acceptance of digital 
 payments.
• Implement the PhilSys in a timely manner for the delivery of public 
 services, social safety net, and access to ﬁnancial services. 
• Expand the participating government agencies under the EGov Pay facility 
 as well as PESONet participating payment service providers. 
BSP
DICT, BSP
CongressLong term• Promote the use of electronic payments through NRPS, and crowd in 
 private sector entities to facilitate the expansion of ACHs with multiple 
 payment instruments and innovation. 
• Strengthen cybersecurity and data privacy regulations to manage the risks 
 of adopting digital ﬁnancial technology.
• Pass the Financial Consumer Protection bill including a consolidated 
 ombudsman for ﬁnancial services.Short term • Ensure a fair and level playing ﬁeld for operators by applying the same 
 service obligations and performance standards for the third telco to the 
 incumbent telcos.
• Fast-track and lower the cost of deploying broadband infrastructure 
 through infrastructure sharing policies that address: (a) the use of 
 government assets (submarine cable, NGCP dark ﬁber); (b) the use of 
 infrastructure across sectors such as roads, railways, electricity trans
 mission; and (c) coordinated build for a shared utility corridor. 
• Reconsider direct government investment in network infrastructure and 
 operations; and develop transition plan, including regulatory framework 
 for open access and non-discriminatory pricing, for NBN and Free Wiﬁ 
 programs to be transitioned to the private sector.
• Pass joint memorandum circulars on streamlining of permits for 
 cellular towers and cable laying within six months, while streamlining 
 permit requirements for network deployment and rationalize fees 
 imposed by national and local government agencies, as well as private 
 sector associations within the short to medium term.DICT, NEDA, PCC
DICT, DPWH
DICT, PCC
DICT, ARTA, DILG, 
DHSUD, DOE, DPWH
• Amend the Radio Control Law and/or the Public Telecoms Policy Act, and 
 pass the Open Access in Data Transmission bill and the guidelines to clarify 
 spectrum assignment, recall, and reassignment.  
• Amend EO No. 467 to liberalize access to satellites for internet connectivity 
 to help address digital infrastructure gap in the countryside.Congress
Ofﬁce of the President
• Prepare for 5G which will be a game changer in terms of facilitating digital 
 adoption across sectors.DICT, NEDAMedium term
Long termTable I.  Policy Recommendations for the digital economy does not fall into the 
hands of a single government entity. Nor will 
it be successful with the piecemeal efforts of 
separate national agencies. Instead, it requires 
a “whole-of-government” approach that 
involves the participation of various sectors 
that are involved in the digital economy and 
their corresponding e-governance projects.
This is the time to implement reforms that have 
been in preparation during the past decade, 
which can lower internet costs, broaden 
economic opportunities, and increase social inclusion. The need to increase digital adoption 
by public and private sectors is critical not only 
in helping the Philippines adapt to the post-
COVID-19 world, but also to leapfrog toward its 
Ambisyon Natin 2040 dream. The government 
must therefore urgently take an active role 
in creating and implementing an enabling 
policy and regulatory framework through 
priority reforms that reduce the digital divide, 
reduce logistic costs, promote the use of 
digital payments, and create a more conducive 
business environment (Table I). Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 9Time Horizon Policy Recommendations Responsible Agency
Immediate termDIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE
• Coordinate and fast track procurement of internet services for government 
 ofﬁces and critical facilities (for example, health centers,  hospitals). 
• Amend the Public Service Act (PSA) to lower barriers to entry for foreign 
 investments.
• Issue common infrastructure policies to speed up the rollout of mobile  
 network infrastructure.
• Issue executive directives on spectrum management and competition for 
 frequencies.All government agencies
Congress
DICT
DICT
Immediate term • Maximize the usage of payment system infrastructures and payment 
 services including private sector payment service providers in delivering 
 emergency subsidy payments digitally. 
• Establish a strong consumer protection framework including grievance 
 mechanisms, and a return and refund policy.
• Implement e-invoice and e-receipt to make transaction digital from 
 end to end.
• Mandate government agencies to make and receive payments digitally to 
 the extent possible.DOF, DTI, DSWD, BSP, 
DICT
DTI
DTI, BIR, DICT 
NEDA, DOF, DBM, ARTA, 
BTr, BIR, COA
BSP
BSP
PSA
BSP, all government 
agenciesDIGITAL PAYMENTS
Short to medium
term• Expand the ﬁnancial literacy program in partnership with other
 stakeholders, covering digital ﬁnancial services and digital literacy.
• Accelerate QR Code-enabled merchants for wider acceptance of digital 
 payments.
• Implement the PhilSys in a timely manner for the delivery of public 
 services, social safety net, and access to ﬁnancial services. 
• Expand the participating government agencies under the EGov Pay facility 
 as well as PESONet participating payment service providers. 
BSP
DICT, BSP
CongressLong term• Promote the use of electronic payments through NRPS, and crowd in 
 private sector entities to facilitate the expansion of ACHs with multiple 
 payment instruments and innovation. 
• Strengthen cybersecurity and data privacy regulations to manage the risks 
 of adopting digital ﬁnancial technology.
• Pass the Financial Consumer Protection bill including a consolidated 
 ombudsman for ﬁnancial services.Short term • Ensure a fair and level playing ﬁeld for operators by applying the same 
 service obligations and performance standards for the third telco to the 
 incumbent telcos.
• Fast-track and lower the cost of deploying broadband infrastructure 
 through infrastructure sharing policies that address: (a) the use of 
 government assets (submarine cable, NGCP dark ﬁber); (b) the use of 
 infrastructure across sectors such as roads, railways, electricity trans
 mission; and (c) coordinated build for a shared utility corridor. 
• Reconsider direct government investment in network infrastructure and 
 operations; and develop transition plan, including regulatory framework 
 for open access and non-discriminatory pricing, for NBN and Free Wiﬁ 
 programs to be transitioned to the private sector.
• Pass joint memorandum circulars on streamlining of permits for 
 cellular towers and cable laying within six months, while streamlining 
 permit requirements for network deployment and rationalize fees 
 imposed by national and local government agencies, as well as private 
 sector associations within the short to medium term.DICT, NEDA, PCC
DICT, DPWH
DICT, PCC
DICT, ARTA, DILG, 
DHSUD, DOE, DPWH
• Amend the Radio Control Law and/or the Public Telecoms Policy Act, and 
 pass the Open Access in Data Transmission bill and the guidelines to clarify 
 spectrum assignment, recall, and reassignment.  
• Amend EO No. 467 to liberalize access to satellites for internet connectivity 
 to help address digital infrastructure gap in the countryside.Congress
Ofﬁce of the President
• Prepare for 5G which will be a game changer in terms of facilitating digital 
 adoption across sectors.DICT, NEDAMedium term
Long term
Congress
BOC
PHLPost, BOC
BOCShort to medium
term• Pass the PSA amendment to clarify the legal status of foreign ownership 
 restrictions in the logistics sector.  
• Implement the CMTA provisions for e-commerce goods, adopting the WCO 
 recommendations in its E-Commerce Package that includes the Framework 
 of Standards, Technical Speciﬁcations, Immediate Release Guidelines, and 
 other documents and tools supporting its implementation. 
• Fix clearance processing between PHLPost and BOC, particularly for goods 
 destined for places outside the NCR. 
• Continue efforts to modernize Customs processes through automation.
DOF, PHLPost
DTI
DICTLong term• Revitalize PHLPost as an important anchor for the small parcel delivery 
 logistics industry, especially for remote and isolated communities.  
• Encourage logistics companies to upgrade their facilities, transportation 
 assets, and ICT infrastructure and systems, through assistance and access 
 to long-term ﬁnancing with low interest rates.
• Review and align with operational realities the transition and transfer of 
 oversight and control functions over postal service providers from the 
 DOTC, PHLPost, NTC, and now DICT.Immediate term • Implement public-private information campaigns among SMEs, especially 
 those outside the major cities, about logistics services to encourage them 
 to explore the potential of e-commerce trading.
• Provide support for SMEs to adopt e-commerce options.DTI 
DTI, DOST, DICTLOGISTICS
Short to Long
term• Obtain more precise data to allow for assessment of the tax revenue lost 
 as a result of the current low value consignment exemption from VAT and 
 the potential yield from its reduction, or abolition. 
• Identify what data is available about the consumption of digital services by 
 consumers in the Philippines, and enter into dialogue with the industry to 
 assess the scale of the market and future trends. That could be part of an 
 overall consultation about changes to the VAT treatment of imports.
• Develop an appropriate legislative model that can be translated into
 provision in the Philippine Tax Code, and compliance strategy to support 
 the policy changes and BIR and BOC that can be best integrated into their 
 current operations. DOF, BIR
BIR
DOF, BIRDIGITAL TAXATION
Immediate term • Require government agencies to accept scanned documents, digital 
 photographs, and digital payments as legal equivalents in the processing of 
 permits, licenses, and taxes. BIR, COA, BTr, BSP
Short to medium
term• Pass the PSA amendment.
• Pass Executive Order on the National Competition Policy.
• Prepare teachers and school leaders for multiple learning delivery
 modalities and learning resources.Congress
Ofﬁce of the President
DepEd
Long term • Embed socioemotional skills in the curricula of the extended compulsory
 education from kindergarten to grade 12 by explicitly stating objectives and 
 targets and by preparing the teachers for effective delivery of content.DepEdCOMPETITIVE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENTPhilippines Digital Economy Report 2020 10What are the payoffs of these 
reforms?
Digital reforms can help the economy become 
more competitive. Digital technologies can 
increase the productivity of businesses, and 
the efficiency of the government. They can 
enhance coordination and automate processes 
in a way to increase operational efficiency and 
reduce costs. These technologies can replace 
existing factors of production like labor or non-
ICT capital the way travel agency is replaced 
by online airline booking system; or augment 
the factors to make them more productive like 
workers using technology. They can also deliver 
economies of scale and platform contributing to 
greater organization and collaboration among 
economic agents. The Philippines can learn 
from other countries. In Turkey, firms using the 
internet for online orders or reservations are 
11 percent more productive, 25 percent larger, 
and twice more likely to export. Governments 
using one-stop computerized service centers 
and online portal have improved service 
efficiency. For example, Malaysia’s introduction 
of an online registration system for Goods and 
Service Tax reduced the time to start a business 
by 10 days in 2019.
Digital reforms can also help the Philippines 
become more resilient. The transition to a digital 
economy will make the country more resilient 
to external and natural shocks like the COVID-19 
pandemic.  Digital technologies will help the 
country address the pandemic and the new 
normal by facilitating social distancing while 
maintaining engagement and communication. 
It can support work-from-home arrangements, 
distance learning, and offsite service delivery, 
avoiding business disruptions and ensuring 
service continuity.  Digital payment solutions 
facilitate contactless transactions on online 
payments and fund transfers that would be 
more effective than the traditional banking 
experience. Reform efforts can ensure the government reliable systems for efficient and 
transparent public service delivery, which can 
be used to deliver cash aid and other services to 
disaster-prone country like the Philippines. 
  
Digital reforms can finally help the Philippines 
be more inclusive. Digital technologies 
can make development more inclusive 
through information sharing, facilitating 
search-and-matching, and providing service 
deliveries to those previously unreached 
and unserved. Online jobs markets are able 
to connect employers with job applicants, 
while e-commerce platforms connect Filipino 
sellers from urban or rural areas to buyers in 
local and foreign markets. These technologies 
can also stimulate new business models and 
provide new avenues for activities away from 
their traditional domains. Massive open online 
courses offer learning opportunities for Filipino 
students at the click of a button, while local 
microfinance companies offer lending services 
through mobile applications. Leveraging 
these digital technologies can help deliver 
inclusive development by widening economic 
opportunities for everyone. CHAPTER 1
OVERVIEW OF THE 
DIGITAL ECONOMY 
IN THE PHILIPPINES
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 11The Philippines aims to be a prosperous middle 
class society free of poverty by 2040. This 
collective long-term vision of the Filipinos for the 
Philippines is enshrined in the Ambisyon Natin 
2040. The vision depicts the life of all Filipinos 
in the next 20 years to be matatag (strongly 
rooted), maginhawa (comfortable), and panatag 
(secure) – essentially, a middle class lifestyle 
characterized with home and vehicle ownership, 
steady income source to support family and self, 
ample finances for children’s education, leisure, 
and retirement. As a long-term national vision, 
Ambisyon Natin 2040 serves as a guide and 
anchor for development planning in the country 
starting with the Philippine Development Plan 
(PDP) 2017-2022 and in succeeding PDPs across 
different administrations until 2040.
The country also aspires to be a globally 
competitive knowledge economy. To build 
the foundation for a knowledge economy, the 
government is making it a priority to promote 
and accelerate technology adoption, and 
stimulate innovation in all economic sectors. 
The current PDP outlines the strategic priorities 
on science, technology and innovation (STI) 
that encompass both the public and private 
sectors. These priorities include strengthening 
open collaboration among actors in the STI 
ecosystem, enhancing the creative capacity 
for knowledge and technology generation, 
investing in STI-based start-ups, enterprises, 
and spin offs, and increasing STI utilization in 
agriculture, industry, and services sectors. 
The PDP recognizes the need to leverage 
the potential – and manage the risks – of 
digitalization to enable service delivery and 
expand opportunity for all Filipinos.11
The emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic 
threatens the growth momentum of the 
economy. The COVID-19 pandemic has reached 
Philippine shores, risking lives and disrupting 
livelihoods. To flatten the infection curve, the 
authorities responded with tough containment 
measures through social distancing guidelines and an enhanced community quarantine 
(ECQ) in Luzon and other regions, restricting 
the movement of people and reducing 
business operations to only the essentials. 
The containment measures have paralyzed the 
economy, resulting in the losses of incomes, 
jobs, and investments, and disruptions in 
domestic value chains. These adverse socio-
economic outcomes necessitated the delivery 
of unprecedented social assistance and fiscal 
measures to help households survive the 
lockdown, businesses avoid bankruptcies, and 
the healthcare system respond to the outbreak. 
Nevertheless, if the pandemic prolongs further, 
large scale fiscal and monetary policy support 
may not prevent vulnerable firms from exiting, 
and households from curtailing consumption. 
The call to leverage the digital economy has 
become compelling as the country grapples 
with the nature of the “new normal”. Until a 
vaccine is discovered, an immediate return to 
normalcy is unlikely. Between now and then, 
the Philippines has to resume activities under 
a cloud of social distancing measures, and 
health and hygiene protocols. Evidences are 
mounting that digitalization has accelerated 
through digital banking, e-commerce, and 
online bills payment amidst the lockdown.12 
The longer the pandemic endures, the more 
entrenched the changes underway become. 
Businesses and individuals will have learned 
the benefits of digital technologies to alter their 
way of enterprises and lives. Workers will have 
discovered that home-based work can be as 
productive as reporting to duty station despite 
its own set of challenges. Firms will have learned 
to develop supply chains with built-in resilience, 
and to operate as normally as possible with 
reduced in-person meetings and limited travels. 
With the infrastructure and processes in place, 
and behavioral changes taking permanent hold 
among firms and individuals, the digitalization 
momentum will likely stay even after a vaccine 
rolls out.  The National Context
11  Similarly, the Philippine Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy (i3s) aims to grow and develop globally competitive and innovative manufacturing, agriculture, and services industries 
    by focusing on three major areas: (1) the creation of an innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem; (2) the removal of obstacles to growth to build industry clusters; and (3) the 
      strengthening of domestic supply and value chains. It relies on strong government-academe-industry collaboration with the government acting as the main coordinator and facilitator 
     in addressing the most binding constraints to the growth of industries.
12 Data from the BSP revealed that the two electronic fund transfer services – Instapay and PESONet – saw a combined 158.6 percent year-on-year increase in transaction value in the 
     second quarter of 2020.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 12While the Philippines has grown remarkably 
in the past decades, only a transformative 
solution will catapult the economy into 
reaching its long term targets. The Philippines 
has enjoyed 21 years of uninterrupted growth 
since the Asian Financial Crisis of 1998.  
Economic growth has accelerated from an 
annual average of 2.8 percent in 1990-1999 
to 4.5 percent in 2000-2009 and further to 
6.4 percent in 2010-2019. However, in recent 
years, growth has steadily declined from the 
levels of 7.0 percent seen in the early-2010s 
13  The definitions on digitization, digitalization, and digital transformation are much clearer. Digitization is the process of encoding analogue information or procedure into binary bits     
        that can be read and manipulated by computers. Digitalization is the process of using digital technologies to change a business model, and provide new revenue and value-producing 
      opportunities.  Digital transformation is the process of integrating digital technology into all areas of the business, changing the operations and value delivery to customers.
      See Ahmad and Ribarsky, 2018;  Bloomberg, 2018.
14  The 2016 OECD Ministerial Declaration on the Digital Economy alluded to the growing use of and investment in digital technologies and knowledge-based capital, and the powerful 
    catalyst of the digital economy for innovation, growth and social prosperity. In the following year, Asia-Pacific Economic Conference (APEC) leaders affirmed the importance of 
      promoting the internet economy and adopted the APEC Internet and Digital Economy Roadmap. The G20 Osaka Leaders’ Declaration in 2019 affirms the need to harness the power 
      of technological innovation, in particular, digitalization, and its application for the benefit of all.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 13There is no standard definition of the ‘digital 
economy’. Much of the confusion surrounding 
the digital economy, especially on its coverage, 
attributes, and measurement, lies in the 
absence of a widely agreed definition.  The lack 
of a standard definition is attributed to the new 
and rapidly evolving nature of the technology, 
and our own insufficient understanding 
of the subject matter. As a result, multiple 
definitions of the same term have arisen not 
only across the literature but also over time. 
On the one hand, digital economy has been 
defined narrowly as online platforms and those 
business transactions and activities arising 
from those platforms. On the other hand, it 
has been defined broadly as anything that use 
digitized data.13 Many commentators have taken 
electronic commerce (e-commerce) as a proxy 
for the digital economy, while others have 
pushed further to refer to it as encompassing 
both e-commerce and the Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) sector. 
Despite the differing definitions, international 
organizations are unanimous in affirming the 
digital economy’s importance as a contributor 
to growth and innovation. Even international 
organizations have defined the digital economy 
quite differently. In its study of value creation of 
the digital economy, the United Nations adopted 
the definition by Bukht and Heeks (2017), 
who distinguished the digital economy as the 
part of economic output derived from digital 
technologies with a business model based on 
digital goods and services (UNCTAD, 2019). The with indications that potential growth is already 
declining. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic 
may lead to a growth contraction in 2020, and 
if not managed well, lead to negative long term 
effects. Thus, a business-as-usual approach 
cannot deliver the sustained growth necessary 
to reach the Ambisyon Natin 2040 targets; 
rather, a transformative solution is needed 
to increase the economy’s productivity and 
competitiveness. That transformative growth 
solution lies in harnessing the potential of the 
digital economy.
Why the Digital Economy?
G-20 and World Economic Forum (WEF) defined 
it as the broad range of economic activities that 
use digitized information and knowledge as key 
factors of productions, modern information 
networks as an important activity space, as well 
as ICT to drive productivity growth. Rather than 
covering a broad scope, the IMF (2018) focused 
on the digital sector comprising the producers 
at the core of digitalization: online platforms, 
platform-enabled services, and suppliers of ICT 
goods and services. Despite the differences 
in definitions, international organizations are 
unanimous in affirming the importance of the 
digital economy to economies, citing it as 
a catalyst for innovation, growth, and social 
prosperity.14
In the context of the Philippines Digital 
Economy Report, the digital economy 
refers to private sector utilization of digital 
technologies as a driver of economic growth, 
innovation, and other means of transforming 
the economy. This definition is aligned with 
the World Bank 2019 report on the Digital 
Economy in Southeast Asia: Strengthening the 
Foundations for Future Growth. It is based on an 
emphasis on the digital economy’s contribution 
to economic growth; and encompasses the 
adoption of digital technology in all sectors of 
the economy, not just the ICT.  As a consequence, 
the authorities must look beyond the ICT sector, 
and the policies and regulations relating to it, 
when developing strategies to grow the digital 
economy and maximize its positive impact 
(World Bank, 2019a). Digital technologies can make development 
more inclusive, efficient, and innovative. They 
facilitate search-and-matching and information 
sharing; automate processes and enhance 
coordination; and contribute to greater 
organization and collaboration among economic 
agents (Figure 1.1). In practice, technology-
enabled platforms have been used to reduce 
transaction and information costs, allowing the 
participation and inclusion of those previously 
un-reached and un-served (for example, 
Philippines job posting sites for job seekers). 
They have been used to boost efficiency through 
the enhancement of existing production factors, 
or the replacement of costlier and inefficient 
ones (for example, internet money transfer 
services that allow overseas Filipinos to remit 
money home at lower fees and shorter wait 
times). Furthermore, they have led to innovation 
as they stimulate new business models and 
provide avenues for activities away from their 
traditional domains (for example, ride-hailing 
applications that provide income-earning 
opportunities for Filipinos and convenience 
for public commuters). Leveraging digital 
technologies delivers inclusive development by 
widening economic opportunities for everyone. 
In designing digital strategies, authorities must 
invest in the analog complements (Figure 1.2) to 
avoid turning the rewards of the digital economy 
into risks  (Box 1.1).  
There is evidence to show that digital 
technology adoption increases productivity 
and economic growth. A World Bank analysis 
of 120 countries reveals that a 10-percentage 
point increase in broadband penetration 
results in a 1.3 percentage point increase in 
economic growth (World Bank, 2009). This 
growth effect of broadband is significant 
and stronger in developing countries than in 
developed economies, and it is higher than that 
of telephony and internet. Among European 
Union (EU) countries, Gal et al. (2019) show that 
digital adoption is associated with productivity 
gains, having particularly strong effects in 
industries such as manufacturing and those 
with routine-intensive activities. From 2013-
2017, the most digital intensive-using industries 
drove labor productivity growth in the EU; while 
they contributed to as much as 86 percent of 
labor productivity growth in the United States Digital
Technologies
INCLUSIONSearch and
InformationAutomation and
coordinationScale economies
and platforms
EFFICIENCY INNOVATION
Digital
Technologies
CONTROLSearch without
accountabilityAutomation without
skillsScale without
competition
INEQUALITY CONCENTRATIONFigure 1.1.  Digital technologies promote development through three 
mechanisms…
Figure 1.2 .  …but without investing in the analog complement, these 
mechanisms can bring risks.Source:  World Bank (2016a).
Source:  World Bank (2016a).
(Van Ark et al., 2019).
Digital technologies contribute to growth 
by expanding trade, raising efficiencies, and 
leading to greater competition. The use of 
internet, in particular, has led to greater trade 
to more markets, often by newer and younger 
firms.  A 10-percent increase in internet use 
in the exporting country is found to increase 
the number of products traded between two 
countries by 0.4 percent; while a similar increase 
in internet use of a country pair increases the 
average bilateral trade value per product by 
0.6 percent (World Bank, 2016a). In Turkey, 
firms using the internet for online orders or 
reservations are 11 percent more productive, 25 
percent larger, and twice more likely to export. 
These technologies raise efficiency and labor 
productivity in all economic sectors. Access 
to information helps firms make better use 
of existing capacity, optimizes inventory and 
supply chain management, cuts downtime of 
capital equipment, and reduces risk. Internet-
based services also facilitate market entry and 
encourage competition, with internet firms 
generally able to start and scale up quickly with 
relatively little staffing or capital investment. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 14Without a strong analog foundation, the 
benefits reaped from adopting digital 
technologies may turn into risks. While digital 
technologies deliver economies of scale 
for firms, markets may become excessively 
concentrated in the absence of a business 
environment that fosters competition. As 
digital technologies automate many tasks 
and increase labor productivity, inequality 
may rise when workers do not possess the 
skills that technology augments. While the 
internet surmounts information barriers that 
impede the government’s ability to provide 
its services, states and corporations may 
use the same technology to exercise control 
when a country lacks institutions that ensure 
the government’s accountability. To mitigate 
such risks, the digital economy requires the 
support of “analog complements” consisting 
of regulations, skills, and institutions. 
Firms can leverage the internet to compete 
and innovate if regulations that promote 
competition and easy entry of firms are 
effectively enforced. Gradually reducing 
market distortions that disincentivize firms 
to use these technologies can increase 
competitiveness and encourage greater 
use of these technologies. Examples 
of such market distortions are state 
control in economic sectors, barriers to 
entrepreneurship, and restriction on trade 
and investment. Improving firm registration 
and making markets more transparent 
reduces price collusions, market sharing, 
and rigged public procurements, allowing 
firms to enter the market more easily. Where 
firms may have limited understanding on 
leveraging the internet, benchmarking and 
information programs can be effective. 
Carefully tailoring regulations for firms in ‘new 
economy’ markets (for example, Uber and 
Airbnb) to guarantee competition is crucial 
given that these markets are characterized 
by new business models and structures that 
differ from those observed in traditional 
markets. Ultimately, policymakers have to 
design enabling regulations and avoid the 
associated risk of being too restrictive.  
Workers, entrepreneurs, and public 
servants can maximize the opportunities 
in the digital world if skills that automation 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 15complements rather than replaces are 
developed. Learning these skills should 
begin early to lay down the cognitive and 
socioemotional foundations for more 
advanced technical skills. Exposing children 
to coding and basic ICT concepts can also 
influence career choice and instill a basic 
understanding of digital technologies. 
The onset of digital transformation also 
requires a change in the way that education 
systems teach students.  Instead of training 
students for a particular job by teaching 
them rigid skills, educational systems should 
prepare them for a career in the context of 
an ever-changing environment driven by 
technological changes. This preparation 
requires honing skills such as creativity, 
teamwork, problem solving, and critical 
thinking, and emphasizing project work 
and fewer assessments in place of frequent 
testing. Lastly, workers must constantly 
reevaluate and upgrade their skills to take 
full advantage of advancements in digital 
technology. To facilitate this, governments 
can provide incentives for firms and workers 
to create mechanisms for lifelong learning.   
The government can effectively use digital 
technology to empower its constituents 
and deliver services if institutions that 
guarantee accountability are established 
and strengthened. Improving the monitoring 
of government workers and government-
funded organizations that deliver services 
using digital technologies help curtail 
absenteeism, operational inefficiencies, 
and corruption. Making information 
services accessible to citizens also supports 
transparency in service delivery. Digital 
technologies can also improve electoral 
accountability, help uncover election fraud, 
and reduce election-related violence. 
Automation in business regulations, citizen 
feedback systems, and procurement 
systems also reduce the risk of corruption 
and poor services. Providing incentives such 
as faster tax refunds for e-filing or greater 
convenience through simplified and closely 
integrated services across agencies lead to 
universal use of e-government services. The 
wider usage of these services, in turn, create 
a platform for broad-based participatory 
policy making. Box 1.1.  The Analog Complements of the Digital EconomyIn the new normal, digital technologies can 
facilitate social distancing by reducing face-
to-face interactions. Digital platforms have 
been used for people to stay connected and 
engaged, and for some businesses to operate 
amid the lockdown.  With social distancing 
measures in place, the use of these technologies 
supports work-from-home arrangements, 
remote learning, and offsite service delivery. 
Efforts to digitize government processes could 
be expanded and made permanent, making the 
government more transparent and efficient. 
E-commerce facilitates social distancing 
through online shopping and bringing 
products to people’s home.  Several firms have 
responded to the need of providing consumers 
their necessities without requiring them to 
step outside of their homes. Lazada and Grab 
have launched grocery delivery services, while 
platforms such as MyKuya and MrSpeedy have 
provided services where riders buy grocery 
items, and have them delivered to customers. 
Food delivery and courier service providers 
have launched ‘contactless deliveries’ to 
ensure the safety of both customers and riders. 
Effective and affordable logistics is therefore 
pivotal to make sure that e-commerce fulfills 
the opportunities for micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) and entrepreneurs.
Digital payment solutions should continue 
to replace cash and checks, and facilitate 
contactless transactions. During the ECQ, 
several banks have waived InstaPay and 
PESONet fees, permitting account holders to 
transfer money to another account holder of 
other banks using mobile phones or internet 
browsers for free. This has allowed transfers 
that are otherwise difficult or nearly impossible 
during the ECQ. For instance, firms can transfer 
the salaries of their employees directly into their 
bank accounts. Customers can conveniently 
pay for essentials they bought online through 
internet banking, mobile banking, or digital 
wallets. Moreover, the government can easily 
disburse financial aid to the beneficiary’s 
bank account, which removes the need for 
beneficiaries to line up or for government 
15  The CHIP framework was developed by a select team of managers and senior specialists within the World Bank East Asia and Pacific Region unit in 2019.workers to distribute door-to-door, as in the 
case of DOLE-AKAP program for displaced 
overseas Filipino workers (OFWs). 
Digital applications are ideal conduits in 
delivering information and healthcare 
services including the testing and tracing of 
individuals. Telemedicine services have started 
to be adopted by doctors across the country 
who consult patients remotely through online 
schedule sign-ups and video-conferencing 
tools. Contact tracing mobile apps are used 
as digital alternatives for the more expensive 
physical tracing. The Department of Health 
(DOH) has launched its COVID-19 Tracker, sharing 
up-to-date information on the epidemiology 
of the disease. The tracker includes data on 
laboratory testing capacities, the total number 
of tests, and the number of unique individuals 
tested, and makes use of data science tools 
to visually present the data and make it easily 
understandable to the general public. 
A Framework to analyze Digital Transformation
The CHIP conceptual framework is a tool 
to analyze the factors contributing to the 
acceleration of digital transformation. The 
framework15 lays out four main elements of 
digital transformation: Connect, Harness, 
Innovate and Protect (Figure 1.3). Connect refers 
to building the digital foundation and enablers 
to ensure compatibility and interoperability 
with the goal of ensuring participation in the 
digital economy.  Harness refers to investing in 
analog complements such as skills and literacy, 
regulations, leadership and institutions in a 
way to leverage the old economy.  Innovate 
refers to creating and expanding the new 
economy services, business models, digital 
entrepreneurship and e-government. Finally, 
protect refers to mitigating the risks and 
protecting everyone from risks on cybersecurity 
and privacy, digital monopoly, and inequality of 
opportunities.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 16Figure 1.3 The CHIP framework shows the four ways to support digital transformation, …
Figure 1.4.  … and identify country priorities to support digital transformation.Connect
everyone to participateHarness
enable the old economyInnovate
expand the new economyProtect
everyone from the risks
Emerging Transitioning Transforming
ConnectConnect
ConnectProtext
Harness HarnessInnovate
Innovate ProtectHarness
Protect
Innovate
Source: World Bank staff
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 17The framework can be used to identify 
priorities by country context. Countries are 
classified in three categories depending on the 
priorities to accelerate digital transformation: 
emerging, transitioning, and transforming 
(Figure 1.4). Emerging economies are 
characterized as countries starting to leverage 
digital transformation, and hence, initially 
focus on connecting people, businesses 
and government digitally. These economies 
prioritize the building of digital infrastructures 
and setting in place much of the foundations for 
digital transactions such as digital payments and 
digital IDs. Meanwhile, transitioning economies 
are characterized as countries that give equal 
weights to all elements. They have sufficiently 
connected digitally, and have resources to 
focus on harnessing the analog economy and 
expanding the new economy while taking 
measures to protect from risks.  Finally, transforming economies are characterized as 
countries that have strongly set foothold on the 
digital economies, taking innovative measures 
to leverage technologies, and strengthening 
security from risks.
The Philippines is a transitioning economy, 
focusing efforts on all elements of digital 
transformation.
In the Philippines, the public and private sectors 
are simultaneously taking measures to connect 
people, harness the old economy, support the 
new economy, and set up security measures 
to protect from risks. The country has brought 
in a third player in the telecommunication 
industry in an effort to lower the prices of 
mobile technology and internet services, and 
expand digital connectivity. Regulatory issues 
are being addressed on infrastructure-sharing, 
and demand side aspects on interoperability to Source: World Bank staff
Note:  A refers to the physical/analog economy; and D the digital economy.support digital government platform. Likewise, 
the roll out of the Philippine Digital ID System 
(PhilSys) meant to introduce a universal ID 
system for Filipinos and foreign permanent 
residents in the Philippines is underway.  
Numerous agencies are working together 
to harness the analog and digital economy 
through e-commerce roadmaps, national 
The Philippines is potentially a significant 
player in the global digital market. From 23 
million in 2010, the number of Filipino internet 
users has more than tripled to 73 million in 2020 
(We Are Social, 2020). Connected Filipinos 
are world leaders in internet usage and social 
media. On average, every Filipino spends nearly 
10 hours on the internet per day, the highest 
worldwide; with over five hours on mobile 
internet, and nearly four hours on social media. 
The size of the country’s domestic market, 
with over 105 million consumers, has attracted 
international and regional ICT companies 
including Facebook, Google, Alibaba, Grab, 
and Lazada, whose platforms for e-commerce, 
online sharing, and social media have gained 
strong foothold in the country. Similarly, the 
Philippines has penetrated foreign markets, 
being a leader in the Information Technology 
and Business Process Outsourcing (IT-BPO) 
industry. broadband plans; and measures to promote the 
creative economy on the back of an emerging 
advertising, film, animation, game development 
and design industries.  Measures have also 
been undertaken to protect individuals from 
risks which began early with the Data Privacy 
Act of 2012, and continues with the National 
Cybersecurity Plan 2022 (Figure 1.5).
Figure 1.5. The Philippines focuses on all four elements of digital transformation.
Source:  World Bank staff
The Philippines registered strong growth in 
gross value added of the digital economy in 
the past decade. The share of the value-added 
of the digital economy to real GDP steadily 
grew from 6.9 percent in 2012 to 10.1 percent in 
2018. During the same period, the value added 
of the digital economy posted double-digit 
growth averaging 13.3 percent. E-commerce 
expanded the fastest with an average growth of 
22.5 percent between 2012 and 2018, followed 
by infrastructure at 11.5 percent, and digital 
media at 9.1 percent. Moreover, real gross 
output of the digital economy nearly doubled 
in 2018 compared to 2012, while the average 
compensation in the digital economy was 
about 50-60 percent higher than for the total 
economy (Box 1.2).State of the Digital Economy in the Philippines
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 18Connect
Harness Protect• National Broadband Roadmap
• Common Tower Policy
• Third player entry in the 
   telecommunication market
• Philippine National ID SystemInnovate
• Philippine Innovation Act
   (RA 11293)
• Promotion of Creative Economy
• Philippine Roadmap for Innovative   
   Startups
• Innovative Startup Act (RA 11337 )
• Philippine Industry 4.0 Roadmap
• Digital Philippines Plan
• E-commerce Roadmap
• IT-BPM Roadmap
• Digital economy in the System of 
   National Accounts
• MSME assistance through SETUP• Data Privacy Act of 2012
   (RA 10173)
• National Cybersecurity Plan of 
   2022
• Digital Literacy  Program for 
   Overseas Filipino WorkersThe World Bank, in collaboration with the 
Philippine Statistics Authority, coordinated 
efforts in measuring the size of the digital 
economy in the country. Until then, the 
Philippine System of National Accounts 
(PSNA) has not fully captured activities 
under the digital economy as well as digital 
products and services resulting from digital 
computing technologies. As a result, no 
official estimates for the digital economy 
in the Philippines has been available, which 
resulted in various estimates of the size and 
scope of the sector from multiple sources.16  
The World Bank-Philippine Statistics Authority 
joint study aims to develop the statistical 
and measurement framework for the digital 
economy in the Philippines  along the lines 
of a satellite account of the PSNA, bearing in 
mind the desirability of using methodologies 
that strive for the international comparability 
of the resulting digital economy indicators.
The project builds on earlier initiatives by 
institutions and the experience and insights 
that have been gained through these 
initiatives. Building on the works of the OECD, 
• Conceptual Framework
• Initial Coverage (the core ICT    
   industries)
• Guidelines, Standards and 
   Methods
    - SNA Framework/Satellite 
       Accounts 
    - Deﬁnitions (includes PSA 
      Board-approved deﬁnitions)
    - Classiﬁcation Systems The Digital Economy 
• Institutional Mechanisms
• Legal Framework/Basis
   (Statistics Law, PSA Board
   Resolutions)
• Delineation of Institutional 
   Responsibilities
• Statistical Coordination/
   Regular Consultation
• Relevant IACs
• MOAs/Interagency 
   Collaboration
• Advocacy Forums
• Communication Plan   Enabling Environment
• Local Data Sources 
   (Censuses, Surveys, 
   Administrative Record  
   Systems [no big data yet])
• Data Compilation by 
   International Organizations
• Core List of DE Indicators
• Tier 1-5 DE Indicators
• Additional DE IndicatorsStatistical Inputs and IndicatorsFigure 1.6. Statistical Framework for the Measurement of the Digital Economy in the Philippines
Source:  Virola (2020).and the United States Bureau of Economic 
Analysis (BEA), the conceptual framework 
recognizes the multidimensional nature of 
the digital economy, and contextualizes it 
in relation to the total economy through 
an elaboration of a satellite account within 
the System of National Accounts (SNA). 
It looks at the digital economy from the 
conventional SNA prisms of products, 
production, and use (that is, who, what, 
and the institutional sectors), in addition to 
the nature of the transactions (that is, how). 
It also recognizes the role of the enablers 
for the functioning of the digital economy. 
However, data constraints in the Philippine 
Statistical System data ecosystem limits 
the operationalization of this conceptual 
framework. As a result, the coverage of the 
statistical framework is less broad, by a) not 
going beyond the SNA production boundary; 
b) limiting to transactions that are digitally 
ordered and/or digitally delivered; and c) 
excluding the enablers dimension since 
there is ongoing debate on its measurement. 
The statistical framework is seen in Figure 
1.6.Box 1.2.  Measuring the Size of the Digital Economy in the Philippines
16  The various estimates arose due to differences in the conceptual framework, coverage, and data measurement.  See, for instance, the UNCTAD Digital Economy Report (2019);    
      Hinrich Foundation (2019); Google-Temasek-Bain & Company (2019).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 19The estimation methodology follows 
the methodology by the US BEA in the 
compilation of key measures of the digital 
economy in the United States. 
The estimation process includes four main 
steps: (a) develop a conceptual definition of 
the digital economy; (b) identify goods and 
services within the supply-use framework 
relevant for measuring the digital economy 
defined in the first step; (c) use the supply-
use framework to identify the industries 
responsible for producing these goods and 
services, and estimate the output, value 
added, employment, compensation and 
other variables associated with this activity; 
and (d) compile the results.
The contribution of the digital economy 
in the Philippines is measured through 
the production approach or value-added 
approach.
This method consists of summing the gross 
value added (GVA) of all industries that are 
classified as part of the digital economy. 
For each industry classified to be part of 
the digital economy, the gross output (GO), 
and the goods and services that were used 
up in the process of generating output are 
estimated. These goods and services are 
referred to as intermediate consumption. 
The difference between an industry’s gross 
output and its intermediate consumption 
is its GVA. The sum of the GVAs of all the 
industries belonging to the digital economy 
is the GVA of the digital economy. In 
defining the statistical coverage of the 
digital economy, the estimates use the core 
ICT industries as defined by the Philippine 
Statistics Authority Inter-agency Committee 
on ICT statistics (IAC-ICT) including the 
digital-enabling infrastructure and digital 
content/media; and incorporate the digital 
transactions for e-commerce. 
Key results show solid growth of the digital 
economy in the Philippines between 2012 
and 2018.• In current prices, the value added of the 
digital economy expanded by 10.1 percent 
in 2012 and has grown by double digit since 
then peaking at 15.1 percent in 2017 before 
slowing to 12.4 percent in 2018. Annual 
growth averaged 12.2 percent between 2012 
and 2018. By component, e-commerce grew 
the fastest at 25.4 percent between 2012 
and 2018, followed by digital media at 11.9 
percent; and infrastructure at 9.8 percent.
• The value added of the digital economy in      
current prices is distributed by component 
as follows: infrastructure (average of 79.8 
percent during the period from 2012-2018), 
e-commerce (17.3 percent) and digital media 
(2.9 percent). The share of infrastructure has 
been consistently going down from 84.6 
percent in 2012 to 74.5 percent in 2018, 
while that of e-commerce has gone up from 
12.5 percent to 22.9 percent during the same 
period.
• In constant prices, the value added of the 
digital economy posted double-digit growth 
averaging 13.3 percent during the period. 
Growth rose from 11.2 percent in 2012 to 11.9 
percent in 2018. E-commerce expanded the 
fastest with an average of 22.5 percent from 
2012 to 2018, followed by infrastructure at 
11.5 percent and digital media at 9.1 percent
• Similarly, the share of value added of 
infrastructure in the digital economy went 
down from 81.6 percent in 2012 to 74.5 
percent in 2018. The share of e-commerce 
gradually went up from 15.0 percent in 2012 
to 22.9 percent in 2018, while the share of 
digital media from 3.5 percent in 2012 to 2.7 
percent in 2018.
• In real terms, the value added of the digital 
economy as a percentage of GDP grew 
steadily from 6.9 percent in 2012 to 10.1 
percent in 2018.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 20The digital economy in the Philippines is 
far from reaching its full potential, and the 
country’s performance generally trails behind 
many regional neighbors. The World Bank 
Digital Adoption Index (DAI) and its three
sub-indices on people, government and 
business reveal that the Philippines fell behind 
the world average on digital adoption (Box 1.3). 
In general, the country’s digital adoption is on 
par with its level of economic development 
when compared to countries around the world, 
but it performed poorly compared with regional 
peers (Figure 1.7 and Figure 1.8). Among the 
three key agents in the Philippines, businesses 
and people are more accustomed to the use 
and adoption of digital technology than the 
government. The relatively poor performance 
in digital adoption can be traced to a multitude 
of factors including problems of digital 
infrastructure and connectivity, high cost of 
broadband and internet services, and uneven 
quality of internet service.  Equally important, 
the lack of competition in other sectors within 
both the analog and digital enablers like 
logistics also contribute to the Philippines 
trailing behind peers in digital adoption.
-2-1.5-1-0.500 .511.52Standard deviation difference
Lao PDR Cambodia Indonesia Philippines Vietnam Thailand Brunei Malaysia Singapore Myanmar
Digital Adoptation Index Business sub-index People sub-index Government sub-index
20Figure 1.7. Digital adoption in the Philippines lags some of its regional peers
Source: World Bank (2018).
Note:  Droplines show the standardized difference of indicator values between ASEAN countries and the world average.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 21Digital adoption by businesses in the country 
is higher than the average ASEAN country, 
and slightly higher than the per capita income 
would predict (Figure 1.9). Business adoption 
is comparable to regional peers like Malaysia, 
Thailand and Vietnam, but trails Singapore by 
a wide margin. The Philippines performs better 
than its average (median) regional and income 
group peer on two of the three indicators that 
comprise the business sub-index: the percent 
of business establishments with a website and 
the international internet bandwidth per user.  
It performs poorly, however, in the number of 
secure servers per capita. The DAI business 
sub-index results suggest that the average 
Philippine firm tends to be more digitally 
savvy – and ready to connect to customers 
through the internet – than the average firm in 
ASEAN; however, it also suggests the lack of a 
secure digital infrastructure and system robust 
enough to support a potentially wider increase 
in e-commerce traffic and digital financial 
transactions.Digital Adoption in the PhilippinesFigure 1.8. Overall digital adoption in the Philippines is about 
what income would predict.Figure 1.9. Business adoption is higher than the average 
lower-middle income or ASEAN country, and slightly higher 
than income would predict.
Source:  World Bank (2018). Source:  World Bank (2018).
Figure 1.10. Adoption by people is higher than the average 
lower-middle income country and comparable to ASEAN 
average.Figure 1.11. Adoption by government is lower than
the average ASEAN country and lower than income would 
predict.
Source: World Bank (2018). Source:  World Bank (2018).
Meanwhile, digital adoption by people is 
comparable to ASEAN average, and higher than 
per capita income would predict (Figure 1.10). 
Filipinos are, on average, as digitally savvy as 
their regional counterparts, performing slightly 
better than Indonesia and Vietnam, but worse 
than Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore in the 
DAI people sub-index. The number of mobile-
cellular telephone subscriptions per capita 
in the Philippines is lower than the average in the region, but close to the world average of 
more than one subscription per person. This 
nominally indicates market saturation in the 
Philippines, with many people having more 
than one subscription, and some subscriptions 
on record are not used. With the prevalence of 
mobile hand-held devices, Filipinos connect to 
the internet more through mobile broadband 
services compared to the more stable fixed 
broadband services. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 22Source:  World Bank (2018).Digital adoption by the government 
underperforms, scoring lower than the 
average ASEAN country and lower than per 
capita income would predict (Figure 1.11) . The 
Philippines performs worse than regional peers 
in government’s digital adoption. Among the 
three indicators of the government sub-index, 
the Philippines does slightly better than the 
average country in core administrative systems 
and online public services, but below average in 
digital identification. Among the key weaknesses 
were the fragmentation of human resources 
Sub-index Business
People
GovernmentSub-index Business Indicator
Measures the quality of digital 
infrastructure needed for e-commerce
and other business functions
Measures the extent and quality of 
individuals’ connection to the digital 
worldMobile-cellular subscriptions
Mobile broadband
Internet use
Fixed broadband subscriptions
Measures the adoption of government 
systems, identiﬁcation schemes, and 
services to better serve the publicCore administrative systems
Digital identiﬁcation
Online public servicesBusiness websites
Internet bandwidth
Secure servers The DAI is a worldwide index developed for 
the World Development Report 2016: Digital 
Dividends. It measures the depth of digital 
adoption across three dimensions of the 
economy: people, government, and business. 
Each sub-index comprises technologies 
necessary to promote development in the 
digital era: expanding opportunities and 
improving welfare for people; increasing 
the efficiency and accountability of service 
delivery for government; and accelerating 
broad-based growth for business. 
The DAI Economy is a simple sum of three 
sub-indices (Table 1.1). The business sub-
index is the simple average of four normalized 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 23Table 1.1. The DAI comprises representative indicators for digital adoption by business, people, and governmentBox 1.3.   Digital Adoption Indexmanagement information system (HRMIS) 
and government payroll across line ministries; 
the disconnect of online portals such as the 
e-custom portal to other government systems; 
the limitations of e-procurement systems from 
allowing online transactions; and the inability 
in the budget system to dynamically query 
from line ministries or financial management 
information systems (FMIS).  Likewise, some 
of the Philippines’ existing paper-based 
system imposes a commensurate drag on the 
government score.
indicators: percentage of businesses with 
websites, the number of secure servers, 
download speed, and 3G coverage in the 
country. The people sub-index is the simple 
average of two normalized indicators from 
the Gallup World Poll: mobile access at home 
and internet access at home. Finally, the 
government sub-index is the simple average 
of three sub-indices: core administrative 
systems, online public services, and digital 
identification. The country with the highest 
level of adoption in a given sub-index 
achieves the maximum score of 1, and the 
country with the lowest level of adoption 
achieves the minimum score of 0.Innovation and entrepreneurship can create 
and expand the new digital economy, and 
the Philippine’s innovation system and 
entrepreneurship ecosystem have room for 
growth. The recent rise in Philippine ranking in 
the Global Innovation Index from 54th spot (out 
of 129) in 2019 to 50th spot (out of 131) in 2020,  
reflects an improvement on the innovation 
capabilities of the country.  The Philippines 
has improved in both leading indicators of 
innovation inputs and outputs. As in most cases, 
the Philippines resembles Indonesia, Thailand, 
or Vietnam, but trails Malaysia and Singapore 
by a wide margin. There is, thus, space for 
improvement. According to the most recent 
data, the Philippines spends only 0.16 percent of 
its GDP on research and development and has 
only 106 researchers per million inhabitants—
R&D expenditures
(% of GDP)
Indonesia0.0-0.5-1.0-1.5-2.0-
0.0-2.0-4.0-6.0-8.0- 8.0-
6.0-
4.0-
2.0-
0.0-
-2.0- -5.0- 5.0- 0.0-2.0-4.0-6.0-8.0-
6.0-7.0-8.0-9.0-
0.0-5.0-10.0-Researchers in R&D
(per thousand people)Payments for IP
(per capita)High-technology
exports (per capita)Trademark applications
(per million people)Patent applications
(per million people)
Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand VietnamFigure 1.12. The Philippines has low innovation inputs relative to its innovation outputsLatest values for select countries on indicators of innovation inputs and outputs, versus the worldwide distribution
Source:  World Bank (2020a).
Note:  Payments for IP , high-tech exports, and trademark and patent applications are logged. Boxplot shows the worldwide distribution,
with whiskers at the 10th and 90th percentiles; the box spanning the interquartile range; and the center line at the median.
The Philippine’s entrepreneurial ecosystem 
is nascent. According to the Global 
Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM), the self-
perception of Filipinos on entrepreneurship and 
subsequent entry into entrepreneurial activity is 
among the highest in ASEAN countries (Licaros-
Velasco et al., 2017). However, the rate of failure 
or business discontinuance is also high, leading 
to a low rate of businesses that exist for more 
than 3.5 years. The challenges faced by the Innovation and Firm-level Adoption of Digital Technology
below the 25th percentile worldwide. Those 
inputs yield mixed results. Payments for 
intellectual property (IP) of US$8.60 per capita, 
trademark applications of 417 per million 
inhabitants, and patent applications of 40 per 
million inhabitants are all below average, with 
trademark applications particularly low. In 
contrast, high-technology exports of US$318 
per capita is relatively high, above the 75th 
percentile (Figure 1.12). Still, the Philippines 
seem to be leveraging relatively low inputs into 
greater outputs, suggesting a higher rate of 
return than other economies. If firms involved 
in high-technology exports were better able to 
absorb technology, and that learning spilled 
over into the rest of the economy, it could spur 
further development.
Philippine’s entrepreneurship ecosystem are 
reflected with the country ranked 86th out 
of 137 in the 2019 Global Entrepreneurship 
Index, lagging behind its neighbors (Acs et 
al., 2019). The index measures the quality of 
entrepreneurship and the extent and depth 
of the supporting entrepreneurial ecosystem 
through 14 indicators covering perceptions, 
skills, human capital, risks, among others. 
For the Philippines, the entrepreneurship 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 24ecosystem does well with high levels of product 
innovation, human capital, and startup skills, 
but suffers from  human capital, and startup 
skills, but suffers from a still relatively small 
number of tech startups contributing to 
subdued levels of technology absorption, risk 
86Philippines
76
88
94Overall Ranking 2019 Global Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurial Attitude
(Opportunity Perception, Startup Skills,
Risk Acceptance, Networking, Cultural Support)
Entrepreneurial Abilities
(Opportunity Startup, Technology Absorption,
Human Capital, Competition)
Entrepreneurial Aspiration 
(Product Innovation, Process Innovation,
High Growth, Internationalization, Risk Capital)75Indonesia
63
65
10273Vietnam
89
69
6654Thailand
74
54
4543Malaysia
34
44
4734China
43
47
1627Singapore
39
21
21Table 1.2. The Philippines entrepreneurship ecosystem lags most of its neighbors.
Source:  Acs et al. (2019)
Supporting firms’ ability to innovate and learn 
would encourage the development of new 
products and services for the digital economy. 
The areas for support may focus on indicators 
where the Philippines has underperformed 
compared to the average ASEAN country 
such as company spending on research and 
development, university-industry collaboration 
LowestAveerageHighestCompany
spending on R&DFirm-level technology
absorptionFDI and technology
transferCapacity technology
innovationUniversity-industry
collaboration in R&D
2009 2018 2009 2018 2009 2018 2009 2018 2009 2018Singapore
Indonesia
Thailand
ASEAN
PhilippinesSingapore
Indonesia
Thailand
ASEANPhilippinesSingapore
IndonesiaThailand
ASEAN
PhilippinesSingapore
Indonesia
ThailandASEANPhilippinesSingapore
Indonesia
Thailand
ASEAN
PhilippinesFigure 1.13. The Philippines lags regional peers in measures of firms’ ability to innovate and learn
Source: WEF, Global Competitiveness Index, 2009 and 2018.capital, and internationalization. Manila has 
recently been ranked 36th out of 100 emerging 
startup ecosystems in the Global Startup 
Ecosystem Report 2020, citing market reach, 
talent and experience; and vibrant fintech and 
e-commerce sub-sectors among its strengths.
in research and development (R&D), and foreign 
direct investment (FDI) and technology transfer. 
Over the last decade, the Philippines has 
surpassed the ASEAN average in capacity for 
innovation and firm-level technology adoption, 
but it still lags Singapore, Thailand, and 
Indonesia in all categories but one (Figure 1.13).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 25Firm-level adoption of general business 
function technologies, such as ICT and the 
internet in business transactions, in the 
Philippines could be further enhanced to grow 
e-commerce activities and improve overall 
productivity and product value.  A survey of 
business executives by the WEF suggested that 
the extent to which firms in the Philippines use 
ICTs for transactions with other businesses is 
similar to Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam, and 
China (Baller et al., 2016). Considering the high 
penetration of the internet across the general 
population and their interest in searching for 
and purchasing products online, firms could 
adopt e-commerce technologies to reach 
potential customers and grow their businesses. 
It also suggests that the firms are missing out 
on opportunities to integrate ICTs into an 
innovation-conductive environment that boost 
their productivity.  
Availability, adoption and use of the latest 
technologies by firms in the Philippines is 
neither limited nor extensive but has fallen 
behind its regional peers in recent years. 
Introduction of new technologies through FDI, 
general availability of latest technology, and 
firms’ adoption of such technology is only 
slightly extensive in the Philippines, as indicated 
in the 2017-2018 Global Competitiveness Report 
(Schwab, 2017). Firms tend to use somewhat 
labor-intensive processes as opposed to 
applying the latest technologies in their 
production processes. Other countries in the 
region, except for Vietnam, are currently ahead 
of the Philippines in this regard. For instance, 
only 9 percent of firms in the Philippines have 
obtained internationally recognized quality 
certifications and only 11 percent of firms use 
technology licensed from foreign companies, 
lower than in most peers (World Bank, 2019b).
 
Data on firm-level adoption of specific 
technologies are being gathered to identify 
opportunities to support the growth of 
digital entrepreneurship. There have been 
few systematic attempts to measure firm-level 
technology adoption through firm surveys in 
the Philippines. While a handful of specific case 
studies indicate limited information on firm-
level adoption of general business function 
technologies and sector-specific technologies, these studies strongly suggest that adoption 
of technology has contributed to the firms’ 
productivity and growth. Recently, the DTI has 
conducted an initial firm level survey using 
the Manufacturing Enterprise Solutions Smart 
Manufacturing Maturity Index. The aim of the 
survey is to assess the level of technologies 
used by manufacturing companies in the 
Philippines and evaluate their readiness for 
adopting Industry 4.0 technologies. This will 
help DTI in crafting evidence-based and data-
driven Industry 4.0 policy interventions to help 
firms in their Digital Transformation journey.
About three quarters of SMEs in the National 
Capital Region (NCR) and the Calabarzon 
region use digital technologies for accounting 
and financial management operations, and 
these firms are less credit-constrained. A 
2018 survey of 480 SMEs in NCR and the 
neighboring Calabarzon region showed that 72 
percent of SMEs have a moderate to high use 
of digital software for accounting and financial 
management (AFM) operations (Flaminiano and 
Francisco, 2019). These firms were 16 percent 
less likely to be credit-constrained (that is, 
unable to get a loan from formal sources, 
obtained loan was not enough, or did not apply 
for a loan although needed). These firms were 
also 12 percent less likely to be constrained 
when dealing with informal sources of loan. 
Using digital software for AFM improves the 
firm’s ability to organize its records and use 
the statements to banks and other lending 
institutions, making them more attractive to 
external creditors.
Firms in a rapidly growing business process 
outsourcing (BPO) sector are integrating cloud 
technology and robotic process automation 
(RPA) into processes and applications, resulting 
in increased productivity and business model 
sophistication. A survey of 575 firms suggested 
that large firms and SMEs alike have invested 
in using an online network of remote servers 
to store, manage and process data through 
standardized applications over a cloud platform 
(that is, cloud technology) and software robots 
with artificial intelligence algorithms capable of 
performing highly structured and ordinary tasks 
(that is, RPA) (Orozco, 2017). These investments 
are shifting the Filipino BPO firms to become 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 26more specialized and knowledge-based BPOs to 
cover fraud analytics, data integration, project 
management, R&D, mergers and acquisitions 
valuation, and product profitability analysis, 
among others. As the BPO sector becomes 
more sophisticated, skills requirements in the 
Filipino BPO sector will change from English 
services, e-commerce, and the sharing 
economy. This momentum holds promise, and 
if supported effectively, will lead the Philippines 
to reap the developmental rewards of the digital 
economy.
The next chapters assess the key enablers 
for digital transformation in the Philippines. 
Chapters 2 and 3 cover digital infrastructure 
and digital payments, respectively, which are 
key enablers to ensure participation in the 
digital economy. To harness the old economy, 
chapter 4 goes into deep dive on the logistics 
system, an important analog complement that 
support e-commerce. The next two chapters 
focus on the expansion of the new economy 
through digital taxation (chapter 5), and the 
business environment (chapter 6). Chapter 
7 caps the report with highlights on the role 
of public policies to manage and support the 
digital economy, and protect people from risks. 
The goals of the chapters are to present the 
central issues and challenges, and offer policy 
advice and recommendations. These chapters, 
all taken together, point to the urgent need to  
digitalizing the Philippine economy for a better 
normal under COVID-19 .Digitalization Momentum
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 27Despite below-global average digital 
technology adoption, there is a digitalization 
momentum the Philippines can leverage on. 
The Philippines is characterized with high 
momentum, and significant headroom for 
growth despite a low current state of digital 
transformation (Chakravorti and Chaturvedi, 
2017). The country holds the potential of 
catching up with some of the current leaders, 
provided the infrastructure, institutions and 
enabling regulations are afforded by the 
digital economy. To this end, the government 
is keen to upgrade the country’s digital 
infrastructure with policies and programs being 
rolled out to encourage digital adoption and 
entrepreneurship. Meanwhile, domestic firms 
remain attuned to the digital trend, actively 
making use of websites, mobile applications, 
and online platforms to complement and 
expand business operations, which reflects the 
Philippine’s rank at 10 out of 141 in companies 
embracing disruptive ideas in WEF’s 2019 
Global Competitiveness Index (Schwab, 2019). 
Furthermore, there is emergence of Filipino 
startups that seek to leverage technology 
innovations in the field of financial services, ICT, 
software, logistics, mobility, and food services. 
More and more Filipinos are connecting online, 
and engaging on social media, media streaming proficiency and service-oriented personality, 
which are sufficient for the currently dominant 
labor-intensive, language-based call center 
processes. Workers with specialized training and 
knowledge in engineering, finance, business, 
law, and so on, will likely to be in demand to 
serve the knowledge-based BPOs.Acs, Zoltan, et al. (2019). “The Global Entrepreneurship Index 
2019,”  Washington DC: The Global  Entrepreneurship and 
Development Institute.
Ahmad, Nadim and Jennifer Ribarsky. (2018). “Towards a 
Framework for Measuring the Digital Economy,”  Working 
Paper prepared for the 16th Conference of the International 
Association of the Official  Statisticians, OECD, September.
Baller, Silja, et al. (2016).  “The Global Information Technology 
Report 2016: Innovating in the Digital  Economy,”  Geneva: 
World Economic Forum. 
Bloomberg, Jason. (2018). “Digitization, Digitalization, and 
Digital Transformation: Confuse them at your  Peril,”  Forbes 
Magazine, April.
Bukht, Rumana and Richard Heeks. (2017). “Defining, Conceptualising 
and Measuring the Digital  Economy,”  GDI Development 
Informatics Working Paper no. 68, Manchester: University of 
Manchester.
Chakravorti, Bhaskar and Ravi Chaturvedi. (2017). “Digital Planet 
2017: How Competitiveness and Trust in  Digital Economies 
vary across the World,”  Massachusetts: Tufts University, July.
Flaminiano, John and Jamil Francisco. (2019). “Firm Characteristics
and Credit Constraints across  SMEs in the Philippines.”  Manila: 
Asian Institute of Management Rizalino S. Navarro Policy 
Center  for Competitiveness Working Paper 2019-006.
Gal, Peter, et al. (2019). “Digitalisation and productivity: In 
search of the holy grail – Firm-level empirical  evidence from EU 
countries.”  OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 
1533. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Google, Temasek, and Bain & Company. (2019). “e-Conomy SEA 
2019: Swipe up and to the right Southeast Asia’s $100 billion 
Internet economy.”  Singapore.
Hinrich Foundation. (2019). “The Data Revolution: How the 
Philippines Can Capture the Digital Trade  Opportunity at 
Home and Abroad,”  Singapore: AlphaBeta.
International Monetary Fund. (2018). “Measuring the Digital 
Economy,”  Washington DC: IMF, February.
International Telecommunication Union. (2018). “Measuring the 
Information Society Report volumes 1  and 2,”  Geneva: ITU.
__________. (2019). “World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators 
Database 2019,” https://www.itu.int/pub/D-IND-WTID.OL-2019, 
February 24, 2020. 
Licaros-Velasco, Aida, et al. (2017). “Philippine Entrepreneurship 
Report 2015-2016” . Global  Entrepreneurship Monitor. Manila: 
De La Salle University.References
National Economic and Development Authority. (2017a). 
“Ambisyon Natin 2040: A long-term Vision for the Philippines,” 
Pasig City: NEDA. 
__________. (2017b). “Philippine Development Plan 2017-2022,” 
 Pasig City: NEDA. 
Orozco, Linda Vega. (2017). “ASEAN in Transformation: How 
Technology Is Changing Jobs and Enterprises. The Philippines 
Country Brief.”  Manila: International Labour Organization. 
Schwab, Klaus. (2017). “The Global Competitiveness Report 2017
-2018,”  Geneva: The World Economic Forum.
__________. (2019). “The Global Competitiveness Report 2019,” 
Geneva: The World Economic Forum.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 
(2019).  “Digital Economy Report  2019: Value Creation and 
Capture: Implications for Developing Countries,” New York: 
United  Nations Publications.
Van Ark, Bart, et al. (2019). “Productivity and Innovation 
Competencies in the Midst of the Digital  Transformation Age: A 
EU-US Comparison.”  European Commission Discussion Paper 
119.  Luxembourg: Publication Office of the European Union. 
We Are Social. (2020). “Digital 2020: Global Digital Overview,”  
https://wearesocial.com/digital-2020,  February 8, 2020. 
World Bank. (2009). “Information and Communications for 
Development: Extending Reach and  Increasing Impact.” 
Washington DC: The World Bank. 
__________. (2016a). “World Development Report 2016: Digital 
Dividends,”  Washington DC: The World Bank.
__________. (2018). “Information and Communications for 
Development: Data Driven Development,”  Washington DC: The 
World Bank.
__________. (2019a). “The Digital Economy in Southeast Asia: 
Strengthening the Foundations for Future  Growth,”  Washington 
DC:The World Bank.
__________. (2019b). “Philippines: Assessing the Effectiveness of 
MSME and Entrepreneurship Support.”  Washington DC:
The World Bank.
__________. (2020a). “World Development Indicators Database,
https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-
development-indicators, February 26, 2020.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 28CHAPTER 2
DIGITAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE – 
ACHIEVING FASTER, MORE 
AFFORDABLE INTERNET 
FOR ALL
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 29Digital technologies have emerged as key 
in addressing the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic.  They provide the opportunity for 
individuals, businesses, and governments to 
cope with social distancing measures, ensure 
business continuity, and continue public service 
delivery. Never has this point been more glaring 
than now when the economy has virtually ground 
to a halt; individual lives disrupted with inability 
to freely move and gather; and the government 
compelled to deliver unprecedented social 
programs to support the lives and livelihoods of 
Filipinos. Amid the lockdown, the digitalization 
momentum has accelerated. Commercial banks 
have reported growth surge in daily sign ups 
on online and mobile banking portals while 
an incumbent telecommunication player has 
reported a more-than-double increase in mobile 
data traffic in the first half of 2020 (Abadilla, 
2020).
Weak digital infrastructure in the country 
is hampering the effective use of digital 
technologies. Not all Filipinos or Filipino 
businesses are fortunate to have access to 
digital technologies or possess the digital skills 
to reap the benefits of digitalization. Digital 
infrastructure is limited in remote and rural 
areas, and where they are available, the internet 
services are relatively expensive and of poor 
quality. This has led to a digital divide between 
those with and without access to reliable 
internet, which contributes to unequal access 
to services that are delivered via the internet. 
The unequal access to the internet poses a 
challenge to the effective and intended delivery 
of digitalization. For instance, the roll out of 
online classes in select educational institutions 
was eventually suspended after learning that not 
all students have reliable internet connections; 
or that work-from-home arrangements fail when 
workers are not equipped with reliable internet 
connections.
Affordable, reliable, and widely available 
internet services are essential to support 
economic recovery post COVID-19, and 
more equitable growth and competitiveness 
in the long term.  The ongoing COVID-19 
17  There is discussion globally about establishment of a meaningful connectivity standard defined as: when a user has access to  a smartphone and or 4G equivalent quality mobile 
internet, along with reliable fixed wired or wireless access at home, school, or work every day.  
18  “Regional” here refers to Southeast Asia, which includes Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.outbreak and imposed ECQ highlight the need 
to accelerate the digitalization of Philippine 
economy. This would require having a resilient 
and affordable internet service which enables 
business continuity in the current context, 
disease tracking and monitoring, supply chain 
management, expansion of e-commerce, 
digital financial services, technology-based 
entrepreneurship, and digital public service and 
social protection delivery.17 
The current state of internet in the Philippines, 
however, calls for urgent and substantial 
improvements for the digital economy to 
play a key role in the economic recovery. The 
broadband (high-speed) internet penetration 
level of the Philippines is “below the expected 
level of countries with comparable per capita 
income” (World Bank, 2019). For instance, 70 
percent of Filipinos are active mobile broadband 
subscribers, compared to the ASEAN regional 
average of 88 percent (ITU, 2018); 4G/LTE 
mobile broadband network coverage is at 72 
percent of the population versus the regional 
average of 82 percent (Opensignal, 2019); 4 
percent of Filipinos are subscribed to fixed 
broadband, compared to the regional18 average 
of 10 percent (ITU, 2019); 3G/4G mobile average 
download speed is 7 Mbps, compared to the 
regional average of 13.26 Mbps (Opensignal, 
2019); and fixed broadband average speed is 
at 26 Mbps versus the regional average of 59 
Mbps (Ookla, 2020) (Table 2.1). Introduction
Table 2.1.  Philippines vs. ASEAN penetration level and speed
Source:  Opensignal (2019), Ookla (2020), ITU (2018)Philippines ASEAN
Share of population which are
active broadband subscribers70 percent 88 percent
4G/LTE mobile broadband
network coverage72 percent 82 percent
Share of population which are
ﬁxed broadband subscribers4 percent 10 percent
3G/4G mobile average
download speed7Mbps 13Mbps
Fixed broadband average
download speed26Mbps 59Mbps
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 3019  Fixed internet connection pertains to that which is accessed in homes and other physical establishments, while mobile connection is accessed typically through cellular phones. Increasing digital adoption and its contribution 
to economic growth requires a whole-of-
government business-enabling approach. The 
Philippines’ digital infrastructure has always 
been private sector led. From the monopoly 
and fixed line era, the country shifted to mobile 
services, as the telecommunications sector was 
liberalized, and new market entrants competed. 
However, unchecked mergers and acquisition 
over the years have resulted in a highly 
concentrated market, with two dominant players 
The Philippines digital infrastructure consists of 
the following components:
(i) First mile. The first mile or backbone 
links the Philippines to the worldwide web. 
The  first data transmission link is made 
between international networks made up 
of international submarine cable systems 
and satellites, and associated terrestrial  
infrastructure, and the domestic backbone 
that connects the cable landing stations to 
the major regions throughout the country. It 
should be noted that the Philippines is well-
served by international cable networks; 
(ii) Middle mile. This connects the domestic 
backbone to the core networks of the telecomBox 2.1.  Digital Infrastructure Componentseach controlling and operating their own single, 
vertically integrated network. The current state 
of internet in the Philippines is thus the result 
of under-investment in broadband internet 
network resulting from insufficient competition 
and an outdated legal, policy and regulatory 
framework and makes the case for a whole-of-
government business-enabling approach to 
unleash the full potential of the digitalization of 
the Philippine economy.
The digital infrastructure—defined here as 
the physical networks and resources that 
facilitate Internet connectivity, including 
radio spectrum—is the basic foundation of 
the digital economy. The Internet is seen as a 
critical enabler for sustainable development 
globally.  Its effects on human lives over the 
past two decades have become more apparent 
and increasingly more profound that the United 
Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) have included as one of its targets the 
significant increase in “access to information 
and communications technology (ICT)” and the provision of “universal and affordable access 
to the Internet in least developed countries 
by 2020.”  As the Internet cuts across many 
sectors, it is believed that the achievement of 
this target is instrumental in addressing many 
other development goals and targets. Digital 
infrastructure requires physical facilities and 
resources that facilitate connection to the 
Internet, whether fixed or mobile.19 This includes 
different network segments that allow packets 
of data to be transmitted to their destination, 
as summarized in Figure 2.1. See Box 2.1 for the 
Internet Network System.Market failures in the provision of digital infrastructure
internet service providers (ISPs) in provinces 
and/or to cities and municipalities through 
Points of Presence. 
(iii) Last mile. This refers to the towers and 
cables that provide connections to computers, 
phones, mobile devices of end users. Users 
include government offices, public 
facilities, businesses and households 
(iv) Digital infrastructure also includes: internet 
exchange points (IXPs) that allow exchange  of 
local internet traffic; content delivery networks 
(CDNs-geographically distributed  servers 
coordinated for fast delivery of internet to 
users);  and data centers that host servers 
containing digital content and services. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 31FOBN
DFONTELECPHILBallesteros
Cavite
La Union
DavaoBatangasDaet
Last Mile
Middle MileData Centers,
IXPs, CDNsSatellite
Domestic
BackboneInternational
Cable BackhaulCable Landing
StationInternational
Submarine
Cable SystemsINTERNETFigure 2.1.  How the Philippines Connects to the Internet
Source: DICT (2017), with author’s edits
These networks transmit packets of data that 
are delivered to end-user devices through 
fixed (wired) or mobile (wireless) technologies.  
Fixed internet connections include optical 
fiber, cables or copper wires used for fixed 
line telephony. Installation of fixed internet 
services typically requires some civil works. 
Mobile internet is delivered to mobile phones 
or other devices (for example, tablets) through 
radio signals transmitted via networks of 
towers. These radio signals are transmitted at 
different frequencies (measured in megahertz 
or gigahertz) of the electromagnetic spectrum, 
affecting the speed of data transmission, from 
2G (lowest) to 3G, 4G, and 5G (highest). The 
speed of transmission (for example, uploading/
downloading data) is measured in megabits 
or gigabits per second. A country’s spectrum 
is a scarce resource managed by government 
regulators. It is divided into different frequency 
bands that are allocated to particular services 
such as broadcast TV, radio, and mobile 
telephony/internet.
The Philippines’ market for internet services 
is “effectively a duopoly market” (World Bank, 
2019).  As a result of mergers and acquisitions, 
and the absence of a comprehensive 
competition law20 before 2015, the market 
became consolidated and ended up with two dominant players, PLDT and Globe, who have 
almost equal market share in all segments.21 The 
two dominant telecommunications companies 
(telcos) each operate a vertically integrated 
network, where one company has a significant 
stake and operates in all segments of the digital 
infrastructure—from the international submarine 
cable, cable landing station, backbone, middle 
mile, and last mile network, down to the device 
and equipment at the customer premises.  
This can be disadvantageous to smaller ISPs 
particularly outside Metro Manila. For example, 
there are no open access or nondiscriminatory 
pricing regulations for the domestic backbone 
that would guarantee any service provider 
access to the backbone infrastructure built by 
PLDT or Globe.  Also, there are no regulations that 
prevent price discrimination, which contributes 
to the high price of wholesale broadband 
access. According to the industry’s regulatory 
body, the National Telecommunications 
Commission (NTC), there is ‘limited competition’ 
in international connectivity and nationwide 
backbone networks, while the access network 
can be considered ‘very competitive’ for 
fixed connectivity but still ‘limited’ for mobile 
networks.22 For mobile broadband services, 
competition between the two providers has 
largely focused on increasing market shares.
20  Prior to the enactment of the Philippine Competition Act in 2015 and the creation of the Philippine Competition Commission, it was the sole responsibility of the NTC to review and 
      approve mergers and acquisitions in the telecom sector. 
21  Telecommunications is classified as a public utility in the Philippines and is subject to foreign ownership limitation of 40 percent. PLDT has investment from the Salim Group of 
      Indonesia and NTT Docomo of Japan while Globe Telecom has investments from Singtel of Singapore. Dito Telecom, a new entrant that has not yet commenced operations, has 
      investments from China Telecom.
22  While there are more than ten providers of fixed-line and fixed wireless broadband networks, including PLDT and Globe, there are only two mobile network providers in the country. 
      Source: presentation by NTC Deputy Commissioner Edgardo Cabarios at the celebration of the 25th anniversary of the Philippine Internet, March 29, 2019, Richmonde Eastwood 
       Hotel, Quezon City.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 32The number and location of cell sites – which 
determine the access and quality of mobile 
Internet – is among the lowest in the region. The 
DICT estimates the number of towers to be less 
than 20,000 in 2019 (Pateña, 2018), far below 
Vietnam’s 70,000 and Indonesia’s 90,000 towers 
(Camus, 2018). This equates to about 5,400 
people per tower in the Philippines, compared 
to 1,364 in Vietnam and 3,000 in Indonesia. More 
recent data gathered by Project Bandwidth and 
Signal Statistics (BASS)—a volunteer, non-profit 
group that measures mobile broadband and 
Wi-Fi quality of service through crowdsourced 
data—detected a total of 32,183 unique cell site 
IDs, of which 76 percent are 4G/LTE (see Figure 
2.4 and Figure 2.5).  As a result, mobile network 
coverage and signal strength vary widely across 
the country (Figure 2.6).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 33
Figure 2.2.  Fiber optic network and submarine cables in the Philippines
Figure 2.3.  Fixed and Mobile Broadband Market Share*
Figure 2.4. Number of Unique Cell Site IDs Detected (as of 
February 2020)Figure 2.5. 4G Network Coverage (% of Population)*Note:  Total of fixed broadband and mobile service markets are based on combined total subscribers of indicated service providers.
Source: Project BASS (2020).
Note: Number of Cell sites  reflects those detected within range when 
subscribers use the BASS app.Source: Opensignal (2019)
Note:  Availability is the percentage of time that 4G mobile device users 
were able to access a 4G signal.Fixed Service Market Share
(includes ﬁxed wireless)PLDT, 48%Sky, 7%
Converge, 13%
Globe, 32%
Mobile Service Market Share
(includes mobile broadband)Globe, 58%PLDT, 42%
05,00010,00015,00020,00025,000
4G 3G 2G
Globe Smart78.6282.0572.40 
66.00 70.00 74.00 78.00 82.00 84.00Global AverageASEAN AveragePhilippines
Fixed internet access is also very limited in the Philippines. The Philippines is much further behind fiber 
deployment than similar countries with a comparable GDP per capita. For example, Vietnam23 has 170 
percent more fiber connections than the two dominant Philippine operators have of all types of fixed 
broadband subscribers combined24. 
23  In 2017, the Philippines had a GDP per capita, PPP (current international $) of $8,343 while Vietnam had $6,776 (World Bank, 2017a).
24  Extrapolated from citations of Philippines fixed line subscribers and Vietnam fixed lines FTTH connections extensively cited in the FTTH section (See Mirandilla-Santos et al., 2018).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 34Figure 2.6. The Digital Divide - Unserved and Underserved Areas
Source: DICT, 2017 . Note that this is based on NTC survey data from 2016.As a result, the Philippines is still experiencing 
a very significant digital divide. In 2018, the 
United Nations Broadband Commission reported 
that about 40 percent of the Philippines’ total 
population of 103 million and about 57 percent 
of the country’s 23 million households did not 
have internet access (ITU, 2018).  Obtaining 
updated granular data about access and quality 
by region/municipality remains challenging so 
the full extent of the digital divide is difficult 
to quantify. Figure 2.6 is based on a survey by 
the regulator (NTC) in 2016.  In addition, open 
source/crowdsourced data on mobile network 
(the BASS App) illustrates the extent of cell 
site coverage by region and open source/
crowdsourced data (Opensignal) illustrates 
signal strength or quality of service by region 
(see Figure 2.7 to Figure 2.13).  These data sets 
illustrate regional disparities in the access and 
quality of internet service.  Some regions are 
very remote and may only be reachable via 
satellite at this stage, or potentially by emerging 
technologies.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 35Figure 2.7. Philippines cell site locations identified by the BASS 
appFigure 2.8. Philippines cellular signal strength recorded by 
OpenSignal
Note:  Blue color indicates Globe Telecom, green is PLDT/Smart, pink is 
PLDT, and orange is PLDT/Sun.Note: Blue color indicates Globe Telecom, green is PLDT/Smart, 
pink is PLDT, and orange is PLDT/Sun.
Figure 2.9. Unique cell sites identified by BASS (Luzon)Figure 2.10.  Cellular signal strength measured 
by OpenSignal (Luzon)
Figure 2.11.  Unique cell sites identified by BASS (Palawan, Visayas)
Figure 2.12 . Cellular signal strength 
measured by OpenSignal (Palawan, 
Luzon)
Figure 2.13.  Cellular signal strength measured by OpenSignal (Visayas)
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 36Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 37This digital divide, between people with and 
without access to internet, contributes to 
unequal access to services that are delivered 
via the internet. For example, in 2016, the 
Department of Education found that around 74 
percent of 46,700 public schools nationwide 
are unable to connect to internet facilities in 
their communities, despite having the budget 
allocation from the government (DepEd, 
2016).25 About 70 percent or 34,500 of these 
schools without internet connectivity have 
electricity.26 One explanation for this is the 
lack of fixed infrastructure that is necessary to 
connect institutions or feed enough bandwidth 
to the mobile networks that reach those areas. 
Investment in fiber optic networks in the country 
is quite recent and there has been no massive 
Figure 2.14.  Broadband internet penetration in ASEAN member countries (% of population)
Sources: ITU (2018), Telegeography (2020).
Note:  Mobile broadband means access to internet using a 3G or (faster) 4G enabled device. A GSM 2G connection means that the user 
only has basic data service that is, text messa ging. Fixed broadband means access to internet using fixed line networks sucheffort to connect those outside the urban 
centers and high-income communities, unlike 
in other Asian countries such as Indonesia and 
Vietnam. Infrastructure sharing arrangements—
which would lower the cost of fixed broadband 
deployment—are also not in place. This is 
discussed in more detail below.  
The Philippines is also on the wrong side of 
the regional ‘digital divide’. Compared to its 
middle-income ASEAN neighbors, fixed and 
mobile broadband internet penetration in 
the Philippines are relatively low. As shown 
in Figure 2.14, GSM (2G or basic mobile and 
text messaging service) remains the dominant 
mobile technology across the country. 
MalaysiaChinaVietnamThailandPhilippinesIndonesia
4G (% of population) 3G (% of population) Fixed-broadband (per HH)Broadband Penetration, December 2018
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
ASEAN Mobile prenetration per technology (2019 Q3)
0.0%50.0%100.0%150.0%
Indonesia
Timor Leste
Lao PDR
Cambodia
Myanmar
Philippines
Brunei
Vietnam ThailandSingapore
Malaysia
GSM 3G LTE
Limited infrastructure and weak competition 
lead to poor quality and high cost. The quality 
of Internet service is an important factor to 
participate and thrive in the digital economy. 
Although, like internet penetration, internet 
download speed in the country continues to 
improve, it remains among the slowest in the 
region according to various sources (Figure 
2.15). Prices have declined, but entry-level 
fixed broadband (postpaid, 1GB) service is 
equivalent to 6.5 percent of the country’s gross national income (GNI) per capita27 per month. 
This cost is above the 2 percent affordability 
threshold recommended by the UN Broadband 
Commission and the Alliance for Affordable 
Internet.28 Mobile (postpaid, 1GB) broadband 
service is more affordable, but still higher than 
the ASEAN average. In 2017, the cost of a 1-GB 
mobile broadband stood at 1.94 percent of GNI 
per capita, against Vietnam’s 2.94 percent and 
Indonesia’s 1.39 percent (Figure 2.16 and Figure 
2.17).
25  DepEd Order No. 13, s. 2016 provides for the inclusion of the budget for communications (telephone and internet connectivity) in a school’s maintenance and other operating  
       expenses (MOOE). According to a DepEd official, each public school is allocated P4,000/month for Internet connectivity (DepEd, 2016).
26  This includes alternative sources, such as solar power, generator sets, etc.
27  The Philippines per capita GNI was recorded at PHP 25,396 in Q1 2019 in constant pesos.
28  In 2018, the ITU’s Broadband Commission adopted the A4AI’s target of “1 for 2”—1GB of mobile broadband available for 2 percent of less of GNI per capita (A4AI, 2018). Besides the disparity in digital access, the 
digital divide also arises from gaps in digital 
literacy and digital content. Digital literacy, 
covering basic ICT skills and internet know-
how, among others,  provides individuals the 
aptitude to access online services and use 
digital content to explore opportunities for 
personal and professional development. In the 
Philippines, a wide gap in digital literacy exists, 
caused by factors such as age, educational 
attainment and household income (Talandron 
et al., 2019). To partly address the problem, the Figure 2.15.  Mobile and Fixed Internet Download Speeds (August 2019)
Source:  EIU, 2019Source: A4AI, 2017Source: Ookla (2019)
Note: Methodology described in https://theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com/
assets/external/downloads/3i-methodology.pdfFigure 2.16.  Price of mobile broadband (1GB, prepaid) as % of 
GNI per capitaFigure 2.17. Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) Affordability Score 
2017-2019
Score of 0-100, higher scores represent more affordability
5.46%1.37%1.95%
0.00% 1.00% 2.00% 3.00% 4.00% 5.00% 6.00%Global AverageASEAN AveragePhilippines0 10 20 30 40 50 60SingaporeVietnamThailandBruneiMyanmarLao PDRMalaysiaCambodiaPhilippinesIndonesiaMobile download (Mbps)
0 50 100 150 200 250SingaporeThailandMalaysiaVietnamLao PDRPhilippinesBruneiCambodiaIndonesiaMyanmarFixed download (Mbps)
SGP MYS VNM THA PHL IDNEconomist Intelligence Unit (EIU)  Affordability Score
2017-2019  
Score of 0-100,  higher scores represent more affordability
PHL, 62.8IDN, 71.3VNM, 73.7MYS, 79.1SG P, 83.7THA, 85.5
5060708090100
2017 2018 2019
authorities are incorporating ICT education in 
students’ curriculum while initiating technology 
training programs for teachers. Yet, besides 
digital literacy, digital content has also been 
a hurdle for the wider and effective use of the 
internet. The problem of content arises due to 
the predominance of English as the language 
of choice for content online. Likewise, there 
is a growing trend by content providers to 
request subscription fees for access to online 
encyclopedias, dictionaries, journals, research 
reports and databases (Guadamuz, 2005).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 38The government has recently launched major 
initiatives to improve internet service and 
quality. Through the Department of Information 
and Communications Technology (DICT), the 
Government has been working on: (a) the 
National Broadband Plan (NBP), (b) free public 
Wi-Fi in public places, and (c) the selection of 
a new, third major telecommunications player.  
Other policies and regulations issued recently 
are summarized in Annex 1. 
Under the NBP,  the government aims to 
develop an alternative source of international 
bandwidth, submarine cable landing station, 
and domestic backbone network. This is 
intended to provide smaller market players a 
choice of bandwidth source other than PLDT and 
Globe. However, the optimal business model for 
such a network has yet to be determined. The 
NBP outlines three options for bringing Internet 
capacity down to the last mile: (a) the network 
and service provider to install infrastructure 
and provide internet services to end users, 
with the option for the government to share the 
cost; (b) the government to install infrastructure 
and the network while service providers lease 
the utilization of the lines and provide internet 
services to end users; and (c) the government to 
install infrastructure and provide direct internet 
services to end users. While the government 
may have the capital resources to fund the 
building of infrastructure, it does not have 
the expertise nor the flexibility necessary for 
building and operating a telecom or broadband 
network. Global best practice suggests that the 
government should play a role in addressing 
regulatory and legal issues supportive of a 
market-driven approach rather than direct 
investment and operation of networks.
As a related measure, to augment the still 
limited fiber optic network coverage in the 
country, the government is deploying its own 
fiber network to connect the major government 
agencies in Metro Manila. According to the 
DICT, it is using government assets, such as 
the metro rail transit (MRT) system, that can provide infrastructure and right of way at lower 
cost. Apart from providing internet service for 
the government, the DICT believes that this 
initiative will augment the still limited fiber optic 
network deployed by private telcos nationwide. 
This could potentially be implemented through 
availability and cost oriented pricing for dark 
fiber, a model currently being considered by the 
government of Mexico City, for example. In May 
2019, the DICT signed an agreement with the 
Philippine Fiber Optic Cable Network Ltd., Inc.  
(PFOCN) which will reportedly invest between 
US$1 billion and US$2 billion to establish a 
shared network infostructure between 2019 and 
2028. According to the DICT (2016), the PFOCN 
rollout will also become part of the Free Public 
Wi-Fi Network. The PFOCN will reportedly give 
preferential rates to the government while the 
rest of its capacity will be leased to telcos, 
ISPs, and cable TV operators. Depending on 
the final business model, the shared network 
model could potentially lower the cost of fiber 
offerings.29 
The Free Public Wi-Fi program is intended 
to provide internet service to low-income 
locations, but implementation has been slow. 
The Free Internet Access in Public Places Act 
of 2017 aims to provide internet access in over 
100,000 public sites nationwide by 2022 (from 
the previous target of 20,000) to extend internet 
to the low-income municipalities, lower the cost 
for end users, and improve internet quality of 
service by offloading mobile traffic in the free 
Wi-Fi sites. Despite the huge budget allocated 
for the program, only 3,283 free Wi-Fi sites or 3 
percent of the total target has been put up since 
2015 (Free Public Wifi Office, 2020). Challenges 
include developing an exit strategy sustainable 
business model for this program. For instance, 
a sunset provision could determine when 
government funding for free public Wi-Fi is no 
longer needed in certain areas, when the private 
sector is already willing to come in. This should 
be feasible since Republic Act (RA) 10929 allows 
ISPs enrolled under the program to sell excess 
capacity for a fee. 
29   ICT company and cellular mobile telephone system (CMTS) licensee, NOW Corporation, signed a memorandum of understanding with PFOCN for the former’s nationwide expansion.Government initiatives to improve internet service and quality
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 39To complement these two government 
programs, a new major telecommunication 
player was selected in 2019, but its defined 
service obligations are not at par with the 
requirements for the two incumbent telcos. In 
2019, the government awarded a license to Dito 
Telecom, through a special selection process in 
response to a Presidential Directive. Unlike the 
incumbent telcos, the new entrant is expected 
to comply with defined service obligations, 
including a minimum population coverage 
and broadband download speed after 5 years of operation. Not only do these requirements 
make it for difficult for the new telco to provide 
competitive prices, but failure to deliver will 
result in a loss in its performance bond worth 
PHP 25.7 billion. Network planning had started 
as of early 2020, but the timing for the third 
telco’s network rollout is currently uncertain as 
well as its impact on the competitive landscape. 
A fair and level playing field for operators would 
require the government to apply the same 
service obligations and performance standards 
for the third telco to the incumbent telcos.
Beyond these initiatives there are four 
key challenges that need to be addressed 
to improve the availability, quality, and 
affordability of internet services: (a) 
restrictions on investment and competition; (b) 
complex permit regulations; (c) infrastructure 
sharing for deployment of mobile and fixed 
networks; and (d) more efficient and effective 
radio spectrum management. This section also 
briefly considers the issue of satellite services 
for very remote regions. 
(a) Restrictions on investment and 
competition 
Public utility designation limits foreign 
investment. The Public Service Act of 
1936 (Commonwealth Act 146) provides 
a high-level framework for classifying 
telecommunications or ‘wired and wireless 
communications’ as a ‘public utility’. A public 
utility is subject to certain regulations, such 
as restrictions on foreign ownership and a 
cap on the rate of returns. The law does not 
distinguish between a ‘public service’ and 
‘public utility’ so these two terms are often 
used interchangeably. It does not provide a 
definition of ‘public services’ but enumerates 
businesses—such as ice plants and ice-
refrigeration plants along with freight or 
carrier services, electricity, gas, power, and 
wired or wireless communication systems—
as public services. Under this definition, 
telecommunications/internet is considered 
a public utility, and thus subject to a 40 
percent foreign ownership ceiling. The 
legislation is in process of revision, however.  
The recent Congressional approval of House Legal and Regulatory Challenges 
Bill No. 78, on March 10, 2020  distinguishes 
telecommunication systems as a public 
service, no longer as a public utility. A public 
service was defined as those which are “non-
rivalrous or imbued with public interest.” 
It likewise allows for 100 percent foreign 
ownership of public services. Hence, this 
amendment will allow for more players to 
enter and usher in competition.
The requirement for a Congressional 
franchise is a significant barrier to entry. 
The Public Telecommunications Policy Act of 
1995 (RA 7925) requires an entity wishing to 
build a ‘network’ to have a license as a public 
telecommunications entity (PTE). To  become 
a PTE, the following needs to be secured: 
(a) franchise from Congress; (b) provisional 
authority (PA) valid for 3 years validity from 
the NTC; and (c) a certificate of public 
convenience and necessity (CPCN) which 
will be co-terminous with the Congressional 
franchise also from the NTC, usually valid for 
25 years. The approval of CPCN undergoes 
a quasi-judicial process in accordance with 
the provisions of the Public Service Act of 
2926 (CA 146). A legislative franchise can 
only be granted to entities that are at least 
60-percent Filipino-owned, as articulated 
in Art. XII Sec. 11 of the 1987 Philippine 
Constitution.
Inefficient spectrum allocation limits 
market competition. The Radio Control Law 
of 1931 (Act 3846 and its amendment RA 584), 
which governs radio spectrum management, 
requires a Congressional franchise to secure 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 40a permit to “construct, install, establish, or 
operate a radio station,”30 which includes 
even the testing of radio equipment for a 
new and emerging technology, according 
to the NTC (Mirandilla-Santos, et al. 2018). 
The Radio Control Law also limits the use 
of radio spectrum (used for transmission 
of data, that is,  for internet services) to 
enfranchised telcos only (that is, only to 
providers that offer voice telephony services 
as well as internet). This is a further barrier 
to entry as it effectively requires potential 
participants to make telephony investments 
while that industry slowly becomes obsolete. 
As demand for internet increases and as 
different types of Internet technologies have 
emerged (for example, use of internet for 
30  Under the law, a ‘radio station’ is interpreted to mean a facility that uses radio equipment for wireless data transmission.
31  In some countries, regulators have adopted innovative licensing, such as a ‘social purpose’ license, and exclusive service license granted in rural unserved or underserved areas to 
      non-traditional network operators, including community networks (Internet Society, 2017). Examples include India, Mexico, and Brazil.Table 2.2.  Licensing of ISPs Across Select Asia Pacific Countries
Source:  Better Broadband Alliance, 2019.Cambodia License from Telecommunication Regulator of CambodiaCountry Licensing
Indonesia License from Indonesian Telecommunications Regulatory Authority
Malaysia License from Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission
Telco franchise law passed by Congress; 
PA/CPCN issued by National Telecommunications Commission
Thailand License from National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission 
Singapore License from Infocomm Media Development Authority 
South Korea Registration with Korea Communications Commission
JapanRegistration with Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (MIAC)
(If installing cable facilities); Notiﬁcation to MIAC prior to providing telecoms
services, including InternetPhilippinesphone calls for example, Skype, WhatsApp, 
Viber, and so on), the policy governing the 
management of spectrum should evolve and 
adapt as well. An updated approach would be 
to allow ISPs that do not provide traditional 
voice telephony to have regional—rather than 
nationwide—spectrum assignments, and to 
consider dynamic spectrum use.  This will 
allow more participants to enter the market 
and improve competition. This will also be 
particularly helpful for communities that 
traditional telecommunications networks 
do not reach.31 Identifying and expanding 
unlicensed spectrum opportunities are also 
critical and will receive a big push with 6 Ghz 
band licensing. 
operate a network. Competitive global best 
practice points to administrative licensing 
by either the industry regulator or ministry 
of ICT (Table 2.2). In the 17th Congress, a bill 
proposing an open access framework in data 
transmission was approved in the House of 
Representatives but failed to move forward 
in the Senate. This was a major setback for 
broadband development in the country, 
especially since many of the proposals in 
the NBP is anchored on an open access 
policy. The bills were refiled by both houses 
in the 18th Congress, but are both pending 
committee approval, to date.Lack of open access to the different parts 
of the broadband infrastructure also limit 
market competition.  The Open Access in 
Data Transmission bill identifies the various 
segments in the broadband infrastructure 
and proposes to open them up to more and 
different types of players. This is a means 
to level the playing field and ensure that 
market players compete based on services 
and innovation, not on their capacity to 
secure costly licenses. The Philippines is the 
only country in the ASEAN region that still 
requires a franchise from Congress as the 
first step to obtaining a license to build and 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 4132  Below this capitalization, an entity who wishes to engage and invest in retail trade needs to be whole owned by Filipino citizens.
33  https://phcc.gov.ph/press-releases/pcc-urbandeca-8990-holdings-abuseodominance-sett-case/Current laws make it difficult for existing 
cable TV to provide broadband services. 
The operation of Cable TV operators, 
governed by EO 436, is regulated by NTC 
through the awarding of a PA or Certificate 
of Authority. As such, cable TV (CATV) 
operation is reserved for Filipino-owned 
entities. These licenses, which also go 
through a quasi-judicial process, are given 
per municipality and only by the NTC central 
office in Manila. This requirement can be 
lengthy and costly for a provider who wishes 
to operate a network across municipalities. 
While CATV operators are not allowed to 
offer telecommunications services, they can 
offer broadband services by sub-leasing any 
excess capacity of its cable TV system to a 
third party. However, under RA 7925, cable 
operators who wish to build any network 
segment outside their service area will need 
to secure a franchise from Congress and a 
PA for each municipality the network will 
pass through. In addition, private companies 
who wish to offer retail broadband service 
at the last mile are subjected to the Retail 
Trade Liberalization Act of 2000 (RA 8762). 
For foreign companies, a capitalization of at 
least US$2.5 million is required.32
The reform or repeal of various legislative 
barriers is a prerequisite to a more open 
and competitive broadband market in the 
Philippines. In sum, there is a need to amend 
the Radio Control Law, the Public Service Act, 
and the Public Telecommunications Policy 
Act, and to pass the Open Access in Data 
Transmission bill to lower barriers to entry 
and allow a more diverse set of providers to 
enter and operate in the market. Specifically, 
the policy change should remove the 
requirement for a Congressional franchise 
and PA/CPCN and consider a simple 
administrative registration and qualification 
process for the entry broadband network 
operators and for the assignment of radio 
spectrum. 
(b) Permits and licenses
A proliferation of permits and licenses slow 
down the rollout of broadband networks. The deployment of broadband networks 
in the urban and rural areas depends not 
only on the availability of facilities from the 
major PTEs or telcos, but on a whole gamut 
of licenses, permits, and other bureaucratic 
requirements. Under Section 2 of RA 3846, 
a mobile network provider needs to secure 
a permit for the installation of a radio 
station, a permit to import equipment, and 
a radio station license. These requirements 
determine the radio equipment, location, 
and frequencies to be used for the network. 
While the awarding process is administrative 
in nature, the process can sometimes take 
time, and without guidance for an expeditious 
awarding process, can cause delay or even 
halt network rollout.
Various network deployment permits 
and fees are required by different 
authorities. These are imposed by several 
national government agencies (NGAs), 
local government units (LGUs), and 
private property management, such as 
building administrators and homeowners’ 
associations. Some of these bureaucratic 
requirements, arbitrary fees and permits can 
be considered as ‘institutionalized barriers 
to competition’ and prevents the timely and 
cost-effective expansion of infrastructure in 
the last mile. According to a Globe webpage, 
the approval process can take up to 8 months 
(Table 2.3).  Service providers have identified 
an average requirement of 25 permits, 
depending on the cell site’s location and 
other impositions by the approving entity. 
Aside from the general need to streamline 
processes in securing permits and licenses 
among relevant agencies, LGUs, or 
associations because this acts as a barrier 
to entry, there is a need to look into the 
issue of exclusivity, particularly between 
ISPs and certain residences or homeowners’ 
associations. The PCC has recently filed a 
competition case against a condominium 
corporation in this regard.33
A recently issued joint memorandum 
circular aims to reduce the requirements 
and processing time for securing permits 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 42(c) Lack of infrastructure sharing policies
The absence of a tower-sharing policy for 
mobile networks keeps entry costs high. 
A new firm would have to finance huge 
amounts of capital expenditure to build and 
maintain its own network infrastructure or 
suffer discriminatory charges to use their 
competitors’ network. In contrast, under 
infrastructure sharing arrangements for 
mobile networks in other markets, operators 
typically agree to share facilities ranging 
from passive infrastructure (for example, site 
locations, masts, cabinets), to radio access 
networks (RAN) (for example, base station 
equipment, operation and maintenance), 
to active infrastructure (for example, radio 
spectrum, core network) (ITU, 2008). Cell site 
deployment can consume up to 50 percent 
of a mobile carriers’ capital expenditure and 
up to 60 percent of its operating expenses. 
Given the massive amount of capital 
resources needed to promote broadband 
deployment expansion,34 infrastructure 
sharing policies for mobile networks is 
becoming global best practice.35
34  Former DICT undersecretary Eliseo Rio, Jr. announced that the Philippines needs 50,000 cellular towers to cope with the demand and quality standards of good mobile services.
35  Towers and base stations also require users to be within 0.5 to 2km radius (Mirandilla-Santos, 2016). This will become more crucial with the introduction of 5G technology.
36  The DICT issuance includes a list of DICT towers and real estate that can be used for the tower buildout, a list of about 1,000 ‘hard to acquire sites’ (according to PLDT and Globe) 
       where government assistance in securing permits is most needed, and GovNet sites (DICT, 2019).  Table 2.3.  Reasons for the 8-month Long Process to Construct a Cell Site in the Philippines
Source:  Icogo (2016); ABS-CBN News (2018)Requirement
Right of WayPermit and Clearance
Negotiations and documentation of prospective cell site locationNo. of Permits
8Length of Time
1-2 months
Social Acceptability Barangay resolution, Homeowners Association consent, and 
residents’ conformity5 1-2 months
Various LGU permits Zoning clearance from HLURB city or municipal resolution, occupancy
permit, mayor's permit8 2 months
National permits DENR, LLDA, CAB, DOH, PCSD, BFAR, NCP 8 1-2 months
Structural permits
Construction startsZoning permits, locational clearance, building permit inclusive of electrical
permit, sanitation permit and mechanical permit, occupancy permit8 3-5 months
The government developed and recently 
passed a common tower policy. In mid-
2018, the government announced a plan to 
issue a common tower policy to accelerate 
the buildout of telecommunications towers 
and achieve its target of 50,000 by 2022. 
In May 2019, the DICT issued Rules on the 
Accelerated Roll-out of Common Towers,36 
which also identified 2,500 government 
sites that can be used for tower installation. 
In May 2020, the DICT issued department 
circular no. 8 on the co-location and sharing 
of passive telecommunications tower. To 
date, 24 tower companies have each signed 
memorandum of understanding with the 
DICT to express their intent to enter the 
tower market. The policy would facilitate 
faster rollout of the third telco, and address 
the following issues: 
• Foreign ownership restrictions on 
  independent tower companies (ITCs)
• Limitation on the number of ITCs allowed 
  to  enter the market
• Mode of engagement of ITCs
• Independence of tower companies from   
   mobile network operators
• Financial and technical qualifications on  
   ITCs 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 43for common towers to half a month. In 
July 2020, the administration issued a joint 
memorandum circular entitled “Streamlined 
Guidelines for the Issuance of Permits, 
Licenses, and Certificates for the Construction 
of Shared Passive Telecommunications Tower 
Infrastructures”. The joint circular aims to 
reduce the multiple permitting requirements for the construction of said shared tower 
infrastructures that will be constructed by 
Mobile Network Operators and Independent 
Tower Companies registered with the DICT. 
The inter-agency initiative is expected to 
result in streamlining the processing time 
for securing permits for common towers to 
16 days.Poor coordination with the Department of 
Public Works and Highways (DPWH) leads 
to slower deployment and higher costs for 
both service providers and the government. 
Civil works (that is, the excavation and 
restoration of roads) is said to take up as much 
as 80 percent of the cost of deployment of 
fixed broadband networks.37 There are no 
common or shared utility corridors that will 
allow various operators to use conduits to 
lay fiber in existing roadworks, nor a ‘dig 
once’ policy that requires coordination for 
one-time civil works.38 Ideally, broadband 
infrastructure installation is done at the 
same time as the building of new roads 
or road digging to minimize the amount 
of disruption to the people and the public 
space.39 With coordination, the cost for both 
the service providers and the government 
will also be minimized since the road digging 
and reinstallation will be done only once. 
Synchronizing the schedules of project 
implementation is critically important, as 
a national road project cannot wait for 
the deployment schedule of broadband 
operators.40
New regulation on pole attachment can 
help reduce fiber deployment costs. 
Pole attachment is very important for 
cable broadband operators and aerial 
fiber deployment. Poles are often owned 
and operated by electricity distributors 
(for example, Meralco and the electric 
cooperatives in the provinces) and are within 
the jurisdiction of electric power industry 
regulators (for example, Energy Regulatory 
Commission (ERC) and the National 
Electrification Authority (NEA)). Currently, 
there is no regulation on pole attachment for 
non-electric access seekers, such as telecom 
and broadband operators. In August 2018, the 
DICT, NEA and the Philippine Rural Electric 
Cooperatives Association, Inc. (PHILRECA) 
signed a memorandum of understanding 
for the implementation of the National 
Broadband Plan, particularly on the co-use of 
fiber optic cables (NEA, 2019).  However, the 
rising cost of pole attachment (from PHP100 
37  According to MetroWorks ICT Construction that carries out civil works for telecom and ICT operators.
38  Instead, the operator needs to submit a detailed plan for the civil works and get approval from the regional or district offices.
39  Interview with DPWH Central Office officials and staff for policy and design, and bureau of planning, 2019.
40  Interview with DPWH Central Office officials and staff for policy and design, and bureau of planning, 2019.
41  See Memorandum No. 2018-55 to Electric Cooperatives on Standard Joint Pole Agreement and Pole Rental Rate, https://nea.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_phocadownload&view=
      category&download=3256:memo-to-ecs-2018-055-standard-joint-pole-agreement-and-pole-rental-rate&id=203:2018&Itemid=264to 400 per pole, per attachment, per year) 
has been challenging.41
The two dominant incumbent players 
own and control the country’s broadband 
infrastructure. The operation of any 
broadband network in the country, including 
the government’s, is dependent on access to 
the infrastructure of PLDT and Globe. Any new 
player, unless it plans to build and operate 
its own network or is given access to some 
of the government’s assets (for example, 
existing roads, railways, towers, fiber optic 
network and/or planned cable landing 
stations, NGCP’s fiber optic network) will 
have to bilaterally negotiate interconnection 
and access to the incumbent telcos’ facilities 
from the cable landing stations, backbone, 
middle mile, and access networks. This puts 
any new player at risk of non-competitive 
behavior (for example, discriminatory 
charging) from the two incumbents.
For this reason, open, non-discriminatory 
open access to broadband infrastructure 
is extremely important . Instead of a single, 
vertically integrated network, an ‘open access’ 
approach is recommended. This promotes 
infrastructure sharing among service 
providers and access to network segments 
on fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory 
(FRAND) terms. Infrastructure sharing is 
a way to optimize the use of resources by 
allowing two or more service providers to 
use the same structure or network element. 
With the end goal of increasing broadband 
connectivity, infrastructure sharing promises 
to reduce costs of deployment, lower 
asset duplication, reduce environmental 
impact, lower barriers to entry and increase 
competition, expand network coverage, and 
lower service prices (Deloitte, 2015).
In the absence of a law, the DICT should 
consider issuing its own policy on 
infrastructure sharing. Using an open 
access approach, DICT may allow the use 
of government assets, such as the 2Tbps 
cable capacity from PLCN, the landing 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 44stations built by the Bases Conversion and 
Development Authority (BCDA), and the 
NGCP fiber optic network, by private service 
providers. In doing so, the government 
should balance between maximizing the use 
of assets, and even monetize them, while 
providing an alternative source of bandwidth 
for new and small players in the countryside. 
Infrastructure sharing can adopt any of the 
following business models (World Bank, 
2017b):
• Joint development: infrastructure owners 
and telcos (for example, network operators) 
coordinate in planning and construction
• Hosting: infrastructure owner hosts third 
party telco network equipment
• Dark fiber: host provides passive 
infrastructure for lease to network operator
• Joint venture: infrastructure owner provides 
network owner with use of existing 
infrastructure to provide commercial service 
on profit-sharing basis
• Wholesale telecom service: 
infrastructure owner provides commercial 
wholesale service to network operators
The scope of an infrastructure sharing 
policy should, ideally, be cross-sectoral to 
include networked infrastructure such as 
roads, railways, electricity transmission. 
The policy must include standards, regulation 
on access and pricing,  and a coordinating 
body to look into how different utilities, 
government agencies, and regulators 
can work together. The policy should 
also include provisions for coordinated 
planning and construction among various 
government agencies and private service 
providers. The timing is appropriate as the 
current administration implements its ‘Build, 
Build, Build’ program and a number of roads, 
bridges, and train projects are underway. 
Finally, in a setting where open access to 
a private operator’s property is involved, 
the policy must provide a mechanism for 
when and how government can intervene in 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 4542  The process often involves the submission by an applicant of a letter of request to the regulator for its spectrum needs. This is unlike in other countries, where there are public 
        consultation documents, market reviews, and spectrum management plans issued by the regulator before spectrum is assigned or awarded to an entity.
43    On August 23, 2005, the NTC issued Memorandum Circular No. 07-08-2005 or the Rules and Regulations on the Allocation and Assignment of 3G Radio Frequency Bands, allocating 
        the 825-845MHz/870-890MHz frequency bands for 3G. The NTC issued 3G spectrum to four mobile operators, namely Smart, Globe, Digitel and CURE. Bayantel was disqualified but 
         won a petition in the Court of Appeals, who, in December 2010, ordered the NTC to stop the bidding for the last remaining 3G frequencies. The case has been pending in the Supreme 
       Court since April 2010. https://www.philstar.com/business/2010/04/11/564944/ntc-elevates-3g-award-row-bayan-supreme-court. 
44   PCC. Note on Spectrum Management. Also, see https://businessmirror.com.ph/2018/04/11/phl-internet-speed-hinges-on-equitable-spectrum-allocation-and-management/.
45  Gilbert Llanto, Policy Note on Reviewing the Philippines’ spectrum management policy, 2006; PCC’s Policy Note on Spectrum Management, 2018.cases where there are: (a) failures in access 
seeker and infrastructure owner to reach an 
agreement within the prescribed time period 
of negotiation, (b) disputes in the terms and 
conditions for accessing infrastructure, and 
(c) pricing disputes. 
(d) Spectrum management for mobile 
broadband 
Current laws that regulate spectrum use 
and allocation are outdated. The way the 
government manages its radio spectrum 
resources is crucial to ensuring mobile 
broadband coverage and quality of service, 
as well as in promoting competition in the 
mobile service market. However, the laws 
that govern radio spectrum in the Philippines 
are designed for legacy (analog) technology 
and merely provide a general framework for 
the regulator to interpret into regulation. 
Radio spectrum has never been 
competitively bid out in the Philippines. 
The NTC has never carried out an open 
tender for spectrum because the supply has 
reportedly always exceeded the demand for 
spectrum. To date, all frequencies have been 
awarded through a simple administrative 
process42 akin to a ‘beauty contest’,43  where 
the applicants that best show financial and 
technical capacity to provide the required 
capitalization and infrastructure are granted 
the spectrum license, regardless of the 
applicant’s current spectrum holdings or the 
validity of the justification for the additional 
spectrum.44  Given these criteria, the process 
is likely to favor incumbents and large telcos, 
and leave a slim chance for spectrum to 
be awarded to a new entrant. Moreover,  
the administrative method of assigning 
frequency has produced “inefficiencies and 
underutilization of spectrum bandwidth, not 
to mention limiting the flexibility in service 
provision and impeding technological 
developments.” 45 The scarcity of the remaining 
unassigned spectrum bands will limit the 
competitiveness of any new incoming 
player. In 2017, upon the directive of the 
DICT, the NTC published the result of an audit 
of “assigned, returned and vacant mobile 
access frequencies,” which showed that 
spectrum in key bands, such as 900 MHz and 
1800 MHz, have been assigned to only two 
players. A recent Senate report noted that 
the remaining frequencies for the third player 
“will be limited to data-driven services” 46 in a 
country where at least 40 percent of mobile 
phone users are still dependent on basic call 
and text services. As spectrum hoarding has 
become a barrier to competition, the policy 
will need to clarify the powers and functions 
of the NTC in spectrum assignment, recall, 
reassignment, as these are absent in existing 
laws. The policy should define the guidelines 
for how and when NTC initiates proceedings 
for recall and reassignment of spectrum, 
as necessary to assure the availability of 
spectrum for multiple operators.  In the 
current scenario the third telco will face 
higher costs associated with the limited 
amount of spectrum that it has been allocated 
(less spectrum requires construction of 
more infrastructure to offer the same level of 
service as a telco that has more spectrum).
The process of spectrum management 
could be more transparent and dynamic. 
Spectrum assignments in the Philippines are 
considered confidential and the awarding 
of spectrum an internal process. Moving 
forward, the publication of all applications, 
approvals and decisions for test permit, 
demonstration permit, assignment, re-
assignment, or co-use of spectrum would 
be advisable. This also includes public 
consultations before any issuance of approval 
can be made by the NTC. Part of enhancing 
transparency is defining the period for a 
spectrum assignment review and publishing 
the results of such review. Furthermore, 
the NTC, in coordination with DICT and the 
Philippine Competition Commission (PCC), 
and in accordance with global best practice, 
can issue rules and regulations governing 
shared spectrum use. The NTC and DICT can 
explore the adoption of emerging spectrum 
46  Senate Committee Report No. 78, May 16, 2017. management practices, such as dynamic 
spectrum allocation.
(e) Addressing connectivity needs for 
very remote areas 
The government needs to develop a 
clear strategy on how to deploy better 
broadband services to far-flung areas. A 
small number of regions in the Philippines 
are unable to be readily connected through 
terrestrial (fixed and mobile) networks due 
to geographic constraints. These areas 
will have to continue to rely on satellite 
services. Despite this, there is very little 
information about the government’s plans 
on how to facilitate access to satellites for 
broadband connectivity, other than that 
satellite technology will be used to address 
the requirement of isolated locations (that 
is, mountains, coastal and small islands) 
where the deployment of fiber network 
facilities will be challenging. However, there 
seems to be increasing adoption of satellite 
technology through the Free Public Wi-
Fi program. Satellite is also being used to 
connect Free Public Wi-Fi sites in unserved 
areas in Marinduque and hard-to-reach areas 
in Bohol, Davao, and Sorsogon. An option 
to consider for the medium term may be 
the deployment of more advanced HTS – 
high through-put satellites are also making 
a significant impact on cellular backhaul 
though 200-500Mbps to the tower (a near 
substitute for fiberizing towers) for both 
community WiFi and 4G mobile services.
Open access to satellites can boost the 
rollout of satellite-based broadband 
services. The Government could consider 
replacing EO 467 (s. 1998) to enable more 
equitable access to satellites and other 
emerging technologies that can offer 
innovative solutions for the rural and hard-
to-reach communities. The tourism, banking, 
shipping, and mining industries are just some 
of the sectors that can benefit from open 
access to satellite broadband technology. 
A liberalized satellite market can also help 
connect the 34,000 or so public schools 
that remain offline due to the lack of Internet 
facilities in their communities (DepEd, 2016).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 46The COVID-19 pandemic calls for urgent 
action to improve digital infrastructure and 
connectivity in the country. Recommendations 
in the immediate term include the speedier 
rollout of mobile network infrastructure which 
can be implemented through the DICT issuance 
of common infrastructure policies.  Because 
legislative options normally take time, authorities 
can consider executive issuances including, 
for instance, on spectrum management and 
competition for frequencies. To deliver quick 
access for public servants, the government can 
coordinate and fast track the procurement of 
internet services for government offices and 
critical facilities (for example, health centers, 
hospitals). 
Drawing in greater private sector participation 
will help improve broadband connectivity and 
unleash the Philippines’ huge potential to thrive 
in the digital age and for Filipinos to be active 
participants in the digital economy. Investment 
in the Philippines’ digital infrastructure should 
continue to be led by the private sector. Still, the 
government plays an important role in creating 
an enabling policy and regulatory framework 
to enhance access to, and affordability of, 
internet services throughout the country, and 
in ensuring a more competitive market. This 
can be achieved through a combination of the 
following short- and medium-term measures: 
Lower barriers to market entry by easing the 
restrictions to foreign ownership of equity 
in telecommunications and broadband 
networks. This can be accomplished by 
amending the Public Service Act and the 
Public Telecommunications Policy Act, 
and by passing the Open Access in Data 
Transmission bill. 
Streamline permit requirements  for network 
deployment and rationalize fees imposed 
by various national and local government 
agencies, as well as private sector 
associations.Conclusions and Recommendations
Establish a fair and level playing field for 
operators  that requires the government 
to apply the same service obligations and 
performance standards for the third telco to 
the incumbent telcos.
Fast-track and lower the cost of deploying 
broadband infrastructure through 
infrastructure sharing policies that address: 
(a) the use of government assets (submarine 
cable, NGCP dark fiber); (b) the use of existing 
infrastructure across sectors such as roads, 
railways, electricity transmission; and (c) 
coordinated build for a shared utility corridor. 
Encourage more private sector infrastructure 
sharing. This policy can be approved under 
existing bills, such as the proposed Open 
Access in Data Transmission Act or can 
be proposed as separate DICT policies to 
promote common towers, pole sharing, and 
access to ducts. However, an executive order 
mandating infrastructure sharing across 
these passive infrastructure modalities would 
have a more immediate impact.
Make more spectrum available for Internet 
connectivity.  About 95 percent of Filipinos 
access the Internet through mobile and 
wireless devices. Spectrum management 
reform would entail amending the Radio 
Control Law and/or the Public Telecoms Policy 
Act, and passing the Open Access in Data 
Transmission bill, including the guidelines 
that will clarify the powers and functions of 
the NTC in terms of spectrum assignment, 
recall, and reassignment. 
Finally, the government is recommended 
to focus its efforts on addressing these 
regulatory and legal issues supportive of a 
market-driven approach. Government should 
refrain from directly owning and operating 
network infrastructure as these are not its 
comparative advantage, and also against global 
best practice. Ultimately, the government’s role 
should be as a policymaker and regulator. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 47Abadilla, Emmie (2020). “Mobile data traffic more than doubles 
in pandemic.” Manila Bulletin. August 2020. https://mb.com.
ph/2020/08/20/mobile-data-traffic-more-than-doubles-in-
pandemic/.
ABS-CBN News (2018). “Globe says permit delays delay cell site 
building.”  ABS-CBN News, November  2018.
https://news.abs-cbn.com/business/11/22/18/globe-says-
permit-delays-delay-cell-site- building
A4AI (2017). “Mobile Broadband Data Costs.” 
https:/ a4ai.org/mobile-broadband-pricing-data/
________ (2018). “UN Broadband Commission Adopts A4AI “1 for 2” 
Affordability Target.”
https://a4ai.org/un-broadband-commission-adopts-a4ai-1-for-
2-affordability-target/
Camus, Miguel (2018). “Gov’t pushes new cell tower scheme for 
level field, better service.”  Inquirer.net, January 2018. 
https://business.inquirer.net/244506/govt-pushes-new-cell-
tower-scheme-level-field-better-service
Deloitte (2015). “Unlocking broadband for all: Broadband 
infrastructure sharing policies and strategies in emerging 
markets.” https://www.apc.org/sites/default/files/Unlocking% 
20broadband%20for%20all%20Full%20report.pdf
DepEd (2016). “Building the Digital Infrastructure, Bridging the 
Education Divide.” https://www.deped.gov.ph/wp-content/
uploads/2018/07/Education-Summit-2016_Pascua_Building-
the-Digital-Infrastructure-LAST.pdf
DICT (2016). “DICT partners with HyalRoute for billion-dollar 
fiber network investment.” https://dict.gov.ph/dict-partners-
with-hyalroute-for-billion- dollar-fiber-network-investment/
________ (2017). “National Broadband Plan: Building Infostructures 
for a Digital Nation.”  Quezon City: DICT.  
https://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/2017.08.09-
National-Broadband-Plan.pdf
________ (2019). “Rules on the Accelerated Roll-Out of Common 
Towers in the Philippines.”  https://dict.gov.ph/rules-on-the-
accelerated-roll-out-of-common-towers-in-the-=philippines/
EIU (2019). “The Inclusive Internet Index.” 
https://theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com/
Free Public Wifi Office (2020). “Free Wi-Fi for All eyes Taytay And 
Cavite for next rollout of sites.” http://freepublicwifi.gov.ph/
free-wi-fi-for-all-eyes-taytay-and-cavite-for-next-rollout-of-
sites/
Guadamuz, Andres (2005). “The Digital Divide: It’s the Content, 
Stupid!”  Computer and  Telecommunications Law Review, vol. 
304, 113-118.
Internet Society (2017). “Policy Brief: Spectrum Approaches 
for Community Networks.”  https://www.internetsociety.org/
policybriefs/spectrum/
Icogo, Peter Jan (2016). “Why it takes 8 months for one cell site to 
ITU (2008). “Mobile infrastructure sharing.”  ITU News Magazine. 
https://www.itu.int/itunews/manager/display.asp?lang=en&ye
ar=2008&issue=02&ipage=sharingInfrastructure-mobile
________ (2018). “Measuring the Information Society Report – 
Volume 2.” https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents 
publications/misr2018/MISR-2018-Vol-2-E.pdf
________ (2019). “ITU – ICT Statistics.” 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/default.aspxMirandilla-Santos, Mary Grace (2016). “Philippine Broadband: A 
Policy Brief.”  Manila: Arangkada Philippines.
http://www.investphilippines.info/arangkada/wp-content/
uploads/2016/02/BROADBAND-POLICY-BRIEF-as-printed.pdf
Mirandilla-Santos, Mary Grace, Jonathan Brewer, and Jaime 
Faustino (2018). “From Analog to Digital: Philippine Policy and 
Emerging Internet Technologies.”  Manila: The Asia Foundation.
https://asiafoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
From-Analog-to-Digital_Philippine-Policy-and-Emerging-
Internet-Technologies.pdf
NEA (2019). “NEA, DICT urge power co-ops, cable operators, and 
telcos to collaborate to expedite NBP rollout.” 
http://www.nea.gov.ph/ao39/387-nea-dict-urge-power-co-
ops-cable-operators-and-telcos-to-collaborate-to-expedite-
nbp-rollout
Ookla (2019). “Speedtest Global Index – Monthly comparisons 
of internet speeds from around the world.”  Speedtest, August 
2019. https://www.speedtest.net/global-index
________ (2020). “Philippines’ Mobile and Broadband Internet 
Speeds – Speedtest Global Index.” Speedtest, January 2020. 
https://www.speedtest.net/global-index/philippines
Opensignal (2019). “The State of Mobile Network Experience: 
 
Pateña, Aerol John (2018). “PH needs more cell tower firms, telco 
stakeholders say.”  Philippine News Agency, September 2018. 
https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1049367
Philstar (2010). “NTC elevates 3G award row with Bayan to 
Supreme Court. Philstar, April 2010.”
https://www.philstar.com/business/2010/04/11/564944/ntc-
elevates-3g-award-row-bayan-supreme-court
Project Bass (2020). “BASS Quick Reference Sheet.”  Tableau.
https://public.tableau.com/shared/GBRGCT86S?:display_
count=n&:origin=viz_share_link 
Talandron, May et al (2016). “Investigating the Digital Divide 
in a Rural Community in the Philippines.”  Central Mindanao 
University Journal of Science, vol. 20. 
Telegeography (2020). “GlobalComms Database Service.”   
https://www2.telegeography.com/.
Valdez, Denise (2019). “ DICT may issue new common tower 
policy.” BusinessWorld, August 2019.  https://www.
bworldonline.com/dict-may-issue-new-common-tower-
policy/
World Bank (2017a). “GDP per capita, PPP (current international 
$).” https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD
________ (2017b). “Infrastructure Sharing and Co-Deployment 
Issues.”  Presented in the Asia-Pacific Information Superhighway 
SC Meeting, December 2017. https://www.unescap.org/
sites/default/files/Infrastructure%20Sharing%20and%20Co-
Deployment%20Issues%2C%20 World%20Bank.pdf
________ (2019). “ The Digital Economy in Southeast Asia: Building
the Foundations for Future Growth.”  Washington, DC: 
World Bank.   http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/328941558708267736/pdf/The-Digital-Economy-in-
Southeast-Asia-Strengthening-the-Foundations-for-Future-
Growth.pdf
Better Broadband Alliance (2019). State of Philippine Internet 
and Recommended Solutions policy brief and presentation. 
(unpublished)References
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 48Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 49Annex 1. DICT and NTC Policy and Regulatory Issuances Affecting Broadband Access, Quality and 
Affordability (2016-present)
47  https://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Final-Version-Rules-on-the-Accelerated-Roll-Out-of-Common-Towers-in-the-Philippines.pdf 
48  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/MC-03-06-2019.pdf
49  https://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Memorandum-Order-No.-004.pdf
50  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2019/MC/MC-01-05-2019.pdf
51  http://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/DICT-MO-001-2018-POLICY-GUIDELINES-FOR-THE-ENTRY-OF-A-NEW-MAJOR-PLAYER-IN-THE-PUBLIC-TELECOMMUNICATIONS-
       MARKET.pdf; See latest amendments http://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/MEMORADUM-N0.-003.pdf  
52  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/MC/MC-09-09-2018.pdf 
53   http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/MC/NMP_TWG_Document_Verification_Report_20181112.pdf (Box continues next page)Topic DICT
Issuance
Share
InfrastructureMay 2019
DICT-DC-
008-2020Policy NTC
IssuanceRegulation
Rules on the Accelerated
Roll-Out of Common
Towers in the Philippines47
Policy Guidelines on the
Co-Location and Sharing
of Passive Telecommunications
Tower Infrastructure
for Macro Cell Sites
NTC MC
No. 03-06-
2019Rules and Regulations
Implementing Republic
Act No. 11202 Otherwise
Known as the “Mobile
Number Portability Act”48
NTC MC
No. 01-05-
2019Rules and Regulations
on Unlocking of Mobile
Phones and Devices50DICT-MO-
004-2018Mandatory Unlocking of
Mobile Phones and
Devices After Lock-In
Period and Compliance
with Terms and Conditions
Contained in Subscription
Agreements49Mobile Number
Portability
Mobile Device
Unlocking
NTC MC
No. 09-09-
2018
NTC MC No.
12-03-2018Rules and Regulations on the
Selection Process for a New
Major Player in the Philippine 
Telecommunications Market52DICT-MO-
001-2018 Policy Guidelines for
The Entry of a New Major
Player in The Public
Telecommunications Market51 Third Telco
Document Veriﬁcation
Report on the Requirements
Submitted by the Provisional
New Major Player5354  https://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/RA10929-Published_IRR_Free-Internet-Access-in-Public-Places-Act.pdf 
55  http://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/DICT-DO-004-2018-DIRECTING-THE-NATIONAL-TELECOMMUNICATION-COMMISSION-NTC-TO-REVIEW-AND-MAKE-APPROPRIATE-
       ADJUSTMENTS-TO-INCREASE-SPECTRUM-USER-FEES-SUF.pdf 
56  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/MC/MC-02-02-2018.pdf
57  http://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/imagetopdf.pdf
58  http://dict.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/DICT-DO-002-2018-DIRECTING-THE-NATIONAL-TELECOMMUNICATIONS-COMMISSION-TO-REDUCE-THE-INTERCONNECTION-
       RATES-BETWEEN-PUBLIC-TEECOMMUNICATIONS-OPERATORS..pdf 
59  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/MC/MC-05-07-2018.pdf 
60  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2016/MC/MC-No-09-11-2016.pdf 
61  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2016/MC/MC-10-12-2016.pdf  
62  http://ntc.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2016/MC/2015/MCNo.2015_0708.pdfTopic DICT
IssuancePolicy NTC
IssuanceRegulation
June 2018 Rules and Regulations to
Implement the Provisions of
Republic Act No. 10929
(Free Internet Access in
Public Places Act)54
NTC MC
02-02-2018Additional Frequency
Allocations for Broadband
Wireless Access (BWA)56DICT-DO-
004-2018Directing the National
Telecommunication 
Commission (NTC) to Review
and Make Appropriate 
Adjustments to Increase
Spectrum User Fees (SUF)55 Radio
SpectrumFree Internet
Access in
Public Places
DICT-DO-
003-2018
DICT-DO-
002-2018Directing the National Tele-
communications Commission
(NTC) to Review and Make
Appropriate Adjustment 
on The Spectrum User Fee
(SUF) for the 610-790 MHz,
790-960 MHz,and  ‘
710-2025 MHz International
Mobile Telecommunications
(IMT) Frequency Bands57
Directing the National
Telecommunications
Commission to Reduce the
Interconnection Rates betwee
Public Telecommunications
Operators58
NTC MC No.
09-11-2016
NTC M  No.
-12-2016NTC MC No.
05-07-2018
Interconnection Charge for
Voice Service60Interconnection Charge for
Short Messaging Services 
and Voice Service59
Rules on the Measurement of
Mobile Broadband/ Internet
Access Service61
NTC MC No.
07-08-2015NTC MC No. 07-08-2015
Rules on the Measurement of
Fixed Broadband/ Internet
Access Service62 Interconnection
Charges
Broadband
Quality of
Service
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 50CHAPTER 3
PROMOTING
DIGITAL
PAYMENTS
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 51The COVID-19 pandemic has elevated the 
urgency of using digital payment services. 
During this period of social distancing, 
restricted mobility, and rising uncertainty, 
digital payment services have facilitated daily 
financial transactions, enabling users to send 
money to another person or a family member, 
pay bills, and receive wages while keeping them 
safe.  Comparing 45 days before and after the 
implementation of the lockdown measure, ATM 
cash withdrawal and check clearing declined 
and transactions through automated clearing 
houses increased.  The recent surge in the use 
of digital payments has indicated the growing 
acceptance of digital financial solutions in an 
economy that heavily relies on paper-based 
payment instruments such as cash and checks. 
However, not all Filipinos experience the same 
level of convenience and safety in transactions 
that digital payments allow. Majority of Filipinos, 
most especially the poor and unbanked, risk 
their health and safety as they continue to 
use cash in making payments, undermining 
social distancing measures. To regulate such 
risks and support the economy in recovering 
from the pandemic, the government and the 
private sector could accelerate their efforts 
in promoting digital financial adoption in the 
country. 
In addition to keeping people safe when 
carrying out payment transactions, the use of 
digital payment services is key to increasing 
efficiency, promoting financial inclusion, and 
enabling the digital economy as the country 
transitions to the ‘new normal’. Digital payment 
services increase efficiency by removing 
frictions in payment processes and reducing 
the cost of doing business. The transition from 
the use of cash and checks to digital payments 
significantly lowers the cost of payment, and 
accelerates payment processes for merchants 
and expand the transaction scale of digital 
payments which will bring in more digital 
payments through a network effect. Digital 
payments also promote financial inclusion, 
especially for the unbanked population. Mobile 
money schemes, for example, allow individuals 
who own a phone but do not have a bank account Introduction
to save money and carry out transactions. The 
use of digital payments facilitates growth of the 
digital economy as businesses reach a wider 
set of customers while customers increase 
patronage of e-commerce due to greater 
convenience in payment. The use of digital 
payments also improves trust in technological 
solutions, leading to greater engagement in the 
digital economy.
Fortunately, in the last five years, the 
country’s policy and regulatory framework 
has undergone major reforms, creating an 
enabling environment for greater adoption of 
basic digital financial services. 
Recent reforms in the National Payments System 
of the Philippines include the National Payment 
Systems Act, the National Retail Payment 
System Framework, and initiatives such as the 
standardization of a QR code for payments and 
eGov Pay (digitizing payments to government 
agencies). The government has also passed key 
regulatory reforms that increase competition 
and innovation in the digital financial industry. 
The enactment of Republic Act No. 10641 in 2014, 
for instance, allowed full entry of foreign banks 
into the Philippines, increasing competition 
in the banking industry and stimulating 
knowledge transfer especially in areas such as 
financial technology innovation. Despite the 
implementation of these landmark reforms, 
the country’s digital payment ecosystem still 
needs development to effectively increase the 
country’s digital financial activity. 
The development of digital payment 
ecosystems around the world has been very 
heterogenous. While different policy paths 
may result in creating the digital payments 
ecosystem, a number of critical enablers must 
be present for digital payments to emerge, 
gain acceptance, and flourish. They include 
appropriate legal and regulatory framework, 
robust financial and ICT infrastructure, and 
well-designed financial products. They can 
be strengthened by high financial literacy, 
good standards of consumer protection and 
digitalization of existing payment streams, 
particularly those with high volumes.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 52Making digital payments widely available 
and accepted depends on the availability of 
infrastructure - both general ICT infrastructure 
and payment systems in particular. 
Infrastructure that allows fast and reliable 
remote on boarding becomes invaluable—
and this means that digitally-enabled national 
ID systems and conducive environment that 
facilitate the use of the ID is a critical enabling 
63  Benefits of implementing ISO20022 messaging standards are 1) richer data: more information can be carried in each message, improving analytics and fraud detection, 2) reduced 
       risk: the better structure of the message supports improved straight-through-processing, leading to better customer service and fewer delays, and 3) Flexibility: ISO 20022 messaging 
      can be adapted more easily to changes in the wider payments environment, so will be more responsive to emerging technologies, promoting innovation in the financial sector (Bank 
      of England, 2019).PVP - payment versus payment
EFTIS - electronic funds transfers instruction system
PDDTS - Philippine domestic dollar transfer system
AABs - authorized agent banks
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 53factor. Digital payments require interoperable 
payment systems allowing seamless fund 
transfers between accounts maintained by 
different institutions—switches, automated 
clearing houses, and supporting infrastructures. 
The current state of the payment systems 
ecosystem and digital financial infrastructure is 
discussed in detail in the succeeding sections. 
The Philippines’ National Payments System 
(NPS) landscape continues to evolve, thanks to 
new legal and regulatory frameworks, payment 
system infrastructures, payment service 
providers and products (Figure 3.1). The NPS 
plays a key role in promoting financial stability 
and financial inclusion. The Bangko Sentral 
ng Pilipinas (BSP) has a mission to promote 
and maintain price stability, a strong financial 
system, and a safe and efficient payments and 
settlements system conducive to a sustainable 
and inclusive growth of the economy. The Philippines’ NPS is anchored in its real-time gross 
settlement (RTGS) system, called PhilPaSS. It 
provides real-time settlement services in local 
currency (PHP) to banking institutions, private 
and public entities, and financial markets, 
and is considered a systemically important 
payments system (World Bank, forthcoming). 
BSP is currently upgrading the PhilPaSS to 
a new generation that will process payment 
instructions with ISO20022, a global standard 
for financial messaging being adopted by the 
payment industry worldwide.63Payment Systems Landscape in the Philippines
PhilPaSS (RTGS)
PDDTS
USD-PHP
tradesFixed income
DVP
securities ***nRoSS
DVP
Govt. Sec.CICS PESONet InstaPay ATM/POS
NBQBs Commercial Banks
“EMI-Others” Cooperatives RBs/MKIsCommercial Banks, some thrift banks,
some rural banks
*Sponsored into settlement by banks.
**On-us transactions...
***PSSCAfﬁliate Switch Network **PDDTS USD-PHP
 PVP trades /
transfers ***
Commercial banks,
other thrift banks and
rural banks
Customers/Account holdersFigure 3.1.  Philippines National Payments System Architecture
Source : World Bank (forthcoming).
Legend:
EMI - electronic money issuer
MFIs - microfinance institutions
CICS - check imaging clearing system
NBQBs - non-bank financial institutions with quasi-banking functions The development of retail payment 
infrastructures and services is rapidly 
progressing. In 2017, BSP issued Circular No. 
980 on the Adoption of the National Retail 
Payment System (NRPS) Framework. New 
governance arrangements under the NRPS 
Framework include BSP oversight over retail 
payment systems, the creation of an industry-
led self-governing body (the “Payment 
System Management Body” or PSMB) and the 
separation of rule setting for the various retail 
payment clearing streams from the actual 
NRPS Governance Framework
BSP
Philippine Payment Management Inc. (PPMI)
Clearing Switch Operator(s)
PhilPaSSPESONet
ACHInstaPay
ACHFuture
ACHRegulatory
oversight
Governance
Clearing
Agreements
Clearing
Infrastructures
Settlement
Source:  BSP . Available Online: http://www.bsp.gov.ph/payments/nrps_framework.asp.
PESONet and InstaPay are interbank retail 
payment systems already in operation in the 
Philippines.  The two systems are operated 
by the private sector and are regulated and 
overseen by the BSP. Both PESONet and 
InstaPay can handle large volumes of payments. 
One important difference between the two is 
that in InstaPay, payments are processed and 
credited to beneficiary accounts in real-time, 
while in PESONet,  the crediting of transactions 
is made on the same day, provided that the 
transfer is made on or before the cut-off time 
set by the sender’s bank or EMI; otherwise, 
crediting will be made on the next banking 
day. A typical cut-off time set by banks falls 
between 12:00 and 15:00.  PESONet appears to 
be better suited for payments like payroll and clearing operations (Figure 3.2). The clearing 
streams are referred to as ‘automated clearing 
houses’ or ‘ACHs’, while clearing operations 
are performed by ‘clearing switch operators’ 
or ‘CSOs’. One ‘ACH’ can only be cleared/
processed via one CSO, although one CSO may 
clear/process multiple ‘ACHs’.  Also, the BSP 
prioritized the formation of two ‘ACHs’, namely 
the batch electronic fund transfer (EFT) Credit 
or PESONet, and the real-time Low Value EFT 
Credit or InstaPay, given their perceived impact 
in driving the usage of electronic payments.
other corporate payments, social assistance 
payments such as a conditional cash transfer 
program bulk payments of individual low-value 
that can be processed in a planned manner, so 
that the funds reach the destination account on 
the planned date. Moreover, as per BSP Circular 
No. 980 of 2017, each beneficiary being paid 
through PESONet or InstaPay must receive the 
full value of the payment transaction in their 
account. Clearly, this is of utmost importance 
for social grant recipients. As of June 2020, 
there were a total of 58 direct participants  in 
PESONet. In the first two quarters of 2020, 
the volume of PESONet transaction processed 
almost reached 12.0 million payment orders 
which was as high as the 2019 entire volume of 
approximately 12.1 million payment orders.64Figure 3.2. NRPS Governance Framework
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 5464   http://www.bsp.gov.ph/payments/nrps_empowering.aspTable 3.1. Comparison of fund transfer methods in the Philippines
Source:  BSP , InstaPay Factsheet, Available Online: http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/primers/InstaPayFactSheet.pdf.*The funds transferred via PESONet are available on the same banking day, provided the sender initiated the payment within the cut-off time set by his bank or EMI.
While the Philippines payment systems have developed over the years, certain functionalities are 
missing to promote digital payments. Currently, no systems provide interoperable direct debit. Direct 
debit is a payment for the debiting of a payer’s payment account whereby a payment transaction is initiated 
by the payee on the basis of authorization given by the payer (European Central Bank, 2010). Direct debit 
is often used recurring payments such as bill payments, and loan and mortgage repayments. The industry 
is currently considering developing direct debit under NRPS. Many banks provide auto-debit arrangement 
services to their own clients in order to facilitate payments such as paying for the credit card balance.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 55Table 3.2.  Philippines: Essential banking sector data
Note: *as of March 2019
Source:  World Bank technical note based on BSP’s website and 
various reportsConcept Aug-19
Total number of banks 552
Universal 21
Privately owned 12
State owned 3
Branches of foreign banks 6
Commercial 25
Privately owned 5
Subsidiaries of foreign banks 2
Branches of foreign banks 18
Thrift banks 50
Of which, authorized to accept
demand deposits37
Rural and cooperative banks 456
Of which, authorized to accept
demand deposits 149
Number of deposit accounts at 
universal/commercial banks *48,162,126
Number of deposit accounts at thrift banks* 7,683, 597
Number of deposit accounts at 
rural/cooperative banks* 9,400,704Payment TypeFunds
Availability Maximum
Transaction
Limit  ModeService 
AvailabilityCharges Applied
InstaPayAlmost
immediate Max of
PHP50,000 Electronic24/7, all year
round Sender may bear charges; Receiver is not
charged and gets full amount sent 
PESONet Same day* No limit Electronic Banking hours
only 
Banking hours
only 
Banking hours
only Sender may bear charges; Receiver is not
charged and gets full amount sent
Checks Next Day No LimitOver-the-
counter
Over-the-
counterCharges may vary; Receiver gets full
amount on check 
Money Transfer
Agent Same Day No LimitSender may bear charges; Receiver
may also bear charges 
Stakeholders
The BSP is the country’s central monetary 
authority and banking supervisory agency, 
and is a crucial player in the country’s national 
payments system. BSP is the regulator and 
overseer of payment systems in the Philippines. 
It is also a payment system operator, being 
the owner and operator of PhilPaSS, a real-
time gross settlement (RTGS) system, which is 
the core payments system of the country. As 
part of this last role, it also provides liquidity 
facilities to PhilPaSS participants. BSP has a 
payment system oversight department which 
is an overseer of the payment system including 
RTGS that is operated by the Payments and 
Settlement Office.
Banks and non-banks provide digital payment 
services in the Philippines. Banks are the main 
payment service providers in terms of total 
value and volume of payment transactions 
processed. Under the BSP charter, all banks 
and several types of NBFIs, including their 
subsidiaries and affiliates engaged in related 
activities, are supervised and regulated by BSP. 
Banks typically offer a wider range of electronic 
payment instruments – card payments (credit 
and debit), inter-bank payments and electronic 
money. BSP has licensed 31 banks as electronic 
money issuers (EMIs).  Essential banking sector 
data are available in Table 3.2.in money changing/foreign exchange 
dealing business.
d. Remittance business refers to the 
transferring of funds or facilitating 
the movement of funds or monetary 
instruments from the sender or originator 
to a receiver or beneficiary locally and/
or internationally and undertaken by any 
financial institution.
The availability of electronic payment 
instruments is increasing in the Philippines. 
Available instruments include credit transfers, 
card payments (credit, debit and prepaid) 
and electronic money. Debit transfers are yet 
available in the Philippines. A comparison of 
payment instruments is seen on Table 3.3. Non-bank institutions offer a more limited 
range of payment instruments with innovative 
features such as e-money, linking to other 
digital services on an App. BSP-supervised 
EMIs include one non-bank financial institution 
(OmniPay) and 16 non-bank institutions (EMI-
other) including FinTech companies (Figure 
3.3). A few FinTech companies provide 
Figure 3.3.  Philippine FinTech Startups Landscape (2018)
Source:  Fintech News Singapore. Available Online: www.fintechnews.sg 
Money service businesses (MSBs) are non-
bank entities that engage in international 
and domestic remittances, money changing, 
and/or foreign exchange dealing. Within the 
concept of MSBs the following specific activities 
are considered, all of which require registration 
with the BSP:
a. Remittance and Transfer company (RTC) 
refers to any entity that provides money or 
value transfer service. 
b. Remittance sub-agent (RSA) refers 
to any person authorized by the RTC to 
perform certain relevant undertakings in 
the remittance business.
c. Money changer/Foreign exchange 
dealer refers to any entity who engages 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 5665   http://www.bsp.gov.ph/payments/cor.pdfe-commerce companies with solutions such as 
a payment gateway, e-wallet/e-payment for an 
e-commerce site. Given the nature of FinTechs 
and innovative solutions, the landscape is 
constantly changing.  As of July 2020, 103 
operators of payment system registered with 
BSP.65Table 3.3.  Comparison of Payment Instruments
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 5766  It needs to be noted that all payment instruments have acceptance costs; in the case of payment cards there are certain explicit costs for the merchants. This should not be 
       interpreted to mean that acceptance costs are high or low; a detailed contextual analysis taking into account all explicit and implicit costs needs to be done for this.
67  Certain payment card issuers or acquirers could impose specific fees for certain transactions like for examples, online bill payments, transactions at other bank ATMs and inactivity  
       fees.Instrument Payee Payer Channels
Cash – Instant liquidity
– Handling costs and risk of loss
– Safekeeping costs
– Difﬁcult to maintain audit trails– Wide acceptance
– Handling costs and risk of loss
– Difﬁcult to maintain audit trails
– Anonymity– Agent Location
– Physical interaction
– For ecommerce: Agent location 
   or Cash on Delivery (COD) at delivery
   location
Check – Funds not guaranteed*
– Clearing time required
– Costly to handle
– Highly susceptible to fraud– Might have limited acceptance
– Inconvenient
– Susceptible to fraud 
– Suitable for person-to-person
   and person/business/
   Government to business/
   person/Government– In person
– With Check truncation through
   ATMs, internet and mobile banking
– For e-commerce: Not common as
   there is a credit risk. However, it can
   be used for be used for COD or
   Pay at Agent.
Payment cards
Debit transfers– Funds guaranteed if based on online 
   authorization, which enables the
   sale to be completed immediately 
– Reconciliation is easy
– Explicit acceptance costs exist 66
– Fraud and security risks can exist if 
   adequate controls are not in place
– Dispute resolution process is 
   well deﬁned
– Clearing timelines
– Suitable for recurring payments
– Low processing costs
– Easy to reconcile (if banking partner 
   provides details)  – Clearing timelines
– Suitable for recurring payments
– Low processing costs
– Easy to reconcile (if banking partner 
   provides details)
– Can control initiation
– In the case of authenticated and pre-
   approved debit transfers, suitable for
   online payments
– Fraud and security risks can exist if 
   adequate controls are not in place.– Wide acceptance
– Convenient to use
– Could lead to over-spending if use is
   not well controlled (credit cards)
– Certain usage patterns could lead to
   high fees 67  
– Suitable for both face-to-face and
   online payments, as well as for one-
   time and recurring payments, both
   payee-initiated and payer-initiated
– Value added features might be
   included by issuers as part of product 
   packaging (for example, travel
   insurance)
– Easy to track usage
– Fraud and security concerns; but
   these are actively managed by the
   payment networks and issuers
– Account maintenance costs
– May have limited acceptance
– Suitable for recurring ﬁxed-amount 
   payments
– Often require pre-registration of the
   payee, making it unwieldy for
   unplanned and online purchases**– ATM, POS
– Agent
– Internet and mobile banking
– For e-commerce:  At merchant
   website; at agent; or on delivery at a
   hand-held POS.
– Executed automatically, mandate
   can be placed through ATM, POS,
   agent, internet and mobile banking
– For e-commerce: At merchant
   website**.
Credit Transfers – Suitable for recurring 
   payments
– Low processing costs
– Easy to reconcile (if banking 
   partner provides payer details)
– Prolongs order processing
– Cannot control initiation– Account maintenance costs
– Can control initiation
– Suitable for varying amount recurring    
   payments and for person-to-person
  payments
– Audit trails and reconciliation is easy
– Low processing costs
– Several channels available like Internet,
   ATM and mobile to initiate transaction
– Fraud and security risks can exist if
   adequate controls are not in place.– Can be placed through ATM, POS,
   Agent, Internet and mobile banking
– For e-commerce: At merchant 
   website**.
(Box continues next page)The National Strategy provides a framework to enable the government and the private sector to 
take a coordinated and systematic approach toward a clear vision. The overall vision is a financial 
system that is accessible and responsive to the needs of the entire population toward a broad-
based and inclusive growth, particularly, to ensure that this financial system also serves the 
traditionally unserved or marginalized sectors of the population. This vision is guided by a focus 
on the client.
• Presence of a wide range of financial services that serve different market segments
• Financial services are appropriately designed, priced, and tailor-fitted to market need
• Presence of a wide variety of strong, sound and duly authorized financial institutions  
 utilizing innovative delivery channels
• Effective interface of bank and non-bank products and delivery channels
• Use of technology and innovation to reach the financially excluded
• Adequately educated and protected citizenry confident to make well-informed financial  
 decisions
• Comprehensive and robust financial inclusion data and measurement
Source:  BSP (2015).Box 3.1. BSP vision for an inclusive financial systemInstrument Payee Payer Channels
Innovative payment
products (e-money
and mobile money)
"Notes: * This often limits the usage for payments between trusted parties.
             ** This is however addressed in the systems referred to in Box on Online Banking Enabled Payments.
             *** While this risk exists for other payment products as well, it is heightened in the case of innovative products, mainly because of
                   their novelty and insufﬁcient maturity and also because many of the issuers are non-banking institutions. This risk can however
                   be effectively managed by instituting mechanisms like having escrow accounts.– Funds guaranteed; enables
   completion of the sale right away
– Reconciliation is easy
– Processing costs could be low
– Fraud and security risks can exist if
   adequate controls are not in place
– Typically accepted by payee for low
   value transactions– Limited acceptance
– Convenient to use
– Easy to track usage
– Fraud and security concerns
– Risk of losing pre-funded amount if
   operator goes bankrupt*** 
– Risks related to weaknesses in new 
   technologies
– Suitable for person-to-person
   payments– ATM, POS
– Agent
– Internet and mobile banking
– For e-commerce: at merchant
   website; at agent; or on delivery at
   a hand-held POS or mobile phone.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 58Access Points
Access points to financial services are growing 
yet they are still limited. Banks’ networks with 
branches and ATMs show significant year-on-
year (y-o-y) growth. Thrift banks and rural banks 
expanded their office network by 8.7 percent 
and 4.9 percent, respectively. The number of 
branch-lite units68 has grown reaching 1,892 
units in the first quarter of 2019. The number 
68   A branch-life unit refers to any permanent office or place of business of a bank, other than its head office or a branch. A branch-lite unit performs limited banking activities and records 
       its transactions in the books of the head office or the branch to which it is annexed.of credit cooperatives and microfinance NGOs 
have also grown at a significant pace. At the 
same time, access points to e-money agents, 
POS terminals, MSBs, and pawnshops showed 
sizable decline. The number of active e-money 
agents is 26,455 out of 27,933. BSP also 
included a preliminary data on the number of 
cash agents.Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 59Source: BSP Financial Inclusion Dashboard (2019 3Q).
Available Online: http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/Publications/2019/ FIDashboard_3Q2019.pdf
Expanding access points to payment services 
is a challenge in promoting financial inclusion. 
Establishing a full-service branch has serious 
cost implications in areas with low financial 
transactions in particular areas at a low level 
of lending activities.  This is relevant to the 
Philippines where the numbers of branches and 
ATMs per 100,000 adults for some regions have 
been relatively low (Figure 3.4). In the quest to 
expand access to payment services in a cost-
effective manner, banks and other institutions 
began using local entities like small shops to 
provide basic payment and banking services 
on their behalf. Brazil was one of the early Banks and Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)*
2018 Q3 2019 Q3 Growth
Banks (head ofﬁce, branches, and other ofﬁces) 12,100 12,638 4.4%
Universal & Commercial Banks 6,562 6,815 3.9%
Thrift Banks 2,562 2,616 2.1%
Rural & Cooperative Banks 2,976 3,207 7.8%
ATMs 21,095 21,437 1.6%
On-site ATMs 11,720 11,864 1.2%
Off-site ATMs 9,375 9,573 2.1%
*Nationwide count only (i.e., excludes ofﬁces/ATMS of Philippine banks abroad)
2018 Q3 2019 Q3 Growth
Number of operating branch-lite units 1,762 2,105 19.5%
Number of cities and municipalities with branch-lite 756 841 11.2%
Number of cities and municipalities without head 
ofﬁce/branch but with branch-lite156 187 19.9%
"Branch-lite" gives banks the ﬂexibility to determine the appropriate size and model of a banking ofﬁce for a speciﬁc area or locality
based on market needs (BSP Circular No. 987)Branch-lite
[1] Other NBFIs include lending investors and ﬁnancing companies (that are afﬁliated with BSP-supervised banks), credit card companies,
     investment companies, securities dealers/brokers, government NBFIs and credit granting entities (excluding MF NGOs) which are supervised by the BSP.
[2] Preliminary data based on banks implementing/piloting the case agent model (BSP Circular No. 940).
[3] Total number of registered e-money agents, of which 26,455 are considered active in 2018 based on preliminary data. This count includes agents that
     are pawnshops, MSBs, and cooperatives.
[4] Sourced from the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA). In 2018, there were 28,784 coops in the registry.
[5] Based only from a sample of MF NGOs that responded to the BSP data request.2018 Q3 2019 Q3 Growth
NSSLAs 197 200 1.5%
Pawnshops 11,563 13,497 16.7%
Money Service Businesses (MSBs) 5,290 6,818 28.9%
Other NBFIs (1) 218 235 7.8%
Cash agents (2) ---
2017 2018 Growth
E-money Agents (3) 41,990 27,993 -33.3%
Point of Sale (POS) Terminals 119,559 103,852 -13.1%
Credit Cooperatives (4) 3,664 3,881 5.9%
Microﬁnance NGOs (5) (2016 vs. 2017) 2,603 2,861 9.9%17,057Other Financial Service Access PointsTable 3.4.  Select Data on Financial Inclusion in the Philippines
adopters of this model and various countries 
have begun adopting this (World Bank, 2012). 
Countries introduce a regulatory framework for 
using a third-party entity (typically a merchant) 
as an agent of a financial institution. To promote 
access points, BSP issued a regulation on cash 
agents (Circular No. 940). The cash agent 
regulation issued under Circular No. 940 allows 
banks to tap third party entities to accept and 
disburse cash on the bank’s behalf, subject to 
existing rules on outsourcing and compliance 
with certain conditions. In 2019, over 17,000 
cash agents were reported.To further complement its effort to expand 
access points, BSP issued a regulation on 
branch-lite unit69  (Circular 987). The circular 
aims to promote greater access to efficient 
and competitive banking services through the 
adoption of proportionate regulatory framework 
that provides banks with flexibility to execute Source:  BSPFigure 3.4.  Number of Branches and ATMs per 100,000 adults across the regions of the Philippines (June 2018).
69  A branch-life unit shall refer to any permanent office or place of business of a bank, other than its head office or a branch. A branch-lite unit performs limited banking activities and 
       records its transactions in the books of the head office or the branch to which it is annexed. 
70  BSP Circular 987 (2017)Recent Legal and Regulatory Developmenttheir strategies and enables them to innovate in 
line with their business model70. As of the third 
quarter 2019, the number of operating branch-
lite unit in the country has two-digit growth 
year-on-year at 19.5 percent, faster than the 
y-o-y growth in the 1st quarter of 2019 at 12.0 
percent.
Several important milestones with respect 
to creating the legal foundations of digital 
payments have been achieved. The legislature 
has enacted the new central bank charter, as 
well as well as the National Payment Systems 
Act. The new laws have formalized the role 
of the BSP as the overseer and the regulator 
of the national payments system, clarified 
several concepts such as settlement finality or 
netting, as well as paved the road for greater 
participation of non-banks in payment systems.
BSP has made continuous efforts to create an 
enabling regulatory environment to promote 
digital financial services and payments. 
These regulatory reforms intend to increase 
transaction account opening and usage. Often, 
fees associated with opening, maintaining, and 
using accounts can be high. Bank accounts that 
are often referred to as ‘no frills’ accounts that have no minimum balance requirements and 
low fees for transactions have been introduced 
in many countries to promote account opening 
and usage. The Philippines introduced such 
an account called a basic deposit account. 
BSP issued Basic Deposit Account (BDA) – BSP 
Circular No. 992. The BDA is designed to meet 
the need of the unbanked for a low-cost, no-
frills deposit account which they can open even 
if they do not have the standard identification 
documents. The regulation enables banks to 
offer such basic accounts, free of charge, and 
with a prescribed bundle of payment services—
such as free cash withdrawals—included without 
any additional fees. The framework allows banks 
to design their own BDA as long as it meets 
key functions such as no dormancy charges, a 
maximum balance being PHP 50,000. Banks can 
enjoy zero required reserve requirements when 
they offer BDA. In addition, BSP issued a series 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 60Figure 3.5. Transaction Account Ownership among ASEAN  
Total Percentage of Adults (15+)
Source: BSPof regulations such as No. 1033 (Amendments 
to Regulations on Electronic Banking Services 
and Other Electronic Operations), No. 1049 
(Rules and Regulations on the Registration of 
Operators of Payment Systems) and No. 1055 
(Adoption of National Quick Response Code 
Conduct) in order to create enabling regulations 
that are intended to promote digital payments.
Transaction Accounts – Access and Usage
Access to a transaction account is usually an 
entry point to the financial system. Efficient, 
accessible and safe retail payment systems 
and services are critical for greater financial 
inclusion; and a transaction account is an 
essential financial service in its own right and 
can also serve as a gateway to other financial 
services (CPMI and World Bank Group, 2016). A 
transaction account is referred to as an account 
that enables a customer to make and receive 
payments and to store monetary value with 
a bank or other payment service providers. 
Expanding access to a transaction account to 
those without access to financial services is 
critical to promote financial inclusion via using 
digital payments. According to the Global 
Findex, globally 52 percent of adults made 
at least one digital payment in a year, which 
represents around 76 percent of those with 
access to a transaction account.
With the development of payment systems, 
the Philippines has a great opportunity to 
increase digital payments; however, low level 
of access to transaction accounts remain as a 
key obstacle. In 2017, only 34.6 percent of adults 
had accounts; slightly up from 31.3 percent and 
26.6 percent in 2014 and 2011, respectively. 
Account ownership in the Philippines is lagging 
the rest of ASEAN 5 countries (Indonesia – 49 
percent, Malaysia – 85 percent, Singapore – 98 
percent and Thailand – 82 percent) and East Asia 
and the Pacific Region (71 percent) (Figure 3.5). 
Wealthier adults are more than twice as likely 
than poorer adults to have an account. Among 
adults in the richest 60 percent of households 
in the Philippines, 45 percent have an account, 
against 18 percent of those in the poorest 40 
percent of households.The unbanked in the Philippines cite various 
barriers to getting an account, including 
distance (41 percent), high costs (53 percent), 
and lack of documentation – such as ID (45 
percent). Those numbers are roughly twice the 
developing world averages. Account ownership 
is nearly two times higher among urban adults 
than rural adults. In the Philippines, 46 percent 
of urban residents have an account, against 
only 27 percent of rural dwellers.
Making and receiving digital payments 
remains low in the Philippines. About 25 
percent of the Filipino adults made or received 
digital payments, up from 20 percent in 2014. In 
rural areas, only 18 percent of the Filipino adults 
made or received digital payments, up from 17 
percent in 2014.  
Moving routine cash payments into accounts 
could increase financial inclusion in the 
Philippines. Based on the Findex data, it is 
estimated that if businesses paid unbanked 
employees digitally instead of in cash, the overall 
share of unbanked adults in the Philippines 
could drop by 29 percent – and 10 million of 
these workers have a mobile phone which could 0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Cambodia
Indonesia
Lao PDR
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Thailand
Singapore
Vietnam
EAP
2011 2014 2017
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 61The COVID-19 pandemic and ECQ created 
emergent needs to provide financial support 
to those significantly affected. Under the 
Bayanihan to Heal as One Act (Republic Act 
11469), an emergency subsidy is provided to 
around 18 million households between PHP 
5,000 and 8,000 a month for two months. The 
existing Pantawid (conditional cash transfer 
program) beneficiaries will receive the subsidy 
together with Pantawid payments through Land 
Bank’s cash card (a single-purpose prepaid 
card) and rice farmers will receive it with a rice 
subsidy in cash. 
However, many of the emergency subsidy 
are not beneficiaries of either program. Over 
65 percent of Filipino adults do not have 
any transaction accounts (bank or e-money 
accounts) according to the Global Findex in 
2017. The Department of Social Welfare and 
Development (DSWD) has made a significant 
effort to deliver the emergency subsidy 
payments as quickly as possible provided the 
restrictions such as social distancing are met. 
Private sector financial institutions have also 
Source:  World Bank (2019), World Bank (2020)Box 3.2.  Digital payments solutions in the COVID-19 pandemic
The BSP has prioritized strengthening financial 
literacy and consumer protection of the users 
of payment services, as part of its financial 
inclusion outreach efforts. This includes 
outreach activities, as well as alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms (the bank maintains a 
desk where members of the public can lodge 
complaints or concerns with respect to financial 
services received). While the regulator remains actively responded to the needs to distribute 
such emergency subsidy digital.
DSWD have been exploring partnership with 
E-money issuers such as G-Cash and PayMaya to 
deliver digital payments. The Rizal Commercial 
Banking Corporation (RCBC) also deployed 
its ATMGo (a POS terminal) to remote areas 
to disburse payments. Temporary relaxation 
of customer due diligence requirements by 
BSP also enabled financial institutions to offer 
transaction accounts for emergency payments 
and other purposes. At the same time, challenges 
such as identification of beneficiaries, updating 
IT systems, and maximizing available payment 
system infrastructures in the country remain. 
For example, a lack of coordination among 
stakeholders could create many bilateral digital 
payment solutions which could increase costs of 
operation and confusion among beneficiaries. 
Although it is challenging to develop a strategic 
approach at the time of crisis, best practices from 
different countries could help the government 
implement practical delivery mechanisms.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 62help facilitate the switch to electronic payroll. In 
addition, if the government digitized payments 
of wages, social benefits, and pensions, the 
share of unbanked women could fall by up to a fifth – including 3 million with a mobile phone.  
See Box 3.2 for digital payments solution during 
the COVID-19 pandemic.
reluctant to directly intervene in the market and 
take part in setting prices of financial services, 
it aims to foster market-driven pricing and 
enhance transparency by providing consumer 
information—for example, the BSP website 
shows a list of fees charged by BSP supervised 
financial institutions for electronic fund transfer 
(EFT) services under the NRPS Framework.
Digital Payments for e-Commerce
Digital payments facilitate e-commerce 
transactions. E-commerce policies and 
regulations are considered potential enablers 
for the expansion of digital financial services 
mainly because (a) e-commerce companies 
can push customers to become familiar with a 
digital interface and make payments through digital channels, (b) they are becoming financial 
service providers for the stakeholders along 
their value chain, and (c) they are an important 
source of alternative data on current or potential 
customers for financial institutions (World Bank, 
2017; ASEAN and World Bank, 2018). Figure 3.6 
illustrates the e-commerce payment system.71  Purchases of digital goods, goods above P50,000, overseas sellers, and multiple unsuccessful deliveries.E-commerce providers began to remove a 
Cash-on-Delivery (COD) payment option. 
Shopee (Ph) recently removed COD as a 
payment option due to operational costs 
caused by issues such as refusal of receiving 
parcels. Lazada (Ph) also removed COD for 
certain types of transactions71 while promoting 
digital payments. Foodpanda (a food delivery 
app) initially allowed COD in the first weeks 
of ECQ but later it removed the cash payment 
option. This would help the e-commerce 
platform to reduce operations costs associated 
with delivery refusal. The shift also benefits 
increasing the use of digital payments since 
banks and payment service providers will take 
care of payment and risks associated with 
payment. 
E-commerce platforms provide digital wallet 
and payment services to facilitate digital 
payments for transactions on the platforms. Two 
Source:  World Bank presentation (May 2019).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 63largest e-commerce platforms in the Philippines 
offer e-wallet and e-payment services where 
customers open e-wallet account or e-payment 
account on the platform. For example, Shopee 
partners with AirPay Technology, an EMI, and 
offers ShopeePay (in-App wallet) to facilitate 
digital payment transactions. By partnering with 
a BSP supervised EMI, the e-commerce platform 
provides a regulated digital payment service to 
its customers through a third-party payment 
service provider. 
Consumer protection is highly important to 
promote digital payments for e-commerce. 
Consumer confidence in the right to return 
a defective product and receive a refund 
influences a decision to use digital payments on 
e-commerce platform. Addressing disagreement 
between a seller or an e-commerce platform 
and a consumer in the framework of consumer 
protection is critical.
E-commerce Website
E-commerce Website
E-commerce Website
Authentication
Authentication
AuthenticationPayment
Gateway
Issuer Acquirer Payment
System1
32 9
4 8
5 6 7Figure 3.6  E-Commerce Payment ProcessesBox 3.3.  Enhancements to the ACH to Support Authenticate e-Commerce TransactionsDigital payments are also being used for MSME 
payroll and supplier payments, and to disburse 
and collect loans. Digitizing these processes 
could reduce the cost to serve and form a part 
In the recent past, in many countries the clearing 
and settlement features of the ACH have been 
leveraged to support online e-commerce 
transactions as well. ACH by design are 
deferred settlement systems with no means for 
online authentication and authorization of the 
payer. This has generally resulted in ACH being 
limited to certain types of transactions like bulk 
payments, person-to-person transfers, and 
recurring payments.
 
The increasing popularity of Internet banking and 
mobile banking, has, however, been leveraged 
in some countries to add on an authentication 
and online authorization capability to traditional 
ACHs. A typical transaction sequence in such an 
arrangement is described below. 
1. The payer is ready to checkout his purchases 
of goods/services at the payee’s website and 
clicks on the available payment options. 
2. One of the options could be the new payment 
option—ACH-enabled payment. 
3. The payer chooses this option and is asked to 
enter his bank account number and other ACH 
specific routing information like bank routing 
identification. 
Source:  World Bank (2019), World Bank (2020)of an overall re-engineering of bank lending 
that automates MSME lending and servicing 
to make it a more viable product (World Bank, 
forthcoming ).
4. This information along with the purchase 
information is passed onto the additional  
component added to the ACH, which uses 
this information to re-direct the payer to the 
website of the payer’s bank where he can 
authenticate himself and the payer responds 
back to the ACH component with the results of 
the authentication. At this stage, the rules of the 
ACH are modified to bind the payers’ bank to the 
transaction when a successful response. 
5. Based on the assurance that the payers’ bank 
has verified and committed to accepting the 
transaction when presented for settlement, the 
payee completes the transaction. 
6. There are two options for processing the 
settlement—either the payee can request his  
bank to process a direct debit to the payer’s 
account based on the assurance received in 
Step 4, or the payer’s bank can be obligated to 
process a credit transfer to the payee’s bank 
within a specified period of time. 
7. The standard ACH clearing and settlement 
process then kicks in. 
8. There could be other variations where Step 
4 can be concluded on a mobile phone by 
exchange of SMS messages, or by entering a 
PIN at a POS terminal, and so on.
Digital Payments for Government
Regarding payments to and from the 
government, the banking infrastructure is 
largely used for the payment of taxes and 
other mandatory contributions. In recent years 
there has been notable progress in migrating 
some types of government payments from 
cash and checks to electronic. This has been 
achieved largely for payments made by the 
central government to individuals, specifically for what concerns government payrolls in 
urban and semi-urban areas, as well as payment 
of pensions of the Social Security System. In 
terms of volume, most of such payments are 
made in cash at branches. These payments can 
also be made at the premises of other payment 
service providers (PSPs) and/or their agents, as 
well as through some electronic platforms (for 
example, some e-wallets). 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 64A low level of Filipino’s account ownership is 
a key constraint to usage of digital payments. 
Access to and usage of a transaction account 
is a key driver to initiating digital payments. 
Although access to a transaction account alone 
will not increase digital payment transactions, 
such account will provide opportunities for the 
account holder to make and receive payments 
and store value according to their needs. 
A lack of national ID has created a challenge 
for consumers to produce multiple IDs that 
are often required by commercial banks. The 
Government of the Philippines is currently 
developing a national ID system to implement 
the Philippine ID System (PhilSys) Act of 2018. 
Adequate implementation of the national ID 
system would facilitate access to and usage 
of transaction accounts. BSP has renewed its 
financial inclusion commitment to 70 percent 
of adults in 2023. The implementation of 
the national ID system will play a key role in 
advancing digital payments and economy.
While 45 financial institutions joined the 
InstaPay scheme, and 58 joined the PESONet 
scheme, the membership is not yet universal. 
In InstaPay, 13 participating institutions 
are receiver-only institutions. These do not 
include rural and thrift banks, the majority, of 
which, remain outside the interoperable retail 
payments infrastructure. On the other hand, 
InstaPay and PESONet were joined by the two 
largest e-money issuers, which made it possible 
for some wallet owners to make and receive 
payments to and from different providers or 
banks. The role of BSP as the payment system 
72  The payee originates the payment order for the purpose of collecting funds from the payer (“payee-pull” instrument). DDTs are typically used for person-to-business, business-to-
       business or person-to-government payments, for example for the payment of utility bills and installment payments, and typically need to be set up in advance by the payer by way  
       of providing explicit permission to the payee to collect funds through a DDT (Payment System Development Group, the World Bank)
73  See Chapter 2 on Philippine Digital Infrastructure.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 65Government agencies and payment industry 
players developed EGov Pay, an online 
facility for government collections and 
disbursements. EGov Pay enables citizens to 
pay electronically to the government. A user 
initiates payments through the Land Bank of the 
Philippines’ (LBP’s) Link.Biz Portal which then 
directs the user to the Philippine Clearing House 
Corporation’s (PCHC’s) PayGate platform where 
Constraints to Promoting Digital Paymentsthe user chooses the PSP from which funds 
will be transferred to the government via the 
PESONet. As of launch date, nine government 
agencies including the Bureau of Internal 
Revenue, Department of Trade and Industry 
(DTI), Philippine National Police and some local 
government units have been onboarded in the 
EGov Pay Facility. As of end April, 56 government 
agencies have joined the facility.
overseer to be a catalyst continues to be 
important to develop the National Payments 
System to further promote the use of digital 
payments.
Available payment instruments are limited 
since there are only two payment streams. As 
shown in Figure 3.2, by design, the number of 
ACHs is still limited to two – batch payment and 
real-time low value credit transfer payment. 
To provide payment services for the need 
to support economic activities, a variety of 
payment instruments can be developed such as 
direct debit transfers72. In addition, each ACH has 
its own membership structure and customers 
may not be able to use all payment instruments 
depending on their financial institutions access 
to ACH, which can be direct or indirect.
Gaps in the IT and telecommunications 
infrastructure are substantial obstacles to 
promoting digital payments in the Philippines. 
Access to digital infrastructure in the Philippines 
is still limited.73 The quality of broadband and 
mobile connections lags behind other ASEAN 
economies. Remote communities often lack 
access to low bandwidth internet through 
a mobile network — and this even includes 
branches of thrift or rural banks operating 
in those areas. At the same time, even areas 
covered by the mobile networks suffer from 
service quality issues: network connections 
are slow, base transceiver stations (BTS) run 
at capacity, while connection errors abound. 
As a result, large parts of the population are 
excluded from the potential of effectively using 
digital payments in their everyday transactions.Privacy and security concerns have 
constrained consumer trust on digital 
payments. Some consumers do not feel safe 
in using digital payments for fear of privacy 
and security breaches, or fraudulent online 
business practices. These security concerns 
have partly contributed to the preference for 
Policy Recommendations
Encouraging wider participation in digital 
payments can facilitate the recovery of 
activities towards the ‘new normal’. Since 
the COVID-19 outbreak, a need to shift to 
digital payments has become more eminent. 
The use of digital payments has surged, and 
cash withdrawal and check usage declined 
during the community quarantine restrictions. 
However, majority of Filipinos, especially 
the poor, continue to rely heavily on cash. 
Such interventions include the following:  
• Mandate government agencies to make 
and receive payments digitally to the extent 
possible.
• Maximize the usage of payment system 
infrastructures and payment services 
including private sector payment service 
providers in delivering emergency subsidy 
payments and disburse payments digitally as 
much as possible. In so doing, avoid bilateral 
and duplicate digital payment solutions 
for similar programs which would create 
confusion at LGU levels and would not be 
sustainable.
• Encourage e-commerce and other online 
platforms such as logistics and ride-sharing 
providers to drop cash payment option 
and accept a wide array of digital payment 
instruments, and require the   establishment 
of a strong consumer protection framework 
including return and refund policy.
Although the country’s policy and regulatory 
environment is becoming more enabling for 
providers and customers of digital payments, 
many Filipinos forego using digital payments 
due to low account ownership and/or lack 
of trust in the security and efficacy of these 
digital financial services. The government, in cooperation with the private sector, should 
therefore continue its efforts in promoting the 
use of digital payments by implementing the 
measures listed below.
The BSP should continue to work with 
government agencies to promote the use of 
electronic payments through NRPS where 
possible.  The government is typically the largest 
user of the National Payments System and it 
can often influence the design and governance 
of the payment systems. The government can 
crowd in private sector entities. This would 
facilitate the expansion of ACHs with multiple 
payment instruments and innovation. The 
EGov Pay facility can continue to expand the 
number of participating government agencies 
and PESONet participating payment service 
providers for more users. At the same time, 
users should have payment instrument options 
to choose in making the payment including 
cards and e-money.
BSP and other government agencies should 
expand access to transaction accounts 
where possible given the low level of account 
ownership in the Philippines. The government’s 
development programs often use payment 
services such as conditional and unconditional 
cash transfers. Such payments are usually 
recurring payments and create an opportunity 
to use transaction accounts. The government 
should use every opportunity to increase access 
and use of such transaction accounts. 
BSP should undertake a study of measuring 
the cost of payment instruments, which could 
further promote reforms. The role of payment 
system overseer is essential for payment 
systems reforms – in this case, promoting digital cash payment for online purchases for fear of 
non-delivery of paid items.  Improving trust in 
the digital payment system requires ramping up 
security measures including a comprehensive 
consumer protection framework and a strong 
grievance mechanism.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 66payments. While efforts to expand access to 
financial services through transaction accounts 
continue, efforts to promote digital payments, 
over paper-based instruments, namely cash and 
checks, should be made. In order to develop a 
Retail payment systems play an important role 
in the smooth functioning of an economy and 
inefficiencies in the retail payments market 
can have cascading effects throughout the 
economy. While there are issues responsible 
for the persistence of inefficiencies in retail 
payment markets, the lack of a coherent, holistic 
strategy for the development of retail payment 
systems is among the most common. To develop 
such a strategy, it is important to economically 
substantiate the migration from less cost 
efficient retail payment instruments (typically 
cash and paper-based instruments) to more cost-
efficient ones (typically electronic payments). A 
good understanding of the costs associated with 
different retail payment instruments is therefore 
needed to inform the cost-benefit analysis of 
Source:  World Bank (2016)Box 3.4.  Measuring Retail Payment Costs
digital payment reform drive.
The results of a cost study based on this 
methodology can help decision makers to agree 
on the targeted gains in efficiency in their retail 
payments system, define an implementation plan 
for achieving a desired future mix of payment 
instruments, and provide information for all 
stakeholders involved in the retail payments 
market. By applying the methodology for 
measuring the costs of retail payments provided 
in this document, cross country comparability 
and benchmarking is possible and the experience 
of other countries can be taken into consideration 
when developing or adjusting the national retail 
payments strategy based on the results of the 
cost study.design of policy interventions, understanding 
the cost of different payment instruments and 
inducing the change of payment behaviors 
would be helpful (Box 3.4).
The Government should implement PhilSys in a 
timely manner. A national ID is a critical enabler 
of the delivery of public services, social safety 
net, and access to financial services, among 
others. The role of national ID in promoting 
digital payments may be limited to facilitating 
onboarding, opening accounts, and KYC 
procedures. Leveraging electronic KYC could 
further facilitate access to financial services 
remotely. Along with the payment system 
infrastructures, a national ID system is a critical 
infrastructure for development in many sectors. 
The government should create disincentives 
to use paper-based payment instruments 
and incentives to use electronic payments. 
The government can use tax incentives to 
encourage businesses and individuals to adopt 
digital payments. It can also set the fee for 
check clearing higher than the fee for using 
digital payment instruments. The government should strengthen regulations 
and create programs that manage the risks of 
adopting digital financial technology. While 
the use of digital payments can facilitate 
significant benefits for the economy, it also 
poses risks that can compromise data privacy 
and cybersecurity, and inhibit financial inclusion 
instead of promoting it. Data trails created 
by digital financial services can expose users 
to misuse of personal data. Digital financial 
services also rely on data infrastructures that 
are vulnerable to cyber-attacks and system 
failures. Unequal access to digital infrastructure 
and technology can exclude the poor and those 
living in remote areas from reaping the benefits 
of using digital payments.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 67ASEAN and World Bank (2018). “ Advancing Digital Financial 
Inclusion in ASEAN - Policy and Regulatory  Enablers.” 
Jakarta: ASEAN Secretariat. 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (2015). “The National Strategy 
   for Financial Inclusion.” Manila: BSP.
Committee on Payments and Market Structures and World 
Bank Group (2016). “Payment Aspects of  Financial 
Inclusion.”  Washington DC: World Bank.
European Central Bank (2010).  “The Payment System.” 
Edited by T. Kokkola. Frankfurt: European Central Bank.
International Monetary Fund (2019). “Financial Access
Survey: 2019 Trends and Developments.”  Washington DC: 
IMF.
Piad, Tyrone Jasper (2020). “E-money transfers seen to grow 
even after ECQ.” BusinessMirror.ph, May 2020. Accessible 
online:https://businessmirror.com.ph/2020/05/11/e-
money-transfers-seen-to-grow-even-after-ecq/World Bank (2012). “Developing a comprehensive retail 
payments strategy.”  Washington DC: The World Bank.
__________ (2016).  “A Practical Guide for Measuring Retail 
Payment Costs.”  Washington DC: The World Bank.
__________ (2017). “Global Findex Database 2017.” Washington 
DC: The World Bank.
__________ (2020). “The Payment System Landscape in the 
Philippines.”  Washington DC: The World Bank.
__________ (forthcoming). “The National Payments System of t
the Philippines.” Washington DC: The World Bank.
__________ (forthcoming). “FinTech and MSME in the 
Philippines.”  Washington DC: The World Bank.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 68ReferencesCHAPTER 4
STATE OF LOGISTICS
FOR SMALL PARCELS IN
THE PHILIPPINES
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 6974  Statista considers an e-commerce market that encompasses the sale of physical goods via a digital channel to a private end user (business-to-consumer [B2C]). Incorporated in 
      this definition are purchases via desktop computer (including notebooks and laptops) as well as purchases via mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets. The following are 
      not included in the e-commerce market: digitally distributed services (see instead: eServices), digital media downloads or streams, digitally distributed goods in B2B markets nor 
      digital purchase or resale of used, defective or repaired goods (reCommerce and customer-to-customer [C2C]). All monetary figures refer to the annual gross revenue and do not 
      factor in shipping costs.
75  The figures from We Are Social represent sales of physical goods via digital channel on any device to private end user, and do not include digital media, digital services such as travel 
      software, B2B products and services, resale of used goods or sales between private persons (person-to-person [P2P]).
76 Data from We are Social and Hootsuite: https://datareportal.com digital-in-the-philippines?utm_source=Reports&utm_medium=PDF&utm_name=Digital_2019&utm_content=Country_
      Link_SlideWith an expanding domestic e-commerce 
consumer base, the Philippines can increase its 
significance in the regional and global digital 
market. The consumption-fueled economic 
growth, improving telecommunications 
infrastructure, and a growing proportion of the 
population with internet connectivity, especially 
through mobile phones, are some of the key 
factors that make the Philippines a major player 
of e-commerce in Southeast Asia. According 
to the Statista’s Digital Market Outlook, the 
Philippine e-commerce market74 revenue has 
been expanding and posted US$1.1 billion in 
revenues as of early 2020. It is projected to 
grow at annual rates of 7.9 percent and reach 
about US$1.5 billion by 2024. 
  
As of January 2020, even before the COVID-19 
pandemic, almost half of the 105 million 
Filipinos were already buying goods and 
services online. According to Statista, 50.3 
million individuals have used e-commerce as 
of January 2020 in the Philippines, and this is 
expected to rise to 54.7 million by 2024. The 
average revenue from e-commerce transactions 
amounted to US$21.7 per user, translating to 
almost US$1.1 billion in sales.75  Additionally, 
annual surveys conducted by Global Web 
Index from 2015 to 202076  suggested an 
increasing share of internet users engaging in 
various e-commerce activities (Figure 4.1). In 
the latest survey conducted in January 2020, 
76 percent of those surveyed have purchased 
a product online using any device such as a 
laptop, desktop, or mobile device, while 91 
percent visited an online retail store. In 2019, 
online spending on other goods and services 
amounted to US$0.3 billion on electronics 
and physical media; US$0.2 billion on fashion 
and beauty; US$0.2 billion on furniture and 
appliances; US$0.15 billion on toys, hobbies, Yet, the Philippines ranks the lowest in 
terms of average revenue per consumer 
and e-commerce usage among its regional 
peers. Despite the increased revenues and 
positive prospect on e-commerce growth in the 
Philippines, its average e-commerce revenue 
per user ranked the lowest compared to other 
Southeast Asian (SEA) countries as of January 
2020 (Figure 4.2). These indicators suggest 
that there is substantial room for the growth 
of e-commerce in the Philippines, on the 
back of its growing internet and smartphone 
penetration, rising middle class, and expanding 
young population. 0%25%50%75%100%
Jan-16 Jan-17 Jan-18 Jan-19 Jan-20
Searched for an online product or service to buy
Visited an online retail store
Purchased product or service online
Made an online purchase via laptop or desktop computer
Made an online purchase via a mobile deviceShare of internet users aged 16-64 who engaged in
e-commerce activities in the past 30 days 
Source: Global Web Index survey results reported by We Are Social and 
Hootsuite Figure 4.1.  A growing number of internet users are engaging in 
various e-commerce 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 70Introduction and Context
do-it-yourself (DIY);  US$0.15 billion on food; 
and US$0.05 billion on digital music.  Source:  Statista
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 71Even prior to the epidemic, Filipino SMEs 
have begun selling online and may have 
already gained some benefits from going 
digital. Filipino companies, from SMEs to giant 
corporations, are complementing their existing 
brick and mortar stores with e-commerce to 
broaden their consumer base and expand 
their market. Many e-commerce merchants 
also set up Facebook and Instagram pages 
where they post images and details of their 
products to enable online browsers to enquire 
and review product details directly with the 
company or the merchant for a better-informed 
purchase. A 2018 survey on SMEs in the Asia 
Pacific, including 500 SMEs in the Philippines,77  
indicated that 96 percent of the surveyed SMEs 
use e-commerce which helped generate 52 
percent of their revenues, while 89 percent of 
them also use mobile commerce. Furthermore, 
the survey also revealed that 95 percent of the 
SMEs use social media tools and 81 percent of 
them also use emerging technology to improve 
supply chain and distribution (Figure 4.3).SMEs use e-commerce from which
52% of their revenue are generated
96%SMEs use mobile commerce
89%
SMEs use social media tools which
account for 48% of their revenue
95%SMEs use emerging technology
to improve supply chain
and distribution channels
81%
Yes No
Source:  FedEx Business Insights, “E-Commerce use of selected SMEs”Figure 4.3.  A number of SMEs are already realizing the 
benefits of going digitalFigure 4.2. The Philippines’ e-Commerce revenue per user ranked 
lowest in SEA
675.7 
213.2 
148.4 136.4 
58.4 46.4 21.7 
Singapore Malaysia Indonesia Thailand Vietnam Cambodia PhilippinesAverage E-commerce Revenue per User
in January 2020 (in US$) 
77  The 2018 survey results were obtained from “Global is the New Local: The Changing International Trade Patterns of Small Businesses in Asia Pacific”. The study surveyed 4,573 SMEs 
      across Asia Pacific, including 500 respondents from the Philippines, and was conducted by a private firm commissioned by FedEx. 
      Sources: http://fedexbusinessinsights.com/en/sme/global-is-the-new-local/, http://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1046522 , https://www.bworldonline.com/local-smes-plan-to-increase-
      exports-outside-asia-pacific/
78  https://www.sunstar.com.ph/article/1852782Furthermore, the recent COVID-19 pandemic 
is forcing consumers and businesses to go 
digital.   Quarantine restrictions brought about 
by the pandemic starting on March 15, 2020, 
indicate a substantial fall in retail activity, 
with analytics on freely available big data 
indicating an 80 percent drop in visits to malls, 
restaurants, and movie theaters (Figure 4.4).  
According to Google Trends, consumer taste 
has moved towards increased consumption in 
movie streaming and getting delivery, owing to 
restrictions on leaving the house (Figure 4.5). 
This transformation is paralleled by banking 
reports of surges in the use of digital payments 
and online transactions.78-100-50050
15-Feb 21-Feb
27-Feb
4-Mar10-Mar
16-Mar 22-Mar 28-Mar
3-Apr 9-AprRetail and recreation mobility compared to
January 6 - February 3, 2020 baseline  Figure 4.4. Visits to retail locations have dropped by over
80 percentFigure 4.5. People’s interest and desires have changed since the ECQ
To fully take advantage of the new economic 
realities, Filipino SMEs need access to cheaper 
and more reliable means of bringing in inputs 
and delivering their products. As more SMEs 
are becoming aware of the potential gains of 
transacting online, greater demand for small 
parcel deliveries may ensue to support the 
SMEs’ smaller scale of operations. Normally, 
large corporations can cheaply import input 
materials and export products by taking advantage of high-volume shipments. However, 
local SMEs operate on a much smaller scale 
and usually face high shipping and delivery 
costs when importing smaller batches of 
raw materials, which limits their production 
possibilities. Thus, more reliable and cheaper 
logistics and transportation of smaller parcels 
may allow local SMEs to reduce costs, improve 
productivity, and potentially invest in more 
innovation.020406080100120
1-Jan 8-Jan
15-Jan 22-Jan
29-Jan
5-Feb
12-Feb
19-Feb
26-Feb
4-Mar
11-Mar 18-Mar 25-Mar
1-Apr 8-AprInterest over time
Travel Netﬂix Delivery
Source:  Google Trends (April 15, 2020)Source:  FedEx Business Insigha Source: Google COVID-19 Community 
Mobility (May 9, 2020) ts, “E-Commerce use of selected SMEs”
The cost of logistics in the Philippines is 
among the highest in ASEAN. According to a 
policy brief made by the International Finance 
Corporations (IFC), logistics costs accounted 
for about 27 percent of sales of manufacturing 
firms in the Philippines in 2017, the highest 
among selected Southeast Asian countries. The 
Philippines was compared to Indonesia (21.4 
percent), Vietnam (16.3 percent), and Thailand 
(11.11 percent), where a similar methodology 
was applied. The same survey links low 
logistics performance in the Philippines to 
high logistics costs and identifies reliability as 
79  The Doing Business’ Trading Across Borders methodology on the import and export case studies assume different traded products. It is assumed that each economy imports a 
     standardized shipment of 15 metric tons of containerized auto parts (HS 8708) from its natural import partner—the economy from which it imports the largest value (price times 
     quantity) of auto parts. It is assumed that each economy exports the product of its comparative advantage (defined by the largest export value) to its natural export partner—the 
     economy that is the largest purchaser of this product. Precious metal and gems, mineral fuels, oil products, live animals, residues and waste of foods and products as well as 
     pharmaceu ticals are excluded from the list of possible export products, however, and in these cases the second largest product category is considered as needed. 
     Source: https://www.doingbusiness.org/en/methodology/trading-across-bordersThe State of Logistics in the Philippines
the leading supply chain performance issue 
for stakeholders (Figure 4.6). The World Bank 
Ease of Doing Business Report includes Trading 
Across Border (TAB) as one of the indicators 
that measure time and cost (excluding tariffs), 
associated compliance, border compliance, 
and domestic transport – within the overall 
process of exporting or importing a shipment 
of goods79 in the country. Table 4.1 shows the 
steady decline of the Philippines’ performance 
over the last 9 years, moving from 61st place 
out of 183 countries in 2011 to 104th out of 190 
countries in 2019. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 722011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20192018 vs.
2019 2011 vs.
2019 
Brunei Darussalam 52 35 40 39 46 121 142 144 149 -5 -97
Indonesia 47 39 37 54 62 105 108 112 116 -4 -69
Thailand 12 17 20 24 36 36 56 57 59 -2 -47
Singapore 1 1 1 1 1 41 41 42 45 -3 -44
Philippines 61 51 53 42 65 95 95 99 104 -5 -43
Vietnam 63 68 74 65 75 99 93 94 100 -6 -37
Malaysia 37 29 11 5 11 49 60 61 48 13 -11
Cambodia 118 120 118 114 124 98 102 108 115 -7 3
Lao PDR 170 168 160 161 156 108 120 124 76 48 94
Total respondents 183 183 185 189 189 189 190 190 190Hiring and ﬁring
practicesTable 4.1. Rank in World Bank’s Doing Business - Trading Across Borders Indicator
Figure 4.6.  Logistic Costs as Percent of Sales in Manufacturing FirmsSource:  World Bank
Source: IFC (2020)05.0%10.0%15.0%20.0%25.0%30.0%
Thailand Vietnam Indonesia Philippines
Understanding the Philippines’ E-commerce 
Landscape 
As more sales are done in the digital 
marketplace, the Philippines’ logistics industry 
has attempted to provide complementary 
services in support of the increasing amount 
of online transactions. The continued rapid 
growth in the e-commerce market in the 
Philippines demands an equally rapid and 
innovative response from transport and 
logistics businesses. This response is apparent 
in the arrival of new players in the logistics 
segment of the e-commerce landscape. The 
logistics industry is beginning to catch up, as 
can be noted in the number of players in the 
logistics subsectors: 6 in cross-border logistics, 
6 in package forwarding, 13 in third party 
logistics (3PL), 7 in on-demand delivery, and 7 in 
fulfillment logistics (Figure 4.7).Note: 3PL players include: LBC, Xend, Post10, Fastrack Move 
One, JRS Express, ABest Express, 2GO, Linex, Air21, Ninja Van, 
WWW Express, Black Arrow, and City Xpress; Fulfillment includes: 
aCommerce, Aden, SP Ecommerce, GAC, Quantum, LBC, and Linex; 
On-demand delivery includes: Grab, Mober, Rocket Uncle, Pas Paas, 
Deliveree, Metromart, and Etobee; Package forwarding includes: 
Shipping Cart, Pobox.ph, Johnny Air Plus, Border Linx, USADirectPHL.
com, and MyShoppinBox; and Cross border includes: Quantum 
Solutions, Air21, Dimerco, Linex, RAF International Forwarding Phils, 
and DPEX Worldwide.Figure 4.7.  Logistics Players in the Philippines E-Commerce 
Landscape in 2016
677713
Cross-borderPackage ForwardingOn-Demand DeliveryFulﬁllment3PL
Furthermore, emerging e-fulfilment services 
are enabling e-commerce companies to deliver 
better end-to-end consumer experiences. 
E-fulfilment is defined as the people, processes, 
and technology required to deliver an 
online order to a customer. Some dedicated 
companies have been set up to service this 
need, offering organizations participating in 
e-commerce with the opportunity to outsource 
the critical part of their value chains such as 
warehousing, shipping, logistics management, 
and last-mile delivery. This trend also posed 
a challenge to the existing and established 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 73Figure 4.8. Retail logistics and e-commerce
CONVENTIONAL RETAIL LOGISTICS
Store
Deliveries
by LSPsDistribution
Centers
Retailers
(In store
Inventory)
Travel to Store
Customers CustomersHome DeliveriesParcel Delivery
CompanyOnline
PurchasesE-Tailers Orders Distribution
CentersE-COMMERCE RETAIL LOGISTICS
E-commerce growth requires logistics firms 
to rise to the challenge posed by small parcel 
deliveries.  With e-commerce geared up for 
expansion, new logistical solutions are needed 
to set up and scale up. Logistics firms need to 
think beyond the narrow dimension of their 
service offering and ensure that they integrate 
seamless logistical solutions for the delivery and 
return of goods, as well as uphold high standards 
of customer service, to stay in the market. 
Game changers as well as new entrants that 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 7480   Accessed from: https://transportgeography.org/Source: Adapted from Rodriguez J.P ., et al., 201776CONVENTIONAL RETAIL LOGISTICS
Store
Deliveries
by LSPsDistribution
Centers
Retailers
(In store
Inventory)
Travel to Store
Customers CustomersHome DeliveriesParcel Delivery
CompanyOnline
PurchasesE-Tailers Orders Distribution
CentersE-COMMERCE RETAIL LOGISTICS‘more traditional‘ delivery companies such 
as UPS, FedEx, DHL, Air21, LBC, 2GO, and PHL 
Post, which will need to step up to handle the 
scale, sophistication, and geographic coverage 
demanded by e-tailers (online retailers) and to 
manage the volume of these transactions under 
different cost structures. The last mile segment 
of the transportation and logistics industry 
has exploded with new options that include:  
(a) technology companies like Grab, Mober, 
NinjaVan, Lalamove, and Transportify that 
mostly use crowdsourcing for deliveries, and (b) 
niche market delivery services for restaurants, 
grocery, or single-item delivery services: Grab 
Express, Food Panda, and Lalafood. 
Traditional retail stores are still prevalent in 
the Philippines and still require transportation 
and logistics services. In conventional retail 
logistics (Figure 4.8), customers are assuming 
the whole function of purchasing down to the 
‘last mile’ in freight distribution by traveling to 
the store and back. 
However, e-commerce transactions 
engendered more ways to expand the market 
and led to more innovative and faster delivery 
and logistics services. The emergence of 
e-commerce retail logistics (Figure 4.8) has 
changed the relationships between customers 
and retailers. In this model, the customers 
are directly linked to the supply chain since 
they are ordering a product through a virtual 
interface with stores before it reaches the 
distribution center directly. The deliveries are 
now the responsibility of the e-tailer on its 
own or through a third-party delivery service, 
a move away from standard retailing where the 
customer took charge of the goods as soon as 
they were purchased.
provide technology-driven end-to-end logistics 
solutions for e-commerce are investing heavily 
in technology and are also moving forward to 
tailor-made solutions for business-to-business 
(B2B) customers that include warehousing and 
inventory management. Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 7581   Data obtained from PHLPost’s Roadmap to 2020
82  Instead of a transport and logistics provider, Go-Jek entered the country by acquiring Coins.Ph, a Philippine Fintech startup as its strategic approach to expand in the country.LBC
26%Others
9%
PHLPost
12%
JRS
16%2GO
22%Air21
15%Php22.08
billion 
26%
74%
Air freight Road freight
Source:  Ken ResearchFigure 4.9.  Distribution of total express market in the 
Philippines in 2012
Figure 4.10.  Most of the express deliveries were rendered 
through road transportExpress delivery services (EDS) have also 
become essential in supporting more 
efficient and fast-paced transactions. The 
growing demand for fast and reliable means of 
transporting documents and goods paved the 
way for the EDS in the Philippines and it has 
become one of the most essential sectors of the 
economy. Ken Research estimated that the total 
express market in the Philippines was valued 
at PHP 22.08 billion in 2012, distributed among 
key players as shown in Figure 4.9.81 In 2012, 
the express services through road transport 
dominated the market share at 74 percent of the 
total express delivery while air express accounts 
for 26 percent of the market (Figure 4.10). Improving Competition and Investment in 
Logistics
Enhanced competition in the domestic 
market may facilitate faster growth and more 
innovation in logistics, especially of EDS to 
support the Philippine e-commerce industry.
With the passage of the Foreign Investment Act 
of 1991 and the increasing demand for air parcel 
delivery services, major parcel delivery and 
logistics operators such as FedEx, UPS, and TNT 
entered the Philippine market. More recently, 
the entry into force of the ASEAN Economic 
Community (AEC) should facilitate the entry of 
foreign logistics providers in the near future. 
This will compel domestic freight forwarders 
to become competitive or consider possible 
joint venture agreements with foreign freight 
forwarders or accept equity investments from 
them.
However, the Philippine domestic logistics 
industry remains closed to majority-
owned foreign corporations.  The Philippine 
Constitution limits the operations and 
management of ‘public utilities’ to firms with 
at least 60 percent Filipino-ownership.  While 
the legal definition of which services constitute 
a public utility remains undefined, court cases 
filed by local freight forwarding companies 
against FedEx and other international air freight 
forwarders have led to judicial rulings against the 
legality of foreigners operating in international 
air freight services (Rappler, 2013).  As such, DHL 
and FedEx can only transport cargo to and from 
the international airports, and the domestic 
distribution of these parcels need to be fulfilled 
by local logistics corporations. Even the AEC 
promises of liberalized investment policies 
throughout ASEAN remain stymied by existing 
regulations in other countries like Indonesia, 
Thailand, and Vietnam, which prevent majority 
foreign ownership in air, land, and maritime 
transport activities, which undoubtedly restrains 
investment and innovation in the logistics 
market at a time when e-commerce requires 
new processes and paradigms (Kampan, 2017).  
As such, even Indonesian logistics services 
firms, such as Go-Jek, have been unable to 
enter the Philippines due to legal ownership 
requirements (Rey, 2019).8283  Republic Act No. 7354, an act creating the PHLPost https://www.phlpost.gov.ph/files/transparency/RA7354.pdf
84  Presidential Decree No. 240, Sec. 26 and paragraph (a) Section 27, Article 5 of RA No. 7354
85  DICT’s List of Authorized Private Express and/or Messengerial Delivery Service (PEMEDES) or Courier Service Providers as of December 1, 2019 https://dict.gov.ph/list-of-authorized-
       pemedes-or-courier-service-providers-2019/
86  ZIP Code of Provinces in the Philippines https://www.phlpost.gov.ph/files/archive/new_zip_code_2016.pdf
87  In October 2018, Indonesia reduced its de minimis rule from USD 100.00 to USD 75.00. Effective January 20, 2020, the new regulation on the threshold exemption (de minimis) import 
      duties via e-Commerce will be reduced from the previous USD75.00 to USD3.00 per shipment for all imported goods shipped on a B2C basis. https://www.kemenkeu.go.id/publikasi/
      siaran-pers/siaran-pers-ciptakan-perlakuan-perpajakan-yang-adil-dan-lindungi-industri-kecil-dan-menengah-dalam-negeri-pemerintah-ubah-ketentuan-impor-barang-kiriman-
      e-commerce/
88  In the Philippines, the de minimis threshold is Php10,000. Using February 2020 average exchange rate Php50.74/US$1, this amounts to US$197.The passage of the Public Services Act 
amendment can lead to the liberalization 
of the logistics sector to foreign entities, 
spurring investments, and innovation in the 
sector.  Pending legislation in Congress limits 
the definition of public utilities to the following 
sectors: distribution of electricity, transmission 
of electricity, and water pipeline distribution 
system or sewerage pipeline system.  Such an 
amendment will clarify the status of all logistics 
services across the value chain and allow for the 
flourishing of new logistics services. 
Small parcel delivery is a regulated service in 
the Philippines not as transportation but as 
communication. The Philippines Postal Service 
Act of 1992 defines ‘parcel’ as a rectangular 
box, the dimension and weight of which is 
as specified by PHLPost or the government, 
containing goods or some form of transportable 
property intended for delivery to an addressee 
prominently displayed on at least one (1) of its 
sides.83 The operations of express delivery and 
messenger services are regulated and currently 
requires registration with the Department of 
Information and Communications Technology 
(DICT).84 As of January 2019, there are a total 
of 113 courier service providers authorized by 
the DICT, of which only eight (8) companies are 
authorized to operate nationwide and about 
sixty (60) companies focus their operations 
within the National Capital Region (NCR), 
while the rest are concentrated in one or more 
regions.85
Land transportation of small parcels, although 
becoming more competitive due to the onset 
of tech-based and platform-based logistics 
services, still faces several and mostly 
regulatory challenges. One of the main 
regulatory issues is the ambiguity as to which 
appropriate regulatory body should these 
varieties of logistics providers submit to. The 
Philippine Postal Service Act of 1992 requires 
registration of postal service establishments 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 76and the regulatory authority (Department of 
Transportation and Communications [DOTC], 
now DICT) to register and prequalify any person 
other than freight forwarders, who engage in 
the business of letter and parcel messengerial 
services, door-to-door delivery, or transporting 
property of others similar to mail or parcel. 
Freight forwarders, on the other hand, seeking to 
offer parcel delivery and door-to-door services, 
have to comply with several requirements from 
different government agencies such as the 
Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory 
Board (LTFRB), Land Transportation Office (LTO), 
Department of Transportation (DOTr), DTI, in 
addition to the DICT registration. They also deal 
with conflicting local government ordinances, 
which are sometimes promulgated without 
coordination with other local government units, 
such as trucks bans, vehicle plate number 
coding system, and pass-through sticker 
requirements. Many delivery service providers 
also suggest updating and reorganizing the 
zip code system86 to minimize delays due to 
difficulties in locating a shipping address. 
Transforming the Philippines Cross Border 
E-commerce Landscape
Transparent and simplified customs 
procedures are a pre-condition for seamless 
cross-border trade in physical goods. For 
many shippers, some of the key barriers to 
cross-border e-commerce are inconsistent and 
complicated customs procedures, along with 
trade regulatory controls and clearances. With 
import duties varying widely among countries 
due to disparity in customs de-minimis rules, 
region-wide e-commerce and consumer 
adoption may also be hampered. For example, 
the duties and taxes for a US$50 handbag 
traded among ASEAN member states may 
range between US$0 and US$19.55, with the 
Philippines and Indonesia87 charging virtually 
nothing as they extend a higher threshold 
of de minimis, US$200.0088 and US$100.00, 
respectively (Table 4.2).Customs clearance procedures have been put 
in place to support cross-border small parcel 
deliveries but more needs to be done. The 
Philippines increased its de-minimis threshold 
to Php10,000.00 in 2016 when the Customs 
Modernization and Tariff Act (CMTA) was signed 
into law.89 However, specific regulations and 
procedures in handling and clearing cross-
border e-commerce shipments have yet to be 
issued by the Philippines Bureau of Customs 
(BOC). Together with other trade regulatory 
agencies, the BOC is also taking steps to 
harmonize procedures and speed up the import 
and export of regulated commodities. As of 
March 2020, the implementing guidelines for 
some of these provisions have yet to be issued 
by the BOC and the Department of Finance 
(DOF) as provided in the CMTA.
Adhering to global standards and best 
practices will help advance the Philippines’ 
cross-border e-commerce activities. In August 
2013, the World Customs Organization (WCO), 
where the Philippines is a member, published 
the E-Commerce Package90 that includes the 
Framework of Standards on Cross-Border 
E-commerce91 as well as documents and tools ASEAN Member
State Duty (US$) Taxes (US$) Total (US$)De Minimis
Threshold
(US$)  
Brunei Darussalam 0 2.5 2.5 295
Cambodia 3.5 5.35 8.85 50
Indonesia* 0 0 0 100
Lao PDR 5 5.05 10.5 50
Malaysia 0 3 3 128
Myanmar 3.75 2.69 6.44 500
Philippines* 0 0 0 200
Singapore 0 0 0 296
Thailand 15 4.55 19.55 40
Vietnam 12.5 6.25 18.75 28
Note: Calculation made based on a cotton handbag manufactured in Italy and sold in Singapore (with the exception
of Singapore which was assumed to be sold in Malaysia). *No duty/taxes under the de minimise law.  
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 77supporting its implementation like the Technical 
Specifications,92 and the Immediate Release 
Guidelines.93  
Notwithstanding the issuance of consolidated 
and comprehensive rules and regulations 
for cross border e-commerce, some of the 
issuances of the BOC have considered and 
referenced the Framework of Standards and 
the Immediate Release Guidelines, that is, de 
minimis rule in Sec. 423, CMTA as implemented 
by Customs Administrative Order (CAO) 02-
2016 and CAO 03-2017; categorization of 
consignment for immediate release in CAO 05-
2020 implementing Sec. 439, CMTA on express 
shipments procedures.
Nevertheless, there are still unresolved issues 
surrounding the valuation of small parcels 
traded across borders. Along with the customs 
clearance procedures for e-commerce goods, 
the acceptability of the transaction value for 
customs valuation of goods purchased in flash 
sales and other highly discounted values is a 
contested issue between importers and the 
customs administration (Box 4.1).Table 4.2. Comparative Import Duties and Taxes on a US$50.00 Handbag
89   Sec. 423 (dd) of RA 10863 or the CMTA
90  The WCO’s The E-Commerce Package can be explored in this link: http://www.wcoomd.org/en/topics/facilitation/instrument-and-tools/frameworks-of-standards/ecommerce.aspx
91  The WCO’s Cross-Border E-Commerce Framework Standards can be accessed in this link: http://www.wcoomd.org/-/media/wco/public/global/pdf/topics/facilitation/activities-and-
       programmes/ecommerce/wco-framework-of-standards-on-crossborder-ecommerce_en.pdf?la=en
92   The accompanying Technical Specifications of the Framework of Standards on Cross-Border E-Commerce can be accessed in this link: http://www.wcoomd.org/-/media/wco/public/       
       global/pdf/topics/facilitation/activities-and-programmes/ecommerce/1_technical-specifications_en.pdf?db=web
93   WCO’s Guidelines for the Immediate Release of Consignments by Customs can be accessed in this link: http://www.wcoomd.org/-/media/wco/public/global/pdf/topics/facilitation/
        instruments-and-tools/tools/immediate-release-guidelines/immediate-release-guidelines.pdf?db=webHigh trade costs further restrict competition 
and reduce domestic firms’ opportunities 
to access larger markets. Trade costs in 
the Philippines are among the highest in 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN), according to the 2019 Doing Business 
report (Figure 4.11). Investors in the Philippines 
pay twice as much to export or import a 
shipping container as investors in Thailand. In 
addition, the Philippines ranks lowest among 
peer countries on the World Bank’s Logistics 
Performance Index, and it scores especially low 
on connectivity to international markets.
Source: Doing Business 2019.Figure 4.11. Trade costs in the Philippines are some of the 
highest in the regionBox 4.1. Trade Policy in the Philippines
Export ImportPhilippinesCosts of importing and exporting a container (US$)
Indonesia
Lao PDR
Malaysia
Myanmar
Thailand
Vietnam
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
While the country has a liberalized trade 
regime, non-tariff measures (NTMs) have 
become an increasingly important obstacle.  
The country has a liberalized trade regime 
reflected in its low most-favored-nation tariff 
of 6.3 percent in 2016, only slightly higher than 
Malaysia’s among regional peers. However, 
aside from tariffs, importing and exporting 
firms need to comply with NTMs, which 
encompass a wide range of requirements, 
including technical regulations, product 
standards, and custom procedures. A survey 
conducted by the International Trade Center 
in 2015 shows that 60.7 percent of Philippine exporters and 69.6 percent of importers 
reported obstacles due to NTMs. These 
figures are high compared to peers.
Trade costs and regulatory burdens 
are worse for firms located outside 
metropolitan Manila. Few agencies are 
automated, requiring manual paperwork 
and personal visits to their respective offices 
for the completion and submission of the 
requirements. For example, the Bureau 
of Philippine Standards processes the 
Import Commodity Clearances through the 
different regional offices of the Department 
of Trade and Industry, while the processing 
is completed by its office in Manila. Internal 
estimates by the Department of Trade and 
Industry indicate that this raises compliance 
costs by an additional 25 percent and 
increases the processing time by one 
month, as documents travel by mail from 
the regions to the capital and back. While 
direct international shipping is available in 
large port cities like Cebu and Davao, most 
shipping lines call mainly in Manila. Therefore, 
exporting usually requires transshipment 
through the capital and an additional freight 
burden to firms based in the other islands.
The country has started a trade reform 
process to reduce trade costs. The 
government signed the CMTA into law in 
2016. The CMTA is a landmark law that aims 
to align Philippine customs laws, rules, and 
procedures with the mandatory standards of 
the Revised Kyoto Convention, the blueprint 
for modern and efficient customs procedures. 
Once fully implemented, the CMTA will 
provide the legal basis for the full automation 
of customs procedures and encourage the 
further simplification and harmonization of 
import and export procedures in line with 
international standards. Despite the passage 
of the law, the Philippines has yet to complete 
the secondary regulations to fully implement 
the law.  
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 78The management of returns in cross-border 
e-commerce is more challenging as it moves 
boundaries and is defined differently across 
international borders. Domestic returns are 
already a challenge for retailers and international 
returns represent a completely different set of 
complex challenges and unclear procedures. 
The Philippines BOC has no definite guideline 
yet in addressing certain issues such as how 
cross border e-commerce goods rejected 
or refused by customers will be returned to 
origin. While CAO 04-201994 provides the 
implementing guidelines for Duty Drawback, 
Refund, and Abatement embodied in Sec. 900 
to 902, CMTA, it is not clear whether this also 
covers cross-border e-commerce returns. 
Furthermore, the centralized customs 
processing and clearing imported small 
parcels that go through the state-owned 
postal delivery could be contributing to the 
long waiting time.95 The importer may opt to 
use postal delivery services (PHLPost), instead 
of a private courier, as a delivery option for 
items bought online in other countries. As a 
member of the Universal Postal Union, PHLPost 
provides the domestic delivery service for 
packages arriving in the Philippines from 
international postal offices. However, despite 
the wider nationwide network of the postal 
state-owned enterprise (SOE), it usually takes 
longer to receive the package, especially when 
consigned to a provincial delivery address. This 
could be due to the central customs clearing 
done in the offices of exchange (OEs) which 
are located in Manila – the Airmail Exchange 
Department (PHMNLA), the Express Mail 
Exchange Department (PHMNLB) and Surface 
Mail Exchange Department (PHMNLF),96 despite 
the presence of regional or provincial branches 
in other areas with access to international 
airports where another OEs may also be 
opened, such as Cebu and Davao. There is also 
the issue of ‘double clearing’ when an imported package reaches the Central Mail Exchange 
Center (CMEC), it goes through customs 
already, but when the package arrives at the 
PHLPost Central Office, customs authorities 
may re-tag some packages to undergo the 
same clearing process. While the local customs 
offices in the provinces can attend to inquiries 
and provide assistance to postal consignees in 
their respective jurisdictions, consumers whose 
goods were shipped through the postal service 
have no recourse but to pay duties and taxes 
which are assessed at the OEs in Manila.
Another option is to transport small parcels 
via consolidation and usage of full-container 
load (FCL) shipping which may reduce cost 
but poses potential legal risks. A common 
practice among importers of consumer goods 
is to consolidate their shipments with other 
importers (either via themselves or through a 
cargo consolidator) and do an FCL shipment. 
However, to save on costs and simplify 
documentation, the consolidated items with 
different bills of lading are declared under 
a single consignee, despite not necessarily 
knowing the owners or contents of the other 
shipments in the shared container.97 This 
informal consolidation method98 may 
contribute to transport cost reduction but may 
pose potential accountability and legal risks. 
Thus, smaller enterprises still face high logistics 
costs and risks when they opt to ship small 
parcels via ocean freight which effectively 
prohibits them from sourcing cheaper but 
quality input materials abroad and fulfilling 
their commitments with their online customers. 
These, in turn, limit the significant gains that an 
SME could realize by catering to an expanded 
online market.
On the other hand, less-than-container load 
(LCL) shipments may seem more viable 
but they are laden with regulatory issues 
that effectively bring the costs higher than 
94   CAO No. 04-2019 on Duty Drawback, Refund, and Abatement can be accessed in this link: http://customs.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/cao-04-2019_Duty_Drawback_Refund_
        and_Abatement.pdf
95   An amended memorandum of agreement was signed by BOC and PHLPost on March 21, 2016, which outlined the handling, examination, assessment, appraisal and collection of 
       duties, taxes and other charges on postal items. The “2016 MOA” can be accessed at http://customs.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/cmc-93-2016-AmendedMemorandumof
        AgreementbetweenthePhilippinePostalCorporationPHLPostandtheBureauofCustomsBOC.pdf
96 Central Mail Exchange Center (CMEC) Process Flow can be accessed in this link: http://customs.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/CMEC-Flowchart.pdf This 
     practice, known to sector players as “consignee rental”, or “benchmarking”, is done to save on the ‘tara’ or informal payments made to facilitate clearance and movement of 
        traded goods. 
97   This practice, known to sector players as “consignee rental”, or “benchmarking”, is done to save on the ‘tara’ or informal payments made to facilitate clearance and movement of 
        traded goods. 
98  The term “informal” is used as this is not the regular consolidation that passes through customs-approved off-dock CFS operators
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 79FCL. LCL shipments are handled by off-dock 
container yard/container freight stations99 or 
customs facilities and warehouses (CFWs).100 
Currently, there are only 12 CFWs of this nature 
in the Philippines, 11 of which are members of 
the Association of Off-Dock CY/CFS Operators 
of the Philippines (ACOP). The limited number 
of CFWs, which are concentrated mainly in 
Metro Manila, may be attributed to the BOC’s 
memorandum order101 stating that no new 
application shall be approved unless the 
aggregate capacity utilization (ACU) of existing 
operators exceeds 50 percent, which presently 
has not been reached. The ACOP asserted that 
as of 2017, the ACU is only 23 percent (Portcalls, 
2018). There are also indications that despite 
the BOC’s regulation on uniform charges that 
CFW operators can impose, the warehouse 
charges on imported goods are still considered 
contributing to the high cost of doing LCL 
shipments.
Theoretically, shipping small parcels by sea via 
LCL would be ideal for SMEs, but regulatory 
and handling concerns effectively increase 
its actual costs and thereby limit its usage. For 
those SMEs which are more constrained by costs than time, loose cargo or LCL shipping via sea 
freight, where several importers share the cost 
of container space, would lower their logistics 
costs relative to shipping via expensive air freight 
or using an entire container (FCL shipment) but 
is not being able to maximize it due to their 
relatively lower volume given the SME’s smaller 
scale of operations. However, currently, it can 
be observed that most of the patrons of LCL 
shipping in the Philippines are not SMEs but the 
bigger firms and multinational corporations.102  
As it turns out, an LCL shipment takes a long 
time to process and requires additional charges 
per shipment which effectively raises its costs 
for an individual online seller or an SME with 
lower volumes to transport. LCL is akin to the 
carpooling of parcels from different shippers. 
It also offers door-to-door services. However, 
because of the additional charges and the 
larger amount of regulatory and handling issues 
involved along the chain of an LCL shipment, 
including customs processing, terminal 
handling fees, warehouse charges, trucking 
charges, forwarding charges, and other smaller 
charges (Habito, 2019), small shippers may find 
using FCL shipment more cost-effective.
The state-owned PHLPost, which also offers 
parcel deliveries, has a wider network 
compared to private-sector logistics but the 
latter is preferred due to better accessibility 
and reliability. Postal and parcel delivery 
services are typically offered by the existing 
freight forwarders and logistics service providers 
(LSPs), as well as by PHLPost. Although PHLPost 
has one of the largest networks within the 
country (Figure 4.12), the retail outlets of private 
couriers are more strategically located in high-
traffic areas like shopping malls. Furthermore, 
concerns about the reliability of a government 
postal services are still an issue, as reports of 
delays, losses, and even outright theft are not 
unusual (Gamil, 2012). Source: PHLPost
Note:  *Includes sub-distribution centers (PHLPost) and delivery hubs (LBC)
           ** Offices in the case of PHLPost            Figure 4.12. Network of Top 5 Domestic Courier Services in the 
Philippines
99   See CMO No. 32-2015 enttitled “Revised Rules and Regulations for the Establishment, Supervision, and Control of Off-Dock Container Yards and/or Container Freight Stations 
        (OCC) and other Off-Dock Customs Facilities (OCF) outside of Customs Zones”, which can be accessed in this link: http://customs.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/oldCMO/
        cmo-32-2015-revised-rules-regulations-for-the-establishment-supervision-control-of-off-dock-cy-occ-other-ocf-outside-of-the-customs-zones.pdf
100  Sec. 803, CMTA, list down customs facilities and warehouses to include: container yard, container freight station, seaport warehouses, and airport warehouses
101   See CMO No. 37-2015 for the Addendum to CMO 32-2015, which can be accessed in this link: http://customs.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/oldCMO/cmo-37-2015- 
         Addendum-to-CMO-32-2015.pdf
102   As disclosed by container yard/container freight stations (CY/CFS) operators, district customs collectors, freight forwarders, and other logistics service providers interviewed. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 80Domestic Logistics
371101 1355
1075
700
316
254
2GO Express 2GO Express
Exchanges Distribution centers* Outlets/branches**PHLPost LBC103   GrabExpress delivers within Metro Manila and Metro Cebu, Lalamove operates in Metro Manila and its outskirts,  Sources: https://www.grab.com/ph/express/, https://www.
          lalamove.com/philippines/manila/en/user-faq
104   As in the case of AirSpeed.
105   This is the case in Cebu.
106   The RRTS or the Philippine Nautical Highway System provides connectivity to the island regions through its three segments – Western Nautical, Central Nautical and Eastern    
          Nautical. 
107    Republic Act 7354, the Philippine Postal Act of 1992, amending previous regulations.
108    The Philippines Postal is a member of the United Postal Union since January 1, 1922.
109    PHLPost shared or provided with a facility by local government units (LGUs), where it does not own a facility.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 81Last-mile delivery services (LMDS) are 
beginning to thrive, but mostly in urban areas 
only. Logistics platforms performing last-mile 
services such as GrabExpress, Food Panda, 
Transportify, and Lalamove have given SMEs 
access to cheaper but reliable logistics and 
transport services without having to purchase 
their own delivery vehicles. However, many 
of these platforms have started to establish a 
foothold in major cities,103 with higher demand 
for LMDS in urban centers driven by the stifling 
traffic situation more prevalent in the cities. 
Places in the provinces and far-flung areas that 
are already connected to the internet have yet to 
experience platform-based last-mile deliveries. 
The true barrier is the lack of demand as it is not 
feasible for many companies to service areas 
with limited populations.
LMDS also face several challenges in fulfilling 
its commitments to clients.
The cash-on-delivery (COD) payment system, 
although convenient for most clients, poses 
some risks to the delivery service provider, 
especially the courier or driver. Currently, many 
couriers of COD transactions must remit their 
cash collections back to the main office at the 
end of the day,104 though other courier services 
now allow remittances through the nearest 
remittance centers or selected banks. Another 
challenge in some areas is the lack of enough 
motorcycle couriers as they shifted to a more 
informal but lucrative alternative of transporting 
individuals rather than parcels which bring in 
more ready cash profits and allow for more time 
flexibility.105 
Another main issue for LMDS is the growth in 
the number of vehicles on the road. Growing 
demand for transportation of goods or people 
may lead to uncontrolled growth in the 
number of vehicles, which frequently results 
in traffic congestion. In the Philippines, this is 
compounded with the truck ban and number 
coding issue, whereby, the utilization of these 
additional vehicles, especially commodity 
vehicles, is not optimal most of the time. Most of the LSPs are missing the benefits of loading 
trucks to their optimal capacity as they are 
not participating in the sharing economy 
mechanism.  
Utilizing the nationwide bus transport system 
and its integration into the Philippine Nautical 
Highway System or Roll-on/Roll-off Transport 
System (RRTS)106 presents a potential line-
haul solution in transporting small parcels 
domestically. The Philippines has a wide 
network of bus transport services which reaches 
even far-flung areas in the provinces through 
the connectivity provided by the RRTS. It has 
improved in recent years (Francisco, 2017). In 
this particular model, the RRTS complements 
the linehaul segment of the supply chain that 
the bus system is now addressing, providing 
a cheaper alternative to the high cost of air 
shipments and limited direct domestic ship 
calls from Manila to the island provinces. Taking 
advantage of the cargo space of buses may 
provide another option for SMEs and online 
sellers in transporting their items from one 
island to another. 
PHLPost’s role in small parcel logistics needs 
to be enhanced, given its essential role in the 
transport of goods nationwide. The PHLPost 
has been in the business of mail delivery for over 
a century. It is mandated by law107 to provide 
for the collection, handling, transportation, 
delivery, forwarding, returning and holding of 
mails, parcels and the like materials throughout 
the Philippines, and pursuant to an agreement 
entered into, to and from foreign countries.108 
It has an extensive domestic acceptance, 
distribution, and delivery network, and has 
a presence109 in almost every town, city, and 
in some barangays nationwide. PHLPost’s 
strategic roadmap for 2020 is banking on three 
(3) growth areas such as the growing Philippine 
economy, flourishing e-commerce, and the 
increasing trend in remittances, and is aimed at 
pushing for its express delivery, logistics, and 
payment services. 110 Rates are computed using the provider’s online rate calculator, door-to-door delivery within service area. Despite its size and mandate, PHLPost’s role 
in the e-commerce space is limited.  In 2012, 
PHLPost comprised only 12.4 percent share 
of the market for delivery services, and it has 
a negligible share for logistics, domestic and 
international money transfer, and bills payment 
and collection services. In terms of pricing, 
PHLPost rates both for retail and corporate 
Source:  PHLPost and Provider’s Published Rates (data accessed on July 3, 2019)Table 4.3.  Rates Comparison – PHLPost and other domestic logistics providers110segments of the market are higher than the 
private local service providers. Air21 and 2GO 
are also offering low and negotiated rates for the 
corporate sector while JRS has the lowest rates 
for retail (Table 4.3). LBC Express still dominates 
this particular segment of the market because 
of its price points, network, and reliability.
Provider Origin Destination Destination Qty/Wt
PHLPost NCR Cebu 1 box / 5 kgs 385
Air21 NCR Cebu 1 box / 5 kgs 378
2Go NCR Cebu 1 box / 5 kgs 380
LBC NCR Cebu 1 box / 5 kgs 370
JRS NCR Cebu 1 box / 5 kgs 499.5
This performance is already propped up by the 
fiscal and operational advantages provided to 
PHLPost as an SOE that are not accorded to 
its private competitors. To provide universal 
service, the Republic Act 7354 that created 
PHLPost, provides tax exemptions for any 
credit obligations included those contracted 
with international banks, capital gains tax, 
local government imposts, and fees as well 
as importing material needed for operations. 
PHLPost also takes advantage of the agency-
to-agency agreements, which are widely 
used by other SOEs, and severely affect 
the ability of private operators to compete 
for public contracts. For instance, PHLPost 
secured a memorandum of agreement with 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 82the Department of Justice (DOJ) to deliver 
the department’s international and domestic 
mail.  In 2016, the services rendered to the 
government amounted to about 40 percent of 
PHLPost’s total revenue from domestic services.
Notably, PHLPost’s role in small parcel logistics 
is integral for last-mile delivery, especially 
in remote or non-urban areas.  The universal 
service obligation requires PHLPost to serve low-
volume missionary areas and non-commercially 
viable places that are not served by private 
operators. As a member of the Universal Postal 
Union, PHLPost provides the domestic delivery 
service for packages arriving in the Philippines 
from international postal offices. 
Policy Recommendations
Achieving policy and regulatory clarity around 
the logistics sector will help attract private 
investments and improve innovation. The 
lack of regulatory clarity, particularly in terms 
of foreign investment restrictions across the 
different industry segments, as well as for 
cross-border consumer transactions, may have 
limited greater private sector participation. The 
following recommendations will help address 
the problem. A review of regulatory requirements for 
small parcel delivery providers is necessary 
to support e-commerce. The transition and 
transfer of oversight and control functions over 
postal service providers from the DOTC, PHLPost, 
National Telecommunications Commission 
(NTC), and now DICT, must be reviewed and 
redefined to align with operational realities. 
With the DICT leading the way to improve the 
ICT landscape in the country, it would also be Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 83responsible for improving e-commerce, fintech, 
and now the regulation of express courier 
services engaged in handling postal commerce.
Reviews of regulatory requirements in close 
coordination with other concerned agencies 
are needed to ensure policies are harmonized, 
guarantee seamless delivery of service, and 
ensure secure transactions of consumers. Legal 
and regulatory frameworks should address, 
among others, how to enhance trade flows, 
safety and security, and the control of physical 
goods through the provision of advance data 
across various business models, how to define 
the legal status and respective roles and 
responsibilities of the economic stakeholders 
involved in the e-commerce movement, how to 
observe privacy and anti-trust laws and protect 
the personal information of consumers, and 
how to take care of the interests of e-vendors 
and e-platforms, intermediaries, and customers 
in a fair and non-discriminatory manner. For 
example, while app-based logistics asset 
providers are riding the wave of the shared 
economy, the welfare, safety, security, and 
compensation of the outsourced human asset 
must likewise be considered.  While reviewing 
the regulations around this sector, regulators 
must remember that there is also a need to 
create an enabling environment for the growth 
and the creation of digital business models in 
logistics that can be stymied by the expansion 
of regulations.
The swift passage of the Public Services Act 
amendment can clarify the legal status of 
foreign ownership restrictions in the logistics 
sector and spur greater innovation in the sector.  
The lack of a clear definition of what constitutes 
a public utility limits the ability of foreign firms 
to provide different logistics services in the 
country.  With pending legislation in Congress 
providing a clear definition of public utilities 
across only the following sectors: distribution 
of electricity, transmission of electricity, and 
water pipeline distribution system or sewerage 
pipeline system, the passage of such a law is 
expected to lead to the development of novel 
logistics services in the country. 
The  implementation of the CMTA provisions 
for e-commerce goods, adopting the WCO  
recommendations in its E-Commerce Package 
that includes the Framework of Standards, Technical Specifications, Immediate Release 
Guidelines, and other documents and tools 
supporting its implementation, can further 
enhance cross-border e-commerce of the 
Philippines. While it is understandable that the 
government, through the DOF and the BOC will 
not be able to adopt and implement the WCO 
Framework of Standards and its supporting 
tools and documents immediately, it may do so 
in a phased approach. The relevant provisions 
of the CMTA must be harmonized and a new 
set of standard regulations must be issued 
and implemented. The lack of systematic and 
harmonized rules, regulations, and procedures 
may open significant vulnerabilities in the 
cross-border e-commerce supply chain, 
hence, Customs must work with other relevant 
government agencies and stakeholders to 
address these regulatory concerns that cut 
across multiple agencies. 
A revitalized PHLPost can be an important 
anchor for the small parcel delivery logistics 
industry, especially for remote and isolated 
communities. Numerous plans have been 
floated by previous Philippine government 
administrations to transform PHLPost, including 
its partial privatization or entering a public-
private partnership, but these programs have 
not fully materialized. Given PHLPost’s existing 
asset base, immediate steps that can be taken 
include greater partnerships with third-party 
logistics providers to utilize said assets to 
support consolidation and last-mile delivery 
by using their buildings and warehouses as 
shared service facilities for hub and exchange, 
sorting, and cross-docking.  A deeper legal and 
operational review will need to be conducted to 
assess which specific issues can be addressed 
in the short-term, such as a revision of the 2016 
Agreement between the BOC and PHLPost to 
better reflect the provisions of the CMTA and 
the needs of electronic commerce, and which 
issues can be resolved in the medium term for 
PHLPost that can follow the lead of BrazilPost 
or SingPost in their process transformation. At 
the same time, the PHLPost revisions should 
also ensure competitive neutrality, so that any 
regulatory advantages accorded to PHLPost 
to support its universal service obligations 
maintain the level playing field to allow private 
logistics operators to compete. Information campaigns among SMEs about the 
available logistics services may be crucial in
encouraging them to explore the potential of 
e-commerce trading. Although platform-based 
sellers such as Lazada, Shopee, and Zalora, 
have good knowledge of the available delivery 
options, other budding online sellers that use 
social media such as  Facebook and Instagram 
to reach their market may not be as well-
informed of the variety of logistics services that 
they can tap and suit to their shipping needs. 
This is where the industry and the government 
(DTI E-commerce Office)111 may collaborate in 
collecting and disseminating information to the 
SMEs. The annual Logistics Services Philippines 
Conference launched in 2018 would be a good 
avenue to link the logistics service sector with 
the SMEs and in providing an avenue for further 
discussion on the development and support for 
e-commerce logistics and delivery.
111  The DTI E-Commerce Office is transitioning the Philippines E-commerce Roadmap 2016-2020 to its new and updated versionAlmonte, Liza,  “Beebeelee appoints QRS to deliver online 
orders ”, Portcalls, February 25, 2018
https://www.portcalls.com/beebeelee-appoints-qrs-
deliver-online-orders/
Franciso, Kris, “The Impacts of Roll-On/Roll-Off Transport 
System in the Philippines”  Philippine Institute for 
Development Studies (PIDS) Discussion Paper Series No. 
2017-22, June 2017 https://pids.gov.ph/press-releases/334
Gamil, Jaymee, “ 4-year mail theft busted” , Philippine Daily 
Inquirer, July 20, 201
https://newsinfo.inquirer.net/231811/4-year-mail-theft-
busted
Habito, Cielito, “ Stacked against small business”,  Philippine 
Daily Inquirer, March 8, 201
https://opinion.inquirer.net/120002/
stacked-against-small-business?utm_expid=.
XqNwTug2W6nwDVUSgFJXed.1
Kampan, Palapan, “Strategic Development of ASEAN 
Logistics Infrastructure” , The Open Transportation Journal, 
August 2017
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/319237701_ 
Strategic_Development_of_ASEAN_Logistics_
Infrastructure
“BOC Denies Proliferation of CY/CFS” Portcalls,
March 24, 2018] 
https://www.portcalls.com/boc-denies-proliferation-cycfs/# 
“CA cancels FedEx permit to operate in PH”, Rappler,
July 22, 2013
https://www.rappler.com/business/industries/171-
aviation-tourism/34532-ca-cancels-fedex-permit-to-
operate-in-ph
Rey, Aika, “LTFRB again rejects Go-Jek entry into Philippine 
market”, Rappler, March 18, 2019
https://www.rappler.com/nation/225832-ltfrb-again-
rejects-go-jek-entry-philippine-market
US-ASEAN Business Council, “Express Delivery 
Services:Integrating ASEAN to Global Markets”, June 2005
https://global-express.org/doc/EDS_Report.pdf
World Customs Organization (WCO), “Instrument on 
Valuation of imported goods purchased in flash sales”,
Media  Releases, May 27, 2019 http://www.wcoomd.org/
en/media/newsroom/2019/may/instrument-on-valuation-
of-imported-goods-purchased-in-flash-sales.aspxLastly, investments in logistics must be encouraged 
and supported. Logistics assets require a sizeable 
and long-term investment, particularly in the area 
of warehousing, transportation, and technology. 
Existing logistics companies must be encouraged 
to upgrade their facilities, transportation assets, 
and ICT infrastructure and systems by providing 
assistance and access to long-term financing with 
low interest rates. The support for human capital 
development must be institutionalized through 
competency mapping and designing required skill 
sets, granting scholarships for technical-vocational 
courses in logistics, and providing a mechanism 
for tax exemptions on the importation of training 
tools and equipment, such as driving simulators, 
and logistics software.  Finally, the government 
is advised to support innovative startups and 
enterprises that provide modern technological 
solutions through investments and incentives.
References
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 84CHAPTER 5
INDIRECT TAXATION 
OF CROSS-BORDER 
E-COMMERCE IN THE 
PHILIPPINES
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 85The digital economy is a broad term, 
comprising a range of business lines, which 
raise a variety of tax compliance issues 
However, the main focus of this chapter 
is narrower. It examines the indirect tax 
issues raised by cross-border e-commerce 
transactions involving the importation of goods 
and services into the Philippines. According to 
a recent report, Philippine internet users spend 
an average of almost four hours a day on social 
media, the highest figure for users globally 
(We Are Social, 2020). According to the same 
report, in January 2020, 74 percent of internet 
users aged 16-64 had made an online purchase 
in the past month and the average spending per 
user in the Philippines in 2020 was US$89. One 
estimate suggests that the total e-commerce 
market in the Philippines in 2020 will total 
US$1.09 billion (Statista, 2020). Data published 
by iPrice suggest that the vast majority of 
these purchases are made via platforms 
headquartered outside the Philippines, with 
Lazada and Shopee dominating the market, with 
more than 64 million visits to their websites each 
month (IPrice Insights, 2020). If just half of the 
US$1.09 billion e-commerce market is made up 
of consumer purchases from foreign suppliers, 
the VAT loss is more than US$ 60 million.
The COVID-19 crisis is going to accelerate 
the shift towards online consumption. Social 
distancing is accelerating the growth of digital 
delivery models, including online sale of goods 
and trade in services such as education and 
banking as well as entertainment. This change 
in consumer behavior is likely to persist in the 
post-COVID-19 world. This makes it even more 
important to secure the tax base now and 
ensure that domestic suppliers, who already 
account for VAT, are not undercut by foreign 
suppliers who are not charging VAT.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 86Introduction
In the light of these developments, comparing 
the current treatment of e-commerce 
transactions in the Philippines with 
international best practice could provide a 
valuable information to policymakers. The data 
suggest that cross-border online purchases 
by Philippine consumers are significant and 
growing but this should be verified by means 
of an analysis of customs data. Specifically, 
the numbers of low-value postal consignments 
arriving in the Philippines over the past two to 
three years and the impact on workloads at 
the border should be examined. Any available 
information about the origins of the packages 
and the main suppliers involved should also be 
obtained to verify the working assumption of this 
report that consumers are making large-scale 
purchases of goods from foreign suppliers, VAT 
free. The primary focus is the VAT and customs 
treatment of physical goods purchased online 
from foreign suppliers. However, this note also 
discusses the related issue of VAT and imports 
of non-physical goods and services (such as the 
streaming of music and films). 
Direct taxation is not the main focus of this 
chapter, but the international community is 
currently debating far reaching changes to 
the international tax system in response to the 
growth in importance of the digital economy. 
These could have a bearing on the future 
direction of direct tax reform in the Philippines 
as it affects multinational enterprises. 
Consequently, this chapter includes a short 
discussion of the direct tax issues. That 
discussion also considers the possibility that 
some foreign resident e-commerce businesses 
may be structuring themselves in order to 
artificially avoid having a taxable presence 
in the Philippines in the form of a permanent 
establishment. This is a form of tax avoidance 
that was addressed by the OECD/G20 Base 
Erosion and Profit Sharing (BEPS) project.Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 87Background
In common with many jurisdictions, the 
Philippines exempts low-value packages from 
VAT & Customs duties. However, at PHP 10,000 
(US$196), the level of this exemption is relatively 
high. By comparison, the current exemption in 
the European Union is €22 (US$25). Currently, 
VAT and Customs duties are payable at the 
border as packages arrive and are administered 
by the Bureau of Customs (BOC). Low-value 
consignment exemptions have traditionally 
helped to manage the workloads of Customs 
organizations, allowing them to focus on higher-
value and riskier consignments. This made sense 
when it was relatively unusual for consumers to 
make direct purchases of physical goods from 
foreign suppliers.
The advent of e-commerce has dramatically 
affected the shopping habits of consumers. It is 
now commonplace for consumers to purchase 
goods from foreign retailers online. Modern 
online retailers are able to combine speed of 
delivery with competitive pricing and affordable 
costs of carriage. For goods worth less than 
PHP 10,000, the foreign online retailer has an 
additional advantage because it is able to offer 
those goods to consumers in the Philippines 
free of VAT. For the consumer, the 12 percent tax 
saving is a clear incentive to purchase goods 
from abroad, sidelining domestic retailers and 
eroding the domestic VAT base. Consequently, 
Philippines based retailers that are tax compliant 
are systematically disadvantaged. Philippines 
based retailers that are not registered for VAT 
or Income Tax will also be tempted to source 
goods from foreign online retailers in order to 
evade both VAT and Income Tax. The tax loss 
is increased when foreign suppliers agree to 
understate the value of goods in the customs 
declaration, so that they appear to be below the 
PHP 10,000  threshold.
Modernization of Customs processes is 
already underway, but it does not address 
the impact of e-commerce on the VAT base. 
112  Broadly equivalent to VAT.Taxation of Low-Value Postal Consignments
Currently, consumers can legitimately choose 
not to pay VAT on goods that they can purchase 
from foreign online retailers. As the level of 
the exemption is relatively high, the impact on 
Philippines’ VAT base will be commensurately 
large. It also creates an incentive for sellers to 
agree to understate the value of consignments 
so that their customers can exploit the 
exemption to evade VAT. Securing the VAT base 
will require both a policy and an operational 
response.
Revisiting the Low-value Consignment 
Exemption from VAT
Many jurisdictions have low-value consignment 
exemptions, but e-commerce is calling them 
into question. This is because of the impact 
on countries’ VAT base and the way in which 
domestic retailers are disadvantaged. Australia 
and the European Union have already decided 
to remove the exemption altogether. These 
examples offer a model that the Philippines may 
wish to follow to help secure its VAT base and 
increase levels of tax compliance overall.
Australia was a first mover and has applied its 
General Sales Tax112 (GST) to sales of low value 
imported goods to Australian consumers since 
1 July 2018. Prior to July 1, 2018, GST was not 
payable on imports if their value was no more 
than A$1,000. Foreign online vendors now 
making sales to Australian consumers that in total 
exceed the GST threshold (currently A$75,000) 
are required to register with the Australian Tax 
Office (ATO) and to account for GST on those 
sales. The Australian system provides a hierarchy 
of responsibility for accounting for GST on sales 
to Australian consumers. If goods are acquired 
from an ‘electronic distribution platform’ (EDP) 
based outside Australia that makes sales in 
excess of the threshold, the operator of the EDP 
will be responsible for paying the GST. If sales 
are made directly by a foreign Merchant, or via 
an EDP that is not registered for GST, the foreign 
Merchant will account for the GST if its total 
sales exceed the threshold. If neither an EDP nor a merchant is accounting for GST on low-
value imports, but the consumer is assisted in 
getting the goods to Australia by a re-deliverer, 
the re-deliverer will account for GST on sales 
exceeding the threshold.113
To enable non-resident businesses to comply 
with the new regime, the ATO has created 
a simplified online registration system. The 
system only requires limited information and 
the non-resident business is not entitled to 
claim any credit for GST paid, so no refunds 
arise.114 Once registered, the non-resident 
business must charge GST on sales to Australian 
consumers. Details of the amounts charged 
must be included in the receipt issued to the 
customer and in the customs documentation. 
The GST collected in this way is then accounted 
for and paid on a quarterly basis in Australian 
Dollars. 
Initial estimates were that abolition of the low-
value exemption would increase GST yield 
by around A$300 million over three years 
but actual revenue to date has exceeded 
expectations (Duckett, 2019 and OECD 
2020c115). The process reduces pressure on the 
border control process because the merchant, 
or online platform operator, accounts for the tax 
as the sale is made, and then reports and pays 
the tax direct to the ATO. That allows packages 
to be cleared rapidly at the border on the basis 
of the information included in the customs 
declaration, which will show that GST has been 
charged and will be accounted for. From the 
outset, some key online retailers agreed to 
comply with the new system (Alibaba and eBay) 
while Amazon has ‘geo-blocked’ consumers 
in Australia from using their US site to make 
purchases. Consumers trying to get around 
this by setting up a virtual private network 
to disguise their location will find that goods 
ordered from the US site can only be delivered 
to a US address.
The European Union (EU) currently does 
not charge VAT on the shipment of small 
consignments (less than €22) but has decided 
that this exemption will be abolished in 2021. 
This decision was announced by the European 
Commission in December 2017 and takes effect 
on January 1, 2021. The Commission’s fact sheet 
113  For a fuller description of the system visit: https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/International-tax-for-business/GST-on-low-value-imported-goods/Who-charges-GST/ To see the 
        legislation see: https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2017A00077 
114  That said, there is provision for offset of GST that has been paid in respect of a sale that is subsequently cancelled.
115  The report also includes recent figures for yields in the European Union, Russia, and South Africa.
116  The reason the new regime does not come into effect until 2021 is to allow all member states to make the necessary changes to the IT systems that underpin the one stop shop 
        process.published at the time of the decision, spells out 
the reasons for the policy change:
“Not a level playing field:  under current 
rules, imported goods bought online from 
non-EU countries are exempt from VAT if 
they cost below €22. Companies based 
outside the EU can  fraudulently mark 
expensive goods such as mobile phones 
and tablets as costing not more than 
€22, meaning that no VAT is 
paid. This puts EU businesses at 
a clear disadvantage to non-EU 
businesses (European Commission, 2017).”
There are similarities between the EU’s 
approach and the system already in operation 
in Australia.  Merchants based outside the EU 
will be able to register and account for VAT due 
on sales to customers based in the EU using a 
simplified online process. This will be based 
on the existing ‘one stop shop’ which already 
collects VAT due on the electronic provision 
of e-services.116 The rate of VAT payable is that 
applying in the country where the consumer is 
located. However, the total VAT due from a non-
EU merchant can be accounted for in a single 
process through the one stop shop. Where 
sales take place via an online market place, the 
market place will be responsible for ensuring 
that VAT is paid in respect of goods supplied by 
non-EU businesses to EU consumers.
In the region, Indonesia has cut its exemption 
for shipments of imported goods to consumers 
from US$75 to US$3, per shipment. The reduced 
rate took effect on 30 January 2020. Levelling 
the playing field for domestic businesses was 
specifically cited as one of the reasons for the 
change. Local craftsmen and manufacturers of 
bags, shoes and garment products have been 
especially hard hit by tax free imports of these 
products.
Increasing numbers of jurisidictions are looking 
at how digital platforms can help secure VAT 
due on sales made through their platforms, 
including by smaller foreign suppliers that are 
more difficult for tax administrations to engage 
with. The OECD published a report on this 
specific topic in March 2019 (OECD 2019a). The 
report is designed to assist tax administrations 
in understanding how digital platforms can 
assist in the collection of VAT/GST.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 88Implications for the Philippines
The current low value consignment exemption 
from VAT may not be sustainable.  The increase 
in volumes of low value consignments has led 
some countries, including the Philippines, 
to increase the threshold to help manage 
pressures at the border. Nonetheless, the rapid 
growth in e-commerce represents a threat 
to the Philippines’ VAT base. Moreover, the 
exemption exposes tax-compliant suppliers 
in the Philippines to unfair competition. The 
exemption is high by comparison to the current 
EU exemption and some others in the region 
(Table 5.1). The Philippines should consider 
reducing, or simply abolishing the current 
exemption. It could adopt a staged approach 
to abolition, reducing the exemption in one or 
two steps. The reduction, or abolition, needs 
to be part of a broader reform that adopts 
international best practice to secure payment 
of the VAT due from the foreign suppliers and 
platforms. Goods on which VAT has been paid 
can then enjoy free passage at the border.
117   World Bank (2019). This predates the reduction in Indonesia.
118  The regulations may be found here: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2018/1376/madeTable 5.1.  Low-Value Consignment Exemptions in Selected 
Countries ($ equivalents)
Philippines $196 
European Union (from 2021) Zero
Australia (where sales to consumers >A$75k) Zero
Indonesia $100 
Malaysia $128 
Singapore $300 
Thailand $28 
Regional Average $131 117Online marketplaces can play a particularly 
important part in securing the desired result: 
the EU estimates that between 70 and 75 
percent of online trade is conducted through 
online marketplaces. Requiring non-resident 
businesses to collect and account for Philippine 
VAT may seem counterintuitive, but it is an 
established model. In addition to the Australian 
and EU systems for physical goods already 
discussed, we will see in the next section that 
this is how many countries are ensuring VAT 
is levied on digital services provided to their 
consumers by foreign suppliers.
To assess the impact of significantly reducing 
or abolishing the exemption of low-value 
consignments from VAT , the authorities in 
the Philippines will need to gather additional 
data. In particular, better data will enable more 
accurate estimates of the numbers of packages 
being sent by foreign based online merchants 
and marketplaces and the revenue impact of 
the current exemption and options to reform or 
abolish it. 
Imposing an obligation on foreign businesses 
to register, account for and pay VAT in the 
Philippines will require changes to the VAT 
law. The Australian legislation was cited earlier 
as an example. Although the EU regime does 
not come into force until 2021, there is a 
European example of this type of legislation 
for comparison. The United Kingdom has made 
various provisions to deal with the possibility 
that it will leave the EU without a withdrawal 
agreement (the ‘no deal’ outcome). These 
include regulations that, in the event of no 
deal, will impose VAT on the import of packets 
that are below the threshold for Customs Duty 
(£135 or less). They make the overseas supplier 
responsible for the import VAT that is due and 
remove the existing low value consignment 
relief for consignments worth £15 or less.118 
Foreign online retailers collecting and paying 
over Philippine VAT will need easy access to 
guidance on their obligations and a streamlined 
VAT system would aid compliance. In the next 
section, reference is made to the guidance 
that is available to help jurisdictions implement 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 89Collection of VAT at the border in respect of all 
packages is not practical, given the volumes 
involved.  Requiring foreign merchants and 
online marketplaces to account for VAT directly, 
at the point of sale, offers a solution that 
secures the revenue and reduces pressure on 
the border clearance process. The Australian 
and EU approaches provide a model that the 
Philippines can follow to secure its tax base and 
level the playing field for domestic businesses. simplified VAT registration and accounting 
processes for non-resident businesses. The 
simpler the VAT system is in terms of rates and 
exemptions, the easier it is for non-resident 
businesses to comply.
Interaction with Customs
Currently, the threshold for VAT and customs 
duties on imports are the same. However, that 
need not be the case. The EU will continue not 
to charge customs duty on goods worth less 
than €150 after 2021. This means that goods 
purchased from foreign online suppliers who 
have registered with the one stop shop will not 
be stopped at the border if they are below the 
customs threshold. Similarly, the Philippines 
could retain a customs threshold even if it 
decides to abolish the low-value consignment 
exemption for VAT. This means that the 
improvements in trade facilitation that resulted 
from the 2016 increase in the threshold for 
customs duties can be maintained. The current 
threshold for customs is still relatively high 
but, as the average rates are low, the revenue 
impact is not as significant as it is for VAT. 
Retaining the customs threshold will also mean 
that the taxation of gifts will be unaffected by 
the changes (as VAT only arises when goods 
and services are being supplied by a business). 
This is important in the current context, given 
the numbers of citizens working abroad and 
sending gifts home to support their families. The 
special rules for the importation of ‘Balikbayan 
Boxes’ can continue to apply and would not be 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 90affected by changes to the VAT system, as by 
definition these boxes are not supplied in the 
course of a business. However, as part of the 
process of modernizing customs procedures, it 
makes sense to collect more data about each 
individual box in order to detect potential abuse 
of the system.
Securing Compliance
As the Philippines e-commerce market is 
dominated by a small number of online 
marketplaces, it should be possible to discuss 
compliance directly with them.  Experience to 
date in Australia and in the indirect taxation 
of digital services suggests that the larger 
suppliers will engage and comply. Initially, 
reform can focus on requiring non-resident 
e-commerce platform operators to register and 
account for the VAT on products sold through 
their platforms. However, longer-term, it will 
still be necessary to establish a compliance 
regime that includes those foreign suppliers 
that are not inclined to register to pay VAT on 
sales to consumers in the Philippines. The 
regime for registered foreign suppliers can be 
relatively light touch, probably taking the form 
of spot checks designed to ensure that the 
internal systems of the supplier are accurately 
calculating the VAT dues on sales to consumers 
in the Philippines. This will release resources 
currently being used to monitor all packages 
crossing the border, so that they can focus on 
those that are being sent by persons who have 
not registered to account for VAT.
Indirect Taxation of the Digital Economy
The supply of digital goods and services by 
foreign online suppliers to consumers in the 
Philippines does not create problems at the 
border but it still raises issues of indirect 
taxation.  The issues are similar to those raised by 
sale of physical goods discussed in the previous 
section. Digital supplies often substitute for 
physical goods (DVDs, CDs, books, and so on) 
that would have attracted VAT and there is no 
reason not to tax the digital versions. As digital 
goods and services increase in economic 
importance and value, they need to be part 
of the VAT base. It is also important to ensure domestic suppliers are not disadvantaged as 
they will be required to account for VAT on 
the supplies they make to customers in the 
Philippines.
This is an issue on which there is a clear 
international consensus. This consensus and 
international practice are embodied in the 
OECD’s International VAT/GST Guidelines. 
These allocate taxing rights under a VAT or GST 
to the jurisdiction where the final consumption 
occurs (OECD, 2017a). The International VAT/
GST Guidelines have been supplemented by Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 91specific practical advice on the collection 
of indirect taxes when the supplier of digital 
goods and services is not located in the territory 
in which consumption takes place (OECD, 
2017b). Almost 65 countries have adopted the 
Guidelines’ recommendations for imposing VAT 
on the direct supply to consumers of services 
and intangibles by foreign suppliers, including 
most OECD and G20 countries (OECD, 2020c). 
The EU has levied VAT on nonresident suppliers 
of telecommunications, broadcasting, and 
electronic services, regardless of scale, since 
January 1, 2015. More details are available in 
the Annex to this report but within ASEAN, 
Singapore announced in its February 2018 
budget that GST will be imposed on imported 
digital services, including the streaming of 
music and movies and downloaded applications 
and Malaysia will apply its sales and services 
tax to imported digital services from January 1, 
2020. In April 2020, Indonesia imposed VAT on 
digital goods and services provided by foreign 
suppliers, as one element of a package of 
fiscal measures introduced in response to the 
COVID-19 crisis.
The approach to securing VAT due on 
digital goods and services supplied to local 
consumers by foreign suppliers is essentially the same as for physical goods.  Foreign 
suppliers selling directly to customers are 
responsible for accounting for the VAT due 
on those transactions. They register through 
a simplified process online and account for 
tax payable on sales to consumers. VAT is not 
payable in respect of sales to business customers 
who are registered for VAT. Alternatively, in the 
more common situation where sales are made 
through an online marketplace, the marketplace 
will collect the VAT, unless the vendor can prove 
that they are registered for VAT in their own 
right. The marketplace accounts for the VAT 
to the tax administration and provides data 
about sellers who have asserted that they are 
registered for, and paying, VAT on their sales 
directly. As this is essentially the same process 
as was described earlier for physical goods, 
the same online portal can be used for both 
purposes. Consequently, it makes sense for the 
Philippines to develop a process of collecting 
VAT from foreign suppliers that works for both 
physical and digital goods, drawing on the 
guidance developed by the OECD. A regional 
e-commerce toolkit is being developed as part 
of a joint ADB-OECD-World Bank program and 
the Philippines would be very welcome to pilot 
its use.
A Tax Compliance Strategy for Foreign Suppliers
While many large foreign suppliers will 
comply voluntarily with an obligation to 
collect Philippine VAT , it will still be necessary 
to put into place measures to counter non-
compliance. The changes to the existing VAT 
law discussed in the previous section will need 
to include details of the reporting requirements 
that foreign suppliers must comply with and, 
appropriate sanctions for non-compliance. 
It may be necessary to enhance the powers 
available to the Bureau of Internal Revenue 
(BIR) and BOC to gather information from third 
parties and to exchange information with one 
another.
The detection of non-compliance will require 
extensive use of third-party information. For 
physical goods, data from the main online 
platforms and potentially from carriers will 
clearly be important in identifying potentially 
non-compliant foreign suppliers. This can be followed by action at the border to stop 
packages originating from those suppliers until 
import VAT has been accounted for. This will act 
as an incentive for those foreign suppliers to 
become compliant in order to secure the free 
flow of deliveries to their customers. It will be 
important to integrate the data obtained about 
these imports into the direct tax compliance 
strategy. For example, multiple deliveries 
of similar goods to the same address could 
be a useful pointer to the existence of an 
unregistered business.
Foreign suppliers may not have a physical 
presence in the Philippines, but their 
interactions with customers who are located 
there will leave a financial and electronic trail. 
To identify potentially non-compliant suppliers, 
BIR will need to access some, or all, of the 
following sources of data:119    Chapter 4 of the International VAT/GST Guidelines discusses how information exchange under bilateral tax treaties and the Multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative 
         Assistance in Tax Matters can support effective VAT compliance (the Philippines signed the convention in 2014 but has yet to ratify).
120    For example, Indonesia recently issued regulations requiring digital marketplaces, or “marketplace platforms” as they refer to them, to share monthly transaction information on their 
         merchants’ sales data: Regulation of the Minister of Finance No. 210/ PMK.010/2018
121    For example, the UK legislation referenced in Section 4 introduces the concept of joints and several liability, whereby online marketplaces can be held to account for non-compliance 
         by suppliers using their platform.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 92• Information from tax returns and audit 
activity that documents the use by domestic 
businesses of foreign online suppliers (for 
example in the form of invoices supporting a 
deduction in the business’ accounts). 
• Details of online suppliers registered with 
other parts of government.
• Information from treaty partners about online 
suppliers based in their territories.119
• Regular scanning of the virtual marketplace 
to identify foreign suppliers apparently 
offering services to local consumers that are 
not registered to pay taxes.
• Information from banks and credit card 
companies about cross-border payments. 
Regular patterns of payments to foreign 
entities that are online suppliers would be 
an obvious indicator of potential liability. 
Financial institutions that enable digital 
payments in the Philippines tend to be large 
businesses and compliant. Nonetheless, it 
is important that BIR has the right to obtain 
information about payments from these 
institutions, without violating privacy rights. 
BIR should also have the right to require 
financial institutions to withhold tax from 
payments to foreign suppliers in cases where 
they are non-compliant.
• Information from Internet Service Providers 
that could identify instances of supply to 
local consumers. This might entail searches 
of e-mail content sent or received from a 
foreign IP address for key words, such as 
‘invoice’, ‘receipt’, ‘service’, and so on. Clearly 
access to this type of data will depend on the 
relevant privacy laws and information powers 
that apply in the Philippines and may not 
be practicable in the near-term. It might be 
possible to develop an alternative reporting 
mechanism for ISPs that does not involve 
any direct review of e-mail content by the tax 
administration, given the privacy concerns 
that it could raise.
Digital marketplaces and platforms are 
themselves useful sources of information 
about providers of goods and services, both 
domestic and foreign based. The information 
they have about businesses using their websites to sell goods and services is highly valuable to 
tax administrations. The steps some countries 
have taken to obtain information from multi-
sided platforms have already been described. 
Some tax administrations are requiring digital 
marketplaces to provide information about the 
merchants making use of their platforms.120 
The OECD has now proposed some model 
rules designed to be part of a systematic 
international process for collecting and 
sharing information about sellers using digital 
platforms to sell services. The purpose of the 
system is to ‘ensure that taxpayers and tax 
administrations get timely access to high-quality 
information on the consideration earned by 
platform sellers, in order to enhance compliance 
and minimise compliance burdens for tax 
administrations and taxpayers alike’ (OECD, 
2020a). The proposed rules are focused on the 
reporting of income from renting real property 
and from the provision of personal services in 
the sharing and gig economy. However, as the 
consultation document acknowledges, some 
countries are interested in extending the scope 
to include the sale of goods via platforms. 
Although the main focus of the proposal is to 
enhance the direct tax compliance of sellers, 
the OECD also expects the data to be of value in 
securing compliance with other tax obligations, 
most notably VAT but also local taxes and social 
security contributions.
It will still be necessary to carry out some 
checks of physical goods being sent by 
persons who have not registered to account for 
VAT.  As with checks to ensure compliance with 
the existing VAT and duty exemptions, it will be 
important to reduce the opportunities for rent-
seeking and corruption that can arise. As part of 
its ongoing modernization program, the Bureau 
of Customs will need to ensure strong legal and 
regulatory framework is in place and continue 
its efforts to automate Customs processes.
The process of detection will need to be 
supported by measures designed to punish 
and deter non-compliance. These can include 
financial penalties for failing to notify liability, 
for late filing and late payment and for incorrect 
declarations. However, as the taxpayers are 
located outside the country, some additional 
sanctions may be necessary.121 The ultimate 
sanction would be to deny access to the Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 93123   https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-actions/action7/
124   https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/beps-actions/action15/#d.en.521955
125   Sections 25 and 28 of the Tax Code.local market, cutting off the supplier from the 
customers located there. This would entail 
blocking access to the supplier’s websites and 
preventing e-mails from the supplier from being 
delivered. The technical feasibility of such a 
sanction needs to be confirmed, as does its 
consistency with Philippine law.
The compliance strategy will need to address 
the risk that consumers may try to disguise their 
location from suppliers to avoid the imposition 
of taxes. It is relatively easy for consumers to 
mask their IP address, so that they appear to be 
located outside their home country. Procedures have been developed for determining the actual 
status of the consumer.122
The compliance strategy should include a 
communication plan. This should be designed 
to reach the foreign service providers that will 
be required to account for Philippine VAT. It 
also needs to be ongoing, as this is a dynamic 
environment, with new entrants to the market 
cropping up all the time. Given the nature of the 
businesses involved, it will need to be web-based 
with automatic messaging and advertising that 
is targeted at existing and potential suppliers.
Direct Taxation of the Digital Economy
Some Multinational Enterprises (MNEs) 
have exploited changes in the way they do 
business to artificially avoid having a taxable 
presence in the jurisdictions in which they 
operate.  This issue was addressed directly by 
Action 7 of the OECD/G20 BEPS project.123 The 
issue concerned the way in which ‘permanent 
establishments’ are defined in domestic law 
and in treaties. Some MNEs fragmented their 
business activities in countries to exploit the 
specific exemptions included in the standard 
treaty definition of a permanent establishment 
or replaced local subsidiaries that acted as 
distributors with commissionaire arrangements 
that enabled them to shift profits away from 
the local jurisdiction. To address this, Action 7 
made changes to the permanent establishment 
definition in the OECD Model Tax Convention. 
Those changes were then reflected in the 
Multilateral Instrument that enables its 
signatories to update their existing network 
of treaties by way of a single agreement with 
multiple jurisdictions.124 
The Philippines tax code does not have 
an explicit definition of a permanent 
establishment.  Instead the code says that 
a non-resident alien individual or a foreign 
corporation that is “engaged in a trade of 
business in the Philippines” shall be taxable on 
all sources of income in the Philippines.125 This 
appears to be quite a broad charging provision 
but it is subject to limitation by the tax treaties 
the Philippines has agreed with other countries. 
The vast majority of these treaties were 
negotiated before the BEPS project even began 
and so do not reflect the changes made to the OECD and UN Model Conventions following 
Action 7. The Philippines is not a signatory to the 
Multilateral Convention. Consequently, there is 
a risk that some MNEs may have adopted the 
avoidance strategies described in the Action 7 
report to artificially avoid a taxable presence 
in the Philippines. The BIR should undertake an 
operational review to determine if this is the 
case. The results of that review can then inform 
the future direction of the Philippines treaty 
policy and its view of the potential benefits of 
signing the Multilateral Instrument.
While there is a consensus about the changes 
needed to the definition of permanent 
establishments, the broader direct tax policy 
questions raised by digitalization of the 
global economy are still the subject of debate 
internationally. That debate is currently focused 
on proposals developed by the OECD/G20 
Inclusive Framework on BEPS (IF), which, along 
with a proposed work program, were presented 
to G20 Finance Ministers at their meeting in 
Japan in June 2019 (OECD, 2019b). This proposal 
has been further refined and the intention is to 
reach a consensus on the way forward by the 
end of 2020 (OECD, 2020b). The proposals are 
designed to address the challenges that the 
digital economy poses for the existing system 
of international taxation. This includes the 
issue of businesses that have “scale without 
mass”. This is shorthand for the way in which 
some businesses now have a significant digital 
presence in economies without having any 
physical, and so taxable, presence there. Annex 
1 provides information about ways in which 
various jurisdictions have responded to the Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 94emergence of new ways of doing business in 
the digital economy. It includes a slightly more 
detailed discussion of businesses that have scale 
without mass and some of the policy responses 
that have been generated at the national and 
regional level. One of the reasons for seeking 
an international consensus on the issue, is that 
these national initiatives could result in a highly 
confusing picture internationally and result in 
double taxation, or even new opportunities for 
avoidance.
The IF proposals seek to address the 
challenges of both digitalization and ongoing 
base erosion. They affect traditional business 
models as well as highly digitalized businesses. 
Some of the proposed reforms depart from 
current standards and are potentially beneficial 
to developing economies. The IF’s willingness to 
simplify the rules for taxing MNEs and to depart 
from a strict adherence to the arm’s length 
principle is a noteworthy development. The 
options under consideration are not mutually 
exclusive. Some build on existing principles, 
some break new ground, while others are more 
obviously anti-avoidance rules. Separately, the 
IMF has published a paper that explores broader 
options, including greater use of formulary 
approaches (IMF, 2019).
In the absence of a consensus on fundamental 
reform that introduces more mechanical 
methods, better suited to jurisdictions with 
limited capacity in their tax administrations, 
the fallback will be greater reliance on anti-
abuse rules. The IF proposals include two such 
rules: the ‘income inclusion rule’ and the ‘base 
eroding payment rule’ (inspired by elements of 
the 2017 US tax reform). Both rules are relatively 
straightforward anti-avoidance measures. 
They both require tax administrations to have 
information about the effective tax rates of 
related parties in other jurisdictions. Under the 
income inclusion rule, profits of lowly taxed 
subsidiaries are attributed to the ultimate parent 
and taxed in the jurisdiction of the parent. 
This measure is unlikely to directly benefit capital importing economies significantly. The 
base eroding payment rule would disallow tax 
deductions for payments to related parties that 
give rise to a high risk of base erosion (such as 
interest or royalties) and that are not subject to 
a minimum effective rate of taxation. Such a rule 
could be relatively simple to enforce; taxpayers 
could be required to self-assess whether such 
payments meet the minimum effective tax test 
and information required by tax administrations 
to enforce the rule should be included in a 
transfer pricing tax return schedule. This would 
be a useful addition to the anti-avoidance 
defenses available to jurisdictions but could 
still be undermined by the use of intermediate 
entities located in normal-rate countries (a form 
of treaty shopping that may be hard to combat). 
An additional option is to translate the 
proposed income inclusion proposal into a 
rule designed to meet the needs of capital 
importing economies, based on the concept 
of ‘diverted profits’. This would counter profit 
shifting into low tax jurisdictions, offering a 
relatively simple tool to bring into taxation a 
share of profit shifted to lowly-taxed and low-
substance entities. It simplifies the vexed issue 
of what constitutes ‘substance’ and value 
creation by substituting (in the case of these 
lowly-taxed entities) a simple rule for the current 
complex set of technical considerations. If the 
profits of a lowly taxed entity exceed a certain 
multiple of costs representative of ‘substance’ 
(primarily the direct costs of labor), that excess 
shall be allocated to jurisdictions for taxation 
in accordance with an agreed metric. There is 
scope to develop a relatively simple approach 
that is narrowly targeted, mechanical, with wide 
application (Pemberton and Loeprick, 2019).
If these proposals result in significant 
simplification of the existing transfer pricing 
rules that could benefit the Philippines. The 
Philippines will want to monitor the way in which 
the work of the IF evolves over the coming 
months quite closely.
Safeguarding the VAT base and ensuring 
a level-playing field between foreign and 
domestic sellers are vital. The analysis in this 
chapter suggests that e-commerce does pose 
a threat to the VAT base in the Philippines.  
Moreover, not securing VAT on digital goods Conclusions and Next Steps
and services supplied to local consumers 
by foreign suppliers will disadvantage local 
suppliers who are required to secure VAT on 
their sales. Fortunately, international experience 
shows that there is a solution, which requires 
foreign suppliers to register and pay VAT when Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 95Duckett, C. (2019). “ Aust ralian Taxation Office says low value 
GST collection doing better than expected.”  ZDNet, January 
3. https://www.zdnet.com/article/australian-taxation-
office-says-low-value-gst-collection-doing-better-than-
expected/March 8, 2020
European Commission (2017). “Modernising VAT for 
e-commerce: Question and Answer.”
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
MEMO_16_3746, March 8, 2020.
IMF (2019).  “Corporate Taxation in the Global Economy.” 
Washington DC: IMF.
Iprice Insights (2020). “The Map of Ecommerce Philippines.”
https://iprice.ph/insights/mapofecommerce/en/, March 8, 
2020.
OECD (2017a). “International VAT/GST Guidelines.”  Paris: 
OECD Publishing. 
__________ (2017b).  “Mechanisms for the Effective Collection 
of VAT/GST.”  Paris: OECD Publishing.
__________ (2018).  “Tax Challenges Arising from Digitalisation, 
Interim Report.” Paris: OECD Publishing.
__________ (2019a). “The Role of Digital Platforms in the 
Collection of VAT/GST on Online Sales”.
__________ (2019b). “ OECD Secretary-General Report to the 
G20 finance ministers and central bank governors – June 
2019.” Paris: OECD Publishing.___________ (2020a).  “Public consultation document : Model 
Rules for Reporting by Platform Operators  with respect 
to Sellers in the Sharing and Gig Economy.”  Paris: OECD 
Publishing.
____________ (2020b). “Statement by the OECD/G20 Inclusive 
Framework on BEPS on the Two-Pillar Approach to Address 
the Tax Challenges Arising from the Digitalisation of the 
Economy – January 2020.”  OECD/G20 Inclusive Framework 
on BEPS. Paris : OECD.
__________ (2020c). “OECD Secretary-General Report to the 
G20 finance ministers and central bank governors – July 
2020.” Paris: OECD Publishing.
Pemberton, J. and Loeprick, J. (2019). “ Low Tax Jurisdictions 
and Preferential Regimes: Policy Gaps in Developing 
Economies.”  Policy Research working paper, No. WPS 8778. 
Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
Statista (2020). “E-commerce: Philippines.”   https://www.
statista.com/outlook/243/123/ecommerce/philippines, 
March 2020.
We Are Social (2020). “Digital 2020: Global Digital Overview,”  
https://wearesocial.com/digital-2020, March 8, 2020. 
World Bank (2019). “The Digital Economy in Southeast 
Asia: Strengthening the Foundations for FutureGrowth,” 
Washington DC: The World Bank.
 Referencesthey sell goods and services to consumers in 
the Philippines. It is accepted internationally 
that VAT should be payable in the country 
of consumption, in line with the destination 
principle. The process for collecting the VAT due 
already operates successfully in many countries. 
A single portal can be used by foreign suppliers 
to account for VAT due on physical goods and 
digital services provided to consumers in the 
Philippines. The Philippines could pilot the use 
of the e-commerce toolkit being developed as 
part of a joint ADB-OECD-World Bank program.
An immediate next step will be to obtain more 
precise data about the scale of the problem.
This will also allow the Department of Finance to 
assess the tax revenue being lost as a result of 
the current low value consignment exemption 
from VAT and the potential yield from its 
reduction, or abolition. The data should also 
help verify the main foreign suppliers.
Separately, the Department of Finance 
should see what data is available about the 
consumption of digital services by consumers 
in the Philippines. There may be data available 
in other parts of Government, but it may also 
be necessary to enter into dialogue with the 
industry to assess the scale of the market and future trends. That could be part of an overall 
consultation about changes to the VAT 
treatment of imports.
At the same time, the Department of Finance 
will want to consider how the legislative 
models identified in this chapter can be 
translated into provision in the Philippine 
Tax Code. This report also discussed a high-
level compliance strategy to support the 
policy changes, and BIR and BOC will want 
to consider how that can be best integrated 
into their current operations. The data on 
the scale of the problem, coupled with an 
appreciation of how international practice 
can be translated into local legislation, can 
be used to model the operational impacts on 
BIR and BOC. This will enable an overall cost-
benefit appraisal of the reform options.
Separately, BIR should conduct an exercise 
to establish whether the Philippines 
is subject to the kind of tax avoidance 
addressed by BEPS Action 7. The results of 
this exercise can inform the development of 
the tax treaty policy of the Philippines and 
its judgment about the value of becoming a 
signatory to the Multilateral Instrument that 
resulted from BEPS Action 15.CHAPTER 6
A CONDUCIVE AND 
COMPETITIVE BUSINESS 
ENVIRONMENT
Philippines Digital E conomy Report 2020 96The ability of the private sector to be part of 
the digital economy requires a conducive and 
competitive business environment. In addition 
to good connectivity and digital payments, 
a conducive and competitive business 
environment attracts private sector investment 
and innovations to the digital economy. Without 
competitive pressure, market leaders have 
little incentive to invest in technologies new 
to the firm since they do not face competitive 
pressures to reduce their costs—while laggard 
firms are too far away from the frontier to bridge 
the cost gaps and enter the market (World Bank, 
2016). Those that do enter the market may 
instead use old production technologies and 
focus on local market niches to survive.
The current business environment limits the 
ability of the economy to generate new private 
sector firms, which will affect the ability of 
the economy to recover during the COVID-19 
crisis. New firms are typically responsible for 
126   This section largely draws from the World Bank’s (2018a) report on Fostering Competition in the Philippines: The Challenge of Restrictive Regulations.
127    Price cost margins calculated taking into account direct costs of sales and labor costs.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 97Limited competition in key economic sectors 
is one of the main development challenges for 
the digital economy. A notable proportion of 
markets enjoy high price cost margins, which may 
be an indication of limitations to competition. 
Price cost margins (PCMs) provide a way to 
measure competition as a proxy of the ability 
of firms to raise prices above marginal costs. In 
this case, more than 70 percent of agriculture 
markets, 60 percent of manufacturing markets, 
80 percent of wholesale/retail markets, and 
90 percent of transport/storage markets have 
an average PCM127 of more than 40 percent. 
The ability to charge prices above marginal 
costs is a potential indicator of the exercise of 
market power by firms. In some cases, such 
outcomes can be facilitated by market rules and 
regulations such as price controls. Competition and regulatory constraintsmost nations’ net job growth. However, in 2016, 
only 300 new firms were registered per 1 million 
in the working-age population, compared to 
Thailand with 1,000 and Malaysia with 2,300. 
Entrepreneurs are largely discouraged by the 
administrative burdens placed on startups, 
together with the complexity of regulatory 
procedures, and the regulatory protection of 
incumbents. 
Most startups are in Manila but there is an 
increasing concentration of startup firms in 
Cebu. The 2019 Startup Ecosystem Rankings 
identified Manila and Cebu as the top startup 
ecosystems in the Philippines. In 2019, the 
global ranking of both cities is at 84 and 293, 
respectively. Identifying the constraints faced 
by startups can provide good insights on the 
possible gaps in the startup ecosystem, which 
will be key to bring technologies that facilitate 
social distancing in the new normal. 
Private sector markets face several anti-
competitive restrictions. Product market 
regulation (PMR) indicators provide an 
assessment of the extent to which public 
policies promote or inhibit market forces in 
several areas of product markets. For the 
Philippines, the PMR identifies numerous anti-
competitive restrictions in terms of regulatory 
protection of incumbents, public ownership 
of firms in competitive sectors and the 
administrative burdens on start-ups (Figure 
6.1). These restrictions include barriers to 
foreign investments in utilities, price controls 
on more than 40 products deemed as staples, 
and cumbersome registration procedures for 
corporations that may discourage entry.
 126High administrative burdens on start-ups make 
it costly for startups. In 2020, the Philippines 
ranked 171 out of 190 economies in Starting 
a Business (Figure 6.2). It takes 33 days and 
13 procedures to start a business, way above 
the East Asian average. In addition, for many 
industries, numerous operating permits and 
licenses are required from unrelated agencies 
that need to be renewed on an annual basis. 
For example, companies operating in the 
logistics sector may be required to secure the 
necessary permits from the Maritime Industry 
Authority for their shipping assets, from the 
Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory 
Board for their trucks, client profile registry 
from the Bureau of Customs, and a sea freight 
forwarding accreditation from the Fair Trade 
and Enforcement Bureau. These are in addition 
to permits paid to local entities, such as the 
Mayor’s Business Permit; permits for passage 
from local government units, economic zones, 
and ports, and which must be renewed annually. 
Nevertheless, the government is working on the 
implementation of the Innovation Start up Act 
guidelines for the Startup Business One Stop 
Shop (SBOSS) to address the administrative 
burdens for startups.
With the passage of the Philippine Competition 
Act in 2015, the government has taken the first 
step in minimizing competition constraints 
by creating the Philippine Competition Source: World Bank (2018a), The Philippines PMR questionnaireFigure 6.1.  Anti-competitive restrictions create multiple private sector barriers
Source: World Bank (2018a), The Philippines PMR questionnaireFigure 6.2. It’s less bureaucratically fun to start a company in the 
Philippines41%36%23%
00.511.522.53
PhilippinesBarriers to
trade and
investment
State control
Barriers to
entrepreneurs
hip
73%27%
37%63%
24%47%28%
00.511.522.53
State controlDecomposition of PMR Score for the Philippines
Barriers to
entrepreneurshipBarriers to trade
and investmentComplexity of
regulatory procedures
Administrative burdens
on startups Regulatory protection
of incumbents
Public ownershipInvolvement in
business operation
Explicit barriers
Other barriers
Commission (PCC) an independent quasi-
judicial body to promote and maintain market 
competition by regulating anti-competitive 
conduct. After a two-year transition period, 
the law is now fully operational. The PCC is 
fully staffed, having completed the secondary 
regulations for the Competition Act, and 
internal procedures for the review of mergers 
and the enforcement of anti-cartel behavior 
are in place. Between February 2016 to August 
2018, the Commission conducted 146 reviews 
of merger transactions worth PHP 2.4 trillion 
and has completed seven preliminary inquiries 
on anti-cartel behavior. However, the PCC 
has yet to complete an enforcement ruling 
on companies engaged in anti-competitive 
behavior.
DB 2020 Starting a Business Score
100
62.7: Lao PDR (Rank: 181)81.2: Indonesia (Rank: 140)83.9: Regional Average (East Asia & Paciﬁc)
83.3: Malaysia (Rank: 126)92.4: Thailand (Rank: 47)
71.3: Philippines (Rank: 171)
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 98Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 99The country has been working towards 
reforming its business regulatory and licensing 
environment. In May 2018, the Philippines 
passed the Ease of Doing Business and Efficient 
Government Service Delivery Act. Among 
the provisions of the law are the automatic 
approval of applications beyond the prescribed 
processing time of between three and 20 days 
(depending on complexity); the promotion 
0123456
Malaysia
China
Indonesia
Thailand
Kenya
Bangladesh
Vietnam
Pakistan
Philippines
Sri Lanka
MoroccoEase of Hiring and Firing (7=best)
0123456
Malaysia
Morocco
Bangladesh
Kenya
Sri Lanka
Vietnam
Philippines
China
Indonesia
Thailand
PakistanFlexibility of Wage Determination (7=best)
Source: World Bank (2018b). Source: World Bank (2018b). Figure 6.3. Labor regulations in the Philippines are more 
restrictive than in peersFigure 6.4. Wage determination is also more 
restrictive in the Philippines compared with peers
122   Largely draws from World Bank’s (2018b) Philippines Growth and Productivity Report.Labor regulations in the Philippines are one 
of the most stringent in the ASEAN region, 
limiting the creation of formal jobs, and the 
flexibility that might be required during 
the COVID-19 recovery.  According to the 
Global Competitiveness Report 2017–2018, 
the Philippines ranks 84 out of 137 countries 
in terms of labor market efficiency and 77 on 
the ease of hiring and firing workers, more 
restrictive than in peers (Figure 6.3). The strict 
labor regulations contribute to informality by of automated procedures and electronic 
licenses; and the imposition of administrative 
and criminal penalties for non-compliance. 
The law mandates the creation of an Anti-Red-
Tape Authority (ARTA), an oversight regulatory 
body directly under the Office of the President, 
which has a main task of implementing the law 
to reduce the regulatory burdens of the private 
sector to comply with business regulations. 
Labor Market128
increasing the cost of formal compared to 
informal, discourages employers from hiring 
workers formally and leads them to increasingly 
use temporary employment contracts. 
Moreover, wage determination is restrictive 
both relative to Filipino worker productivity and 
to the minimum wage of other countries with 
similar income levels (Figure 6.4) (Betcherman, 
2014). Finally, redundancy costs are very high in 
the Philippines—27 weeks of salary, resulting in 
a rank of 118 out of 136 countries.
To be able to ride the waves of digital 
transformation, employers and workers 
need to know how to use digital technology, 
handle large volumes of information, and 
act with flexibility and creativity. While more productive firms tend to access the internet 
and use it more intensively, the successful 
use of digital technologies depends on firms’ 
complementary investments in skills and 
organizational restructuring. This entails SkillsSource:  World Bank (2016). Figure 6.5. The skills needed to operate in the digital economy go beyond ICT technical skills
Cognitive
Literacy, numeracy, and
higher-order cognitive skills
(for example, reasoning
and creative thinking)
Raw problem-solving ability
versus knowledge to
solve problems
Verbal ability, numeracy,
problem solving, memory,
and mental speedSocial and behavioral
Socioemotional skills and
personality traits
Openness to experience,
conscientiousness,
extraversion, agreeability,
and emotional stability
Self-regulation, grit, mind-set,
decision making, and
interpersonal skillsTechnical
Manual dexterity and the use
of methods, materials, tools,
and instruments
Technical skills developed
through postsecondary
schooling or training
or acquired on the job
Skills related to specific
occupations (for example,
engineer,economist, IT specialist)
Filipino children born today will reach 
just over half of their maximum potential 
productivity upon adulthood, which indicates 
that cognitive skills might be underdeveloped. 
Findings from the World Bank’s (2018c) 
Human Capital Index (HCI) can be used to 
demonstrate the potential effect of early 
childhood interventions on these skills. The 
HCI measures the amount of productivity that 
a child born today can expect to attain by 
age 18, given the current levels of education 
and health prevailing in the country he or she 
resides in. The Philippines has a human capital 
index of 0.55, which indicates that the future 
productivity of a child born today is 45 percent 
lower than what they could have achieved 
with complete education and full health. Both 
Malaysia and Thailand have higher HCIs, at 
0.622 and 0.604, respectively. The Philippines 
performs slightly better than Indonesia, which 
has an HCI of 0.535. These low results can be 
partially attributed to the low learning-adjusted 
years of schooling. While Filipino children could expect to be in school for 12.8 years by the time 
they are 18, the learning-adjusted years are 
much lower at 8.37 years. 
The skills needed for a more digital future are 
therefore below average.  The WEF’s (2016) 
Competitiveness report differentiates the skills 
of the current workforce with those needed 
for the future (Figure 6.6). Current workforce 
skills cover years of schooling, extent of staff 
training, quality of vocational training, skill sets 
of secondary education graduates, and skill sets 
of university graduates. In comparison, future 
workforce skills cover school life expectancy, 
quality of primary education, internet use in 
schools, and critical thinking in teaching. Using 
the skills of the current workforce, the Philippines 
is above regional peers’ average; however, in 
terms of the skills for the future workforce, the 
Philippines lags behind neighboring China and 
Malaysia. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 100that workers and entrepreneurs would need 
to possess foundational skills in addition to 
technical ICT skills. To maximize the potential 
benefits of the digital economy, three sets 
of skills are required: (1) cognitive, such as 
problem-solving and mental speed; (2) social 
and behavioral, such as socioemotional skills, 
decision-making ability, and interpersonal skills; 
and (3) technical, such as the use of various software, methods, materials, and tools (Figure 
6.5). Moreover, digital technologies perform 
routine tasks more quickly and less costly than 
humans. As a result, the demand for low-skill 
jobs declines and the need for high-skill workers 
that complement these technologies increases. 
This, in turn, motivates people to continuously 
learn new skills and upgrade existing one 
through a lifelong process of learning.Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 101Despite the availability of institutions that 
offer ICT training, there is still a need to Source:  WEF (2019). Figure 6.6. The skills of today are above average, but not fully ready 
for the future
-30-20-100102030Skills of current
workforceSkills of future
workforceDifference to regional peers' average scores (%)
China Indonesia Malaysia
Philippines Thailand Vietnam
Source:  World Bank (2018). Figure 6.7.  The level of domestic credit to the private sector is 
adequate relative to the country’s income level…The level of domestic credit to the private 
sector is low compared to regional peers with 
firms relying heavily on internal funds. At 45 
percent of GDP, credit to the private sector is at 
the level predicted by its income level (Figure 
6.7), but substantially lower than the average of 
regional peers (114 percent of GDP) (Figure 6.8). 
Less than 7 percent of working capital of the 
country’s firms is financed by banks, much lower 
than the 18 percent among firms in regional 
peers. Even for the country’s large firms, only 11.6 
percent of funds used for investment originates 
from banks. However, most Philippine firms that 
apply for a loan through the banking system are 
approved. Based on enterprise survey data from 
2015, while a third of the SMEs in the sample 
have existing lines of credit, few have applied for 
new lines of credit. Aside for not finding a need 
for it, SMEs cite high interest rates, complex 
application procedure and high collateral as the 
main reasons for not applying to a new line of 
credit. Banks cite insufficient or unacceptable 
collateral and adverse credit/repayment record 
as the main reasons for rejection (Aldaba, 2011). 
Rather than access, this heavy reliance on 
internal funds seems to be the result of either 050100150200250
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
GNI per capita PPP (international currency)Domestic Credit to the Private Sector
2016 (% of GDP) 
PHLAccess to Finance, including start-up finance
high costs in the formal banking system or firm 
preferences. The effectiveness of any COVID-19 
support provided to the private sector as lines 
of credit will likely be restricted by the current 
low level of borrowing, especially for working 
capital.update school curriculums and traditional 
modes of teaching. The country’s top-ranking 
universities, including the University of the 
Philippines, Ateneo de Manila University, De 
La Salle University, and University of Santo 
Tomas, all offer degrees related to information 
technology and computer sciences. The UP 
System Information Technology Foundation 
offers individual IT courses open to professionals 
who do not have an IT background, and IT 
majors who want to brush up on their skills. 
The foundation also has a program called 
‘TBC4K: Tech Boot Camp for Kids + Teens’, 
which aims to introduce children to IT courses 
such as robotics and programming. However, 
qualitative interviews with ICT firms reveal that 
there is a mismatch between technical skills 
taught in classrooms and the skills needed in 
the workplace. As a result, firms would resort to 
hiring IT professionals from abroad or investing 
in extensive trainings for new hires, including 
those who graduated with an ICT-related 
degree.129
129  The DTI is conducting reskilling and upskilling of workforce, signing two MOUs partnering with TESDA and Skills Future SG for Human Capital Development. Moreover, DTI, DOLE, and 
        TESDA are cooperating on innovation initiatives for human resource development, reskilling, and upskilling of workforce in the context of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.Thailand Vietnam Malaysia The Philippines700
525
350
175
02012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Source:  Golden Gate Ventures deal trackingSource:  Groh et al. (2018) 
*Covers 125 countries.Figure 6.9.  Venture capital deals in the Southeast Asian region,
2012-2017Table 6.1.   VCPE Country Attractiveness Index*
130  The index measures the attractiveness of countries for investors in the venture capital (VC) and private equity (PE) asset classes. It provides the most up-to-date aggregated 
         information on the quality of the investment environment and an assessment of the ease of transaction-making in 125 countries. Refer to Groh et al. (2018).
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 102Source: World Bank (2018). Figure 6.8.  …but relatively low compared with regional peers
Indonesia020406080100120140160180200
Philippines Malaysia Thailand ChinaDomestic Credit:
the Philippines vs. Regional Peers,
2016 (% of GDP)
The access to finance constraint is especially 
acute among early stage entrepreneurs. 
The 2020 Philippine Startup Survey (PWC, 
2020) shows that access to finance is one of 
the biggest challenges facing startups in the 
Philippines, with 77 percent of founders naming 
it as their top challenge to doing business. The 
disparity of early stage funding per startup is 
stark: US$68,000 in the Philippines compared 
to a global average of US$252,000 (Startup 
Genome, 2018). Also, deal tracking from Golden 
Gate Ventures between 2012 and 2017 showed 
that the Philippines covered less than 5 percent 
of the total in the region, with roughly US$300 
million in funding over the past five years (Figure 
6.9). Investors are beginning to gravitate towards 
the Philippines as an important emerging 
market destination. Looking forward, 45 
percent of investors see Fintech as the top sector 
that will be successful in the next two years 
(PwC, 2020). The Philippines’ strong economic 
potential and large population makes it an 
attractive market for Venture Capital and Private 
Equity (VCPE) investors (Table 6.1). According to 
the latest VCPE Country Attractiveness Index,130 
the Philippines ranks 42 out of 125 countries. 
Moreover, the country has gained three positions 
since 2014. Venture Capital and Private Equity 
(VCPE) index measures the attractiveness of 
countries for investors in the venture capital (VC) 
and private equity (PE) asset classes. It provides 
the most up-to-date aggregated information 
on the quality of the investment environment 
and an assessment of the ease of transaction-
making in 125 countries. According to the 2018 
VCPE Country Attractiveness Index, Philippines 
ranked in the middle when compared to its 
regional and structural peers. 
Country Rank Score
Malaysia 13 83.1
China 18 80.7
Thailand 27 72.2
Indonesia 37 64.3
Philippines 42 61.3
Vietnam 43 60.7
Kenya 53 57.6
Sri Lanka 55 57.3
Pakistan 63 53.2
Morocco 64 52.9Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 103Philippine firms are generally improving on 
their innovation capabilities, but still lag 
behind firms in peer countries. Internal firm 
factors relate to entrepreneurial and managerial 
capabilities and technology adoption/
innovation which are considered central for 
raising productivity. Weak firm capacity to 
innovate limits the ability of firms to respond 
to the challenges presented by society, such 
as moving to online platforms are offer digital 
payments to respond to COVID-19. Productivity 
growth is influenced by the capabilities and 
incentives of firms to innovate. Entrepreneurship 
and innovation at firm level requires enhancing 
firm capabilities for innovation and technology 
learning that in turn affects productivity 
growth. Technological learning at the firm 
level implies an increased ability for firms to 
absorb these effectively and thus the need to 
invest in a firms’ absorptive capacity. According 
to the Global Innovation Index Report - that 
ranks innovation capabilities across world 
economies – Philippines is pegged 50 out of 
131 countries, behind Singapore (8), China 
Figure  6.10. Constraints to Innovation activities – MSMEs vs. large firmsInnovation and internal firm constraints
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Lack of information on markets
Difﬁculty in ﬁnding cooperation partners for innovation
Lack of information on technology
Uncertain demand for innovative goods or services
Lack of qualiﬁed personnel
Market dominated by established enterprises
Lack of ﬁnance from sources outside enterprise
Lack of funds within establishment or enterprise
Innovation costs too highFactors Hampering Innovation
Activities (Percent)
MSMEs
Large ﬁrms(14), Malaysia (33), and Vietnam (42) but above 
Indonesia (85) (Cornell University, INSEAD, and 
WIPO, 2020). The country has been improving 
in rankings but Philippine firms are still less 
likely to adopt existing technologies than firms 
in peer countries. For instance, only 9 percent 
of firms in the Philippines have internationally 
recognized quality certifications and only 11.2 
percent of firms use technology licensed from 
foreign companies, lower than in most peers. 
Addressing the high cost of innovation, 
insufficient resources, market dominance, and 
lack of skills will help firms innovate (Figure  
6.10).  Firms within the Philippines point to the 
high cost of innovation as the primary factor 
that prevents them from engaging in innovation 
activities in the country, followed by lack of 
funds from within firms and external sources. 
Moreover, market dominance and lack of 
qualified personnel are also important factors 
that discourage innovation, especially among 
micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs).A conducive environment needs to minimize 
the inherent risks of a digital world. Issues 
such as hacking, misuse of private information, 
personal security breaches, and unsafe 
access deter producers and consumers from 
embracing digital solutions. Therefore, it is 
crucial to establish and implement regulations 
that build trust and protect consumers from 
risks in the digital markets. 
Electronic transactions
Electronic documents and signatures are 
legally recognized in the Philippines, but the 
law that authorizes it needs to be updated. The 
Electronic Commerce Act was signed into law 
20 years ago. By virtue of this law, documents 
and signatures in electronic form are treated 
as the legal and functional equivalent of paper-
based documents. However, when a notarized 
document is required by law, the document 
cannot use digital signatures (for example, 
tax returns, corporate documents submitted 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission). 
Furthermore, many application processes have 
practices that still require the submission of 
paper-based documents. 
Consumer protection
Regulations that enforce consumer protection 
are essential in digital markets. Traditional 
transactions such as physical shopping involve 
a simultaneous exchange of goods where 
interactions in a physical market permit the 
consumer to test the seller’s professionalism as 
well as the quality of the product. However, in 
online transactions, consumers would have to 
make decisions based on the information given 
by the seller without the usual ‘physical and 
visual cues’ that aid them in decision-making. 
As such, regulations play a key role in ensuring 
that consumers are provided with the following: 
complete information to make sound decisions, 
protection against hazardous products and 
unfair sales practices, and the right to redress. 
The  Philippines has policies related to 
consumer protection, but only a few explicitly 
cover digital transactions.  Consumer 
protection in the Philippines is covered by the 
Consumer Act of 1992, which incorporates 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 104Building trust and protecting consumers
standard guidelines on consumer protection but 
lacks provisions on e-commerce transactions. 
Consumer protection joint circulars for 
e-commerce have been released by DTI, DA, and 
DOH, which mandate minimum requirements 
that e-commerce sites must comply with (for 
example, privacy policy, information about 
products and services). The BSP also issued 
Circular No. 542 in 2006 to provide consumer 
awareness programs for security risks relating 
to e-banking products and services. In terms 
of filing reports, DTI requires those to be 
done in person. However, since transactions 
are conducted online, parties could be from 
different provinces, making the arrangement 
difficult to implement.
Privacy and data protection
Lack of trust on how personal data is kept 
and managed makes consumers reluctant in 
engaging in electronic transactions, lowering 
activity and limiting growth in digital markets. 
Moreover, excessive regulations on the use 
and processing of data can be expensive for 
businesses that analyze consumer information 
for their operations. The objective therefore 
is to allow information transfers that support 
the growth of digital markets while building 
consumer trust by guaranteeing that their 
personal data is secure and under their control. 
The Philippines recently implemented a data 
privacy legal framework. The Data Privacy 
Act was signed into law in 2012, and the 
implementing rules and regulations issued in 
2016. The law aims to protect the human right to 
privacy while ensuring free flow of information 
to promote innovation and growth. The rights 
protected by the law include the following: 
the right to be informed when personal data 
will be collected and processed, the right to 
access any information held by the organization 
relating to one’s personal data, the right to 
object or withhold consent in the collection or 
process of personal data, and the right to order 
destruction of personal data, among others. 
Cybersecurity
With greater use of digital technologies and 
collection of personal data, the need for Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 105a legislation that enforces cybersecurity 
increases. In the Philippines, the Cybercrime 
Prevention Act of 2012 penalizes offenses such 
as illegal computer or system access, identity 
theft, and credit card fraud, among many others. 
Law enforcement of the provisions of the act 
are carried out by the cybercrime units of the 
National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) and the 
Philippine National Police (PNP). Nonetheless, 
based on Kaspersky, the Philippines was the 7th 
most attacked country in the world by cyber 
threats during the last quarter of 2019.
Intellectual Property Rights
Strongly enforced intellectual property (IP) 
rights encourage firm innovation and increase 
consumer confidence in the digital economy. 
Advancements in digital technology have 
dramatically improved the ability to reproduce 
and distribute information. On the one hand, 
these advances enable firms to offer their 
products to a broader market at a faster and 
cheaper rate. On the other hand, the same 
technology allows unauthorized individuals to 
easily distribute illegal copies of these products. 
The enforcement of IP rights is therefore 
necessary to guarantee firms that they would 
be able to reap the benefits of their creations 
and innovations, and fairly compete with other 
firms. 
The Philippines has demonstrated significant 
development in intellectual property rights protection in recent years. It improved by 
about 4 percentage points in the United 
States Chamber of Commerce’s (USCC, 2020) 
International Intellectual Property Index, and is 
ranked 37 out of 53 countries. The USSC identifies 
the provision of basic IP rights through the 
Intellectual Property (IP) Code of the Philippines 
as one of the country’s key strengths. Another 
strong point is the enactment of RA 10372 in 
2012 that brought amendments to the IP code, 
which granted enforcement powers to the 
Intellectual Property Office of the Philippines 
(IPOPHL), and strengthened criminal sanctions. 
However, the country still has a lot to work on as 
online and software piracy remain rampant, and 
barriers for licensing and technology transfer 
continue to disincentivize firm innovation. 
On the bright side, greater development in IP 
protection is expected in the future given two 
pending legislations. House Bill 9148 or the 
New IP Act intends to give IPOPHL the power 
to issue notice-and-takedown orders to address 
online piracy and counterfeiting. It also enables 
copyright owners to claim damages from 
infringing sites and grant them ownership of 
the domain name of the infringing site. Senate 
Bill 497 or the Philippine Online Infringing 
Act grants IPOPHL the authority to order the 
cancellation of an internet service provider’s 
(ISP) operating license should the ISP fail to 
remove infringing content within 10 days from 
receiving a notification.
Policy Recommendations
There are multiple constraints that 
hinder productivity growth and digital 
entrepreneurship in the Philippines. The 
external constraints that deter firms from joining 
and operating in the digital economy include the 
high costs of doing business and establishing a 
new business; regulatory barriers that dampen 
market conditions; high trade (Chapter 4) 
and connectivity costs (Chapter 2); and other 
distortions in labor regulations. There are also 
missing or weak complementarities in the area 
of finance and skills. Lastly, internal firm factors 
–which include weak internal capabilities, and a 
dearth of human capital and skills – discourage 
innovation and technology adoption prospects. 
Remedial measures call for a combination 
of policy reforms and strengthening of firm support. Those should be aimed at improving 
the operating environment of the firms (that 
is, by resolving market failures, removing 
distortions) and within-firm performance (that 
is, by building skills and managerial capabilities, 
technology adoption), as well as entry of new 
firms. 
Improving competition to allow new business 
to enter the market will be key to allow the 
economy to recover and generate the much-
needed jobs. New businesses will be key in 
creating new jobs during the COVID-19 recovery 
as many firms would have exited and market, 
and most net job creation comes from new 
firms. However, firm birth rates are low in the 
Philippines as entrepreneurs are discouraged by complex regulations, including those 
that protect incumbents. In this context, the 
implementation of the recently enacted Ease of 
Doing Business Act could improve competition 
by streamlining and automating all government 
permit processes and extending their validity 
beyond one year. This would reduce the cost of 
doing business and facilitate social distancing. 
Increasing competition will also require the PCC 
to complete enforcement rulings on companies 
engaged in anti-competitive behavior to 
increase market competition. 
Introducing and regulating the standards of 
services provided through platforms.  Since 
the development of the digital economy, 
the sharing economy has gone through a 
spontaneous deregulation process (Edelman 
and Geradin, 2016), with some service 
providers offering lower standards that those 
offline, at the expense of consumers. Therefore, 
there is a need to carefully regulate standards 
(e.g. quality, health, safety) in the provision of 
services through digital platforms, especially 
during the COVID-19 pandemic.  
The skills of the future workforce can be 
improved by fostering socioemotional skills 
and preparing for digital education and remote 
learning.  A first step is to embed socioemotional 
skills in the curricula of the extended compulsory 
131   Acosta, P. et al (2017). Developing Socioemotional Skills for the Philippines’ Labor Market. World Bank. Aldaba, Rafaelita (2011). “SMEs Access to Finance: 
Philippines.”  Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) Access 
to Finance in Selected East Asian Economies. 
Betcherman, Gordon (2014). “Labor market regulations: 
what do we know about their impacts in developing 
countries?”  Policy Research Working Paper Series 6819, 
The World Bank.  http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/887221468326423640/pdf/WPS6819.pdf
Cornell University, INSEAD, and WIPO (2020). “The Global 
Innovation Index 2020: Who will Finance Innovation?”  
https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_
gii_2020.pdf
Edelmal, Benjamin, and Damien Geradin (2016). 
“Spontaneous Deregulation.“  Harvard Business Review. 
Groh, Alexander, Heinrich Liechtenstein, Karsten Lieser, 
and Markus Biesinger. “The Venture Capital and Private 
Equity Country Attractiveness Index 2018.”   https://blog.
iese.edu/vcpeindex/files/2018/02/report2018.pdf
PwC (2020). “Charging ahead: The Philippine startups break 
boundaries. 2020 Philippines Startup Survey.”  https://
www.pwc.com/ph/en/publications/ceo-insights-surveys/
charging-ahead-2020-philippine-startup-survey.htmleducation from kindergarten to grade 12 by 
explicitly stating objectives and targets and by 
preparing the teachers for effective delivery of 
content131. Moreover, COVID-19 has highlighted 
the importance of remote options to ensure 
the continuity of learning. Therefore, the 
government should prepare teachers and school 
leaders for multiple learning delivery modalities 
and learning resources, including minimum 
standards of digital literacy and remote learning 
capabilities. Lastly, encourage university and 
industry linkages to improve the curriculum 
relevance in STEM (science, technology, 
engineering, mathematics) disciplines. 
 
Investments in human capital must be 
complemented by increased access to finance, 
especially at the growth stage, by making the 
country’s regulatory environment friendlier to 
investment and encouraging venture capital 
firms to reside and specialize in the country. 
The government can solve problems particular 
to digital entrepreneurship by providing 
incentives for digital payments and promoting 
transparency and open data through a right to 
information law. Ultimately, more space needs to 
be made for the private sector to thrive if digital 
entrepreneurship is going to meet its promise of 
assisting firms to transition to the new normal, 
and ultimately to make the Philippines a high-
income nation.
Startup Genome (2018). “Global Startup Ecosystem Report 
2018: Succeeding in the New Era of Technology.”   
https://startupgenome.com/reports/global-startup-
ecosystem-report-gser-2018
WEF (2016). “The Global Competitiveness Report 2016-
2017.”  http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GCR2016-2017
/05FullReport/TheGlobalCompetitiveness Report
2016-2017_FINAL.pdf
World Bank (2016). “World Development Report 2016: Digital 
Dividends.”  Washington, DC: World Bank.
________ (2018a). “Fostering Competition in the Philippines: 
The Challenge of Restrictive Regulations.” Washington, 
DC: World Bank. 
________ (2018b). “Growth and Productivity in the Philippines: 
Winning the Future.”  Washington, DC: World Bank. 
________ (2018c). “Human Capital Index (HCI).”   https://
datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/human-capital-index
________  (2019). “Doing Business 2019.” Washington, DC: 
World Bank. References
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 106CHAPTER 7
THE ROLE OF PUBLIC 
POLICY AND THE
WAY FORWARD
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 107Digital technologies will be vital aspects for 
the economy to operate and grow during the 
‘new normal’. To contain the spread of the 
virus and buy time for recovery, the Philippine 
government has enforced measures that 
restrict mobility, regulate physical contact, 
and limit business activity. These constraints 
initiated a transformational shift from analog 
practices, which often require mobility and 
physical contact, to digital modes of operating 
and transacting, which are more efficient 
and demand fewer face-to-face interactions. 
Since the quarantine was implemented, 
online sales of goods and services, digital 
payments and transactions, and the use of 
online communication platforms have rapidly 
increased. This change in consumer behavior 
and firm operations will likely carry on during 
the ‘new normal’ as social distancing guidelines 
and hygiene protocols are expected to be 
enforced even after the quarantine is lifted. To 
take full advantage of this situation and to help 
the economy in recovering from the losses it has 
suffered due to the lockdown, the government 
must ramp up its efforts in accelerating 
digitalization in the economy. In the long term, 
public policies to increase the adoption of digital technologies will help the Philippines to 
make development more inclusive, efficient, 
and innovative; allowing the country to leapfrog 
toward its Ambisyon Natin 2040 dream.
The digital economy can take root and grow 
anywhere if some elements are in place, 
but especially if government policies and 
regulations shape growth in the right direction. 
Facilitating the dividends of growth, jobs, and 
services requires government policy to set up 
a sound regulatory environment and promote 
digital adoption. As previously covered, the 
foundation of the digital economy requires 
a competitive environment that leads to the 
provision of fast, reliable, and affordable internet 
(Chapter 2). Accessing the digital economy 
also requires policies that promote the use of 
digital finance (Chapter 3), which can be largely 
facilitated through a national digital ID. In 
addition, the analog complements that include 
a conducive and competitive business climate 
(Chapter 4 and 6). The resulting ecosystem 
would allow new companies to enter the market 
and create the much-needed jobs and facilitate 
the digitization of existing firms to respond to 
the new normal.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 108Leading by example
In the society-wide digital transformation 
needed to respond to the new normal, the 
government itself must lead by example. Given 
the high demand for social distancing, the 
government can serve as an example by taking 
the lead in fast-tracking their e-governance 
projects. The paragraphs  below identify 
areas that can showcase the government’s 
commitment to a digitally transformed society, 
together with examples of launched and 
ongoing initiatives.
A key step is for government to digitize its 
processes to make policy more efficient 
and promote social distancing. The usage of 
digital technologies in government processes 
can make the government more efficient and 
transparent. Below are examples of ongoing 
initiatives, which have started to digitize 
processes, but are yet to be fully implemented.  
• In 2019, the Bureau of Customs (BOC) launched a total of six information systems, 
which are designed to streamline customs 
processes, increase transparency, and 
mitigate corruption (BOC, 2019a). The 
Document Tracking System, for example, 
enables the public to view and monitor the 
status of documents received by the BOC 
online (BOC, 2019b). However, a large bulk 
of the processes in the BOC remains paper-
based. Informal entry (below Php 50,000) 
transactions are still processed manually, 
while formal importers are still required to 
submit paper documents. 
• In terms of international trade, the 
government is planning to set up a national 
single window (NSW). The NSW will enable 
traders to apply for their permits online and 
allow regulatory agencies to send feedback 
in real-time. Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 109• The DTI and the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) have rolled out online 
business registration systems, but much 
of the remaining procedures in starting a 
business in the country are still manually 
executed. In 2017, the DICT started the 
Integrated Business Permits and Licensing 
System (iBPLS) project, which provides Local 
Government Units across the country with 
a software that digitizes the application of 
business permit and licenses (DICT, 2019). 
Issuing a Digital ID. A digital ID system promotes 
inclusivity, improves efficiency, and enhances 
security. In line with the Philippine Identification 
Systems (PhilSys) Act of 2018, the country will 
issue a national ID using a biometric recognition 
and privacy-by-design technologies. With a 
national ID, unbanked Filipinos will have a proof 
of identity, which is a key requirement in opening 
a bank account or a mobile money account. 
It also addresses the difficulties in obtaining 
documentation, which usually require two 
government-issued IDs as a proof of identity. 
Moreover, the use of biometrics in a digital ID 
allows easier verification of the authenticity 
of a person’s declared identity, including for 
online transactions, making it especially useful 
in digital transactions such as the COVID-19 
emergency subsidies to 4Ps beneficiaries. 
Providing and accepting digital payments for 
government transactions. Providing citizens 
and firms the option to pay taxes and receive 
salaries through digital means can reduce the 
time people spend traveling for this purpose 
and promote social distancing. In addition, this 
encourages citizens to participate in the digital 
economy. For example, the Bureau of Internal 
Revenue (BIR) accepts tax returns via electronic 
channels such as the BIR’s Electronic Filing and 
Payment System, Gcash, Development Bank 
of the Philippines, Land Bank, Union Bank, 
PayMaya, and PESONet (Padin, 2020). Moreover, 
mobile intermediated Government to Person 
payments offer the opportunity to encourage uptake of mobile services by women. Digital 
banking is viewed as an effective way to address 
constraints commonly faced by women, low-
income and rural segments, such as pecuniary 
and non-pecuniary transactions costs, 
regulatory barriers, information and knowledge 
gaps, social constraints and behavioral biases 
(World Bank EAP Gender Innovation Lab). 
Facilitating  digital payments for most Pantawid 
beneficiaries. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
has created an enabling environment for the use 
of digital payments for G2P payments by issuing 
a memorandum allowing financial institutions 
to apply reduced customer identification 
requirements for account opening.  For existing 
Pantawid beneficiaries, the majority have cash 
cards issued by the Landbank (LBP). The LBP 
cash card has been able to facilitate digital 
payments for most Pantawid beneficiaries. 
However, new social amelioration program 
beneficiaries, have relied on house-to-house 
cash delivery or collection of cash at pay-out 
points. 
Delivering learning opportunities using 
multiple digital modalities. DepEd’s online 
platform, Commons, already exists but needs 
to enhance its contents and quality. Moreover, 
access to Commons is still limited as almost 
45 percent of the population, and 74 percent 
(34,500) of public schools did not have access 
to the Internet in 2018. In addition to Commons, 
DepEd plans to use educational television 
programs as a core modality and build on 
the existing programs that it has developed 
in partnership with a non-profit provider. 
Interactive radio instruction—which has already 
been introduced for ALS in some areas—and 
cellphone-supported learning are needed to 
reach the most remote students. Multi-modality 
remote learning using non-face-to-face means 
such as TV, radio and cellphones would allow 
flexibility and equitable access to high quality 
education.Apart from establishing a sound regulatory 
framework and leading by example, 
governments can also use policy to promote 
digital adoption.  The digital economy can 
grow only if consumers and companies make 
use of digital technologies in various aspects 
of their daily operations or activities. Low 
levels of digital adoption among consumers 
will limit the growth of businesses that provide 
digital services. Countries with regulations 
that discourage business from undergoing 
digital transformation will eventually hurt their 
economies as local firms would be outperformed 
by more efficient competitors abroad. 
In the Philippines, there is a large bias in 
innovation towards science and technology, 
suggesting that a rebalancing of the policy mix 
is needed towards business innovation. The 
Source: Growth and Productivity Report.   * Only for manufacturing firmsFigure  7.1. Philippine firms lag in technology adoption 
8.8
0102030405060
Philippines
Indonesia
Thailand
Sri Lanka
Vietnam
Malaysia
Bangladesh
Morocco
Kenya
Pakistan
ChinaPercent of firms with an
internationally-recognized
quality certification
11.2
0102030405060
Philippines
IndonesiaThailand
Sri Lanka
Vietnam
MalaysiaChinaBangladesh
Morocco
Kenya
PakistanPercent of firms using technology 
icensed from foreign companies*features of the MSME Development Plan place 
priority on increasing business capacity of SMEs, 
particularly through its Enhanced Management 
and Labor Capacities and its Improved Access 
to Technology and Innovation components. 
However, most of the resources remain skewed 
towards scholarships, channeled through 
universities to benefit individuals. There is also a 
tendency to frame technology transfer in terms 
of facilitating transfer from own public research 
organizations (PROs) and not necessarily from 
cheaper and more efficient technology in 
the market. This might be reflected in the low 
levels of adoption of existing technologies. 
For instance, only 9 percent of firms in the 
Philippines have internationally recognized 
quality certifications and only 11 percent of 
firms use technology licensed from foreign 
companies, lower than in most peer countries. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 110Promoting innovation and digital adoption
As part of the COVID-19 recovery, a rebalancing 
of the policy mix should also include greater 
efforts on technology adoption. The private 
sector will need to use technology such as 
digital payments and e-commerce platforms 
to operate in the new normal. A program 
effectiveness review analysis carried out by the 
World Bank in 2019 analyzed the private sector 
support programs from DTI and DOST, which 
can be used to assess how the current policies 
are aligned with the potential support under the 
new normal.  Bringing new technology into a 
firm requires changes in business practices and processes. This provision is covered by programs 
that support management practices, which 
represented over 11 percent of policy support 
resources in 2017 (Figure 7.2). Thereafter, firms 
can then bring in the technology. Support to 
non-R&D innovation, technology adoption/
diffusion represents only three percent of the 
private sector support. A policy mix rebalance 
might be required to support Filipino firms to 
adjust to the new demands from the market by 
leveraging digital solutions that support social 
distancing.Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 111Source: World Bank, 2019Figure 7.2  Government programs supporting technology adoption only represent three percent of the overall resources
Distribution of objectives by mandated agency in 2017 Number of programs; n: 62; share of total value in %
Addressing coordination problems is also 
key in increasing digital adoption. Under the 
presence of network externalities, capabilities 
are necessary, but not sufficient to foster 
technology adoption, as the main binding 
constraint is often associated with coordination 
problems. At an early stage of the platform’s 
lifecycle, when both sides of the market are still 
thin, impatient users may be reluctant to make 1.82.237.88.8
810.311.211.414.321.2
Improving business regulatory…Export promotionNon-R&D innovation, technology…Technology transfer and science-industry…EntrepreneurshipBusiness R&D and R&D-based innovationSkills formationAccess to ﬁnanceManagement practicesResearch excellenceMarket access (domestic)
1.52.31.10.213.30.22.319.620.7137.8DTI programs All programs
225.417.21.519.320.10.9030.60.8DoST programs
The development of digital economy 
strategies requires close collaboration with 
multiple stakeholders.  The digital economy 
permeates several areas of society such as 
ICT, energy, education, finance, customs, and 
business registration. Given its multi-faceted 
nature, planning and implementing strategies 
for the digital economy does not naturally fall 
into the hands of a single government entity. 
The complementary nature of its building 
blocks means that piecemeal efforts of separate 
national agencies are not adequate. Instead, it 
requires a ‘whole-of-government’ coordinated 
approach, involving the participation of the 
different entities that are part of the digital 
economy ecosystem. the initial investments to connect if they assume 
others will do the same, even when they would 
all be better off by coordinating adoption. 
Therefore, policy interventions should be 
designed to overcome the coordination failure, 
for example by introducing open interfaces 
(e.g. standard QR codes for digital payments) 
and data transferability (Ruutu et al., 2017).
Whole-of-government approach
Vision and institutional setup
The whole of government approach can take 
different institutional forms. Based on global 
examples, institutional arrangements range 
from single entities (for example, Malaysia and 
Thailand) and units directly under the highest 
government office (for example, Singapore), to 
government-wide efforts led by the Ministries of 
Economy (for example, Germany). The examples 
below illustrate how these countries arranged 
their institutional set-up. In Malaysia the Malaysia Digital Economy Corporation, part of 
the Ministry of Communications and Multimedia, leads the digital 
economy efforts. The government is currently preparing its first Digital 
Economy policy. Ministries and MDEC have prepared multiple policies 
and roadmaps including: National Industry 4WRD Policy (Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry), National eCommerce Roadmap, 
National Big Data Analytics Framework, and the Malaysia Innovation 
Policy Council.
In Thailand , the Ministry of Digital Economy and Society was established 
in 2016 to replace the Ministry of Information and Communication 
Technology. Within the new Ministry, it established a Digital Economy 
Promotion Agency with the goal of promoting and supporting digital 
adoption and innovation.
The Smart Nation and Digital Government Office (SNDGO) drives the 
transition of  Singapore  into a digital economy. It is directly under the 
Prime Minister’s Office, comprising staff from the Digital Government 
Directorate of the Ministry of Finance, the Government Technology 
Policy department in the Ministry of Communications and Information, 
and the Smart Nation Program Office. The SNGDO takes a collective 
approach in by building long-term capabilities for the public sector and 
promoting adoption and participation from the public and industry. 
Their government’s vision is reflected in Smart Nation: The Way Forward.
In  Germany , the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy 
steers the country’s digital transformation. Nonetheless, last decade, 
the government established a cross-departmental steering committee, 
which also included the Federal Ministry of the Interior and the 
Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure. The current 
implementation strategy “Shaping the course of digitization” was then 
released as a federal government-wide document. 
In the Philippines, the Department of 
Information and Communications Technology 
(DICT) leads the government’s connectivity 
and e-government agenda.   In 2016, the DICT 
was established as the government’s primary 
policy-making, planning, and implementing body 
tasked with the development and promotion of the 
national ICT agenda. Although it is part of DICT’s 
mission to lead the country’s transition to a digital 
economy, the department currently focuses on 
three key areas: (1) expansion of the national ICT 
infrastructure, (2) e-governance, and (3) reforms 
in the policy and regulatory frameworks (DICT, 
2019a). These areas are in line with the priority 
strategies outlined in the Philippines Development 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 112Box 7.1. Whole of Government Approaches to Develop the Digital Economy
Plan 2017-2022. Attached to the DICT is the 
National Telecommunications Commission, an 
agency responsible for the regulation of all the 
telecommunications services in the country. Other 
attached agencies include the National Privacy 
Commission, and the Cybercrime Investigation 
and Coordinating Center. 
In addition to the efforts being made by the 
DICT , various government bodies have also 
been taking steps to integrate the digital 
economy agenda with their own mandates. 
The government agencies involved, together with 
their corresponding efforts, are discussed in the 
succeeding points.  Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 113Digital transactions. To stimulate the adoption 
of digital payments, the BSP is currently 
implementing initiatives under the National 
Retail Payments System (NRPS) framework. 
In addition to the establishment of InstaPay and 
PESONet, one of the latest initiatives implemented 
is the launching of an online payment facility 
for government transactions called ‘eGov 
Pay’ (Agcaoili, 2019). Another initiative being 
advocated is the full adoption of a national QR 
code standard for all payment service providers, 
which will enable micro-merchants to accept 
digital payments and allow greater convenience 
in transactions. The BSP, in collaboration with the 
Philippine Statistics Authority, is also preparing 
for the roll-out of national IDs, which is expected 
to improve the degree of financial inclusion in the 
country. The Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), 
under the DOF, is currently exploring ways on how 
to properly tax online transactions (Padin, 2019). 
Although the BIR requires online services to pay 
taxes, collecting revenue from the industry is 
difficult since not all sellers or service providers 
issue receipts for online transactions. The BIR, in 
partnership with the government of Korea, is also 
developing an e-invoicing system with the goal of 
optimizing business and tax processes.
E-commerce. The DTI is leading initiatives to 
promote e-commerce. DTI is currently preparing 
a new e-commerce roadmap that will aid the 
department in reaching its target of 500,000 
MSMEs utilizing e-commerce by 2022 (Desiderio, 
2019). 
Business climate. The Anti-Red Tape Authority 
(ARTA) leads the government’s efforts in improving 
the ease of doing business across the country. 
One of its major initiatives is the establishment of 
the National Business One Stop Shop (NBOSS). 
NBOSS aims to streamline the business registration 
process through co-location of the offices of the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), BIR, 
Social Security System (SSS), Philippine Health 
Insurance Corporation (Philhealth), and the Home 
Development Mutual Fund (Pag-IBIG). With the 
help of the DICT in implementing its initiatives, 
ARTA (2020) projects that starting a business can 
improve from 13 steps in 33 days (as cited in the 
Doing Business 2020 Report) to 9 steps in 7.5 days. 
Innovation.  DTI, DOST, and DICT have prepared an Inclusive Innovation Industrial Strategy (i3s). As 
part of this initiative, DTI has  prepared Innovation, 
Digitalization, and Digital Transformation projects 
to contribute to the Digital Economy. DTI plans to 
implement the Innovation for Regional Inclusive 
Innovation Centers (RIICs), Industry, and, Startups 
(IRIS) program, with the primary objective to 
help foster inclusive and sustainable industrial 
development in the Philippines. Programs 
will be designed to build and strengthen the 
innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem in 
the regions, facilitate the adoption of Industry 
4.0 technologies among firms, and support the 
growth and development of the country’s startups 
and ecosystem for startups. Lastly, in response to 
COVID-19, DTI is promoting innovation and digital 
adoption through webinars in partnership with 
Google Philippines, US-ASEAN Business Council, 
VISA and the Philippine Trade Training Center.
Skills and education. The Department of 
Education (DepEd, 2019) supports the integration 
of ICT skills into the K-to-12 curriculum primarily 
through its Digital Rise Program. The program 
focuses on developing digital literacy skills as 
early as Grade 4, enabling ICT-assisted teaching 
and learning, and automating DepEd’s operational 
processes. To support these goals, DepEd will 
ensure the availability of computer laboratories 
and digital classrooms, provide access to 
e-learning resources, train students on data 
protection and cybersecurity, and guarantee that 
all DepEd offices and schools are connected to 
the Internet. DepEd (2017) has also incorporated a 
Digital Literacy learning strand into the Alternative 
Learning System curriculum to reach students 
who are not receiving formal education. The DOST 
also launched the Smarter Philippines Through 
R&D, Training and Adoption (SPARTA) program, 
which will train 30,000 scholars in data science 
and analytics (Arayata, 2020). The Technical 
Education and Skills Development Authority 
(TESDA) leverages digital technologies to deliver 
their services to a wider range of audiences. 
It created an online program which enables 
Filipinos to access ICT courses (among others) 
at the comfort of their own homes or workplaces 
(TESDA, 2018). TESDA also introduced a mobile 
application that provides users information on 
the different technical-vocation education and 
training programs being offered by the agency 
(Arayata, 2019). In 2019, the BSP partnered with E-PESO, a USAID-funded program, to launch a 
digital literacy program that aims to increase trust 
and confidence in the security of digital payments 
and other financial transactions (BSP, 2019).  The 
DTI also provides seminars and workshops that 
train MSMEs how to expand their businesses 
through e-commerce. Finally, the government’s 
Tech4ED program aims to provide practical digital 
skills training particularly to out of school youth, 
senior citizens, women and indigenous people 
across the country. Of the 54,435 members 
currently enrolled in the platform, 57.8 percent are 
women (Francisco, 2017).
Data protection and cybersecurity.  The 
Office of Cybercrime within the Department of 
Justice (DOJ) is responsible for law enforcement 
investigation and prosecution strategies in 
curbing cyber-related offenses in the country. 
The National Privacy Commission implements 
provisions of the Data Privacy Act of 2012 
and ensures compliance of those who handle 
data with international standards set for data 
protection. The Commission makes use of an 
online complaints system that makes it easy 
for complainants to submit reports on privacy 
breaches and other related incidents. The DTI is in charge of educating consumers on how to safely 
navigate online markets, and enforcing laws to 
protect consumers against unfair practices.
Coordinating government’s efforts
There is a need to rethink the institutional 
arrangements of the digital economy to 
switch from individual efforts to a coordinated 
strategy and implementation. Although the 
DICT has made substantial efforts in maintaining 
dialogue with various sectors in the economy, 
its mandate might be too broad to allow full 
engagement with all stakeholders. The Philippines 
can learn from the experience of its regional 
peers such as Singapore, Thailand, and Malaysia, 
where a joint or independent entity dedicated to 
the digital economy agenda works hand in hand 
with the private sector and other government 
agencies. Germany’s approach of assigning 
the digital economy agenda to its Ministry of 
Economy is also exemplary as it acknowledges 
that the digital economy is a major subsector of 
the entire economy and that an oversight agency 
is better placed to coordinate the efforts that will 
be implemented by other line ministries. 
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 114Digitalizing the new normal for a faster recovery
Increasing digital adoption is hampered by 
expensive and unreliable internet connectivity, 
low use of digital payments, and difficult 
logistics.  Despite paying relatively higher costs 
than its regional peers, Filipinos suffer from slow 
and unstable Internet. Constraints in logistics 
prevent both consumers and businesses from 
fully embracing e-commerce. The reliance of 
most Filipinos on cash, partly due to the lack of 
awareness and trust in digital financial solutions, 
narrows the possible economic opportunities 
they can engage in. The COVID-19 pandemic has 
highlighted these issues as firms, households, and 
the government faced challenges in digitalizing 
fundamental operations, performing essential 
activities, and providing social assistance to 
the sectors severely affected by the pandemic. 
Nonetheless, unequal access to the Internet has 
emphasized the country’s digital divide, forcing 
most schools and businesses to temporarily 
suspend online classes and operations. The 
use of cash in carrying out transactions and 
distributing government aid to beneficiaries has resulted in inefficiencies and procedures where 
social distancing might be difficult to observe (for 
example, long lines, door-to-door distribution). 
Policy recommendations
This is the time to implement reforms that have 
been in preparation during the past decade, 
which can lower internet costs, broaden 
economic opportunities, and increase social 
inclusion. The need to increase digital adoption 
by public and private sectors is critical not only 
in helping the Philippines adapt to the post-
COVID-19 world, but also to leapfrog toward its 
Ambisyon Natin 2040 dream. The government 
must therefore urgently take an active role in 
creating and implementing an enabling policy and 
regulatory framework through priority reforms 
that reduce the digital divide, reduce logistic 
costs, promote the use of digital payments, and 
create a more conducive business environment 
(Table 7.1) Table 7.1.  Policy Recommendations 
Time Horizon Policy Recommendations Responsible Agency
Immediate termDIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE
• Coordinate and fast track procurement of internet services for government 
 ofﬁces and critical facilities (for example, health centers,  hospitals). 
• Amend the Public Service Act (PSA) to lower barriers to entry for foreign 
 investments.
• Issue common infrastructure policies to speed up the rollout of mobile  
 network infrastructure.
• Issue executive directives on spectrum management and competition for 
 frequencies.All government agencies
Congress
DICT
DICT
Immediate term • Maximize the usage of payment system infrastructures and payment 
 services including private sector payment service providers in delivering 
 emergency subsidy payments digitally. 
• Establish a strong consumer protection framework including grievance 
 mechanisms, and a return and refund policy.
• Implement e-invoice and e-receipt to make transaction digital from 
 end to end.
• Mandate government agencies to make and receive payments digitally to 
 the extent possible.DOF, DTI, DSWD, BSP, 
DICT
DTI
DTI, BIR, DICT 
NEDA, DOF, DBM, ARTA, 
BTr, BIR, COA
BSP
BSP
PSA
BSP, all government 
agenciesDIGITAL PAYMENTS
Short to medium
term• Expand the ﬁnancial literacy program in partnership with other
 stakeholders, covering digital ﬁnancial services and digital literacy.
• Accelerate QR Code-enabled merchants for wider acceptance of digital 
 payments.
• Implement the PhilSys in a timely manner for the delivery of public 
 services, social safety net, and access to ﬁnancial services. 
• Expand the participating government agencies under the EGov Pay facility 
 as well as PESONet participating payment service providers. 
BSP
DICT, BSP
CongressLong term• Promote the use of electronic payments through NRPS, and crowd in 
 private sector entities to facilitate the expansion of ACHs with multiple 
 payment instruments and innovation. 
• Strengthen cybersecurity and data privacy regulations to manage the risks 
 of adopting digital ﬁnancial technology.
• Pass the Financial Consumer Protection bill including a consolidated 
 ombudsman for ﬁnancial services.Short term • Ensure a fair and level playing ﬁeld for operators by applying the same 
 service obligations and performance standards for the third telco to the 
 incumbent telcos.
• Fast-track and lower the cost of deploying broadband infrastructure 
 through infrastructure sharing policies that address: (a) the use of 
 government assets (submarine cable, NGCP dark ﬁber); (b) the use of 
 infrastructure across sectors such as roads, railways, electricity trans
 mission; and (c) coordinated build for a shared utility corridor. 
• Reconsider direct government investment in network infrastructure and 
 operations; and develop transition plan, including regulatory framework 
 for open access and non-discriminatory pricing, for NBN and Free Wiﬁ 
 programs to be transitioned to the private sector.
• Pass joint memorandum circulars on streamlining of permits for 
 cellular towers and cable laying within six months, while streamlining 
 permit requirements for network deployment and rationalize fees 
 imposed by national and local government agencies, as well as private 
 sector associations within the short to medium term.DICT, NEDA, PCC
DICT, DPWH
DICT, PCC
DICT, ARTA, DILG, 
DHSUD, DOE, DPWH
• Amend the Radio Control Law and/or the Public Telecoms Policy Act, and 
 pass the Open Access in Data Transmission bill and the guidelines to clarify 
 spectrum assignment, recall, and reassignment.  
• Amend EO No. 467 to liberalize access to satellites for internet connectivity 
 to help address digital infrastructure gap in the countryside.Congress
Ofﬁce of the President
• Prepare for 5G which will be a game changer in terms of facilitating digital 
 adoption across sectors.DICT, NEDAMedium term
Long term
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 115Congress
BOC
PHLPost, BOC
BOCShort to medium
term• Pass the PSA amendment to clarify the legal status of foreign ownership 
 restrictions in the logistics sector.  
• Implement the CMTA provisions for e-commerce goods, adopting the WCO 
 recommendations in its E-Commerce Package that includes the Framework 
 of Standards, Technical Speciﬁcations, Immediate Release Guidelines, and 
 other documents and tools supporting its implementation. 
• Fix clearance processing between PHLPost and BOC, particularly for goods 
 destined for places outside the NCR. 
• Continue efforts to modernize Customs processes through automation.
DOF, PHLPost
DTI
DICTLong term• Revitalize PHLPost as an important anchor for the small parcel delivery 
 logistics industry, especially for remote and isolated communities.  
• Encourage logistics companies to upgrade their facilities, transportation 
 assets, and ICT infrastructure and systems, through assistance and access 
 to long-term ﬁnancing with low interest rates.
• Review and align with operational realities the transition and transfer of 
 oversight and control functions over postal service providers from the 
 DOTC, PHLPost, NTC, and now DICT.Immediate term • Implement public-private information campaigns among SMEs, especially 
 those outside the major cities, about logistics services to encourage them 
 to explore the potential of e-commerce trading.
• Provide support for SMEs to adopt e-commerce options.DTI 
DTI, DOST, DICTLOGISTICS
Short to Long
term• Obtain more precise data to allow for assessment of the tax revenue lost 
 as a result of the current low value consignment exemption from VAT and 
 the potential yield from its reduction, or abolition. 
• Identify what data is available about the consumption of digital services by 
 consumers in the Philippines, and enter into dialogue with the industry to 
 assess the scale of the market and future trends. That could be part of an 
 overall consultation about changes to the VAT treatment of imports.
• Develop an appropriate legislative model that can be translated into
 provision in the Philippine Tax Code, and compliance strategy to support 
 the policy changes and BIR and BOC that can be best integrated into their 
 current operations. DOF, BIR
BIR
DOF, BIRDIGITAL TAXATION
Immediate term • Require government agencies to accept scanned documents, digital 
 photographs, and digital payments as legal equivalents in the processing of 
 permits, licenses, and taxes. BIR, COA, BTr, BSP
Short to medium
term• Pass the PSA amendment.
• Pass Executive Order on the National Competition Policy.
• Prepare teachers and school leaders for multiple learning delivery
 modalities and learning resources.Congress
Ofﬁce of the President
DepEd
Long term • Embed socioemotional skills in the curricula of the extended compulsory
 education from kindergarten to grade 12 by explicitly stating objectives and 
 targets and by preparing the teachers for effective delivery of content.DepEdCOMPETITIVE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 116Time Horizon Policy Recommendations Responsible Agency
Immediate termDIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE
• Coordinate and fast track procurement of internet services for government 
 ofﬁces and critical facilities (for example, health centers,  hospitals). 
• Amend the Public Service Act (PSA) to lower barriers to entry for foreign 
 investments.
• Issue common infrastructure policies to speed up the rollout of mobile  
 network infrastructure.
• Issue executive directives on spectrum management and competition for 
 frequencies.All government agencies
Congress
DICT
DICT
Immediate term • Maximize the usage of payment system infrastructures and payment 
 services including private sector payment service providers in delivering 
 emergency subsidy payments digitally. 
• Establish a strong consumer protection framework including grievance 
 mechanisms, and a return and refund policy.
• Implement e-invoice and e-receipt to make transaction digital from 
 end to end.
• Mandate government agencies to make and receive payments digitally to 
 the extent possible.DOF, DTI, DSWD, BSP, 
DICT
DTI
DTI, BIR, DICT 
NEDA, DOF, DBM, ARTA, 
BTr, BIR, COA
BSP
BSP
PSA
BSP, all government 
agenciesDIGITAL PAYMENTS
Short to medium
term• Expand the ﬁnancial literacy program in partnership with other
 stakeholders, covering digital ﬁnancial services and digital literacy.
• Accelerate QR Code-enabled merchants for wider acceptance of digital 
 payments.
• Implement the PhilSys in a timely manner for the delivery of public 
 services, social safety net, and access to ﬁnancial services. 
• Expand the participating government agencies under the EGov Pay facility 
 as well as PESONet participating payment service providers. 
BSP
DICT, BSP
CongressLong term• Promote the use of electronic payments through NRPS, and crowd in 
 private sector entities to facilitate the expansion of ACHs with multiple 
 payment instruments and innovation. 
• Strengthen cybersecurity and data privacy regulations to manage the risks 
 of adopting digital ﬁnancial technology.
• Pass the Financial Consumer Protection bill including a consolidated 
 ombudsman for ﬁnancial services.Short term • Ensure a fair and level playing ﬁeld for operators by applying the same 
 service obligations and performance standards for the third telco to the 
 incumbent telcos.
• Fast-track and lower the cost of deploying broadband infrastructure 
 through infrastructure sharing policies that address: (a) the use of 
 government assets (submarine cable, NGCP dark ﬁber); (b) the use of 
 infrastructure across sectors such as roads, railways, electricity trans
 mission; and (c) coordinated build for a shared utility corridor. 
• Reconsider direct government investment in network infrastructure and 
 operations; and develop transition plan, including regulatory framework 
 for open access and non-discriminatory pricing, for NBN and Free Wiﬁ 
 programs to be transitioned to the private sector.
• Pass joint memorandum circulars on streamlining of permits for 
 cellular towers and cable laying within six months, while streamlining 
 permit requirements for network deployment and rationalize fees 
 imposed by national and local government agencies, as well as private 
 sector associations within the short to medium term.DICT, NEDA, PCC
DICT, DPWH
DICT, PCC
DICT, ARTA, DILG, 
DHSUD, DOE, DPWH
• Amend the Radio Control Law and/or the Public Telecoms Policy Act, and 
 pass the Open Access in Data Transmission bill and the guidelines to clarify 
 spectrum assignment, recall, and reassignment.  
• Amend EO No. 467 to liberalize access to satellites for internet connectivity 
 to help address digital infrastructure gap in the countryside.Congress
Ofﬁce of the President
• Prepare for 5G which will be a game changer in terms of facilitating digital 
 adoption across sectors.DICT, NEDAMedium term
Long termWhat are the payoffs of reforms?
Digital reforms can help the economy become 
more competitive. Digital technologies can 
increase the productivity of businesses, and 
the efficiency of the government. They can 
enhance coordination and automate processes 
in a way to increase operational efficiency and 
reduce costs. These technologies can replace 
existing factors of production like labor or non-
ICT capital the way travel agency is replaced 
by online airline booking system; or augment 
the factors to make them more productive like 
workers using technology. They can also deliver 
economies of scale and platform contributing to 
greater organization and collaboration among 
economic agents. The Philippines can learn 
from other countries. In Turkey, firms using the 
internet for online orders or reservations are 
11 percent more productive, 25 percent larger, 
and twice more likely to export. Government’s 
using one-stop computerized service centers 
and online portal have improved service 
efficiency. For example, Malaysia’s introduction 
of an online registration system for Goods and 
Service Tax reduced the time to start a business 
by 10 days in 2019.
Digital reforms can also help the Philippines 
become more resilient. The transition to a digital 
economy will make the country more resilient 
to external and natural shocks like the COVID-19 
pandemic.  Digital technologies will help the 
country address the pandemic and the new 
normal by facilitating social distancing while 
maintaining engagement and communication. It can support work-from-home arrangements, 
distance learning, and offsite service delivery, 
avoiding business disruptions and ensuring 
service continuity.  Digital payment solutions 
facilitate contactless transactions on online 
payments and fund transfers that would be 
more effective than the traditional banking 
experience. Reform efforts can ensure the 
government reliable systems for efficient and 
transparent public service delivery, which can 
be used to deliver cash aid and other services to 
disaster-prone country like the Philippines.  
Digital reforms can finally help the Philippines 
be more inclusive. Digital technologies 
can make development more inclusive 
through information sharing, facilitating 
search-and-matching, and providing service 
deliveries to those previously unreached 
and unserved. Online jobs markets are able 
to connect employers with job applicants, 
while e-commerce platforms connect Filipino 
sellers from urban or rural areas to buyers in 
local and foreign markets. These technologies 
can also stimulate new business models and 
provide new avenues for activities away from 
their traditional domains. Massive open online 
courses offer learning opportunities for Filipino 
students at the click of a button, while local 
microfinance companies offer lending services 
through mobile applications. Leveraging 
these digital technologies can help deliver 
inclusive development by widening economic 
opportunities for everyone.
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 117Agcaoili, Lawrence (2019).  “Philippine making great strides 
in digital payments – BSP.”  Philstar.com, December 2019. 
https://www.philstar.com/business/banking/2019/12/03
/1973710/philippine-making-great-strides-digital-
payments-bsp
Arayata, Ma. Cristina (2019). “Tesda introduces mobile app.” 
BusinessMirror, November 2019.  https://businessmirror.
com.ph/2019/11/11/tesda-introduces-mobile-app
________  (2020). “DOST launches ‘SPARTA’ for data analytics 
training.” Philippine News Agency, February 2020. 
https://www.pna.gov.ph/articles/1094721 
ARTA (2020). “ARTA, DICT launch National Business One-
Stop Shop.”  ARTA Press Statements. http://www.arta.gov.
ph/pages/documents/02282020.php
BOC (2019a).  “BOC harness technology to enhance systems, 
processes.”  Philippine Information Agency, August 2019.  
https://pia.gov.ph/news/articles/1026693. 
________  (2019b). “BOC widens its accessibility towards the 
public.” Philippine Information Agency, July 2019. 
https://pia.gov.ph/news/articles/1024880.
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Pai-Ling Yin. (2016). “Adoption of 
New Information and Communications Technologies in the 
Workplace Today.” NBER Working Paper No. 22346. https://
www.nber.org/papers/w22346.pdf
BSP (2019). “2019 Financial Inclusion Initiatives.” http://
www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/Publications/2019/
microfinance_2019.pdf
DepEd (2017). “K to 12 Basic Education Curriculum for the 
Alternative Learning System (ALS-K to 12): Learning Strand 
6 (Digital Literacy).”  https://www.deped.gov.ph/wp-
content/uploads/2019/01/LS-6-Digital-Literacy.pd
________  (2019). “Digital Rise Program.”  Facebook. 
https://www.facebook.com/depedtayo/photos/a.7231053
18110844/743877039367005/?type=3&theater 
Desiderio, Louella (2019). “DTI, UP Law school work on 
e-commerce road map.”  Philstar.com, October 2019. 
https://www.philstar.com/business/2019/10/31/1964715/
dti-law-school-work-e-commerce-road-map
DICT (2019). “National ICT Ecosystem Framework Project 
Profile: Integrated Business Permits and Licensing 
System (iBPLS).”  ICT-ecosystem Project Profiles. https://
ictecosystem.org.ph/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/
Project-Profile_iBPLS_fy2019.pdfFrancisco, Katerina (2017). “Bridging the Digital Divide: 
Tech4ED brings new tech color to Filipinos.”  Rappler.  
https://www.rappler.com/newsbreak/in-depth/167495-
bridging-digital-divide-ict-tech4ed.
Padin, Mary Grace (2019). “Tax on digital economy under 
study.”  Philstar.com, October 2019.
https://www.philstar.com/business/2019/10/04/1957168/
tax-digital-economy-under-study.
Ruutu, Sampa, Casey, Thomas, and Ville Kotovirta (2017). 
“Development and competition of digital service platforms: 
A system dynamics approach”.  Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change. Volume 117, April 2017, pages 119-130.
________  (2020).  “BIR partners with PayMaya for digital tax 
payments.”  Philstar.com, February 2020. 
https://www.philstar.com/business/2020/02/15/1993167/
bir-partners-paymaya-digital-tax-payments
TESDA (2018). “TESDA online program users reach over 
1.2M.”  https://www.tesda.gov.ph/News/Details/17837
Tornatzky, Louis, and Katherine Klein (1982). “Innovation 
characteristics and innovation adoption-implementation: 
A meta-analysis of findings.”  IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management 29(1). 
USCC (2020). “2020 International IP Index.”  https://www.
uschamber.com/report/2020-international-ip-index
Zhu, Kevin, Kenneth Kraemer, and Sean Xu (2006). “The 
Process of Innovation Assimilation by Firms in Different 
Countries: A Technology Diffusion Perspective on 
E-Business. ” Management Science 52(10). 
Zhu, Kevin, Kenneth Kraemer, and Jason Dedrick (2014). 
“Information Technology Payoff in E-Business 
Environments: An International Perspective on Value 
Creation of E-Business in the Financial Services Industry.”  
Journal of Management Information Systems 21(1). References
Philippines Digital Economy Report 2020 118