1
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHCGD Note
May 2019
INTRODUCTION AND COUNTRY CONTEXT
Bangladesh, a country of 165 million people bordering India and Myanmar, is undergoing a rapid 
economic and social transformation. It has experienced steady economic growth over the last decade 
driven mostly by readymade garments exports and remittances from a large expatriate community 
across the world. Bangladesh is a relatively young country with a median age of 26.3 years. Its invest-
ment and outcomes in human capital, especially school education and primary healthcare, have been 
globally recognized. Bangladesh is urbanizing at a rapid rate, integrating into global supply chains; it 
aspires to join the ranks of middle-income countries over the next decade.1
Bangladesh is also witnessing a digital revolution. The mobile subscriber base has grown to over 140 
million, covering nearly 85 percent of the population. Leveraging this, the mobile financial services 
(MFS) sector has shown remarkable growth over the last decade and has been instrumental in the 
transformation of the digital payments ecosystem in the country. With 67 .5 million MFS accounts, 
Bangladesh has almost a 10 percent share of mobile money accounts worldwide, although only half 
of the accounts are classified as active.2 The scope of digitization is not restricted only to digital pay-
ments—it includes several widely used services, such as railways, online banking facilities, internet 
marketing, university admissions, publication of results of public examinations, and e-learning 
courses, among many others. 
DIGITAL BANGLADESH AND GOVERNMENT-TO-PERSON (G2P) PAYMENTS—PRI-
MARY EDUCATION STIPEND PROGRAM 
Digitization of government services and payments is an area of focus for the government. Digital Ban-
gladesh, a government initiative, was launched with the objective of making public services cheaper, 
faster, more reliable, and delivered at the doorstep of citizens. Improvement in service delivery is 
We acknowledge the contribution of Ishter Mahal, Jamil Sharif, and Mahfuzul Hoque for their inputs into the research design 
and helpful comments in reviewing this note.
1 https://www.adb.org/news/features/bangladesh-challenges-and-opportunities-moving-upper-middle-income-status
2 https://www.bb.org.bd/fnansys/paymentsys/mfsdata.phpPrimary Education 
Stipends in Bangladesh:
Do Mothers Prefer Digital 
Payments over Cash?
Alan Gelb, Anit Mukherjee, Kyle Navis, Mahmuda Akter, and Jannatul Naima2
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHassessed in terms of three indicators at the beneficiary level—time, cost, and number of visits (TCV).3 
This allows the government to monitor a range of public services, identify constraints, and redesign 
processes to improve the quality of service delivery.4 The initiative has strong political support, with 
the Prime Minister’s Office acting as the secretariat, which also makes it easier to coordinate and 
monitor implementation across a broad range of sectors. 
The MFS sector plays a key role in supporting the 
government’s policy to transfer benefits digitally 
instead of cash payments. One of the most signifi-
cant applications is the Primary Education Stipend 
Program (PESP). PESP started in its present form 
in 2001. Its key objective is to increase educational 
participation—enrollment, attendance, persistence, 
and performance—of primary-school-age children 
from poor families in urban and rural areas. The 
program provides a stipend of Taka 100 per month 
per child to mothers in need of financial support, 
conditional on their child’s school attendance. 
The stipend has traditionally been disbursed in the form of cash distributed from a designated 
school in the vicinity of the beneficiary’s residence. From June 2017 , the government of Bangla-
desh decided to transfer the stipends for nearly 13 million children currently enrolled in the pro-
gram directly to the mobile banking accounts of their nearly 10 million mothers. This is a signifi-
cant change driven by the policy objective of increasing the efficiency of program implementation 
through digitization of government payments, leveraging the spread of MFS in Bangladesh over the 
past decade. 
How has this move from cash to digital affected beneficiaries? How do they perceive the new system 
vis-à-vis the previous one? What challenges do they face in accessing the stipends? Do mothers have 
more control over the funds than before? Are they able to navigate the new digital environment, es-
pecially those who do not own mobile phones and have limited digital literacy? 
To answer these questions, we conducted a field survey using both a quantitative questionnaire and 
qualitative assessments, with separate modules for school headmasters and mothers with children 
enrolled in the program. The objective of the survey was to understand the perception and experi-
ence of the disbursement of PESP through mobile financial services. A similar survey carried out by 
CGD in Rajasthan, India provided interesting insights on broader social goals of financial inclusion, 
digital literacy, and gender empowerment.5 This model was adapted for use in Bangladesh. 
Our conclusions are broadly positive: an overwhelming majority of both mothers and headmasters 
prefer the new system. Mothers cite greater convenience in access and more control over funds as the 
main reasons for their stated preference.6 For headmasters, digital transfers reduce the risk of allega-
tions of mismanagement that might be levied against them, and cut the time spent on administration 
of cash distribution. We do, however, find that mothers who do not own mobiles, and those who can-
not read or write SMS, have a less positive opinion of the new system. This points to challenges of dig-
3 https://a2i.gov.bd/publication/making-a-sustainable-model-for-g2p-payment-digitization/
4 https://a2i.gov.bd/e-governance/#1510137077583-64604349-2868
5 https://www.cgdev.org/publication/what-a-new-survey-aadhaar-users-can-tell-us-about-digital-reforms-initial-insights 
6 There is no cash out fee for stipend recipients
3
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHital capacity both in access to and use of mobile technology for digital transfers, something that pol-
icymakers will need to address to ensure the inclusivity of the Digital Bangladesh policy framework.
PESP BENEFICIARY SELECTION AND FUNDS DISBURSEMENT
PESP uses five basic criteria to identify poor households: (i) insolvent female-headed households; 
(ii) low-income occupations such as day laborer, fishermen, artisans; (iii) landlessness; (iv) insolvent 
ethnic minorities; and (v) households with students suffering from disabilities. 
At the inception of PESP, the number of stipend recipients were roughly 40 percent of the total stu-
dents in a school.  7 These used to be selected on both need and merit based on recommendation from 
class teachers and final approval of school managing committee. The criteria are not considered sep-
arately but rather in a composite manner to justify enrolment into PESP. However, in parallel to the 
introduction of mobile-based payment of PESP, the percentage allocation per school has been re-
moved. Now, all students who pass both the Term and Final Examination and attend classes regularly 
are eligible for the stipend.
In general, the program appears to have been quite successful. According to a joint report of the gov-
ernment of Bangladesh and UNICEF,8 disbursing stipends with strict adherence to the requirement 
that the mother of the beneficiary student is the authorized recipient has worked well. The trans-
action burden on both the implementer and recipient side was identified as an important issue to 
address, rather than leakages. 
Focus group discussions comprising headmasters and mothers indicated four key problems: 
1. disbursement delays due to non-receipt of the stipend from the government 
2. the opportunity cost of one day’s lost labor and/or travel and food costs for mothers or guardians, 
especially for schools that are further away from their place of residence 
3. loss of staff teaching time on paperwork and disbursal of cash
4. lapse of payment for mothers who miss collection on the appointed day 
To address these issues, from June 2017 , the government started disbursing stipends to mothers di-
rectly through mobile money payments. Bangladesh already had two established mobile money com-
panies (bKash, the market leader, and Rocket), but PESP payments were channeled through Sure-
Cash, a less prominent mobile money provider that is operated by a government-owned bank. The 
reasons for this decision are not known, but there could be several, including preference for govern-
ment-owned systems or a desire to stimulate competition in the very concentrated mobile money 
sector. However, it raises questions regarding the density of the agent network and whether bene-
ficiaries would prefer the use of other operators with whom they might already have mobile money 
accounts. Our questionnaire specifically asked these questions, as well as beneficiaries’ perceptions 
and experience in dealing with the new digital method of transacting. As far as we know, this is the 
first survey of its kind to address these issues in the context of introducing digital payments in a large 
scale G2P program in Bangladesh.
7 Key informant interview with district education officer, Chuadanga
8 https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Bangladesh_Primary_Education_Stipends_survey.pdf4
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHSURVEY DESCRIPTION
• We carried out a rapid assessment of a purposively 
chosen set of PESP beneficiaries and school admin-
istrators regarding their perception and experience 
of the new digital payments system compared to the 
earlier cash distribution of the stipend. The survey 
was carried out by a team of researchers from the 
Faculty of Business Studies, University of Dhaka.
• This survey covered mothers in 100 households 
among 34 villages (with a focus on the poor living in 
remote-rural areas) as well as 25 school headmas-
ters. Eighty-nine percent of the mothers lived in ru-
ral areas. It was implemented in Chuadanga district, 
around 200 km west of the capital, Dhaka, from 19-30 
June 2018. The modest number of respondents lim-
its the power of the surveys, but they offer useful in-
sights from those affected by the change. 
• Eleven percent of the mothers have no education, 
and only 18 percent are involved in a job. The average household has 2.3 children, and a monthly 
income of Taka 14,641 (US$ 174).
• Eighty-one percent of the mothers have one child who receives the stipend, 18 percent have two 
children (the program’s household maximum); none have more than two children receiving it. All 
the survey respondents, except one, had experience with the previous system. 
SURVEY RESULTS FOR MOTHERS
When asked about their preferences, mothers had very favorable opinions of the new system (fig-
ure 2). Almost four in five preferred it to the previous one. Nevertheless, nearly 15 percent found the FIGURE 1. Location of the survey
FIGURE 2. Survey results5
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHsystem to be worse than before, while 6 percent did not find any overall positive or negative change. 
Almost all mothers said the new system registration was easy, indicating that the process of on-
boarding existing beneficiaries went smoothly; a similar proportion reported that they did not 
have to pay for re-registration.
While 55 percent are able to read and/or write SMS, almost half of the mothers are unable to do 
either, which may pose a challenge for access and use of the new digital mode of payment.
Preferences are shaped by convenience factors
Convenience factors dominate 
stated preferences, as shown in fig-
ure 3. The major factor is the flexi-
bility to withdraw money at a time 
and place that are convenient to 
mothers. Other possible reasons, 
such as not having to pay bribes to 
obtain cash, receive little support. 
Rural mothers are more likely than 
urban mothers to say the system is 
better because they do not have to 
travel to school and wait for the pay-
ment, reinforcing the flexibility and 
convenience factors. Over 90 per-
cent of PESP recipients cash out all 
the stipend they receive.
At the same time, lack of access to 
a mobile phone or agent poses problems. Nearly a quarter of mothers say that not having a mo-
bile phone makes the system harder for them to navigate. A smaller proportion cite the distance to 
the nearest agent and difficulties withdrawing 
money as constraints. Unsurprisingly, mothers 
who are over one kilometer from the nearest 
SureCash agent have a less positive view of the 
new system. But across the full sample only 11 
percent cite this as an issue.
Control and digital literacy are still pain 
points
Mobile phone ownership is key to controlling 
the cash in this transfer system. Three out of ev-
ery five mothers own their own mobile phone, 
and figure 4 shows that 30 percent rely on a male 
in their household for access to a mobile phone, 
which poses some questions about mothers’ 
control.
Of the women who own a mobile phone, 68 
percent say they have more control over the 
FIGURE 3. Factors in mothers’ preferences
FIGURE 4. Phone ownership among mothers6
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHstipend in the new system while fewer of the non-owners (58 percent) think they have more control. 
Of the women who use a husband’s mobile phone, 15 percent said they do not have more control and 
31 percent do not know. Nonetheless, 73 percent of non-phone owners still think the new system is 
better, while 20 percent think it is worse.
Digital literacy is important for accessing benefits in this transfer program. Figure 5 shows that 
mothers with ability to read and write SMS have higher opinions of the new system: the relationship is 
statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level.9 We also find that mothers who do not own 
a mobile phone are more likely to say the new system is worse because they cannot read SMS. But it 
is still only a small proportion of our respondents who cite this issue, and only 23 percent of mothers 
overall say that the new system is worse because they cannot read SMS.
The importance of digital literacy emerges as we explore associations. Being able to read or write 
SMS is associated with:10
a positive 
opinion 
of the new 
system
saying the new 
system is better 
because they can 
draw money when 
they want to11
saying it is easy 
to withdraw cash 
when you need it
saying they have 
more control over 
the stipend in the 
new system
owning a mobile 
phone
9 Using a Fisher’s exact test and 95 percent confidence intervals.
10 All are statistically significant with 95 percent confidence intervals using a Fisher’s exact test.
11 Significant at 90 percent confidence level.FIGURE 5. Mothers’ opinion of the new system according to their digital literacy 
7
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHOwnership of mobile phone is related to having more control over the stipend transfer. Two-thirds 
of mothers who own mobiles reported having greater control, compared to 57 percent of those who do 
not. As noted above, dependence on male members, especially husbands, reduces the agency of the 
mothers vis-à-vis their claim to G2P transfers that PESP seeks to enhance. 
The program has had a substantial impact on financial inclusion. Only 31 percent of the mothers 
have, or previously had, a bKash account. Just over half of the mothers who have a bKash account 
would prefer to receive the stipend in their existing account. This suggests that the use of SureCash 
might impose some additional inconvenience, but not to the point where it is not an overwhelming 
factor in preference for the new system. 
The ability to withdraw cash is important, and mothers who are less than one kilometer from the 
nearest SureCash agent are also more likely to say that they have more control over the stipend 
money in the new system.
SURVEY RESULTS FOR HEADMASTERS
Headmasters prefer the new system because it saves time and reduces risk of allegation of mal-
practice in the distribution of stipends.
Eighty percent of the headmasters surveyed said the new system is better than the previous one, 
while only 4 percent (n = 1) thought it worse. The reason that was prioritized most by headmasters for 
it being better was that it saves administration and teachers’ time.
Open-ended feedback revealed another reason. Several headmasters valued the fact that under the 
new system, they and their teachers are less vulnerable to corruption allegations. These could be 
difficult to disprove and lead to administrative action against them, potentially rendering headmas-
ters and staff vulnerable to extortion. 
Still, 28 percent of the headmasters said a drawback of the new system is that they get complaints 
when there are problems with the payments, and one in five mentioned difficulties correcting mis-
takes. All but one headmaster (96 percent) said that parents bring problems with the stipend to them; 
83 percent report that they are sometimes or always able to resolve the problems.
Ninety-six percent think that more transfers should be done through mobile payments. This very 
positive view appeared to reflect more their own experience with digital payments than strong views 
on the experience of the mothers. The impact of the digital transfer on student outcomes and moth-
ers’ agency were less apparent to headmasters. About half of them said mothers do not have more 
control over the stipend money in the new system. This contrasts with the perception of mothers as 
we have explained above. About a third of headmasters held the view that the new system increased 
children’s attendance. 
CONCLUSIONS
Even with modest statistical power our survey results indicate that the digitization of PESP payments 
has been a success. It is a win-win for both headmasters and mothers. Direct transfer of stipend has 
lessened administrative burdens on teachers as well as the risk of allegations of mismanagement 
against them. There is overwhelming support on the part of providers for greater use of digital pay-
ments instead of cash distribution. For the mothers, it is more convenient to withdraw cash through 
agents whenever they choose to do so, thereby saving time and cost compared to the old system. There 
have been gains in closing the financial inclusion gender gap. Nearly 70 percent of mothers did not 8
PRIMARY EDUCATION STIPENDS IN BANGLADESHWWW.CGDEV.ORG
This work is made available under the terms of the Creative Commons  
 Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 license.Ideas to Action: Independent 
research for global prosperityALAN GELB is a senior fellow and the di-
rector of studies at the Center for Global 
Development.
ANIT MUKHERJEE is a policy fellow at the 
Center for Global Development.
KYLE NAVIS is a policy analyst at the Center 
for Global Development.
MAHMUDA AKTER is a professor in the De-
partment of Accounting and Information 
Systems at the University of Dhaka.
JANNATUL NAIMA is an assistant profes-
sor in the Department of Accounting and 
Information Systems at the University of 
Dhaka.have a mobile money account before—they do now, due to the design of the PESP transfer. So far, al-
most all simply cash out their stipends, but having accounts opens the possibility that they will use 
more financial services in the future. This would be encouraged by interoperability of payments be-
tween the mobile money providers and between mobile money and the banking system. 
The main constraint to still more beneficial impact appears to be the uneven capability to effectively 
operate digital devices. Mothers who own mobile phones and are able read and write SMS report hav-
ing greater control over the transfers compared to those who do not and express greater satisfaction 
with the reform. Bangladesh, like other poor countries, will need to grapple with this problem as it 
seeks to move its administration of G2P transfers, and programs more generally, into the digital era. 