CGD Policy Paper 144 
June 2019Public Financial Management 
and the Digitalization of 
Payments
The ability of  digital payments to deliver better outcomes for governments, businesses, 
and individuals—including driving financial inclusion—has been one of  the success stories 
of  the digital age. Payments are central to how governments transfer and receive financial 
resources; however, the way such payments are made—and how they could be made more 
effectively—is often not mainstreamed in public financial management (PFM) despite the 
fact that many of  the direct benefits from effective digitalization of  payments are identitical 
to those traditionally expected from strong PFM systems.The digitalization of  payments does 
not provide a silver bullet for solving PFM problems; therefore it needs to be approached 
in an integrated way, with strong leadership from central agencies, including the Ministry of  
Finance, to exploit the synergies between the many different types of  payments facilitated by 
digital technology. The paper explores the linkages between the digitalization of  payments 
and PFM, including through four case studies.  
www.cgdev.org
Center for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Fifth Floor
Washington DC  20036
202-416-4000 
www.cgdev.org
This work is made available under 
the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial  4.0 
license.Abstract
Marco Cangiano, Alan Gelb, and Ruth Goodwin-GroenCenter for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Washington, DC  20036
202.416.4000
(f) 202.416.4050
www.cgdev.orgThe Center for Global Development works to reduce global poverty 
and improve lives through innovative economic research that drives 
better policy and practice by the world’s top decision makers. Use and 
dissemination of  this Policy Paper is encouraged; however, reproduced 
copies may not be used for commercial purposes. Further usage is 
permitted under the terms of  the Creative Commons License.
The views expressed in CGD Policy Papers are those of  the authors and 
should not be attributed to the board of  directors, funders of  the Center 
for Global Development, or the authors’ respective organizations.Public Financial Management and the Digitalization of  Payments
Marco Cangiano
Overseas Development Institute
Alan Gelb
Center for Global Development
Ruth Goodwin-Groen
Better Than Cash Alliance
This is a revised and updated version of  the paper “Integration of  
Government Digitalization and Public Financial Management—Initial 
Evidence,” which was published as Chapter 12 of  Gupta, Sanjeev, Michael 
Keen, Alpa Shah, and Genevieve Verdier (eds.), 2017. Digital Revolutions in 
Public Finance, Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. We wish to 
thank Fleishman Hillard, Rodrigo Mejia Ricart, Rosita Najmi, and Camillo 
Tellez for their insightful comments, and Matthew Coghlan for excellent 
editorial suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies.
This paper is co-published by the Better Than Cash Alliance and the 
Overseas Development Institute.
The Center for Global Development is grateful for contributions from the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in support of  this work. 
Marco Cangiano, Alan Gelb, and Ruth Goodwin-Groen, 2019. “Public Financial 
Management and the Digitalization of  Payments.” CGD Policy Paper 144. Washington, 
DC: Center for Global Development. https://www.cgdev.org/publication/public-
financial-management-and-digitalization-paymentsContents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 1 
2. Defining Digitalization of Payments  ................................ ................................ .........................  2 
3. Digitalization and Public Financial Management: Complementarity and Caution  ............  5 
3.1 Complementarity  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  5 
3.2 A Cautionary Tale from FMIS Implementation  ................................ ..............................  6 
4. Selected Country Cases  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  9 
4.1 India  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 10 
4.2 Mexico  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 14 
4.3 Estonia  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 15 
4.4 Ghana  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 16 
5. Digitalizat ion Challenges: What Can We Learn and Where Do We Go from Here?  ..... 18 
5.1 High -Level Leadership  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 19 
5.2 An Integrated, Comprehensive Approach  ................................ ................................ ...... 19 
5.3 Appreciation of the Risks  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 21 
5.4 Dire ctions for Future Work  ................................ ................................ ..............................  21 
6. Concluding Remarks ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  22 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 23 
Annex 1  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  27 
Annex 2  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  30 
 
 
 1 1. Introduction  
Payments are central to how governments transfer financial resources. But the way such 
payments are carried out has largely been peripheral to developments in public financial 
management (PFM) systems. This paper seeks to explain how digitalization of payments 
should be mainstreamed as part of functional PFM to improve the management of public 
resources, broaden reform goals, and help ensure that countries take a strategic approach to 
integrating digital technology into their operations.1 This implies a critical role for ministries 
of finance in coordinating a wide range of public and private institutions and actors.  
Every year governments, the private sector, and development organizations make billions of 
dollars in cash payments in low -income and emerging -market economies. It is est imated that 
in 2014 more than one billion people were receiving government transfers and other 
payments, and that the developing countries on average operated some 20 social safety net 
programs at an annual cost of 1.6 percent of GDP (World Bank, 2015). In cluding transfers, 
subsidies, payroll, and pension payments, public payments to individuals typically represent 12 percent of GDP in developing countries and often far more.  
A growing body of data and experience shows that shifting from cash to electronic  payments 
provides more security for recipients, especially women, greater efficiency and accuracy in reaching the financially excluded, and a broader range of financial services. It can also save 
very significant time and human resources that can be then used for more productive 
purposes, supporting overall economic productivity.  
By digitalizing payments, governments aim mainly to foster an inclusive economy.
2 The 
Group of Twenty (G20) has well defined the benefits for governments, including enhanced 
transparency and accountability and cost savings. The transparency of payments under 
digitalization can enhance accountability between governments and citizens, mo re clearly 
linking the services governments provide and taxes levied and paid (Pillai, 2016). In addition, 
the opportunity for driving financial inclusion through the general digitalization of payments 
has been shown to benefit households (Suri & Jack, 201 7, for Kenya) and entire economies.3 
                                                      
1 While often used interchangeably, digitization  and digitalization refer to two different concepts: the former 
refers to the storage of information in digital form; the latter to the integration of digital technologies into 
broader systems, such as PFM (see the introductory chapter in Gupta et al. , 2017)).  This paper uses the latter 
term to connote the integration of digital technologies into payments systems.  
2 Digitalization  of payments may be a key element of a government’s broader digital economy initiatives. Open 
data portals, which provide open a ccess to government data online (OECD, 2016), are another digital 
government initiative. While neither initiative is synonymous with a digital economy, they are both helping build a 
basis for it.   
3 According to IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde: “ Greater financial inclusion has tangible economic 
benefits, such as higher GDP growth and lower income inequality. By providing access to accounts, credit, 
infrastructure, women and low -income users, financial inclusion helps make growth more inclusive.”  (Lagarde , 
2016).  
 2 Despite rapid progress in the technology for digitalizing payments, and noteworthy 
leadership from governments such as China and Mexico, policymakers in other economies, 
either emerging or even advanced ones, have been slower to embrace it. This is in part 
because a coherent and tailored framework to manage this shift has been lacking, as the 
Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA) noted in a 2016 report reviewing the experience of 
digitalization in 25 countries (Janis & Shah, 2016).4 Without a broad and cohesive framework 
to guide implementation, governments and businesses in some instances have struggled to 
leverage the experiences and learnings of other markets and other players. The BTCA report 
thus identifies ten “accelerat ors” to implement digital payments effectively across an 
economy.5 Of particular relevance for this paper is the digitalization of government 
payments and receipts.6 
At the G20 2016 Hangzhou Summit, leaders endorsed eight High Level Principles for 
Digital Financial Inclusion. These included a recommendation to provide incentives to digitalize all payments to and from governments, where feasible (GPFI, 2016a,b). So far, 
however, digitalization has been pursued, and largely implemented, outside the complex 
network of systems and processes that constitute the emerging architecture of PFM 
(Cangiano et al., 2013).  
This paper seeks to explains why digitalization of payments should become an integral component of any modern PFM system. It first defines digitalization of payments and notes 
its main objectives.  It then considers how digitalization and PFM are —or should be —
complementary.  The paper then offers a cautionary example of the challenges of developing a financial management information system (FMIS), demonstrating that technology alone 
cannot be a solution by itself, and presents case studies from Estonia, Ghana, India, and Mexico. Though varied, the cases show that successful digitalization of payments and PFM 
bring significant benefits; however, the trans ition often faces opposition from entrenched 
interests. The final section of this paper sets out some important lessons and directions for 
future research.  
2. Defining  Digitalization of Payments  
Governments, businesses and international organizations dist ribute and receive vast sums in 
cash payments in payrolls, benefits, pensions, social programs, humanitarian aid, fines, fees, taxes, and other payments. With mobile phone usage growing rapidly —reaching some five 
                                                      
4 The BTCA  was launched in 2012 in response to public and private sector demand for more strategic advocacy, 
research,  and guidance on digit alizing cash payments to accelerate the shift from cash to electronic payments. It is 
funded by the B ill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Citi, MasterCard, Omidyar Network, United States Agency for 
International Development, and Visa. The BTCA  is an Implementing Partner of the G20 Global Partnership for 
Financial Inclusion, working closely with the Markets and  Payments Systems Subgroup.   Its Secretariat sits within 
the UN Capital Development Fund.   
5 Transaction volumes in the 25 countries grew an average of 32 percent annually over the past decade.  
6 Relevant  literature classifies these financial flows as gove rnment -to-person (G2P), government -to-business 
(G2B), and vice versa (P2G and B2G).  
 3 billion unique users in 2017 —and innovative  payment options also expanding quickly, 
opportunities to digitalize such payments is expanding at a similarly rapid rate.7 
Digitalization of payments involves the shifting of paper -based payments —that is, cash and 
checks —to some form of electronic or digi tal payment (BTCA, 2012). Box 1 presents the 
definition and classification of electronic or digital payments adopted by the Bank of 
International Settlements’ Committee on Payments and Markets Infrastructure (CPMI).  
Box 1. Electronic Payment Instruments: Definition and Classification  
The Bank for International Settlements’ Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures promotes 
the safety and efficiency of payments, clearing, settlement, and related arrangements for financial stability and the wider eco nomy. CPMI (2015, page 12, paragraph 46) recognizes that “payment services 
providers include banks and other deposit -taking institutions, as well as specialized entities such as 
money -transfer operators and e- money issuers.” It classifies electronic paymen t instruments in three 
broad categories:  
• Electronic -funds -transfer -based instruments: These are direct (that is, account -to-account) 
credit transfers and direct debit transfers. As account -to-account payments, these instruments 
can be processed fully electronically.  
• Payment -card-based instruments: These include credit, charge, and debit card payments, and 
typically still involve a plastic card. With few exceptions, payments with cards are initiated, 
authorized, authenticated, cleared, and settled fully  electronically.  
• Electronic -money -based instruments: In general terms, these e -money instruments involve the 
payer maintaining a prefunded transaction account with a payment service provider (PSP), often 
a nonbank. Specific products include online money when the payment instruction is initiated by 
internet, mobile money when by mobile phone, and prepaid cards.  
 
The definition of digitalization of payments in Box 1 —in essence, digital access to and use 
of formal financial services —shares key foundational fe atures with an FMIS, which is 
typically defined as “an information system that tracks financial events and summarizes 
financial information.”8 However, it should be noted that core FMISs may or may not 
                                                      
7 In the first quarter of 2000 there were 467 million unique mobile phone subscribers (7.7 percent of the global 
population). By the same quarter of 2017, there were 4.97 billion unique subscribers (66.3 percent of the global 
population), representing 15 percent annualized growth over that period (GSMA, 2017). In 1995, 1.6 mobile 
subscriptions existed for every 100 people in the world. By 2015, that number had reached 98.3 (23 percent 
annual growth), and today there are more mobile subscriptions than there are people in the world (International 
Telecommunication Union through World Bank, World  Development Indicators). Compared to growth in 
ownership of mobile phones, th e International Telecommunication Union estimates the number of internet users 
per 100 people increased from 0.8 in 1995 to 43.8 in 2015.  
8 Diamond and Khemani (2005) define an FMIS as the “computerization of public expenditure management 
processes includi ng budget formulation, budget execution, and accounting with the help of a fully integrated 
system for financial management of the line ministries (LMs) and other spending agencies. The full system should 
 4 include payment/transfer (including tax collection) functions.9  Whether digitalization 
should precede full development of an FMIS remains an open question. Certainly both 
digitalization and information technology infrastructure are necessary elements of the 
emerging PFM architecture.  
Table 1 below provides a  framework for the multiple types of payers and payees. It includes 
payments from governments to businesses and individuals as well as between government 
agencies and from businesses and individuals to governments.  
Table 1. Payment Grid: Types of Payments  by Payer and Payee  
  Payee  
  Government  Business  Person  Payer  Government  G2G  
Budgetary 
allocations, 
funding  G2B 
Grants, payments 
for goods and 
services  G2P 
Welfare programs, 
salaries, pensions  
Business  B2G 
Taxes, fees for 
licenses  B2B 
Payments for goods 
and services  B2P 
Salaries and benefits  
Person  P2G 
Taxes, utilities  P2B 
Purchases  P2P 
Remittances, gifts  
Development 
Community  D2G  
Taxes  D2B  
Payments for goods 
and services  D2P 
Cash transfers  
 
Source: Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA, 2012).  
Note: G = government, B = business (nonfinancial private sector), P = person. D = development community 
partner. For further explanation of the payment grid, see BTCA (2012).  
                                                      
also secure integration and communication with other relevant information systems.” They also clarify that 
“because of the integration requirement, the FMIS is commonly characterized as an integrated financial 
management information system. Unfortunately, using the term “integrated financial management inf ormation 
system” can sometimes be erroneously interpreted as describing a system that can capture all the functional 
processes, and the relevant financial flows, within public expenditure management.”  
9 Indeed, much of the most authoritative literature on  the subject (e.g., Diamond &  Khemani, 2005; Khan &  
Pessoa, 2010 ; Dener, Watkins, & Dorotinski, 2011; Dorotinski &  Watkins, 2013 ; and Una &  Pimenta, 2016)  
makes a distinction between “core” modules (such as general ledger, budgetary accounting, accounts pa yable and 
receivable) and “noncore” modules (such as payroll, procurement, project ledger , and asset registry). Actual 
payment or transfer functions thus may be considered outside of the core FMIS modules.  5 3. Digitalization  and Public Fina ncial Management: 
Complementarity and Caution  
3.1 Complementarity  
In general, PFM “relates to the way governments manage public resources (both revenue 
and expenditure) and the immediate and medium -to-long-term impact of such resources on 
the economy or society. As such, PFM has to do with both process (how governments manage) and results (short, medium, and long -term implications of financial flows)” 
(Andrews et al., 2013). While ideally PFM should be an integrated unified system, it is often a set of syst ems managed in parallel, often giving rise to fragmentation with resulting 
inefficiencies. T here is thus no consensus on how to define more precisely PFM, as 
discussed in Annex 1  of this paper, or about its objectives, or its desirable features.  
Surprisin gly, the way payments are processed is often overlooked in existing PFM 
literature —the word “digitalization” is rarely used. This is despite the benefits of digitalizing 
government payments in terms of transparency, accountability noted earlier and its cos t 
savings being widely documented, including by the World Bank in its 2012 Guidelines on Government Payments ( Cirasino et al., 2012 ), and more recently by the G20 (Klapper, 2014).    
Crucially, digitalization of payments —when integrated into PFM systems —can help realize 
the full potential gains in effectiveness and functionality these systems can offer. 
Digitalization substantially strengthens core PFM functions: making regular and timely 
payments, reaching the correct beneficiaries, improving accounting and reporting, and 
strengthening accountability by providing a more reliable audit trail. Digitalization also enhances the quality of information on fiscal developments.
10 Other direct benefits for PFM 
include expediting in -year budget execution reports, prov iding more timely information on 
governments’ cash positions, thus enhancing cash management functions, and better 
reconciliation between fiscal transactions, such as transfers, and corresponding recording in 
the government relevant bank accounts.   
Digita lization of G2P and P2G payments also offers other indirect PFM benefits. It can help 
support a digital financial infrastructure for private transactions that minimizes the use of cash. This can help reduce the size of shadow economies and hence opportunities for tax 
evasion (Rogoff, 2016). The same infrastructure can help shift remittances away from 
informal money transfer mechanisms, helping address leakages in balance of payment transactions, thus closing off another avenue for tax evasion. Increasing di gital P2P 
remittances between identified participants also strengthens compliance with the 
                                                      
10 Quality of fiscal information is at the core of fiscal transparency. In reformulating its 2014 Fiscal Transparency 
Code, the IMF define s this quality as the comprehensiveness, clarity, reliability, timeliness, and relevance of 
public reporting on the past, present, and future state of public finances.  
 6 recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force,11 and diminshes the likelihood of “de -
risking” by correspondent banks —that is, withdrawal of banking relationships  in response to 
perceived risks of sanctions for violating anti- money laundering and financing of terrorism 
regulations.12   
Country experiences show different possible digitalization pathways. It can be encouraged by 
initiatives to digitalize government pa yments and receipts, as has been the case in India.  
Digitalization  can also emerge from private sector initiatives to digitalize P2P payments, as 
has been seen in  Kenya, Tanzania, and  Bangladesh.  However, the overwhelming weight of 
experience shows that only through coordination across the public and private sectors can 
the benefits of digitalization be maximized. This requires governments to recognize the 
complementarity between digi talization and PFM and to demonstrate leadership in 
integrating public and private digitalization pathways to better serve financial management 
objectives.  
3.2 A Cautionary Tale from FMIS Implementation  
Whereas digitalization is still a relatively new conc ept that remains underutilized by many 
governments, FMISs have existed for many years. There is thus a growing body of evidence 
pointing to a mixed record of their success in helping strengthen PFM systems for the 
reasons discussed below.  
3.2.1 Experience t o Date   
In a recent review of World Bank experience with implementing FMISs, Hashim and Piatti -
Fünfkirchen (2018) propose several recommendations and prerequisites for successful FMIS 
project implementation. The recommendations point to the s trong desirability of: identifying 
government needs; developing customized solutions; and strengthening institutional 
capacity.13 Prerequisites include: the existence of some of the basic components of a modern 
PFM system; improvement of budget classificati on; development of a unified chart of 
accounts integrated with budget classification; improvement of treasury single -account 
                                                      
11 The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is an inter -governmental body established in 1989 by the Ministers of 
its Member jurisdictions.  It sets standards and promotes effective implementation of legal, regulatory, and 
operational measures for combating mo ney laundering, terrorist financing and other related threats to the 
integrity of the international financial system.   The FATF is a “policymaking body” that works to generate the 
necessary political will to bring about national legislative and regulatory reforms in these areas. The FATF 
currently comprises thirty -six member jurisdictions and two regional organisations, representing most major 
financial centers in all parts of the globe.  
12 Center for Global Development, 2015.  
13 More technical aspects that c an be used in FMIS projects to improve the reliability, cost -effectiveness, and 
accountability of information systems also include : using Electronic Payment Systems (EPS) for all government  
payments; benefiting from digital/electronic signatures for all fi nancial transactions; and electronic records 
management.  
 7 operations; development of commitment control and monitoring mechanisms; and 
establishment of cash management functions.14  
The list  of prerequisites, however, provides little clarity around the terms “improvement” or 
“development.” Furthermore, it is inconsistent with the reality in most low -income countries 
where FMIS projects have been implemented in the absence of most —in some instance 
all—of these prerequisites, as clearly mentioned later on in the same study in pointing to 
“the significantly higher failure rate for projects in Africa.” Diamond and Khemani stress 
lack of ownership of FMIS as among the most frequent challenges.  The y also note that 
“establishing an FMIS should not be viewed as merely computerizing existing procedures.”15 
This often reflects the lack of a unitary vision of governments’ priorities and objectives 
within the overarching PFM architecture.  
3.2.2 A  Unified PFM Architecture  
FMISs have generally fallen short of expectations in part because they have been increasingly 
seen as a silver bullet solution to governments’ PFM shortfalls. Governments —not just in 
low-income environments —are frequently hampered by incomp lete information when 
deciding between conflicting objectives with limited financial resources.16 As a result, FMISs 
have tended to evolve into an IT -driven solution in search of a problem — a risk flagged by 
Khan and Pessoa (2010) in their IMF technical no te—rather than the other way around. As 
such, they have often been conceived and developed as a way to speed up information flows with the aim of improving transparency and hence accountability. Unfortunately, experience 
both in the private and public sectors shows that faster processing of obsolete procedures 
has resulted in more dysfunction rather than the expected effiency gains and transparency 
goals.  
Successfully developing and implementing an FMIS requires a unified vision of the whole 
PFM architectu re. But first and foremost, there is the need to re -state the objectives a 
government wishes to pursue, as well as the essential functions that seeks to perform, so that 
these objectives are achieved efficiently and effectively. Re -shaping the government’s  
processes and procedures and their internal and external incentive mechanisms (including procedural as well as numerical rules) so as to modify behaviors, should follow a 
                                                      
14 By budget classification, it is usually meant as the manner in which the budget is articulated, approved, 
executed, and reported. The chart of accounts is a tool that allows governments classifying , recording, and 
reporting information on financial plans and transactions in a systematic and consistent way, much like a private 
sector business. The treasury single account is an arrangement for consolidating and managing governments’ cash 
resources, thus minimizing borrowing costs, in countries with fragmented government banking arrangements. 
Finally, commitment means an obligation to effect a future payment subject to the fulfillment of certain 
conditions (contractual or otherwise).  
15 As Diamond and Kh emani point out (2005), it is worth noting that “computerization promotes two kinds of 
reform: efficiency reforms that accelerate the operation of existing procedures and effectiveness reforms that change existing procedures  … and that the real payoff from  IT is when it makes organizations more effective, 
not simply more efficient.”  
16 See, for instance , IMF (2012)  on the quality of information available to countries entering the global financial 
crisis.  8 government’s overarching objectives. This is of course easier in theory than in prac tice, and 
indeed in reality is rarely done. As a result, governments often confuse ends with means, 
processes with objectives, and procedures with functions. FMISs tend to follow a similar 
path; without due attention and caution, the ongoing digitalization agenda is at risk of similar 
shortcomings as well.  
Governments have been shaped historically, culturally, and politically across often poorly 
coordinated layers, and often operate in a fragmented fashion. Citizens are simultaneously 
beneficiaries of the g overnment’s social objectives as well as payers of a range of taxes or 
fees. The relationship between the government and the individual is therefore regulated via complex legislative frameworks; various identifiers, such as social security and taxpayers 
numbers; and an endless number of procedures. The position of individuals —and their 
families —in relation to the many ways a government affects their lives is very difficult to 
ascertain. On the one hand, this adds to individuals’ compliance costs; on the other, it can 
lead to inefficiencies and abuses of position. Only a unified view of the PFM system and 
how it can supports governments’ objectives can overcome these difficulties. The 
persistence of expenditure arrears and “ghost” workers in countries such as  Ghana and 
Malawi, where FMISs have been “satisfactorily” adopted according to the World Bank review, is a case in point. Annex 2 illustrates the limits of a fragmented and technology -
driven approach in the case of Malawi.  
3.2.3 Additional Cautionary L essons  
Digitalizing payments has to proceed in a way that acknowledges the lessons of FMIS implementation discussed in the previous section—identifying government needs; 
developing customized solutions; strengthening institutional capacity; and developing a 
unified view not only of the PFM system but also of the complex financial relations between governments and individuals. Diamond and Khemani (2015) find that computerization can 
promote two kinds of reforms: efficiency reforms that accelerate the operation  of existing 
procedures, and effectiveness reforms that change procedures resulting in higher overall 
impact. The benefits of information technology are maximized when it makes organizations 
more effective, not simply more efficient.  
Experiences in Malawi  also show that digitalization should not be IT - or donor -driven. 
Rather, to realize its potential to boost effectiveness, digitalization should focus on 
functionalities that can address problems while keeping in mind medium- to-long-term policy 
goals. As A ndrews (2013) argues, those managing digitalization should accept a certain 
degree of experimentation and that arises from within a given system. They should embrace 
learning by doing, and be prepared to develop capabilities in parallel with the proposed 
solutions. For example, they should accept the likely need for at least some cash transfers to 
continue in the face of challenging contextual factors (ODI 2016; Sturge, 2017), including limits to connectivity.  
Another key lesson is to avoid developing “sil os” in which different systems and IT 
infrastructures become an impediment to reconciling the whole relationship between the 
government and the individual. This has an important implication for digital payments as 9 both of its foundations —the ability to ide ntify recipients and to make payments —are 
inherently multiple -use capabilities that cut across programs and sectors of public activity. It 
is therefore inefficient to approach digitalization through siloed payments solutions on an 
application -by-applicatio n basis.   
Finally, very little work has been done on the costs and benefits of introducing large computerization systems.  While these have delivered gains in many cases, they have also 
contributed to the waste of resources in others.  This reinforces the  importance of properly 
assessing expected efficiency and effectiveness gains from the beginning of digitalization 
efforts.  
4. 
Selected Country Cases  
The four country case studies described in this section illustrate how PFM and digitalization 
of government payments are indeed two sides of the same coin and point to factors that 
have helped determine their success. Table 2 summarizes the cases. Although  each is 
different, they point to some common factors that the previous section identified as 
desirable for any digitalization project: identifying the problems and needs, developing 
tailored solutions, and strengthening institutional capacity. Perhaps mos t importantly, the 
cases also point to the way problems beyond the specific ambit of the existing PFM systems were addressed and how digitalization contributed to a unitary vision of government 
priorities and objectives.  
The first case considered is India ’s fast -track digitalization approach combining the Aadhaar 
program and financial inclusion to drive both efficiency and effectiveness in delivering 
government benefits.  The second is Mexico’s long -term development of its “Single Treasury 
Account” and the  digitalization of payments —developed at first in parallel before becoming 
aligned —and how this has improved efficiency and effectiveness and worked towards 
inclusion goals. With perhaps the most comprehensive digitalization of government services 
in the w orld, Estonia has seen improvements in public effectiveness as well as developing an 
approach to data privacy and protection that is of great interest for all countries moving towards digital governance. Ghana’s efforts to standardize digital identificatio n and shift 
away from a cash -based economy are still facing challenges, but ghost workers have largely 
been eliminated from public payrolls where the approach has been applied.  
Together, these cases (across four continents) set out in Table 2 illustrat e many common 
challenges in aligning PFM and digitalization. While believed to be substantial, the estimated savings from the initiatives are nonetheless indicative. They are not always grounded in 
rigorous analysis and are not comparable. Far more rigorou s, comparable research is needed 
to understand the economic impact of digitalization, including in developing economies.  
  10 Table 2. Summary of Country Cases  
Country  Years  Main Objectives  Main Reforms  Indications of Effect  Estimated 
Savings  
India  2009- 
ongoing  Rationalize 
subsidies, reduce 
leakage and 
corruption, 
financial inclusion, 
strengthen tax 
collection  Unique digital 
identification,  
reforming subsidies 
and transfers, e-
KYC, enhancing 
payments and 
interoperability  Over 1.1 billion enrolled in  
Aadhaar, 280 million new 
accounts,  comprehensive 
reform of liquefied petroleum gas subsidies,  rollout of 
subsidy and payment reforms 
across states, service 
improvements  $7 billion 
claimed over 2.5 
years up to 
March 2017  
Mexico  2007- 
ongoing  Transparency,  
cost savings, 
modern PFM 
system, financial 
inclusion  
 Single Treasury 
Account,  digital 
payments,  measures 
to encourage 
financial inclusion 
including tiered 
KYC  Payments now through single 
Treasury account and digital at 
Federal level  $1.27 bi llion per 
year 
Estonia  2001-
ongoing  Efficient 
government,  
digital platform 
for private 
economy, data 
protection  Unique 
identification,  digital 
data framework (X -
road): regulatory 
regime for digital 
society  Unique e -identity, X -Road 
connects 170 public sector 
databases for over 1,500 
public and private services,  
98% digital tax filing.  Savings from 
almost universal 
digital services; 
citizen and 
government 
time, perhaps 
2% of GDP  
Ghana  2008-
ongoing  Eliminating ghost 
workers, financial 
inclusion, 
improving tax 
collection  Unique identities,  
public wage 
payments through 
e-Zwich, smartcards  Increasing use of e -Zwich to 
deliver payments, elimination 
of 40% of public payroll 
where applied.  $35 million per 
year from one 
application  
4.1 India  
In 2009, India created the Unique Identification Authority of India with the mandate to issue a unique identifying number, the Aadhaar, to every resident. Aadhaar was introduced, 
together with digital payments, as part of an ambitious project to shif t the country toward an 
inclusive digital economy, with a strong initial focus on reforming and rationalizing a massive 
array of subsidy and payments schemes. Together these accounted for some $60 billion in 
annual public expenditures, with studies suggest ing huge leakage and diversion in many 11 programs. By early 2017, enrollment had topped 1.1 billion; it now includes almost all adults 
and is being extended to children. Aadhaar relies on digital technology and biometrics to 
uniquely identify people and to e nable them to authenticate themselves for transactions. The 
largest identity management program in the world, it is also a platform for a number of 
related digital services.17 
The strategy involves linking subsidies and benefits to identified individuals, paying benefits 
and transfers through financial accounts, and then enabling additional financial services to 
encourage their use. The so -called JAM strategy links (1) financial accounts under the 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana  program,18 (hence  the J from Jan) (2) Aadhaar (hence the 
A) and (3) a mobile number (the M). Digital identity and payments come together in several 
ways. Know -your-customer procedures based on Aadhaar (e -KYC) have drastically reduced 
the cost of gaining new bank customers and enabled the opening of almost 300 million 
accounts, most used to receive digital transfers. E -KYC has also helped expand mobile 
banking and create new payment banks, an essential step to increase the density of the 
payments infrastructure. In addition,  with the Aadhaar Payments Bridge, G2P payments are 
easily made to any identified individual without having to key in the details of his or her 
account. Extending this further, the Aadhaar -Enabled Payments Service enables seamless 
P2P digital payments betw een any two accounts linked to Aadhaar numbers or the 
associated mobile numbers, even if they are with different banks. Use of this Unified Payments Interface (UPI) —a free retail payments switch provided by the National Payments 
Corporation of India —has be en increasing rapidly, with a transactions volume of some 150 
million payments per month by the end of 2017.   
Partly because of the way in which Aadhaar was introduced — before defining its purpose 
and scope in legislation— there has been much debate on the  appropriate scope of this 
digital system.  While the recent Supreme Court judgment placed restrictions on the 
mandatory use of the Aadhaar outside the area of benefits, it endorsed its mandatory linkage 
to the tax Permanent Account Number (PAN), thus ceme nting a critical linkage between 
taxation and benefits administration.
19   
A particularly interesting feature of the digitalization program is how it has been rolled out. 
While the Aadhaar itself and its associated services are central technology projects, individual 
states, and even some districts, have been free to adopt it in their own way, applying the 
technology toward problems and priorities they have identified. Reforms are moving 
forward rapidly in some areas but more slowly in others and may involve  a good deal of 
experimentation and innovation in their implementation. In the most advanced states, 
reforms have been ongoing for five years or more; in the least advanced, they have barely 
gotten off the ground. Incentives exist to move forward at the state level, where 
                                                      
17 This is only a brief treatment of Aadhaar, the associated India Stack, and the digitalization of programs and 
payments.  For more detail, see ID Insight 2017 and 2018.    
18 See the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana website for more information: https://pmjdy.gov.in/ . 
19 https://indianexpress.com/article/india/aadhaar -verdict -full-text-judgment -supreme -court -order -5374794/  
 12 discretionary spending power is increasing as more tax revenue is devolved to states, thanks 
to awards by the Fourteenth Finance Commission.20 States that save money by 
strengthening the administration of their social programs will therefor e have more resources 
available for other purposes.  
Krishna District, Andhra Pradesh, offers perhaps the most advanced example of these 
reforms. The subsidy, benefit, and pension systems have been digitalized, as has the supply chain for subsidized commod ities provided through an extensive system of Fair Price 
Shops —a public system to distribute rations to the poor. This enables real -time monitoring 
of payments and subsidies effected through the system. Budget execution and the 
disbursement of payments and  subsidized rations can be monitored in the aggregate, by 
town, by individual program or service point and, drilling down, even at the level of the 
individual beneficiary —creating a complete audit trail for each transaction. No longer can 
shopkeepers diver t unclaimed products for private gain; the system reconciles stocks and 
flows to ensure that they are held over for the subsequent month’s distribution.  
As in other cases, digitalization in India faces opposition from vested interests that have 
benefited from the previous system. These have included entities on the front line of 
delivering payments, subsidies, and services who are no longer able to divert public spending 
for their own advantage.  In some cases, they can be bought off with increases in serv ice 
margins —if these are not set at reasonable levels there will be no incentive to implement the 
transfers. In other cases, they can be bypassed by concluding new contracts with competitors enthusiastic about providing services under the new systems. As w ith FMIS, implementation 
involves far more than technology. It requires vision, clear objectives, and sustained 
commitment from government and its agencies.  
Another example of the application of these systems in India is the reform of fuel subsidies. 
For reasons of equity and health, and to cushion households against volatile prices and 
reduce deforestation, the country has long provided subsidized fuel to households. Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) is a favored clean fuel, relative to kerosene. In the first  stage of reform, 
the Pratyaksh Hanstantrit Labh (PaHaL) program changed the form of subsidy on LPG 
cooking gas cylinders, moving to market prices and transferring the subsidy directly into the 
financial accounts of beneficiary households for up to 12 cyli nders per year. The reform has 
weeded out a considerable number of duplicate and fake connections and reduced diversion to unsubsidized commercial users. The second stage involves a massive rollout of the LPG 
program launched by Prime Minister Narendra Mod i in 2016 (the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala 
Yojana or Ujjwala scheme) to supply more low -income households.  
One metric for assessing digitalization is fiscal savings.  Among various estimates, in March 2017 the Ministry of Communications and Information Technol ogy put savings at Rs49,000 
crore, (about $7 billion) over the previous two and a half years. The detailed basis for this 
estimate has not been made available and it is probably optimistic, but even a modest 
                                                      
20 For more information please see http://indiabudget.nic.in/es2014- 15/echapvol1 -10.pdf  
 13 fraction of such savings would represent an enor mous rate of return on the investments 
made in digital technology.21 Several factors complicate estimates of savings, however, 
including the need to specify a clear counterfactual and whether savings are to be considered 
ex ante or ex post. Savings from the  LPG reforms, for example, depend on the per -cylinder 
subsidy, which fell sharply as world energy prices declined. Energy markets are unpredictable, however, and the reform has put in place a system that will better enable the 
government to respond to futu re price shocks which are bound to recur.  Another 
complication is that the objective of that reform was not simply to cut subsidies —it was to 
strengthen the administration of the program so that it could be rolled out more widely 
across India. The use of the common Aadhaar identifier also enables subsidy programs to be 
rationalized; households that had previously received kerosene subsidies can be struck off 
the list as they are provided with LPG connections.  
Fiscal savings are, of course, not the only, o r the best, measure of the impact of digitalization 
from a PFM perspective. Perhaps even more important is whether the reforms have 
improved the accuracy, timeliness, and quality of service delivery. Until recently, there was 
little empirical evidence for India. One rigorous study evaluated the impact of pre -Aadhaar 
reform using biometrically authenticated payments infrastructure (smartcards) for beneficiaries of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) and the Social Security Pension (SSP). A  large -scale randomized control trial was carried out for the rollout 
over 158 sub -districts and 19 million people. The new system was found to deliver more 
timely, more predictable, and less corrupt NREGS payments without undermining program 
access. The i nvestment was cost -effective, as time savings to NREGS beneficiaries alone 
were equal to the cost of the program rollout. Leakage of funds between the government 
and beneficiaries in both NREGS and SSP programs was also significantly reduced. Beneficiaries  overwhelmingly preferred the new system for both programs (Muralidharan, 
Niehaus & Sukhtankar, 2014).  
More recently, evidence has started to emerge from wider beneficiary surveys of digitized 
program delivery. Almost 3,000 beneficiaries were surveyed for the State of Aadhaar Report, 
2017-2018, across three states (ID Insight 2018). Substantial majorities preferred the new 
systems to the old ones, essentially for two reasons basic to PFM: more regular payment/delivery and less likelihood that benefits are d iverted. These conclusions largely 
mirrored those from a previous survey of beneficiaries in Rajasthan by Microsave and the Center for Global Development (Gelb, Mukherjee & Navis, 2018) that covered three 
programs:  LPG, pensions, and subsidized rations. T hat survey also confirmed the huge 
impetus to financial inclusion from the digitalization of government programs, particularly 
for women; all had bank accounts compared with only one -third prior to the reforms.  
FINDEX data confirms India’s progress in thi s area, with the gender gap in financial 
                                                      
21 The costs of the Aadhaar system through its first billion -plus registrations were about $1.16 per head. The 
overall costs have been projected at around $2 billion. For more discussion of costs and benefits see Gelb and 
Diofasi 2018.  14 inclusion shrinking from 20 percent in 2014 to only 6 percent in 2017 as the overall financial 
inclusion soared to 80 percent.  
This is not to say that digitalization has solved all problems. Many challenges remain,  
including the need to reconcile data inconsistencies and errors, and there is still concern that 
digitalization should not exclude legitimate beneficiaries —as may have been the case for 
applications in some states (Dreze, Khalid, Khera & Somanchi, 2017).  But India’s reforms, 
though in the early stages, leave little doubt over the potential gains.  
4.2 Mexico  
Mexico illustrates the benefits of combining PFM modernization with the digitalization of government payments to drive efficiency and financial inclusion.
22 The Mexican 
government’s 2013 National Digital Strategy, known as Digital Mexico, was championed by the president as part of the 2013 -18 National Development Plan. It included a commitment 
to “encourage the innovation of digital services through the democratization of public 
spending” and to financial inclusion. This 2013 strategy reflected over 15 years of successive 
presidents’ commitments to centralize payments through a Single Treasury Account and to 
digitize government revenues an d expenses as part of building a modern PFM system, as 
well as a more recent government focus on financial inclusion.
23 
Prior to the 2013 Strategy, Mexico’s commitment to financial inclusion had been on a parallel track. The 2007 -2012 National Development P lan cited the long -term objectives of 
increasing the number of people and enterprises with access to financial services and 
protecting such newcomers. In 2007, the Mexican Congress issued the new Transparency of 
Financial Services Law, which established mo re precise transparency standards for the fees 
charged by financial institutions, principles for disclosure statements, and the obligation for banks to offer basic savings products. In 2008, the Mexican Congress approved reform of 
the Banking Law to enable  the use of nonfinancial entities as banking agents (Goodwin-
Groen, 2010). A presidential decree in September 2011 created the National Council for 
Financial Inclusion. As president of the G20 in 2011, Mexico led the Maya Declaration on 
financial inclusion . All these steps contributed to the launch of the president’s National 
Financial Inclusion Policy in 2016, which committed to merge both agendas by promoting 
                                                      
22 This section draws from Babatz (2013).  
23 As early as 1997, President Ernesto Z edillo had mandated all Dependencias  of the federal government to 
collaborate with the Ministry of Finance to implement the Sistema Integral de Administración Financiera Federal. 
This was the start of the process to develop both the IT infrastructure and t he business process re -engineering 
for an efficient Single Treasury Account. In 2007, President Felipe Calderon and the Head of the Treasury, Maria 
Eugenia Casar, with the support of the Central Bank Governor Agustín Carstens, enshrined the Single Treasury 
Account into law. In 2010, a Presidential Budget Decree mandated all government departments to shift to 
centralized electronic payments. This was the first time in Mexico that the “promotion of the use of electronic payments and the bankarization of benef iciaries,” that is, financial inclusion, was mentioned as one of the 
objectives of developing a modern PFM system.  
 15 the use of electronic payments. Another significant step was the adoption of tiered Know -
Your -Customer (KYC) requirements, to facilitate the opening of basic payment accounts.  
Mexico’s experience pointed to the synergies between digitalization and PFM when the two 
came together after 2013. It also indicated the vital role of consistent senior -level 
sponsorship and support, and the need to coordinate across agencies. At a technical level, 
the shift was designed and supported by a core group of skilled senior civil servants within 
Tesorería de la Federación (the Mexican Federal Treasury), in cooperation  with other key 
agencies such as the central bank. Without this technical competence, the complexity of the 
process may well have caused it to stall.24 The reforms have had to overcome opposition 
including, initially, from banks that anticipated decreased e arnings as government was 
enabled to reduce the volume of deposits held as float.  Overall, it has been estimated that 
the Mexican government is saving some $1.27 billion a year, or 3.3 percent of its combined 
spending on wages, pensions, and social transf ers. The methodology and assumptions 
behind these estimates are described in Babatz (2013),25 and they should be understood as 
indicative not definitive. Nonetheless, this order of magnitude of savings is hard to ignore.  
4.3 Estonia   
Estonia has prioritize d digitalization across the whole government for almost 20 years. As 
Lindpere (2017) notes, the objective was to bring all citizens into the national digital 
economy to get the maximum cost -effectiveness benefit. Unlike many other countries with 
extensive legacy systems, as a newly independent country, Estonia was able to initiate its transition to a digital economy in a remarkably comprehensive way.  
One essential step was the creation of an advanced digital identity system so that citizens could authentica te themselves for digital transactions. Estonia’s system is among the most 
highly developed in the world, allowing not only authentication, but also the digital signing 
of documents.  Some 1.1 million of 1.3 million citizens have a digital identity (Marget ts & 
Naumann, 2016) and, in a global first, the same identification system is being offered to non -
residents through the e -Residency program.  
Another major step was the creation, in 2001, of the X -Road, a data exchange layer that 
enables secure internet -based data exchange between information systems. Public and 
private sector entities can connect their information systems with the X -Road without a fee. 
This shared infrastructure, hosted by the government, makes it easier for public and private 
institutions  to innovate together, as they can leverage the already -existing infrastructure for 
                                                      
24 For instance, the 2011 presidential decree could not have forced the shift overnight. But it was a decisive 
moment, alongside sustained pressure by senior champions.  
25 Cost-savings estimates in Babatz (2013) were calculated for salaries, pensions, and transfer programs using data 
and assumptions on three line items: (1) the interest earned by not having to deposit funds in advanc e of 
payments (the cost of the float), (2) the savings through not having to pay fees to banks for effecting transfers, 
and (3) the estimated savings from reduction in losses due to unauthorized or incorrect payments.  
 16 data exchange, thus saving resources (Janis & Shah 2016).26 Citizens can access the system to 
check on who has requested access to their data and for what purposes; unauthor ized access 
is punishable by law.   
Data on the cost- effectiveness of this initiative, which has been run as Estonia modernized 
its entire PFM system,27 is compelling, even if not all estimates are the result of rigorous 
analysis against a fully -specified c ounterfactual. By eliminating the need for in -person 
interactions, X -Road estimates it saved the equivalent of 820 years of working time in 2016 
(Government of Estonia, 2017).28 If each digital service provided by the system would 
otherwise have required 15  minutes of in -person attention, the savings would represent 
about 10 percent of public sector employment. The Estonian government has estimated 
overall savings from its digital systems at about 2 percent of GDP.29  
The digital tax return statistic also set s Estonia apart. In 2016, over 98 percent of returns 
came in through the e -Tax, the electronic tax filing system set up by the Estonian Tax and 
Customs Board, through X -Road (Margetts & Naumann, 2017), which also links 
employment tax records to each citize n’s tax filings.  
4.4 Ghana  
Ghana offers an example of the potential for digital payments to eliminate ghost workers, 
even if their application has been limited. Despite many years of effort to implement public -
sector reforms, the country has long struggl ed to contain recurrent spending, which is high 
relative to GDP compared with countries at a comparable income level. Overstaffing is chronic and containing the public -sector wage and benefits bill has been a particular 
challenge; it absorbs over 9 percent of GDP. Another PFM challenge for Ghana has been the prevalence of cash -based payments across the economy; these undermine tax 
administration and reduce collection.  
As Breckenridge (2010) explains, Ghana’s e -Zwich payment system, “the world’s first 
biome tric money,” drew on a technology developed in South Africa to transition toward 
digital payments even without full, or reliable, connectivity. It also aimed to extend financial 
                                                      
26 As of May 2017, X -Road had connected  170 public sector databases and provided 1,571 public and private 
services, all based on one standard, obligatory digital identity for each citizen. X-Road receives more than one 
million requests per day  and processed more than 500 million transactions in  2016 (Government of Estonia , 
2017).  
27 Estonia has been and remains a frontrunner in reforming its PFM systems since the 1991 restoration of 
independence. From an early adoption of results -oriented budgeting to accrual accounting and, more recently, 
accrual budgeting, reforms have been support ed by an effective treasury and budget execution system and a 
remarkable degree of transparency and accountability.  
28 The 820 years figure  assumes that every request to the X -Road saves  15 minutes of an officials’ time and  5 
percent  of requests submitted t hrough the X -Road involve communication between people. Using e- services 
then helped save 7,182,262 working hours in the previous year (Government of Estonia , 2017). These are 
obviously simplistic assumptions, but usefully indicate the magnitude of savings . 
29 https://www.ipinst.org/2016/05/information -technology- and-governance -estonia#2  
 17 inclusion to people who were not literate and less able to cope with PINs to s ecure and 
manage their transactions. The e -Zwich system captures clients’ fingerprints during 
enrolment, de -duplicates them to ensure that identities are (statistically) unique,30 and stores 
the template on a smartcard. For each withdrawal from an ATM equip ped with a biometric 
reader, cardholders’ fingerprints are checked against the template stored on their card. The 
system can work offline, reconciling the card balance with that of the underlying account when connectivity is available. To ensure an auditab le trail, the ATM records the last 10 
transactions on the card and the card records the last 10 transactions on the ATM.  
The e -Zwich system was anticipated to serve two key PFM objectives. First, it would clean 
up government payrolls by consolidating all salary payments into a single, de -duplicated 
digital system. This would immediately flag multiple payments, since different accounts belonging to a single individual would all be mapped to the same identity. Second, as it was 
rolled out across the economy,  initially to large employers, it was anticipated that it would 
strengthen tax administration by ensuring that a greater number of formal sector employees 
would see their wages and salaries being paid into digital accounts.  
E-Zwich has been a mixed succes s. Take -up has grown more slowly than anticipated, 
although growth has been higher in recent years. Transactions went up from 2.2 million in 
2014 to 5.3 million in 2016 as its usage increased to pay beneficiaries of public programs 
(Citifmonline, 2017). But as IMF (2016) notes, plans to use e -Zwich to pay all public salaries 
have encountered opposition, particularly from Ghana’s public sector unions. They argue 
that the system imposes additional costs and inconveniences payees, in that it does not yet 
have a sufficiently dense network of service points.  
In retrospect, it would have been better to have separated out the unique identification 
system from a particular financial technology, the approach taken by India. Nevertheless, it is 
reported that one sing le application, to Ghana’s scandal -plagued National Service System, 
uncovered 35,000 fictitious employees —almost half the initial payroll of 75,000 —potentially 
saving the Ghanaian government $35 million a year.
31 This would only be a small gain 
relative to the $3 -billion public sector wage bill, but would represent a huge rate of return on 
the initial investment in the e -Zwich program.32 
                                                      
30 Statistical uniqueness means that the probability that any individual h as two or more distinct identities is 
extremely small. No system can guarantee perfect uniqueness.    
31 B&FT Online. 2016. “E -Zwich Helps Flush Out 35,000 Ghost Names From Payroll … Saves Gov’t 
GH?146m.” April 21 http://con -imedia.net/GhIPSS/news -and-events/27- e-zwich -helps -flush -out-35-000-
ghost -names -from -payroll -saves -gov-t-gh-146m  
32 Net-1, the provider of the system,  was paid an upfront fee of $20 million plus $3 per card. Wide coverage, at 
around 7 million cards for the whole of Ghana, would involve payment of $41 million (Gelb & Clark, 2013). This 
does not of course include all costs of instituting the system, but i t is indicative.  18 5. Digitalization Challenges: What Can We Learn and 
Where Do We Go from Here?  
Traditional approaches to PFM have not paid detailed attention to the digitalization of 
payments, particularly to entities external to the government. Central fiscal agencies (by and 
large treasuries and ministries of finance) responsible for managing public resources through 
their PFM systems are often still at the margin of the digital revolution. However, as outlined 
in the case studies, the problems addressed using digital payments, together with (unique) identification technology, are highly relevant for the sound management of public finances. 
In fact, most of the questions about government payments to individuals and firms are essentially the same as for payments internal to the government and at the core of a 
functional PFM system:  
• Are payments delivered securely, to the intended recipien ts, in a timely manner, and 
at reasonable administrative cost?  
• Are there serious problems of ghost workers, leakage, or corruption?  
• Can government “follow the money” in real time as resources flow through banks 
or other intermediaries to the ultimate reci pients? Is there an auditable trail?  
In addition, one needs to consider the wider role of the payments infrastructure that can be supported through digital G2P payments, in helping the shift from a cash -based economy 
towards a financialized one, reducing t he scope for tax evasion.    
The four case studies —Estonia, India, Mexico and Ghana —present a diverse range of 
approaches to developing a functional PFM that could meet such policy objectives. In 
Estonia, digitalization has gone far beyond payments, to enc ompass virtually all government 
functions and engagement with citizens. The aim has been to govern effectively and 
inclusively at lower cost. India’s digital transition is driven by multiple objectives, but the 
first and most important has been to improve the efficiency of its vast array of subsidies, transfers, and schemes by eliminating leakage and redundancy, as well as creating auditable 
trails. Financial inclusion has also been a major focus while improving tax administration 
through facilitating digit al payments more widely is emerging as another priority.  Through 
consolidating payments services and going digital, Mexico aimed to rationalize payments and 
reap savings, as well as to encourage financial inclusion. Ghana’s program, though far more 
limite d in scope, had similar objectives —in the first instance to substitute for shortcomings 
in managing public payrolls through channeling payments into biometrically enabled accounts. Building on financial inclusion, the next stage intends to focus on broadening the 
tax net to include all formal wages and salaries.  
Looking more generally beyond these four countries, the transition toward digital payments 
and the wider digital economy is happening naturally to some extent with the adoption of 
new technology, b ut often far less rapidly and comprehensively than possible, including in 
countries where the potential benefits are greatest. The transition also needs to avoid 19 common mistakes and draw from recent reviews of efforts to introduce large 
computerization programs within governments.    
In addition, the case studies largely confirm the need for high- level leadership, an integrated 
and comprehensive approach to digitalization and PFM whereby the former becomes a 
constituent element of the latter, and an appreci ation of the risks and challenges. These key 
success factors are briefly discussed below.  
5.1 High-Level Leadership 
Senior and sustained political and technical leadership that brings together these agendas is 
needed for success. This requires more active involvement on the part of central fiscal 
agencies, which should ideally play a leadership role or, at a minimum, be  part of 
coordination efforts to ensure that all benefits are reaped. As Mexico and Estonia illustrate, these reforms take time. And, as India shows, senior political and technical leadership is 
required to deal with the many implementation problems that w ill inevitably arise, including 
the need to neutralize the opposition of those who have benefited from the previous system. 
Technology alone is ineffective without political will. Ghana’s inability to apply its digital 
payments system more widely across th e public sector illustrates this point.  
The approach in India shows how much more there is to these reforms than simply 
installing a new computer system or payments infrastructure. It is more about developing a 
strategy to use digital payments effectively , which requires a top -down view and a broad 
framework of reference. This is true even when digitalization is being driven largely at the subnational level, with the added spur of greater devolution of fiscal revenues to states or at 
the level of individua l programs. The other cases mentioned above faced different problems 
and priorities, but also had specific and broader PFM objectives in mind when developing aspects of their digital strategies.   
5.2 An Integrated, Comprehensive Approach  
It is important to build a comprehensive digital and regulatory infrastructure that will permit 
an inclusive approach to PFM. Examples above include X -Road, the India Stack, and E -
Zwich.  Digitalization of government payments, as in Mexico and India, is only one stage of 
a wider transition toward digital (noncash) payments across the economy. It can be a critical 
stage, however, since it can help build and sustain a first round of infrastructure needed for wider P2P digital payments, including POS and cash -in-cash-out facilities. Digital 
government payments can also increase a population’s familiarity with digital systems, 
including through the opening of large numbers of accounts for new clients of the financial 
system. In the first years, many of these accounts will not be  used for purposes other than 
receiving government payments, but this will slowly change.  
Causality is not one way, however. In turn, wider P2P digitalization complements the initial 
G2P stage to start to build the digital ecosystem. It reduces the need t o cash out payments 
and transfers immediately and lowers reliance on cash -in-cash-out infrastructure. It also 20 increases the transparency of payments and transactions across the economy to improve tax 
administration further down the road. The digital infras tructure should also be ready if, and 
when, it is decided to more actively reduce the role of cash in the economy, whether through eliminating large -denomination banknotes or other measures.    
One regulatory priority is a telecommunications regime that en courages universal 
connectivity. Even with the astonishing spread of mobile devices —now almost one for 
every man, woman, and child on Earth —some less densely populated areas of poor 
countries lack basic 2G connectivity, and higher -capacity broadband internet is still restricted 
and costly in many countries.  
A second regulatory requirement is a level playing field for financial providers, one that 
encourages entry and competition and facilitates the inclusion of low -income clients. For 
example, countries sh ould apply a risk -based approach to know -your-customer, graduating 
the requirements so that small accounts that provide basic services to low -income clients 
face less stringent customer due -diligence requirements.
33 
Interoperability should be another strong  focus to enable cross -provider payments with 
negotiated and low -interchange fees. There are advantages and disadvantages in setting up 
the equivalent of a regulated public utility. One example is India’s Unified Payments 
Interface, the payment system laun ched by the National Payments Corporation of India and 
regulated by the Reserve Bank of India that facilitates the instant transfers of funds between 
all users of the mobile platform. Interoperability can also help ensure a sufficiently dense 
network of fi nancial agents to enable convenient cash -in-cash-out transactions and other 
services.34 On the other hand, too early a stress on interoperability may blunt the drive of 
first-movers to expand coverage.    
Based on these examples, unique identification is an other prerequisite for a well -functioning 
digital payments system. Without such a mechanism to verify identities (particularly, but not only, for adults), it is difficult to develop a strong digital payments ecosystem. In Ghana, for 
example, 98 percent of people report having at least one form of ID, but market participants 
across the country struggle with numerous forms of identification and identity databases. 
With nine separate biometric databases in use across government and public entities, it is 
difficult to perform efficient know -your-customer functions. To verify either the form of ID 
or the holder of a current account, the company must be able to access the accompanying 
database. Yet, Ghana lacks a national, centralized identification method and database, 
hampering the development of its inclusive digital payments ecosystem (BTCA, 2016).  Indeed, such a system could benefit PFM in many other ways, and it is surprising to see 
governments sometimes supporting a diverse and costly range of identification systems that 
                                                      
33 For further discussion of regulation to improve financial inclusion see Center for Global Development (2016)  
as well as GPFI (2016).  
34 It is logical to permit reasonable interchange fees for access to agents of another network as this involves the 
provision of real (non -virtual) services.  21 are not interoperable, rather than focusing attention on the core systems of civil registration 
and national identification.  
5.3 Appreciation of the Risks  
The movement toward a digitized economy also comes with risks, both to citizens and 
government systems. For citizens, digital transactions and interactions leave a trail—in 
contrast to cash, which is anonymous —potentially extending to all aspects of an individual’s 
life. The Responsible Digital Payment Guidelines (2016), of the Better Than  Cash Alliance, 
have researched and documented eight good practices for digital payments that, if followed, 
would significantly reduce risks to citizens. Guideline 7 to protect client data, for example, 
may be less of an issue for G2P payments (at least fr om the perspective of access by 
government), but is a consideration for the wider payments ecosystem. Where one shops, 
what one buys, who one pays —all these become matters of record and translate into data of 
considerable commercial value.  
Countries need to take steps to ensure the security and safety of payments and related data, 
and to ensure that the growing digital cloud of information does not unduly compromise 
either the privacy of citizens or the privacy of classified government information, as both  
engage in the digital economy. This raises legal and regulatory issues that go far beyond the scope of this paper, but it is important to stress them since only about half of all developing countries have data privacy laws in place. The need for continuou s upgrading of digital 
security is now a sine qua non for all such systems and the importance of qualified internal 
experts cannot be overemphasized.  
5.4 Directions for Future Work  
The very limitations of these cases from Estonia, Ghana, India, and Mexico serve to 
highlight the need for more rigorous, comparable research to document, and then 
systematize, how governments are building inclusive digital economies in which the PFM and broader inclusion agenda work together. The speed of innovation in payments makes 
the importance of robust research all the more important so the learning is substantive and 
actionable, not superficial. Also  urgent, though, is the need for research on the 
counterfactual of not integrating PFM with the broader government digitaliz ation agenda 
and of not digitally connecting the increasingly complex relations between government and citizens, for which PFM is the foundation.  
These examples also highlight the imperative for training national and international PFM 
experts to position a modern functional PFM at the center of the government’s broader 
digitalization and inclusion agendas and address the evolving risks. This is a call to action for 
the skills development agenda of the IMF, World Bank, United Nations, and bilateral 
funders active in this sector.  22 6. Concluding Remarks  
The train toward a digital economy has left the station and is moving rapidly. Its destination: 
a more inclusive society where everyone can benefit from lower costs, increased speed in 
processing financial trans actions, and greater effectiveness in delivering government services.  
That future can be reached faster if digitalization becomes a constituent element of a 
modern and functioning PFM and is combined with broader reform agendas such as 
financial and socia l inclusion or digital identification. There is much to be learned from the 
record of large government computerization initiatives in managing risks and from the experience of leaders in digital services, when embarking on these initiatives.  
Digital payme nts are not a silver bullet. It will take significant intellectual capital and 
infrastructure investment. But if the digitalization agenda runs on a parallel track to PFM, 
the greater risk is a missed opportunity. The cases presented in this chapter, altho ugh limited 
in number, are examples of the components of an integrated approach between digitalization 
and more traditional PFM objectives. The call is to mainstream digitalization of payments as 
part of a functional PFM system which will, in turn, facilit ate achievement of PFM goals and 
a broader inclusion agenda.  23 References  
Andrews, Matt. 2013. The Limits of Institutional Reform in Developing Countries: Changing Rules for 
Realistic Solutions.  Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.  
Babatz, Guillermo. 2013. “Sustained Effort, Saving Billions: Lessons from the Mexican 
Government’s Shift to Electronic Payments.” Better Than Cash Alliance, New York.  
Bankable Frontier Associates (BFA) for the Better Than Cash Alliance. 2012. “The Journey 
Toward Cash -Lite: Addressing Poverty, Saving Money and Increasing Transparency by 
Accelerating the Shift to Electronic Payments.” Boston.  
Better Than Cash Alliance (BTCA). 2012. “The Journey Toward ‘Cash Lite’: Addressing 
Poverty, Saving Money and Increasing Transparency b y Accelerating the Shift to 
Electronic Payments.” BTCA, New York. https://www.betterthancash.org/tools -
research/reports/the -journey -toward -cash-lite-addressing -poverty -saving -money -and-
increasing -transparency -by-accelerating -the-shift-to-electronic -payments . 
———. 2016. “Responsible Digital Payments Guidelines.” Research,  July 20. 
https://www.betterthancash.org/tools -research/case -studies/responsib le-digital -
payments -guidelines . 
Breckenridge, Keith. 2010. “The World’s First Biometric Money: Ghana’s E -Zwich and The 
Contemporary Influence of South African Biometrics.” Africa  80 (4). 642 -62. 
Cangiano, Marco, Teresa Curristine, and Michel Lazare. 2013. Public Financial Management and 
its Emerging Architecture. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.  
Center for Global Development. 2015. “Unintended Consequences of Anti -Money 
Laundering Policies for Poor Countries.” CGD Working Group Report, Center for 
Global Development,  Washington, DC.  
———. 2016. “Financial Regulations for Improving Financial Inclusion.” CGD Task Force 
Report,  Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.  
Chang, Ha -Joon.  2006. “Understanding the Relationship between Institutions and Economic 
Development.” WIDER Discussion Paper No. 2006/05, United Nations University World Institute for Development Economics Research, Helsinki.  
Chang, Ha -Joon, Antonio Andreoni, and Ming Le ong Kuan. 2013. “International Industrial 
Policy Experiences and the Lessons for the UK.” Evidence paper for the  Government 
Office for Science, London.  
Citifmonline.  2017. “E -Zwich Patronage Grew by 140% in 2016.” February 15.  
http://citifmonline.com/2017/02/15/e -zwich -patronage -grew-by-140-in-2016/
. 
Cirasino, Massimo, Hermnat Baijal, Jose Antonio, Garcia Garcia Luna, and Rahul Kitchlu. 
2012. “General Guidelines for  the Development of Government Payment Programs.” 
World Bank Working Paper No. 96463, World Bank, Washington, DC.  
Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and World Bank. 2015. 
“Payment Aspects of Financial Inclusion.” Consultative Report, W orld Bank, 
Washington, DC. 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/paymentsystemsremittances/brief/pafi -task-
force -and-report .  
Dener, Cem, Joanna Watkin s, and William Leslie Dorotinsky. 2011. “Financial Management 
Information Systems: 25 Years of World Bank Experience on What Works and What Doesn’t.” World Bank Study, World Bank, Washington, DC.  24 Diamond, Jack, and Pokar Khemani. 2015. “Introducing Financial Management Information 
Systems in Developing Countries.” IMF Working Paper WP/05/196, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.  
Dorotinsky, W. and J. Watkins. 2013. “Government Financial Management Information 
Systems.” The International Handbook of Public Financial Management,  edited by R. Allen, R. 
Hemming, and B. Potter. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.  
Dreze, J., N. Khalid, R. Khera and A. Somanchi. 2017.  “Aadhaar and Food Security in 
Jharkhand: Pain Without Gain?” Economic & Political Weekly. December 16. Vol. 52, 
No. 50.   
Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI). 2016. Global Standard- Setting Bodies and 
Financial Inclusion: The Evolving Landscape.  Washington, DC: CPFI. 
http://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/files/documents/GPFI_WhitePaper_Mar2016.pdf  
Government of Estonia. 2017. X -Road. Republic of Estonia Information Systems Authority 
Facts about the X -Road. Accessed on May 17, 2017. https://www.ria.ee/x -
tee/fact/#eng . 
G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI). 2016a. “G20 High -Level Principles 
on Digital Financial Inclusion.” http://www.gpfi.org/news/new -g20-high-level-
principles -digital- financial -inclusion . 
———. 2016b. “Global Standard Setting Bodies and Financial Inclusion: The Evolving 
Landscape.” Consultative Group to Assist the Poor,  Washington, DC.  
Gelb, Alan, and Caroline Decker. 2012. “Cash at Your Fingertips: Biometric Technology for 
Transfers in Developing Countries.” Review of Policy Research  29 (1): 91 -117. 
Gelb, Alan, and Julia Clark. 2013. “Identification for Development: The  Biometrics 
Revolution.” Center for Global Development Working Paper 315, Center for Global 
Development, Washington, DC.  
Gelb, Alan, and Anna Diofasi Metz. 2018. Biometric Revolution: Towards Sustainable Development 
in the Digital Age. Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.  
Gelb, A., Mukherjee, A. and Navis, K. 2018. “Digital Governance in Developing Countries: 
Beneficiary Experience and Perceptions of System Reform in Rajasthan, India: Center 
for Global Development, Working Paper 489, July.  
Gove rnment of India. 2017. “Direct Benefit Transfer.” Savings Report to the Prime 
Minister’s Office. New Delhi. https://dbtbharat.gov.in/ . 
Goodwin- Groen, Ruth (ed.). 2010. “Innovative Financial Inclusion.” Principles a nd Report 
on Innovative Financial Inclusion from the Access through Innovation Sub -Group of 
the G20 Financial Inclusion Experts Group. Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, 
Washington, DC. 
https://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/files/documents/Principles%20and%20Report%20
on%20Innovative%20Financial%20Inclusion_0.pdf . 
GSMA. 2017. GSMA Intelligence Data. Accessed on May 17,  2017. 
https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/  
Gupta, Sanjeev, Michael Keen, Alpa Shah, and Genevieve Verdier (eds). 2017. Digital 
Revolutions in Public Finance,  Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.  
Hashi m, Ali, and Moritz Piatti-  Fünfkirchen. 2016. “ A Diagnostic Framework to Assess the 
Capacity of a Government's Financial Management Information System as a Budget 25 Management Tool.” IEG Working Paper 2016/1, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25267 .  
Hashim, Ali, and Moritz Piatti-  Fünfkirchen. 2018. “ Lessons from Reforming Financial 
Management Information Systems. A Review of the Evidence.” Policy Research 
Working Paper 831 2, IEG World Bank, Washington, DC, January. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/504361516629959446/pdf/WPS8312.pdf   
IDInsight. 2017. State of Aadhaar Report.  May.  
IDInsight. 2018. State of Aadhaar Report.  May.  
IMF. 2016. “Ghana: Third Review under the Extended Credit Facility Arrangement.” 
Country Report No. 16/321, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.  
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). 2016. “Project Performance Assessment Report: 
Malawi. Financial Management, Transparency, and Accountability Project (Ida -3734a, 
Ida-37340, Tf 90947). IEG, World Bank, Washington, DC.  
Janis, William, and Reeya Shah. 2016. “Accelerators to an Inclusive Digital Pa yments 
Ecosystem.” Better Than Cash Alliance, New York.  
Khan, Abdul, and Mario Pessoa. 2010. “Conceptual Design: A Critical Element of a 
Government Financial Management Information System Project.” IMF Technical Notes 
and Manuals No. 10, International Mone tary Fund, Washington, DC.  
Klapper, Leora. 2014. The Opportunities for Digitizing Payments: How Digitalization of Payments, 
Transfers, and Remittances Contributes to the G20 Goals of Broad -Based Economic Growth, 
Financial Inclusion, and Women’s Economic Em powerment.  Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Lagarde, Christine. 2016. “Opening Remarks —IMF-CGD Event on “Financial Inclusion: 
Macroeconomic and Regulatory Challenges”, April 11, 2016.  
Lindpere, Martin. 2017. “Summary of Estonia’s Digitalization Revolution.” Rem arks at IMF 
2017 Fiscal Forum: Digital Revolutions in Public Finance, Session IV. April 22 -23, 2017. 
http://www.imf.org/en/Ne ws/Seminars/Conferences/2017/03/29/2017 -fiscal -forum -
digital- revolutions -in-public -finance  
Malik, Tariq. 2014. “Technology in the Service of Development: The NADRA Story.” 
Essay, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.  
Margetts, Helen and Andre Naum ann. 2017. “Government as a Platform: What Can Estonia 
Show the World?” Research paper, University of Oxford, Oxford.  
Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2014. “Payments 
Infrastructure and the Performance of Public Programs: Eviden ce from Biometric 
Smartcards in India.” NBER, Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, MA.  
Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD). 2016. Open Government 
Data Review of Mexico: Data Reuse for Public Sector Impact and Innovation . Paris: OECD 
Publishing.  
Overseas Development Institute (ODI). 2016. “Cash Transfers: What Does the Evidence 
Say?” ODI, London. https://www.odi.org/publications/10505 -cash-transfers -what-
does-evidence -say-rigorous- review -impacts -and-role-design -and-implementation . 
Pillai, Rashmi. 2016. “Person to Government Payments: Lessons from Tanzania’s 
Digitalization Efforts.” Case Study, Better Than Cash Alliance, New York.  
Rogoff, Kenneth S. 2016. The Curse of Cash. Princeton University Press: Prince ton. 
Sturge, Georgina. 2017. “Five Myths about Cash Transfers.” ODI: London.  26 Suri, Tavneet and William Jack. 2017. “The Long -Run Poverty and Gender Impacts of 
Mobile Money.” Science  354 (6317): 1288 -92. 
Una, Gerardo, and Carlos Pimenta. 2016. “Integrated Financial Management Information 
Systems in Latin America: Strategic Aspects and Challenges.” Chapter 7 in Public 
Financial Management in Latin America, edited by Carlos Pimenta and Mario Pessoa. 
Washington, DC: Inter -American Development Bank.  
World Bank.  2012. General Guidelines for the Development of  Government Payment 
Programs, Financial Infrastructure Series, The World Bank, Washington DC, July, 
available at 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/883951468000286016/pdf/96463 -WP-
Box391445B -PUBLIC -ADD -TOPIC -payment -systems -remittances -and-other -
related.pd f 
World Bank. 2015.  The State o f Social Safety Nets.  The World Bank, Washington DC.  
World Bank. 2017. World Development Indicators. http://data.worldbank.org/data -
catalog/world -development -indicators  
 
  27 Annex  1 
What is PFM?35 
The emergence of an analytical framework that has come to be known as PFM is a re latively 
new development. It is only since the early 1990s that the term has become of common 
usage although was often used at this time interchangeably with public expenditure 
management. A number of expenditure management handbooks were published at the end 
of the 1990s mainly by the IMF, the OECD, and the World Bank that shared certain 
distinctive features:  
• PFM was described as “a means to an end;” concerned with  how fiscal policies are 
made and implemented distinct from the what to do  questions of policy;  
• PFM was presented as being a rather heterogenous set of systems, rules, processes, 
and procedures, both formal and informal,36 anchored to the canonical annual 
budge t cycle —preparation, appropriation, execution, and validation;37  
• It was recognized that PFM is embedded in wider government institutions and intrinsically part of the political process whereby scarce financial resources are 
allocated among competing goals;
38  
• Following Campos and Pradhan (1996), PFM was understood to contribute 
to  three high -level objectives: aggregate fiscal discipline, allocative efficiency, and 
operational efficiency. This was often linked in turn to the size of expenditu re, its 
composition, and its use.  
Over the past twenty years, PFM as a discipline has broadened considerably as different communities of professionals have wrestled with particular policy challenges and how PFM 
can assist addressing them:  
• Macroeconomists have pushed to broaden the coverage of public financial 
management with the view that oversight of finances should extend to consider the 
whole public sector.  
                                                      
35 This box draws from an unpublished manuscript by Cangiano & Miller (2018).  
36 To the extent that provides a set of rules aimed at authorizing and controlling the use of public resources, PFM 
can also be seen as a governance system. Fukuyama (2013) defines governance as the “government's ability to 
make and enforce rules, and to deliver services, regardless of whether that government is democratic or not.”  
37 Definitions of budgeting have varied dependin g on whether it was analyzed from a public administration, 
public finance, or political economy perspectives.  
38 This tradition dates back to Wildavski (1964) and Schick (1998a and 2013), and was later reinforced by the 
writings of Irene Rubin (2017), among  others. Budgeting remains at its core a “set of processes and procedures 
that relate the expenditure of funds to the accomplishment of planned objectives” (Schick, 2013), or “attempts to 
allocate financial resources through political processes to serve di fferent human purposes,” to use Wildavsky’s 
words.  28 • Sector specialists interested in service delivery have looked at the role of PFM in 
context of wid er mechanisms for resource allocation and use.  
• Public administration specialists have looked beyond procedures and systems to 
study the role of organizations and especially finance ministries in managing 
government finances.  
Civil society organizations hav e leveraged the fiscal transparency agenda to foster public 
participation and social accountability as foundations of legitimate budgeting processes.  
The combined effect has been an increasing lack of clarity as to what might be included 
under PFM as well as its objectives. While the central government budget remains at the 
core of PFM, different communities of professionals have differing views on where it starts 
and stops. As the coverage and scope of PFM shift— they increasingly jar with this idea of a 
single, unified system built around the budget cycle. For instance, across the whole public 
sector, governments are also typically managing multiple financial management cycles and reporting arrangements. Different policy -making processes also do not always neatly around 
the budget. Further, there is still a distinction between core PFM, mainly concerned with the 
expenditure side of the budget, and revenue administration, human resources management, 
and even the payment system.
39 
As a result, PFM has become mu ch harder to pin down. For some, PFM continues to 
describe the familiar traditional budgeting processes within  government , but at other times 
being used to describe more broadly the  governance  of public finances.  Cangiano et al. (2013) 
refer to an umbrella  definition of PFM covering a set of systems aimed at producing 
information, processes, and rules that can help support fiscal policymaking as well as provide 
instruments for its implementation, but this would not yet be an considered a new orthodoxy. Inte grating digitalization of payments within  the PFM system would certainly fall 
under this definition and help meet stated policy objectives such as financial inclusion.  
 
 
  
                                                      
39 As argued in this paper, the payment system should be integral part of PFM.  29 References to Annex 1  
Campos, Ed, and Pradhan, Sanjay, 1996, “Budgetary Institutions  and Expenditure 
Outcomes: Binding Governments to Fiscal Performance,” Policy Research Working 
paper WPS1646, The World Bank, Washington DC.  
Cangiano, Marco and Mark Miller, 2018, “Public Financial Management. Where from? 
Where to?” Unpublished manuscript.  
Cangiano, Marco, Teresa Curristine, and Michel Lazare (editors), 2013, Public Financial 
Management and Its Emerging Architecture , IMF: Washington DC.  
Fukuyama, Francis, 2013. “What Is Governance?.” CGD Working Paper 314. Washington, 
DC: Center for Global  Development, available at: 
http://www.cgdev.org/content/publications/detail/1426906   
Rubin, Irene, 2017, The Politics of Public Budgeting, Eight Edition, SAGE.  
Schick, Allen, 2013, “Reflections on Two decades of Public Financial Management Reforms, 
in Cangiano Marco, Curristine Teresa, and Michel Lazare (Eds.), 2013.  
_____,1998, A Contemporary Approach to Public Expenditure Management, Washington 
DC, World Bank  Institute.  
Wildavsky, Aaron, 1964, Politics of the Budgetary Process  (Boston: Little, Brown & Company).  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 30 Annex 2  
The Malawi FMIS Project  
Starting in 2010, Malawi developed and implemented an FMIS covering most of the budget  
and the key core modules, including a commitment control system. A review of this World  
Bank -funded project shows how even a well -managed FMIS project may not, by itself, be  
conducive to a well -functioning PFM system (IEG, 2016).  
 
The review found that while t he FMIS was well under development, the complementary  
PFM environment, although ostensibly satisfactory, did not experience behavioral change. 
For instance, even though controls were in place, commitments continued to be processed 
outside the system; spend ing units were reported to maintain an off -FMIS registry and to 
upload funding limits on an as -needed basis. Evidence suggests that spending units 
generated local purchase orders and payment vouchers simultaneously, using pro -forma 
invoices despite directi ves to the contrary. Over time, large payment arrears accumulated, to 
an estimated 9.2 percent of GDP in 2014, and $32 million was embezzled in the so -called 
“cashgate” scandal.40   
 
Weaknesses in PFM systems, processes, and controls around the FMIS environ ment caused   
these outcomes. The review notes various technical factors that were more directly associated with the FMIS, such as weak system access controls, inadequate data capture, 
poor system performance due to erratic power supply, inadequate server c apacity, and 
unreliable connectivity. However, these factors were not crucial in explaining the outcomes. 
Rather, it was a more widespread disregard of the regulatory framework, and a breakdown of 
internal controls, that were at the root of the problems. T hese issues reflected a general lack 
of both understanding of the overall PFM architecture —and the interrelationship among its 
many components —and of focus on basic control procedures, such as bank reconciliation.  
 
The independent review of Malawi’s FMIS project provides several key lessons. Notably,  
information technology solutions should be pursued without addressing fundamental PFM challenges in parallel. In Malawi, as elsewhere, unrealistic expectations that the FMIS would 
solve all challenges created a tendency to blame FMIS when problems occurred.  
 
Even a well -designed and functioning FMIS, by itself, is not sufficient to support good PFM.   
The breakdown of the accountability chain that led to a major corruption episode in Malawi 
was chiefly the resul t of a disregard of processes rather than a technical failure of the FMIS.  
                                                      
40 https://www.futurelearn.com/cou rses/public -financial -management/0/steps/14718  