COVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  1Rapid Account Opening in a Pandemic: 
How to Meet AML/CFT Rules  
for Social Assistance Payments
Governments and funders worldwide are responding to the severe economic blow 
from the COVID-19 pandemic by delivering social assistance payments to families 
and individuals.1 Increasingly, they are turning to digital delivery for disbursements, 
which has accelerated the demand for financial services providers (FSPs) to be able to 
open formal financial accounts rapidly and with minimal or zero physical contact with 
customers. This Briefing provides guidance for those designing and deploying social 
assistance payments to help them work with financial sector regulators and implement 
social assistance payments that facilitate rapid, remote account opening in compliance 
with anti-money laundering and counter-financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) rules.
Since the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic, at least 151 countries have adopted 684 
social protection- and labor-related measures. More than half of the measures include 
social assistance payments (Gentilini, Almenfi, and Dale 2020). Social assistance payments 
can be disbursed through physical or digital channels (Figure 1). The COVID-19 pandemic 
has created an urgent need to accelerate digital delivery to minimize the spread of the 
virus through physical contact. For those who already have accounts with FSPs that 
are connected to a payments infrastructure, receiving digital government payments can 
be easy. But there are many people who still must open an account at a participating 
FSP to receive social assistance. This presents several challenges for governments to 
structure assistance in ways that achieve rapid disbursal and allow FSPs to process 
1 In this Briefing, the term “social assistance payments” refers to  financial aid distributed by governments 
and humanitarian agencies to help individuals and households pay for their basic needs.  The payments 
may be delivered in cash, digitally via direct deposit into a financial account, in the form of a bank card or 
voucher, or by other means.  The term encompasses a range of commonly used phrases, including cash 
transfers, government-to-person payments, social benefits, welfare, and social protection payments.  It 
excludes in-kind assistance such as food and clothing.Insights for Inclusive Finance
JULY 2020
COVID-19 BRIEFING2
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICaccount applications quickly and at a physical distance. Barriers to digital delivery can be 
particularly high for women who may lack documentation, have limited literacy or digital 
skills, or limited ability to travel. Yet, women frequently are the primary recipients of social 
assistance payments intended to support the health and welfare of their families.
Rapid and remote opening of financial accounts is feasible, but it requires governments 
and FSPs to navigate the sometimes-confusing web of AML/CFT rules and standards. 
This Briefing explains how social assistance payments managers in various government 
agencies—including social protection, health, education, and welfare—as well as 
nongovernmental actors can meet the AML/CFT requirements for customer due diligence 
(CDD) at both the national and the global level. 
Importantly, under AML/CFT rules, social assistance payments often can be considered 
a lower risk for money laundering and terrorist financing than other forms of account 
opening. Therefore, such accounts often qualify for a simplified CDD or even complete 
exemption. Social assistance payments with the following characteristics often have lower 
risk profiles:
• Known sender. Payments come from government (and/or a trusted international donor).
• Legitimate funds . Money laundering involves proceeds of crime, whereas social 
assistance payments are legal at origin. They may involve proceeds of crime only where, 
for example, the recipient obtained it through fraud—something social assistance 
managers actively seek to limit.
• Targeted recipient . Recipients often are targeted and have been preidentified by 
government programs. This identification can be sufficient for AML/CFT purposes.Social assistance 
payments
Physical
Cash  
deliveryOther  
channel
• eVoucher
• Prepaid card
• ATM (one-time 
password)Formal  
accountDigitalFIGURE 1.  Social assistance payments distribution channelsCOVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  3• Small amounts. As the programs are focused on poor people, payment amounts 
often are small and are therefore recognized for being proportionately at lower risk for 
money laundering.
• Simple and known use . Most people who receive social assistance payments simply 
cash out their funds and do not use their accounts for illicit transactions. Where other 
kinds of transactions are made, the accounts usually are tracked as a part of social 
assistance payments monitoring.
• Program monitoring . While FSPs monitor the accounts of recipients as part of their 
AML/CFT obligations, program managers also monitor the use patterns of accounts to 
ensure that program objectives are being achieved. This adds a further layer of oversight 
compared to that of other types of commercial accounts.
Where some or all of these characteristics are present, social assistance managers can 
take several steps to facilitate compliant, rapid, and remote account opening. However, they 
may not have the power to adopt all the measures and may need to engage with the AML/
CFT regulator. To help in this regard, this Briefing explains the constraints that regulators 
face and how they can be overcome, bearing in mind that the application of rapid, remote 
account opening always will be context specific.
This Briefing offers many country examples, and readers should always consult the original 
text of the referenced regulation. Measures implemented in one country or by one provider 
should not be automatically implemented by another country or provider without first 
appropriately analyzing the applicable law, conducting appropriate risk assessments, and 
creating a risk mitigation plan. These elements are vital to a risk-based approach to AML/CFT. 
Keep in mind that this Briefing offers guidance that should not be construed as legal advice.
Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic
There are two ways governments can facilitate remote account opening to allow more 
beneficiaries to receive their money safely and conveniently. First, design and implement 
social assistance payments in a way that makes compliance with AML/CFT requirements 
easier. Second, engage with the AML/CFT regulator if required and with industry to modify 
the requirements, either temporarily or permanently.
COMPLIANCE-FRIENDLY SOCIAL ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS
Here are some tips on how to design and implement social assistance payments to make 
compliance with AML/CFT requirements easier:
1. Share information about the beneficiaries with FSPs.  When opening an account, 
the FSP must establish who the customer is by collecting key personal data, such 
as full name, date of birth, and address, and by verifying the data against a reliable, 
independent source, such as an official ID document or database. Managers running 
social assistance programs often already have most of the data verified to their 
satisfaction. They should share the relevant, verified data with FSPs so that FSPs do 4
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICnot duplicate that work for CDD purposes. If privacy and data protection concerns 
prevent sharing the data, social assistance managers can enable FSPs to securely 
verify customer data of recipients against their own databases. 
2. Profile beneficiaries of social assistance payments.  Social assistance managers 
often know beneficiaries well; they often have information that includes beneficiary 
names, addresses, ages, income levels, sources of income, and marital status. These 
data can be used to determine the risk profile of beneficiaries for AML/CFT purposes. 
As part of their CDD obligations, FSPs must determine the money laundering and 
terrorist financing risk profile of each customer. By sharing their information with FSPs, 
social assistance managers make the FSPs’ task easier. The managers also can 
coordinate with the AML/CFT regulator and categorize beneficiaries into standardized 
risk profiles approved by the regulator, obviating the need for FSPs to conduct their 
own assessment.
3. Minimize the risk of terrorist financing.  From a money laundering perspective, 
social assistance payments pose a very low risk because the money comes from the 
government or a trusted donor. But there is a remote possibility that a beneficiary will 
use the social assistance payments to finance terrorism. While the risk may be low, 
there are ways to mitigate it. The first is to check beneficiary lists against terrorist lists, 
such as the United Nations Security Council sanctions list. Second, social assistance 
managers monitor customer transactions, especially whether they take cash out, which 
is the most common transaction. Third, when accounts are used for purchases or other 
electronic transactions, these can be followed closely if needed.
When implementing any of these measures, privacy of the beneficiaries always must be a 
priority. Regardless of whether a legal framework for privacy and data protection is in place, 
social assistance managers and FSPs should collect and use only the data required for 
social assistance and AML/CFT purposes, treat individuals’ data as sensitive, and ensure 
that data are used with beneficiaries’ consent and to their benefit. Data theft or leakage 
may undermine the integrity of the assistance and of CDD controls.
There is a good chance that, with smart design, a social assistance manager can convince 
the AML/CFT regulator to apply a proven low risk  exemption  (see Annex). Such an 
exemption would allow FSPs to open clearly defined types of accounts without applying all 
the elements of standard CDD in instances where the accounts pose a low risk of money 
laundering and terrorist financing. For instance, until recently, banks in Mexico were allowed 
to open anonymous Level 1 accounts, providing exemption from customer identification 
and verification requirements within certain limitations, including a ceiling of US$196 in 
deposits per month.COVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  5COORDINATION WITH AML/CFT REGULATOR
The AML/CFT regulator needs to understand the task of social assistance 
managers.  The objective of social assistance managers is to get money to those in 
need quickly and safely while overcoming the challenges of beneficiaries not having 
and/or struggling to open accounts. But AML/CFT regulators operate within limits. At 
the international level, these limits are determined by Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
Recommendations, the international AML/CFT standards that all countries must meet.2 At 
the national level, they often are informed by the national risk assessment  that defines 
the level of money laundering and terrorist financing risk each country faces.
Social assistance managers should ask the AML/CFT regulator about the risk assessment. 
If it is still under development or it is outdated, the manager should suggest running a 
more limited and urgent exercise focused on the social assistance payments that are 
being considered. This exercise should involve the social assistance managers; the AML/
CFT regulator; and other financial sector regulators, law enforcement agencies, and FSP 
representatives. With such a risk assessment, social assistance managers can push for 
appropriate responses, including (i) tier-based, simplified CDD; (ii) authorization of digital 
identification; and (iii) assistance to FSPs.
TIER-BASED SIMPLIFIED CDD
Simplified CDD may take different forms and shapes in different countries, reflecting the 
identified risks and available infrastructure (see Box 1). For FSPs, implementing a simplified 
CDD regime is a complex process that takes time. To make it easier and quicker, social 
assistance managers should convince the AML/CFT regulator to adopt a tier-based CDD 
model that spells out the tiers and control measures for FSPs (see Table 1; for explanation 
of the concept see Annex). Why does it help? Because it largely lifts the burden of individual 
risk assessment and risk control design from FSPs.
2 FATF has recently issued a statement on COVID-19 urging countries to use digital identification, fintech, 
regtech, and suptech to the fullest extent possible to facilitate implementation of AML/CFT requirements 
(see FATF 2020c). The statement was later complemented with FATF (2020a).6
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICBOX 1.   Simplified CDD in response to COVID-19
Ukraine. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
National Bank of Ukraine has waived the requirement 
of physical presence to open bank accounts. The 
new AML/CFT law, enforced as of 28 April 2020, 
allows banks to conduct identification and verification 
remotely. The following verification procedures can be 
used by the banks: 
• “Full-fledged” verification and identification not 
subject to limits, such as using bank identification 
and qualified e-signature and using video 
identification.
• “Simplified” verification and identification, such 
as using bank identification, using qualified 
e-signatures, making payment from the account 
opened in a client’s name, reading of the electronic 
chip on a biometric passport/ID card using a mobile 
phone near-field communication module, verification 
of data via credit bureau, and confirmation of mobile 
phone number via one-time password. 
The following limits apply for simplified procedures: 
total payments shall not exceed US$1,470 per month, 
US$14,700 per year, and a maximum balance of 
US$1,470. Limits are calculated per all accounts 
opened in a specific bank.
The Philippines.  On 1 April 2020, the Central Bank 
of the Philippines eased the requirement for the 
presentation of a valid ID document for customer 
onboarding and transactions during the period of 
enhanced community quarantine and until 30 June 
2020. The measure has been adopted with the 
objective to facilitate the delivery of welfare funds 
to identified beneficiaries who have no valid ID documentation or transactional account with any 
FSP. The central bank relaxed the CDD requirements 
because the accounts involved are considered low 
risk. The relaxed CDD requirements apply to both 
over-the-counter transactions and electronic or 
online transactions. The central bank introduced 
control measures to guard against money laundering 
and terrorism financing risks: (i) the transactions in 
the account shall not exceed US$985 per day, (ii) 
qualified customers are those who reside or conduct 
business in the area that has been declared to be 
under enhanced community quarantine or community 
quarantine, (iii) customers are required to certify that 
they have no valid identification, and (iv) customer 
account activities shall be subject to ongoing 
monitoring. FSPs are expected to obtain the required 
minimum information from the customer and perform 
risk-based CDD measures.
Ghana.  All mobile phone subscribers have been 
permitted to use their mobile phone registration 
details to be onboarded for minimum know-your-
customer accounts.a
WAEMU.  E-money issuers in WAEMU have been 
authorized to activate mobile money accounts on 
the basis of data from mobile network operators, 
subject to collecting by any means the agreement 
of the customer and to performing the due diligence 
related to the remote identification, within the limits of 
regulatory ceilings, for a period of three months. After 
three months, the customer will have to be identified 
according to the regulatory requirements.b
a “AFI COVID-19 Policy Response,” AFI, https://www.afi-global.org/afi-covid-19-policy-response .
b BCEAO’s 1 April 2020 Communique, Section 7, https://www.bceao.int/fr/communique-presse/communique-relatif-aux-mesures-de-
promotion-des-paiements-electroniques-dans-le .COVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  7TABLE 1.  Examples from countries with tiered CDD requirements
CDD requirements Limits
PakistanaTiered CDD for branchless banking: Level 0 and Level 1 
for individuals; Level 2 for individuals and companies.
• Level 0: Formerly based on identification with photo 
or fingerprint scan, but all accounts now require bio -
metrically verified SIM card.
• Level 1: Same as Level 0, plus verify phone number 
or verify with NADRA if biometrics used.
• Level 2: Must open account at bank branch with 
full CDD; customer profile created before account 
opening.
• Levels 0–1: Reduced ongoing monitoring and up -
dates.
• Levels 0 and 1: Accounts may be opened digitally 
(remotely), with delayed verification allowed. Limited 
deposits and withdrawals allowed during account 
opening.Transaction limits
• Level 0 (lowest): US$156 per day, US$250 per month, 
US$1,251 per year; maximum balance: US$1,251
• Level 1: US$313 per day, US$500 per month, 
US$5,003 per year; maximum balance: US$2,502
• Level 2 (highest): No limits
TunisiabTiered CDD for payment services providers (PSP), 
including e-money issuers.
• Level 1: Domestic mobile phone number, valid official 
identification (domestic or foreign) with photo. 
• Level 2: Level 1 information plus create ID record with 
names, birth date, ID number, address, and company 
info, if applicable.
• Level 3: Level 2 info, plus tax ID number and finan -
cials for company. 
• Level 1 and 2 accounts may be opened (i) at an 
agent or (ii) without physical presence of client (re -
motely, not via agent) where ID documents and data 
can be transferred by secure digital channel. 
• Only one account per client.
• Quantitative account limits do not apply to PSP agent 
accounts.• Level 1 account (lowest) limits: Transactions per day: 
US$80; maximum balance: US$160
• Level 3 account limits: Transactions per day: US$320; 
maximum balance: US$1,600 
Mexico Tiered approach for banks 
• Level 1: Before March 2019, it was an anonymous 
account. After that date, banks must collect full name 
and date of birth, but no verification is required.
• Level 2: Basic customer information to be collected 
(full name, date of birth, address). The requirement of 
in-person interview with the customer is lifted if his/
her data are verified online. Address verification is not 
required. In this case, additional data (i.e., gender and 
place of birth) are required.
• Level 3: Level 2 information plus additional informa -
tion such as nationality, occupation, phone number, 
email (no hard copies required).
• Level 4: Full CDD.
• Level 1 and Level 2 accounts only for individuals.
• Remote account opening is allowed for all levels. 
Level 3 and Level 4 customers can make remote 
interviews for account opening.• Level 1: Maximum deposits per month: US$196; maxi -
mum balance: US$261
• Level 2: Maximum deposits per month: US$783; in the 
case of government support funds, the previous limit 
is US$1,567
• Level 3: Monthly transactions: US$2,613
• Level 4: No limit. If remote interview used for account 
opening, maximum deposits per month: US$7,833
a. State Bank of Pakistan, 2016; Meagher, 2019.
b. Meagher, 2019.8
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICAUTHORIZATION OF DIGITAL IDENTIFICATION FOR SIMPLIFIED CDD
Remote account opening is easier when there is a digital ID system. If there is a digital  
ID system, convince the AML/CFT regulator to authorize FSPs to use it for simplified  
CDD purposes.3
3 For more information on the use of digital IDs for AML/CFT purposes, see Annex.BOX 2.   Examples of authorized digital ID systems
Singapore’s MyInfo platform.  The Singaporean 
government is developing a digital ID service stack 
for residents and businesses. MyInfo is the trusted ID 
data service of the National Digital Identity program. 
It includes government-verified data from various 
government agencies and contains more than 100 
personal data items. It provides citizens and residents 
access to and control over the sharing of their data. 
Users are able to autofill their government-verified 
personal information on public and private sector 
e-services via a reliable and independent channel upon 
the individual’s consent.
As of March 2020, more than 60 FSPs in Singapore 
leveraged MyInfo for over 220 digital services to 
onboard and perform CDD on customers. Consent 
of customers is sought before any personal data on 
MyInfo profiles are retrieved by FSPs. The Monetary 
Authority of Singapore (MAS) has issued guidance 
called “Use of MyInfo and CDD Measures for Non 
Face-to-Face Business Relations” (AMLD 01/2018). 
Where MyInfo is used, FSPs will not be required to 
obtain physical documents to verify a customer’s 
identity and also will not be expected to separately 
obtain a photograph of the customer. MAS has 
clarified that it considers MyInfo to be a “reliable and independent source”  for the purposes of verifying 
the customer’s name, unique ID number, date of birth, 
nationality, and residential address. FSPs are required 
to maintain proper data records, including data 
obtained from MyInfo, in accordance with regulatory 
requirements in Singapore.
Pakistan’s biometric-based digital ID system.  
Pakistan’s biometric-based national digital ID system 
developed and managed by the National Database 
and Registration Authority (NADRA) has been used 
for more than 10 years to support account opening 
by poor people. According to NADRA, Pakistan’s 
Computerized National Identity Card (CNIC)—a smart 
card that stores demographic and biometric data of a 
citizen and has a unique 13-digit ID number—covers 
nearly 100 percent of the adult population.a CNIC can 
be issued to citizens of Pakistan who are 18 years of 
age or older. NADRA data are used for ID verification 
of individuals relating to both bank account opening 
and mandatory mobile SIM card registration. NADRA 
provides an online verification system where, for a fee, 
FSPs can verify the identity of a customer. Where a 
user holds a SIM card that is already verified, an FSP 
may remotely open a basic account for that person 
(SBP 2016).b
a. Other estimates put the coverage at 79 percent (Global Findex Database, World Bank, 2017, https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/ ).
b. For details of Pakistan’s tiered approach to CDD, see Table 1.
Source: FATF Guidance on Digital Identity, 2020, https://www.fatf-gafi.org/publications/fatfrecommendations/documents/digital-identity-
guidance.html , and Lyman, de Koker, Martin Meier, and Kerse (2019). COVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  9ASSISTANCE TO FSPS
AML/CFT measures are implemented by each FSP individually. FSPs tend to be risk averse 
to avoid fines (de Koker and Symington 2011). The AML/CFT regulator can ease FSP 
concerns that they will violate standards by:
• Providing appropriate information and guidance on how they can benefit from the 
simplified CDD framework in the country.
• Issuing no-objection letters relating to contactless onboarding models.
• Providing access to government data that may inform FSP risk management, including 
ID verification as well as fraud and other crime data and information.
• Facilitating industry collaboration on simplified CDD (Lyman, de Koker, Martin Meier, 
and Kerse 2019)—for example, help FSPs and mobile network operators enable FSPs 
to improve customer data quality where this may be facilitated by data collected during 
SIM card registration processes, clarify respective roles and responsibilities, promote 
collaboration to improve customer data where required, and joint investigation of 
suspected identity fraud.
• Supporting a noncompetitive, simplified CDD compliance and risk management discussion 
among participating FSPs to share information, experiences, and emerging practices.
Long-term view on emergency measures
While many are focusing on facilitating social assistance payments for pandemic-related 
relief programs in the short term, it is important to consider long-term implications, 
including the following:
• Will FSPs have customers who were subject to the COVID-19 simplified CDD measures 
and other customers, with similar profiles, who were not? If so, how will they distinguish 
between the two groups? 
• If the simplified measures are only temporary, how will customers be identified in the 
future to regularize their CDD requirements (e.g., by submitting ID verification data or 
documents)? What will FSPs do when customers are not able to verify their identities? 
Will their accounts be frozen? If so, will they lose access to monies in those accounts?
• How will FSPs spot identity fraud? 
Identity fraud can be addressed through strengthened customer profiling—by collecting 
data on where a customer lives; how they normally earn a living; whether they operate 
a business and what type of business it is (Isern and de Koker 2009); their estimated 
weekly expenses pre- and post-COVID-19; and whether they regularly receive and send 
remittances, and from/to whom. These data will help FSPs spot fabricated and synthetic 
identities as well as fraud related to money laundering and terrorist financing. Profiling must 
be subject to adequate privacy and data protection rules. If FSPs have limited information 
on customers and their identities, their monitoring is less effective. 10
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICBOX 3.   Examples of regulatory assistance to FSPs
Australia.  Australia’s AML/CFT regulator, AUSTRAC, 
issued guidance on 1 April 2020 on how FSPs could 
comply with customer identification and verification 
requirements during the COVID-19 pandemic.a 
AUSTRAC also amended its AML/CTF rules temporarily 
to provide further flexibility in cases where COVID-19 
measures made it impossible to follow standard ID 
proofing processes. The guidance leverages AUSTRAC 
guidance on identifying customers who do not have 
conventional forms of identification, most recently 
amended on 28 May 2020. AUSTRAC’s guidance 
provides practical examples of how FSPs might apply a 
flexible, risk-based ID proofing process by:
• Using alternative proof-of-ID processes (including 
video calls and selfies).
• Using electronic copies (scans or photographs) 
of reliable and independent documentation, in 
accordance with their AML/CFT program, to verify 
the identity of individual customers or companies.
• Relying on disclosure certificates to verify certain 
types of information about customers who are 
not individuals, where measures put in place by 
industry as part of its response to the COVID-
19 pandemic mean that such information is not 
otherwise reasonably available from other sources.
New Zealand.  The Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 
Financial Markets Authority and Department of Internal 
Affairs, published guidance for FSPs on conducting 
CDD during COVID-19 (FMA 2020). The guidance 
also reminds FSPs that they can apply a risk-based 
approach in line with the AML/CFT Act. The guidance 
includes the following:
• A new business relationship with a customer could 
be established if verification is completed as soon 
as practicable after COVID-19 alert levels have been 
lifted. FSPs need to consider how to effectively manage risks associated with money laundering 
and financing of terrorism during this time.
• FSPs that are continuing to operate and establish new 
business relationships would implement transaction 
limitations—limited transfers or withdrawals—until 
verification requirements were completed.
• For current customers, FSPs have the discretion to 
not necessarily view certain documents in certain 
circumstances, depending on the FSP’s risk 
assessment. FSPs can accept scanned copies of 
documents as an interim measure, with the originals 
to be viewed at a reasonable later time (i.e., upon 
lifting of alert levels).
Hong Kong.  In a recent guidance, the Hong Kong 
Monetary Authority (HKMA) states that where FSPs 
identify lower money laundering and terrorist financing 
risks, AML/CFT regulations allow adoption of simplified 
CDD measures.b Also, FSPs are encouraged to 
continue to work closely with HKMA to provide greater 
convenience for account opening and continued access, 
physically and digitally, to essential banking services to 
the public during the pandemic. HKMA also supports 
public–private partnership in the sharing of information 
and typologies to help prioritize and address key money 
laundering and terrorist financing risks, particularly those 
related to fraud linked to COVID-19. In addition, HKMA 
emphasizes that it is using its supervisory tools flexibly 
during this period and reiterates that its risk-based 
approach to AML/CFT supervision does not require or 
expect a “zero-failure” outcome.
United Kingdom.  The United Kingdom’s Financial 
Conduct Authority issued a guidance on 31 March 
2020 for firms providing services to retail investors for 
customer verification.c The guidance emphasizes that 
AML/CFT regulations already provide for customer 
ID verification to be carried out remotely and give 
Continued on the next page.COVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  11There also are broader concerns that go beyond the scope of AML/CFT rules. Opening and 
funding accounts is pointless unless recipients can withdraw money or use the account in 
cashless transactions (Hernandez and Kim 2020). Opening new accounts may facilitate social 
assistance payments, but to have a lasting impact on financial inclusion, these accounts 
need to bring long-term value to customers. This may mean giving recipients the freedom of 
choice to select an account provider that addresses their needs best (Baur-Yazbeck, Chen, 
and Roest 2019). This also means that policy makers (and FSPs) should avoid temptations to 
unnecessarily restrict account use. Restrictions may limit risks but have deleterious effects on 
customers’ long-term trust in the financial system and deepening of financial inclusion. 
Importantly, CDD requirements often are a barrier to account ownership for women,  
as women may lack the necessary documentation ranging from ID documents, proof of 
residence, to proof of income for opening bank accounts. For example, a study in Côte d’Ivoire 
found that women are more likely to use SIM cards registered in the names of others (Caribou 
Digital 2020). Another study shows that in the Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea, young 
women are expected to stay close to home and women with families have more duties around 
the home, so they have less time to travel to banks and agents (Payne 2020). In the Solomon 
Islands, women reported having to travel 4–5 hours to the nearest bank branch and one-and-
a-half hours to the nearest bank agent. Thus, efforts to facilitate remote account opening 
should consider women’s documentation, mobility, and comfort and familiarity with digital 
tools. These efforts also need to address unique privacy concerns women may face, including 
potential harassment by FSPs agents or financial abuse by those close to them.indications of appropriate safeguards and additional 
checks firms can use to assist with verification. It 
states that such firms can, for example:
• Accept scanned documentation sent by e-mail, 
preferably as a PDF.
• Ask customers to submit selfies or videos.
• Use commercial providers who triangulate data 
sources to verify documentation provided.
• Gather and analyze additional data to triangulate the evidence provided by the customer, such as 
geolocation, IP addresses, and verifiable phone 
numbers.
• Verify phone numbers, e-mails, and/or physical 
addresses by sending codes to the customer’s 
address to validate access to accounts. 
• Seek additional verification once restrictions on 
movement are lifted for the relevant customer group.
a. “How to Comply with KYC Requirements during the COVID-19 Pandemic,” AUSTRAC, https://www.austrac.gov.au/business/how-
comply-and-report-guidance-and-resources/customer-identification-and-verification/kyc-requirements-covid-19 .
b. “Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Measures,” letter by 
Carmen Chu, executive director (Enforcement and AML), Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 7 April 2020, https://www.hkma.gov.hk/
media/eng/doc/key-information/guidelines-and-circular/2020/20200407e1.pdf .
c. “Dear CEO Letter to firms providing services to retail investors about coronavirus (Covid-19),” letter by Christopher Woolard, interim 
chief executive, Financial Conduct Authority, 31 March 2020, https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/correspondence/dear-ceo-letter-
coronavirus-update-firms-providing-services-retail-investors.pdf .BOX 3.   Examples of regulatory assistance to FSPs (continued)12
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICANNEX: AML/CFT Rules Explained
Customer due diligence
The main purpose of AML/CFT requirements is to protect the financial system against abuse 
by criminals and terrorists. In setting the requirements, countries are bound by international 
standards set by FATF (2012–2019). Failure to comply with the standards introduces risks that 
may compromise market integrity and lead the international community to adopt measures 
that may negatively affect the economy of the noncompliant country.
In relation to social assistance payments, the most important rules relate to CDD measures. 
When opening a new account and managing it, an FSP must conduct CDD measures (see 
Table A-1). The main purpose of these measures is to reliably identify customers and ensure 
that they are not using the account for illicit activity.
TABLE A-1.  Customer due diligence process
CDD measures Actions Social assistance payments context
Identify the 
customer and 
verify their 
identity (ID 
proofing)Establish who the customer is by collecting key per -
sonal data (e.g., full name, date of birth, address) and 
verifying veracity of the information against a reliable, 
independent source (e.g., an official ID document or 
data). This process is often referred to as know your 
customer.Social assistance managers can use databases estab -
lished for their national programs with information about 
beneficiaries to facilitate identification and verification.
Identify the 
beneficial ownerAn account can be opened on behalf of or for the 
benefit of a third person (e.g., where a family member 
is opening an account for an elderly relative), whose 
identity must be known to the FSP .This is not a major concern for social assistance 
payments as beneficiaries are known. Most programs 
target either a household unit or an individual. In the 
latter case, usually programs require an account in that 
person’s name but might allow a “caretaker” to collect 
payment on behalf of an elderly person.
Define custom -
er’s risk profileCollect information to understand the purpose and in -
tended nature of the business relationship and to create 
a risk profile of the customer. This includes checking 
customers and beneficial owners against sanctions 
and blacklists and determining whether the customer 
is a “politically exposed person” (e.g., senior politicians, 
senior civil servants, and their relatives who may be 
vulnerable to corruption).The origin of funds is not in question, and recipients 
generally are targeted for being disadvantaged in some 
way and left out of the power system. At the same 
time, the risk of leakages (fraud, corruption) and abuse 
of funds (terrorist financing) must be addressed. Social 
assistance managers often have sufficient data on 
recipients to facilitate such risk profiling by FSPs.
Monitor 
customer’s 
activitiesMonitor transactions and report suspicious and unusual 
activity to a national financial intelligence unit (e.g., a 
transaction that does not correspond to the customer’s 
risk profile and may indicate criminal activity).Despite continuous digitalization, a large share of social 
assistance payments is simply withdrawn as cash.
Source: Lyman, de Koker, Martin Meier, and Kerse, 2019.
Note: For more details, see Recommendation 10 of FATF Recommendations: International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the 
Financing of Terrorism and Proliferation (2012 and subsequently updated), http://www.fatf-gafi.org/publications/fatfrecommendations/documents/
fatf-recommendations.html .COVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  13Risk-based approach
Rigid customer identification and verification regulations have long had a negative impact on 
financial inclusion of poor people who lack proof of official identity (Isern and de Koker 2009). 
Since 2012, FATF standards require countries to adopt a risk-based approach. In terms of this 
AML/CFT approach, regulation and CDD measures must be adjusted to mitigate the nature 
and assessed level of money laundering and terrorist financing risk. Where the risk of abuse is 
low, less stringent CDD requirements may be allowed (Meagher 2019).
Implementing a risk-based approach requires countries and FSPs to understand the risks 
based on money laundering and terrorist financing risk assessments . The World 
Bank, for instance, has developed the World Bank National Risk Assessment tool to support 
country risk assessments.4 Depending on the level of risks identified, policy makers have two 
options to simplify CDD requirements: (i) by adopting an exemption based on proven low 
risk or (ii) by allowing FSPs to simplify CDD measures in relation to products, channels, 
and customers that pose a lower money 
laundering and terrorist financing risk.
Proven low risk exemption . In line with FATF 
standards, where there is proven low money 
laundering and terrorist financing risk emerging 
from government assessments, exemptions 
from AML/CFT regulation, whether in full or 
partial, may be created in strictly limited and 
justified circumstances and with regard to a 
particular type of FSP or activity. Countries 
should make clear the conditions for and 
potential beneficiaries of the exemptions.
Simplified CDD . CDD measures are 
risk-control measures. Countries may allow 
FSPs to simplify these controls where the 
risks are lower. Which elements to simplify, 
to what extent, and how to counter-balance 
them depend on the risk assessment and 
the controls required to limit the risk. In some 
cases, it may be appropriate to simplify the verification of the identity of a customer based on 
the FSP’s risk assessment. However, having a lower money laundering and terrorist financing 
risk for customer identification and verification does not automatically mean that the same 
customer poses a lower risk for other CDD measures including monitoring of customer 
activities. Monitoring might need to remain at the standard level to check that the transactions 
in the account remain within the risk-based thresholds and in line with the customer’s risk 
profile. Or monitoring might need to be tightened to mitigate the inherent risks of the products 
and services and to compensate for the relaxed initial due diligence checks.
4 “Risk Assessment Support for Money Laundering/Terrorist Financing,” World Bank, 29 February 2016, 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialsector/brief/antimoney-laundering-and-combating-the-
financing-of-terrorism-risk-assessment-support . BOX A-1.   Example on monitoring customer’s 
activities
Fiji issued guidelines that enabled FSPs to rely 
on birth certificates and a letter from a “suitable 
referee” to verify the identity of customers who do 
not have sufficient formal ID documents (FIJIFIU 
2009). Fiji considered the risk that use of referee 
certificates could be abused by members of the 
public due to the ease with which these could be 
obtained. To mitigate this risk, FSPs were advised 
by the Fiji Financial Intelligence Unit to specifically 
monitor customer accounts and transactions for 
unusual transactions or pattern of transactions 
when account opening relied on a referee 
certificate (FIJIFIU 2007; FATF 2013–2017).14
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICIn other cases, ID verification may be 
conducted within a prescribed time 
frame or postponed until the customer’s 
transaction amounts cross a specified 
monetary level.
Such simplification of ID verification may 
be of particular benefit to customers 
who are poor, underserved, without ID 
documents or data required to meet the 
standard verification processes, and 
cannot travel to a branch for in-person 
verification. The level of risk can be actively 
lowered through product design. In many cases, FSPs have designed products with built-in 
restrictions to keep money laundering and terrorist financing risks low. Such restrictions may 
be voluntary or required by regulation and may include (i) transaction limits (allowing only small-
amount, low-risk transactions), (ii) customer limits (allowing only individuals to open accounts), 
and (iii) function limitations (not allowing cross-border transactions).
To make things easier, regulators may adopt a tier-based approach  to CDD, defining tiers 
of products whose complexity increases with the complexity of CDD steps undertaken. 
Often, there are three tiers or types of accounts (Meagher 2019): 
• Basic.  Minimal opening requirements and transaction limits.
• Medium.  Higher ceilings and requirements but less than full CDD.
• Full CDD.  Higher limits, sometimes including special accounts for businesses (e.g., 
agents and merchants) with much higher ceilings than individual accounts and more 
rigorous procedures for account opening.
Remote account opening
Traditionally, customers were identified in person. They presented ID documents that were 
inspected and recorded to verify their identities. AML/CFT authorities have been concerned 
about identity fraud risks where remote or contactless ID proofing took place, for example, 
where the customer could photograph his or her ID document and send the photograph to 
the FSP without any contact with bank staff or agents. The development of trustworthy digital 
identities has ushered in a new approach.
To determine whether the use of a digital ID system is consistent with customer identification 
and verification and ongoing monitoring requirements, government authorities and FSPs should 
(i) determine reliability/independence of the digital ID system based on the assurance levels 
determined by its technology, architecture, and governance and (ii) analyze whether the digital ID 
system, given the assurance level, is appropriate for use in ID proofing and other CDD elements.5
5 “Assurance level” refers to the level of trustworthiness or confidence in the reliability of each component 
(e.g., identity proofing and enrollment, authentication) of the digital ID process.BOX A-2.   Example on delayed verification
Brazil  permits simplification of some elements of 
CDD for “special” or basic banking accounts, subject 
to quantitative limits (e.g., balance limit of US$750). 
Customer identification and verification can be based 
on information provided by government programs or 
on provisional identification using the social insurance 
number—with a delay of up to six months to complete 
customer identification and verification (Meagher 2019).COVID-19 BRIEFING   |  July 2020  15To encourage use of digital identification, FATF has issued guidance on the adoption of 
digital identity for CDD purposes (FATF 2020b). It broadened the use of digital ID solutions 
that provide different levels of ID proofing 
reliability. A digital identity providing a 
sufficient but lower assurance that identified 
persons are who they claim to be, for 
example, can be considered as an element 
of simplified CDD to provide access to a 
lower risk product. Importantly, FATF stated 
that non-face-to-face customer identification 
and transactions that depend on reliable, 
independent digital ID systems with 
appropriate risk mitigation measures in place 
may present a standard, or even lower level 
of risk. 
FATF’s decision process helps FSPs decide 
whether the use of a specific digital identity 
is appropriate for customer identification 
and verification and ongoing monitoring 
(FATF 2020b): 
• If the government has authorized the use 
of a specific digital ID system for CDD 
purposes, an FSP can use such digital ID 
system without performing its own level 
of assurance assessment.
• If the government has assigned assurance 
providers, an FSP should use its services 
to determine the level of assurance 
provided by a system and match it for 
CDD purposes to the money laundering 
and terrorist financing risks of its accounts 
and products.
• Where the government has not 
authorized the use of specific digital ID 
systems for CDD or assigned assurance 
providers, an FSP must undertake the 
assurance assessment itself and match 
the level of assurance to the money 
laundering and terrorist financing risks of 
its accounts and products.BOX A-3.   India’s digital ID program: Aadhaar
India’s Aadhaar ID program uses several biometrics, 
such as fingerprint and iris scan and biographic 
information, as well as official ID documentation 
where it is available, to provide a digital identity to 
all residents. The Unique Identification Authority of 
India (UIDAI) Aadhaar enrollment process has flexible 
ID evidence requirements to ensure comprehensive 
coverage in a jurisdiction where many people lack 
basic ID documents and that relies on biometrics to 
establish the uniqueness of individuals. Enrollment 
must be in person but is conducted at authorized 
registrars throughout the country, using software 
and biometric capture and other equipment 
prescribed by UIDAI. 
UIDAI accepts many different types of ID documents 
to verify core attributes at enrollment: 32 types of ID 
documents containing name and photo (AADHAAR 
2020), 14 proof-of-relationship documents, 10 
date-of-birth documents, and 45 proof-of-address 
documents. If an individual does not have any of 
the “notified” ID documents, the individual can 
enroll in Aadhaar if a family entitlement document 
includes his or her name and the head of family in 
the entitlement document enrolls in Aadhaar, using 
required proof-of-identity and proof-of-address 
documents and introduces the family member while 
he or she is enrolling. Where no proof-of-relationship 
or other required documents are available, a resident 
may use “introducers” or “certifiers”—individuals 
notified by the registrar or regional UIDAI office and 
who are available at the enrollment center. 
Use of Aadhaar for CDD is strictly voluntary and 
must be based on the customer’s informed consent. 
Regulated entities may verify the identity of their 
customers by (i) authentication or offline verification 
of Aadhaar, (ii) passport, or (iii) any other documents 
notified by the central government.
Source: FATF, 2020b.16
RAPID ACCOUNT OPENING IN A PANDEMICReferences
Aadhaar. 2020. “List of Acceptable Supporting Documents for 
Verification.” 9 May. https://uidai.gov.in/images/commdoc/valid_
documents_list.pdf
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 2020. “BSP Relaxes KYC Requirements to 
Facilitate Access to Financial Services.” Media Release, 1 April. http://
www.bsp.gov.ph/publications/media.asp?id=5342
Baur-Yazbeck, Silvia, Gregory Chen, and Joep Roest. 2019. “The 
Future of G2P Payments: Expanding Customer Choice.” Washington, 
D.C.: CGAP. https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/future-g2p-
payments-expanding-customer-choice  
BCEAO. 2020. “Communiqué relatif aux mesures de promotion 
des paiements électroniques dans le contexte de la lutte contre la 
propagation du Covid-19.” Media Release, 1 April.  https://www.bceao.
int/fr/communique-presse/communique-relatif-aux-mesures-de-
promotion-des-paiements-electroniques-dans-le
Caribou Digital. 2020. “Which DFS Features Matter More to Women 
Than Men? Experiences from Côte d’Ivoire and Kenya.” Blog post, 
6 March. https://medium.com/caribou-digital/which-dfs-features-
matter-more-to-women-than-men-3a21765b2236  
de Koker, Louis, and John Symington. 2011. “Conservative Corporate 
Compliance: Reflections on a Study of Compliance Responses by 
South African Banks.” Law in Context , 30: 228–54, 2014. https://ssrn.
com/abstract=3562092
FATF (Financial Action Task Force). 2012–2019. “International 
Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Financing of 
Terrorism & Proliferation.” Paris, France: FATF. www.fatf-gafi.org/
recommendations.html
———. 2013–2017. “Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing 
Measures and Financial Inclusion—With a Supplement on Customer 
Due Diligence.” Paris, France: FATF. www.fatf-gafi.org/publications/
financialinclusion/documents/financial-inclusion-cdd-2017.html
———. 2020a. “COVID-19-Related Money Laundering and Terrorist 
Financing–Risks and Policy Responses.” Paris, France: FATF. https://
www.fatf-gafi.org/publications/fatfgeneral/documents/covid-19-ml-tf.html
———. 2020b. “Guidance on Digital Identity.” Paris, France: FATF. 
https://www.fatf-gafi.org/publications/fatfrecommendations/
documents/digital-identity-guidance.html  
———. 2020c. “Statement by the FATF President: COVID-19 and 
Measures to Combat Illicit Financing.” Paris: FATF, 1 April. https://www.
fatf-gafi.org/publications/fatfgeneral/documents/statement-covid-19.html
FIJIFIU (Fiji Financial Intelligence Unit). 2007. “Advisory: Financial 
Transactions Reporting Act.” https://www.fijifiu.gov.fj/getattachment/
Pages/Guidelines-and-Policy-Advisories/Policies-advisories-on-the-
FTR-Act/Advisory-2_2007-CDD-of-Customers-Who-Have-Insufficient-
or-No-Official-Identification-Documents-(1).pdf.aspx
———. 2009. “Guideline 4: Financial Transactions Reporting Act.” 
https://www.fijifiu.gov.fj/getattachment/Pages/Guidelines-and-
Policy-Advisories/Guidelines/Guideline-4_Customer-Due-Diligence-
Aug-2009.pdf.aspx  
FMA (Financial Markets Authority). 2020. “Guidance: Complying with 
AML/CFT Verification Requirements during COVID-19 Alert Levels.” 26 
March. https://www.fma.govt.nz/assets/Guidance/AMLCFT-Supervisor-
Guidance-COVID-19-Alert-26-March-2020.pdfGentilini, Ugo, Mohamed Almenfi, and Pamela Dale. 2020. “Social 
Protection and Jobs Responses to COVID-19: A Real-Time Review of 
Country Measures.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank. http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/383541588017733025/pdf/Social-
Protection-and-Jobs-Responses-to-COVID-19-A-Real-Time-Review-
of-Country-Measures-April-24-2020.pdf  
Hanmer, Lucia, and Marina Elefante. 2019. “Achieving Universal 
Access to ID: Gender-Based Legal Barriers Against Women and Good 
Practice Reforms.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank. http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/606011569301719515/pdf/Achieving-
Universal-Access-to-ID-Gender-based-Legal-Barriers-Against-
Women-and-Good-Practice-Reforms.pdf  
Hernandez, Emilio, and Dave Kim. 2020. “Agent Networks: Vital to 
COVID-19 Response, in Need of Support.” CGAP blog post, 27 April. 
https://www.cgap.org/blog/agent-networks-vital-covid-19-response-
need-support  
Isern, Jennifer, and Louis de Koker. 2009. AML/CFT: Strengthening 
Financial Inclusion and Integrity. Focus Note 56. Washington 
D.C.: CGAP. https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/amlcft-
strengthening-financial-inclusion-and-integrity
Kazzaz, Zachary. 2020. “Emergency Disbursements During COVID-
19: Regulatory Tools for Rapid Account Opening and Oversight.” 
Washington, D.C.: Glenbrook Partners, LLC. https://www.
findevgateway.org/paper/2020/07/emergency-disbursements-during-
covid-19-regulatory-tools-rapid-account-opening-and
Lyman, Timothy, Louis de Koker, Chrissy Martin Meier, and Mehmet 
Kerse. 2019. “Beyond KYC Utilities: Collaborative Customer Due 
Diligence for Financial Inclusion.” Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: 
CG AP. https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/beyond-kyc-utilities-
collaborative-customer-due-diligence
Meagher, Patrick. 2019. “Risk-Based Customer Due Diligence: 
Regulatory Approaches.” Technical Note. Washington D.C.: CGAP. 
https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/risk-based-customer-
due-diligence-regulatory-approaches  
Payne, Rose. 2020. “Five Reasons Women in Solomon Islands 
and Papua New Guinea Are Financially Excluded.” Pacific Financial 
Inclusion Programme blog post, 5 June. http://www.pfip.org/
five-reasons-women-in-solomon-islands-and-papua-new-guinea-are-
financially-excluded/
State Bank of Pakistan. 2016. “Branchless Banking Regulations.” 
http://www.sbp.org.pk/bprd/2016/C9-Annx-A.pdf
The authors of this Briefing are Ivo Jenik, Mehmet 
Kerse, and Louis de Koker of CGAP. The authors 
thank Gregory Chen, CGAP, for overall guidance. 
Thanks also go to Robert J. Palacios, World Bank 
Group, and Stefan Staschen and Silvia Baur-
Yazbeck, of CGAP, for their insightful reviews. 
Joep Roest and Yasmin Bin-Humam provided 
valuable insights.