 
1 
 
Trade and COVID -19 Guidance Note  
RECOMMENDATIONS TO LEVERAGE E-COMMERCE  
DURING THE COVID -19 CRISIS   
 Christoph Ungerer , Alberto Portugal , Martin Molinuevo  and Natasha Rovo1 
May 12 , 2020  
KEY MESSAGES  
• In the fight against COVID -19, economic activities that require close physical contact have been 
severely restricted. In this context, e -commerce – defined broadly as the sale of goods or services 
online - is emerging as a major pillar in the COVID -19 crisis . E-commerce can help further  reduce 
the risk of new infections  by minimizing face to face interactions . It can help preserve jobs during the 
crisis. And it can help increase the acceptance of prolonged physical distancing measures among 
the population.  
• Public policy can only play an enabling role, tackling market failures and creating an environment in 
which digital entrepreneurship can thrive. This guidance  note highlights 13 key measures that 
governments can take in the short term to support e -commerce during the ongoing crisis. The first 
group of measures aims to help more businesses and households to connect to the digital economy 
during the crisis. The second group of measures aims to ensure that e -comm erce can continue to 
serve the public in a way that is safe, even during the COVID -19 lockdown.  The third group of 
measures aims to ensure that the government’s e -commerce strategy during the crisis is clearly 
communicated, implemented , and coordinated with other policy measures.  
• The crisis may have a permanent impact on the private sector landscape, consumer preferences , 
and shopping patterns. Many brick -and-mortar shops have been forced to move online. Customers 
are more willing than e ver to adopt online shopping and to experiment with new services. 
Governments need to play their part and make sure that the e -commerce sector can rise to its full 
potential in this public health and economic crisis.  
 
THE ROLE OF E-COMMERCE IN DEALING WITH COVID -19  
In the fight against COVID -19, economic activities that require close physical contact have been 
severely restricted.  Governments around the world have put in place containment measures to slow down 
the rate of infectio n, including lockdowns, border closures , and restrictions on economic activities. Even where 
strict restrictions are not in place, consumers and businesses are opting for “social -distancing” to avoid 
physical proximity and potential contagion. Activities deemed as essential, such as grocery shopping and 
visits to health facilities, have  not yet seized up in most countries – but are key remaining hotspots for potential 
new infections.  
In this context, e -commerce – defined broadly as the sale of goods or services online - is emerging 
as a major pillar in the fight against COVID -19. First, e -commerce can help further reduce the risk of new 
infections. By offering online grocery delivery, for example, supermarkets can help customers avoid in -store 
 
1  Trade and COVID -19 Guidance Notes are prepared by the Global Trade and Regional Integration Unit of the World Bank to provide 
practical measures governments can implement to mitigate the impact of the COV ID-19 outbreak.  This note is the result of a 
collaboration between the  Global Trade and Regional Integrati on Unit and the Macroeconomic s, Trade and Investment regional 
unit for Europe and Central Asia (MTI -ECA).  For further information about this note please contact the authors Christoph Ungerer 
(Senior Economist, cungerer@worldbank.org ), Alberto Portugal (Senior Economist, aportugalperez@worldbank.org ), Martin 
Molinuevo (Senior Counsel, mmolinuevo@worldbank.org ), Natasha Rovo (Young Professional,  nrovo@worldbank.org ), or Antonio 
Nucifora (Practice Manager, Global Trade and Regional Integration Unit, anucifora@worldbank.org ) and Gallina Vincelette (Practice 
Manager, MTI-ECA, gvincelette@worldbank.org ). The authors wish to thank Holti Banka, Tania Begazo, Ana Cusolito, Michael 
Ferrantino , Natalija Gelvanovska -Garcia , Karim Gharbi , Martha Martinez, and Juni Zhu  for their  invaluable inputs to the note . A full 
list of Trade and Covid -19 Guidance Notes is available at https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/tr ade/brief/trade -and-covid -19. 
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized 
2 
 
visits. Online payments can obviate the need for  in-person cash transactions. Second,  e-commerce can help 
preserve jobs during the crisis. For instance, while restaurants cannot accommodate in -venue dining, many 
have resorted to offering online take -out services – maintaining a basic revenue stream that can help keep 
the business afloat thro ugh the crisis. In some cases, e -commerce can even create new jobs during the crisis 
– as consumers shift towards online offerings ( see US ). Third, e -commerc e can help increase the acceptance 
of prolonged physical distancing measures among the population. The continued availability of online 
shopping and online services, including video chats, movie streaming , and online classes, makes it much 
more bearable to  live and work while limiting physical interaction with others.  
This briefing note highlights 13 key measures that governments can take in the short term to support 
e-commerce during the ongoing crisis.  A full e -commerce ecosystem takes years to develop, requiring 
complex investments by the private sector and the implementation of multi -faceted government reforms. This 
is not the subject of this note.2 Instead, the focus of this briefing is on practical short -term measures that can 
be implemented to leverage e -commerce in the current fight against COVID -19. Even as infections and 
hospitalizations peak in more countries over the coming weeks, and as some of the more extreme lockdown 
measures are gradually lifted, preventing new infections and limiti ng in -person interaction are likely to remain 
key policy priorities for some time to come. E -commerce can contribute to containing the virus. Facilitating 
the digital economy can be an important pillar of government strategies to deal with the crisis.  
This potential can be harnessed by a series of 13 steps government can adopt to foster the use of e -
commerce :  
The first group of measures aims to help more businesses and households to connect to the digital 
economy during the crisis. While access to the digital economy is valuable for development even in normal 
times, the crisis makes e -commerce a particularly us eful asset in the fight against the virus.  
1. Develop a dedicated information website to support businesses that want to serve their 
customers online during the crisis . The website would serve two purposes. First,  the website should 
inform businesses about how to go online. It should clarify what activities are allowed and what activities 
are not allowed during the crisis. It should also inform businesses about key steps they need to take 
(advertise online sales channel, decide how delivery and payment will take place, consider selling through 
existing large e -commerce platforms , etc.). The website could highlight local businesses that have 
successfully made the transition online, motivating other entrepreneurs to join.3 Second, the website 
should help customers connect with local businesses that offer online services during the crisis.  The 
website would allow local businesses to post their online service offering and would make it easy for local 
customers to find what is  available in their area.4 Similar websites have already been launched in other 
countries ( see Italy ).5  
2. Ensure an enabling regulatory framework  for e-commerce . Fostering digital transactions as a tool for 
implementing social distancing requires a sound regulatory environment. Where regulations on e -
commerce, including digital signature s and documents, online consumer protection , and data privacy are 
already in place,  as in  most  lower -middle  income countries, it is important to  ensure that they are 
effectively used by businesses and the public by improving  dissemination, offering online tutorials, and 
 
2 A forthcoming policy note on Digital Business will focus on medium -term policy actions to support the d igital economy , including, 
but not limited to,  digital business , enabling regulatory framework, s upplier protection , consumer protection, quality standards and 
consumer data privacy . 
3 Eventually, the website could also offer a mentor match -making service, connecting businesses that have already gained online 
experience with those that are at the start of the  journey. It could also include a feature that would allow customers to give 
feedback on the quality of the service provided by each business.  
4 To enhance accessibility, e -businesses should be encouraged to also provide a telephone number, helping customers that may 
not be comfortable with online purchases to nonetheless complete their orders.  
5 Besides connecting buyers and sellers, the website  would also help Government to monitor online sales activities and to take 
action if there are concerns that customers are at risk.   
3 
 
strengthening government support.  Where legal frameworks for electronic tr ansactions are  instead  weak, 
and e -transactions are not recognized by law , as in most of the lower -income countries, this moment 
could represent an opportunity to revise  the regulatory framework by prioritizing needed laws and by -
laws. As citizens may need to purchase goods and services online in third countries, regulations on cross -
border data transfers should not impair such transactions.  Yet, addressing more structural obstacles or 
building a full-fledged  regulatory and institutional framework for e -commerce will require a medium -term 
reform strategy.  It may be necessary to adopt or update adequate implementing regulation in the form of 
decrees or other resolutions , even as temporary emergency rules . For example, a  simple emergency 
regime could allow  data collection during the health crisis on the basis of  individual consent  or “vital 
interests ”, while protecting privacy by limiting the use of the data to purposes related to  containing the 
spread of the virus  (see France ). Finally a  website could be set up allowing the public to propose the 
elimination or temporary suspension of regulations that prevent e -commerce from playing its role in 
fighting COVID -19 (in a similar spirit, see US ).    
3. Clarify (and , where appropriate, relax) the legal framework surrounding online delivery  of 
professional services , particularly medical  and other health  services . Not all the countries are 
equipped with a legal framework surrounding online delivery of professional services , and when existent, 
it may not be clear enough . Legal frameworks need to be examined profession by profession.  For 
example, at least for the duration of the crisis, doctors should have widest possible latitude in using 
telemedicine ( see US ). Telemedicine should be covered by health insurance on an equal basis to in -
person visits at the doctor’s practice. Equally, call centers should receive clear guidance on the extent 
that their workers can work from their homes during the crisis, including guidance on how to handle 
confidentiality of client data and supervision of home -based workers ( see UK  facing similar challenges). 
Fitness trainers that deliver classes online need clear guidance on their poten tial liability in case one of 
their clients has an accident when executing classes from home.  
4. Work with the private sector to secure access to the digital economy for all, including for 
disadvantaged population groups . Internet service providers  and mobile network operators could be 
encouraged to offer special low-cost mobile and fixed line internet packages during the crisi s.6,7 Internet 
access could be included into the list of essential services (together with other utilities) that cannot be 
disconnected, if bills are not paid during the crisis , provided that a mechanism to mitigate  liquidity 
problems  is in place . Sellers of el ectronic equipment could offer special deals on PCs, laptops, tablets 
and cell phones to go online ; and universal service funds could be repurposed to provide connectivity to 
vulnerable groups . Internet content providers could be encouraged to temporarily offer some of their 
content for free online, including basic online fitness and mental wellness classes, digital newspaper 
subscriptions and movie streaming archives. For the unemployed, the government could partner with 
private sector and public sector training providers to offer discounted/free access to high -quality online 
classes to learn new skills (such as for example programming, website design or online marketing). For 
population groups  at special risk from serious illness due to the crisis (such as the elderly), the 
government could negotiate discounted/free grocery delivery service to further incentivize the use of e -
commerce and to offer additional protection from the virus. Many act ors in the private sector may be 
motivated to join such partnerships by a sense of patriotic duty and solidarity during the crisis, as well as 
the prospect of reaching potential future new customers. Where necessary, a temporary government 
 
6 These measures to increase internet access should target both (i) new customers as well as (ii) existing customers that ma y need 
to upgrade due to higher internet usage by multiple household members during the lockdown.  In the case of existing customers, 
relaxing data caps and increasing speed would increase affordability.  For more details, s ee the Digital Development Joint Action 
Plan and Call for Action .  
7 These measures to incentiv ize e-commerce do not necessarily address main binding constraints such as overcoming barriers to 
technology adoption in the presence of network externalities . For more details, see the forthcoming Digital Business note.   
4 
 
subsidy could be  considered. A government website, TV announcements and emails could summarize 
all special offers available during the crisis, ensuring that the public is aware ( see Italy ).  
The second group of measures aims to ensure that e -commerce can continue to serve the public in 
a way that is safe, even during the COVID -19 lockdown. In this crisis time, earning the trust of the public 
is particularly important for the digital economy. Equally, e -commerc e, as a strategically important sector in 
the fight against the virus, needs to be supported, ensuring that it can continue operations during the 
lockdown.  
5. Develop and share with businesses a COVID -19 code of conduct for online sales of goods, 
ensuring the  safety of customers and workers during the crisis . The code of conduct would establish 
clear health and safety standards for online sales, in particular for (i) grocery and food take -out 
businesses and (ii) delivery workers. The code would help businesses establish best practice routines to 
avoid contamination and confirm what is (and is not) allowed during the crisis. The code would reassure 
customers that measures are taken to minimize the chance that they will be exposed to the virus during 
delivery, making it more likely that they will use the service. Minimum standards could be made 
compulsory requirements for online delivery. Advanced standards could be voluntary – delivery 
companies would sign up to the standards online, giving them the rig ht to advertise that they meet the 
advanced standard (potentially, a quality certification logo could be introduced for this).8  
6. Strictly monitor and enforce safety and quality standards for e -commerce companies throughout 
the crisis . Companies that sell online face an especially important responsibility to maintain safety 
standards and to avoid acting as super -spreaders of the virus during the crisis. Many customers are 
disoriented and may be more prone to online scams during the crisis, includi ng the sale of fake virus 
remedies/tests, price -gouging on protective gear and phishing scams to access personal information. To 
protect customers and to encourage them to take up buying online during the crisis, the government 
needs to maintain  strict monitoring of the digital economy and enforce regulations throughout the crisis. 
Consumer protection needs to be paramount.  
7. Educate the public , particularly families and micro-, small-, and medium -sized  enterprises 
(MSMEs) on how to stay safe when shopping online, including basic cybersecurity measures . By 
making the public aware of the code of conduct that e -commerce companies and delivery services need 
to respect during the COVID -19 pandemic, the government can enroll  private citizens in helping to ensure 
that the code of conduct is respected. Equally, education on potential online scams may be the most 
effective way to protect customers from becoming victims. When customer detect wrongdoing , they 
should  be aware about where to go to report the case and, if necessary, seek redress.  
8. Designate the e -commerce workforce as one of the frontline groups during the COVID -19 crisis . 
COVID -19 testing and protective gear remains rationed in many countries. Given the role that e -
commerce can play in tackling the crisis and the importance of ensuring that e -commerce does not 
contribute to further spreading the virus, countries should incl ude e -commerce companies as one of the 
priority groups for receiving access to such items. Where travel restrictions are in place, a simple and 
workable mechanism needs to be developed to allow online delivery to continue functioning. The 
government shoul d work closely with e -commerce companies to ensure that the workforce has access 
to adequate healthcare in case of sickness. The vital contribution of the e -commerce workforce in tackling 
the COVID -19 crisis, including the fact that workers put their healt h at risk every day to serve the public, 
 
8 Minimum standards could include that customers are not required to physically si gn on delivery. Instead, the delivery worker signs 
to confirm delivery or the customer confirms delivery online. Employees should handle goods with gloves at all times and wear  face 
masks. Advanced standards could include that delivery workers are required  to twice daily report on their body temperature (as 
implemented by some companies in China), allowing for early detection of cases in which delivery workers become virus carrier s.  
5 
 
should be regularly acknowledged and praised by public officials – helping to maintain worker morale and 
helping to preserve the functioning of this vital branch of the economy.  
9. Support businesses in adopting electr onic payment options during the crisis . Some businesses 
moving to online orders during the crisis will resort to cash -on-delivery, either because they do not have 
the capabilities to accept online payments or because many of their customers cannot make electronic 
payments.9 Especially during the COVID -19 crisis, this is a second -best option – full contactless online 
payment can obviate the need for in -person exchange of cash. Governments should therefore actively 
engage banks and e -money prov iders, encouraging them to offer a simplified procedure for businesses 
and households to gain access to remote electronic payment capabilities during the crisis, including by 
limiting physical interaction during the onboarding process. Regulators should cl arify the latitude that they 
can give to financial service providers in limiting documentation requirements for new customers so that 
there is no increase in anti-money  laundering /countering the financing o f terrorism ( AML/CFT ) risks. 
Government should rai se awareness about the public health benefits of using electronic payments, 
creating public pressure on businesses and customers and building trust to foster the adopt ion of  these 
means of payment.  
10. Maintain the functioning of the logistics system, including the national postal service . For online 
shops, the national postal service is often the main (and cheapest) means of delivery to clients. As such, 
maintaining this vital public infrastructure service throughout the crisis – while adjusting p rocedures to 
safeguard public health – is crucial to allow this segment of the economy to continue operating. In fact, 
the postal service can be reinforced during the crisis to cope with increased e -commerce parcel volumes, 
for instance by introducing a 7 -days -a-week delivery service.  
The third group of measures aims to ensure that the government’s e -commerce strategy during the 
crisis is clearly communicated, implemented and coordinated with other policy measures. For e -
commerce measures to be effective, the public needs to be aware of them. All measures need to be well 
embedded in the country’s overall strategy to fight the pandemic.  
11. Design COVID -19 fiscal policy measures that support the development of online sales channels . 
Support measures should not disincentivize businesses from developing online sales channels. For 
instance, a restaurant should not receive less fiscal support, just because it is able to successfully build 
an online take -out business on the side. Tax framework s should  account for the existence of different 
actors in the digital economy, including marketplaces that offer intermediation services and seller s of 
goods and  service s with an online presence , offering a transparent and administratively simple approach 
for the e -commerce sector to comply with tax obligations . 
12. Establish an e -commerce working group . E-commerce falls at the intersection of many government 
ministries . Governments should therefore consider establishing a multi -sector working group, consisting 
of government and private sector representatives. The working group should regularly meet to review 
progress with implementation of an e -commerce action plan, rev iew other developments in the e -
commerce space and, when necessary, amend the action plan. To avoid excessive dilution of 
responsibility, the working group should at all times be led by a chairperson . The chairperson  should 
regularly report recommendations of the working group to the prime minister . 
13. Raise public awareness about the importance of e -commerce to fight COVID -19, including the 
measures taken by the government to support the sector , and build trus t in the digital economy . 
Key channels could be TV and print interviews, social media and government websites.  
 
9 Another factor driving the reliance of cash upon delivery is lack of cons umers’ trust. Consumers want to inspect the 
product before agreeing to payment.  Cash payments avoid the need to share confidential financial data (such as credit 
card details).   
6 
 
Ultimately, e -commerce lives on the dynamism and initiative of the private sector. Public policy can 
only play an enabling role, tackling market failures and creating an environment in which digital 
entrepreneurship can thrive. Already, the crisis has chan ged the e -commerce landscape. Many brick -and-
mortar shops have been forced to move online. Customers are more willing than ever to adopt online 
shopping and to experiment with new services. Governments need to play their part and make sure that the 
e-comme rce sector can rise to its full potential in this public health and economic crisis.  
SUMMARY MATRIX OF POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS  
The actions discussed above are summarized in this table:   
Policy Action  Responsible Agency  
Helping more businesses and households to connect to the digital economy during the crisis  
Develop a dedicated information website to support businesses that want to 
serve their customers online during the crisis  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and  Economy  / Local 
Governments  
Ensure an enabling regulatory framework for e -commerce  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry of 
Justice / Ministry  of Finance and 
Economy/ Ministry of 
Telecommunications  
Clarify (and, where appropriate, relax) the legal framework surrounding online 
delivery of professional services, particularly medical and other health services  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy / Ministry of 
Justice  
Work with the p rivate sector to secure access to the digital economy for all, 
including for disadvantaged population groups  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy / Ministry of 
Telecommunications  
Ensur ing that e -commerce can continue to serve the publ ic in a way that is safe, even during the COVID -19 
lockdown  
Develop and share with businesses a COVID -19 code of conduct for online sales 
of goods, ensuring the safety of customers and workers during the crisis  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy / Ministry of 
Justice  
Strictly monitor and enforce safety and quality standards for e -commerce 
companies throughout the crisis  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy/ Ministry of 
Health/ Ministry of Justice  
Educate the public on how to stay safe when shopping online, including basic 
cybersecurity measures  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy  
Designate the e -commerce workforce as one of the frontline groups d uring t he 
COVID -19 crisis  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy  
Support businesses in adopting electronic payment options during the crisis  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy/ Central Bank  
Maintain the functioning of the logistics system, including the national postal 
service  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy/ Ministry of 
Trade / Ministry of Transport  
Ensur ing that the Government’s e -commerce strategy during the crisis is clearly communicated, implemented 
and coordinated with other policy measures.  
Design COVID -19 fiscal policy measures that support the development of online 
sales channels  Prime Minister’s Off ice/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy  
Establish an e -commerce working group  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy/ Ministry of 
Health   
7 
 
Raise public awareness about the importance of e -commerce to fight COVID -19, 
including the measure s taken by the Government to support the sector , and build 
trust in the digital economy  Prime Minister’s Office/  Ministry  of 
Finance and Economy  
 
 
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES  
 
Guidance Notes  
Trade and Covid -19 Brief Page  
Managing Risk and Facilitating Trade in the COVID -19 Pandemic  
Do's and Don'ts of Trade Policy in the Response to COVID -19 
Trade in Critical COVID -19 Products  
Trade Responses to the COVID -19 Crisis in Africa  
  
Data & Research  
Database on Coronavirus (COVID -19) Trade Flows and Policies  
COVID -19 Trade Watch: April 2020  
Working Paper: The Potential Impact of COVID -19 on GDP and Trade  
  
 
 