Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from
Lockboxes and Mobile Money in Malawi*
Shilpa Aggarwal†Valentina Brailovskaya‡Jonathan Robinson§
May 21, 2021
Abstract
We test whether the provision of multiple labeled savings accounts affects savings and
downstream outcomes in an experiment with 761 microentrepreneurs in urban Malawi. Treat-
ment respondents received one or multiple savings accounts, in the form of lockboxes or mo-
bile money. We ﬁnd that while providing additional boxes increased savings by 40%, technical
issues marred the efﬁcacy of a second mobile money account. Data from novel high-frequency
surveys suggests that both types of accounts had impacts on downstream outcomes, including
farming decisions and credit extended to customers. We do not detect differential downstream
effects by the number or modality of accounts.
JEL Codes: D14, L26, O12, O16
Keywords: savings, mobile money, lockboxes, liquidity, labeling, mental accounting, mi-
croenterprises
*We are extremely grateful to Calvin Mhango and Gabriella Fleischman for overseeing the project and to Marble
Karuu and David Park for research assistance. We thank Carly Farver for her continuous support, and IPA Malawi
for implementing the research protocol in Malawi. We thank Airtel Malawi for their collaboration, especially Tione
Kafumba, Bigboy Makaloma and Chris Sukasuka. We thank Naresh Kumar and Raychel Schwartz for supporting data
collection for the long-term follow-up. We thank the Financial Inclusion Program at IPA, ISB, and UCSC for ﬁnancial
support. We thank Amit Khandelwal, Jessie Li two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at IPA, Williams
College, the University of Cape Town, the Paris School of Economics, UCSC, and IDinsight for helpful comments in
shaping this paper.This research protocol was approved by the the National Commission for Science and Technology
in Malawi and the IRBs of UCSC and the ISB. This trial is registered in the AEA registry for randomized controlled
trials (AEARCTR-0002449). A pre-analysis plan is available on the AEA registry website. All errors are our own.
†Indian School of Business, email: shilpa_aggarwal@isb.edu
‡IDinsight, email: valentina.brailovskaya@idinsight.org
§University of California, Santa Cruz and NBER, email: jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
11 Introduction
Most people have multiple concurrent ﬁnancial goals. For example, it is common for households
to be saving up for large indivisible investments such as buying a house or paying for higher
education, while also setting aside smaller amounts for day-to-day expenses or for dealing with
unforeseen emergencies. How do people save towards multiple goals simultaneously? One poten-
tial strategy is to create separate labeled accounts. Research in behavioral economics suggests that
once these accounts are created, withdrawals for any purpose other than the labeled one impose
a utility cost on the account-holder (Ainslie 2001; Bénabou and Tirole 2004; Koch and Nafziger
2016; Thaler 1999). Previous studies have shown that accounts labeled for a speciﬁc purpose
can be effective in increasing savings for that purpose (i.e. Brune et al. 2016; Dupas and Robin-
son 2013b; Karlan and Linden 2014), and this ﬁnding likely generalizes to having more than one
labeled account.
As a practical matter, however, it is not clear how one can accomplish the cognitively challeng-
ing task of keeping track of distinct sums of money that have been mentally allocated towards dif-
ferent purposes.1We conjecture that the effectiveness of mental accounts will likely be enhanced
when accounts are accompanied by the physical separation of money. The practice of physically
separating pots of money meant for distinct uses has precedent,2although it is not known if this
method actually leads to an increase in deposits. A related, policy-relevant question for developing
countries with low levels of formal account prevalence, but where mobile money has emerged as a
viable alternative to the banking sector, is whether multiple accounts provided via mobile money
can help people save towards multiple purposes.
In this paper, we report results from an experiment with 761 micro-entrepreneurs in the city
1Research on the cognitive costs of scarcity (i.e., Mani et al. 2013) suggests that this task might be even harder
for the poor.
2For example, see this oft-quoted anecdote cited in previous work (i.e. Zelizer 1994; Soman and Cheema 2011),
from Bradley (1923): “Take for instance Mrs. M’s system as she told it to Women’s Home Companion in the early
1920’s: "I collected eight little cans, all the same size, and pasted on them the following words, in big letters: groceries,
carfare, gas, laundry, rent, tithe, savings, miscellaneous.... [W]e speak of those cans now, as the grocery can, carfare
can, etc. ” In the present day, a number of personal ﬁnance advisors recommend maintaining different accounts for
money meant for different purposes - popularly known as the “envelope method”.
2of Blantyre, Malawi, who were randomized into one of several different treatments designed to
measure the savings efﬁcacy of single versus multiple labeled accounts, which we provided either
via mobile money or through lockboxes. The average respondent had 2.4 savings goals at baseline,
so providing multiple labeled accounts could be beneﬁcial in this population. One treatment group
was offered simple metal lockboxes in which to save up, while a second group was offered mobile
money accounts. Both of the treatment groups were further randomized into receiving either one
or more of the savings device in question (the multiple box group were offered up to 3 boxes, while
the multiple mobile money group were offered 2 mobile money accounts). A control group was
not offered any accounts.
A primary contribution of the paper is to document the effect of the accounts on a set of down-
stream outcomes. In addition to savings, our analysis focuses on labor supply (in the main business
and in the alternative of farming), business success (proﬁts and revenues), and credit (these out-
comes are highlighted in a pre-analysis plan, Aggarwal, Brailovskaya and Robinson 2019). To
measure these and other secondary outcomes at a high frequency, all respondents (including the
control group) were given cell phones, and half of the sample was called once or twice per week
to get survey measures of savings decisions, labor supply, income, expenditures, and transfers. We
also conducted two rounds of monitoring surveys with all respondents.
During the study period (of about 9 months), 73% used their mobile money account at least
once, 60% used it 5 times, and average deposits were about $9 per month. Usage of the lockbox
was even higher: at least 95% used their box at least once, 91% used it at least 5 times, and
total deposits averaged $27 per month.3These are substantial sums for this context, in which
daily business proﬁts are roughly $3.50. We ﬁnd strong evidence that providing a second account
increased savings for lockboxes, by about 40%. This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that
having a second, labeled account is helpful to achieve savings goals. We ﬁnd no effect of a second
account on savings for the mobile money group, but this is likely due to design problems with
the technology. In particular, the telecom company (“telco”) can offer only one account per SIM
3The ﬁgures for the box were measured earlier, about 5 months after account opening.
3card, and so users had to switch between SIM cards to use multiple accounts, and this proved too
burdensome despite having access to a dual SIM phone. This suggests that sophisticated ﬁnancial
products will work only when using them is simple enough.
Second, we ﬁnd strong evidence that the saving accounts (both boxes and mobile money) had
effects on pre-speciﬁed downstream outcomes. In particular, we ﬁnd strong evidence that they
increased the time spent working on their farms. Our data suggests that this increase in farm hours
came from reductions in labor supply in the main business – we ﬁnd negative point estimates for
labor in the own business, though speciﬁcations are not always statistically signiﬁcant. This ﬁnding
is related to several recent papers that ﬁnd labor supply effects of an easing of credit constraints,
such as Fink, Jack and Masiye (2020), who ﬁnd that providing credit to smallholder farmers de-
creases off-farm labor and increases own-farm labor. Our ﬁnding that saving accounts cause a
reallocation of labor supply is related to Callen et al. (2019), who ﬁnd that Sri Lankan households
who were given access to deposit collection reduce leisure time and increase their hours worked, a
ﬁnding that is likely explained by the fact that the accounts were interest-bearing. In our case, fur-
ther analysis points to greater investments in the farm, which suggests that the reallocation of labor
supply between occupations may have been driven by higher marginal returns to farming. Specif-
ically, we ﬁnd that treatment respondents are more likely to buy and rent land, as well as invest
more in farm inputs (though these were not speciﬁed as primary outcomes). These investments,
particularly in land, are lumpy by nature, and were likely facilitated by savings. We also ﬁnd an
increase in credit extended to customers, and some evidence of an increase in total expenditure.
We make four main contributions to the literature. First, our experimental design isolates the
effect of an additional labeled savings place.4While there have been many recent papers which
have studied the effect of providing un(der)banked households with savings devices, there are
a variety of pathways by which accounts may increase savings, including that savings accounts
provide security, limit liquidity, increase the salience of saving money or because savings accounts
4There is a small literature on a related issue about partitioning consumption items between physically separated
places. Soman and Cheema (2008) conduct experiments in which experimental subjects were paid in different num-
bers of accounts (i.e. money split into multiple envelopes or chocolates split into separate packages), and ﬁnd that
immediate consumption is decreasing in the number of accounts.
4encourage the activation of mental accounts for particular goals. Isolating a single channel in
this context is challenging. In this experiment, we offer an incremental savings option which is
identical to the ﬁrst, and thus the design isolates the effect of an additional, physically separate
savings location, since other pathways such as security or salience are equalized.5
Second, we contribute to a nascent literature on the impacts of mobile money accounts. Given
the extensive uptake and usage of mobile money in several sub-Saharan African countries, there has
been a large amount of research and policy interest in the topic. However, the popularity of mobile
money makes identiﬁcation challenging because of the difﬁculty of maintaining a control group.6
Consequently, the seminal studies in this research area are identiﬁed from plausibly exogenous
regional differences in mobile money rollout (Jack and Suri 2014; Suri and Jack 2016). More re-
cently, several researchers have implemented RCTs, usually by partnering directly with the telcos.
These include Batista and Vicente (2020b), who randomize mobile money access at the community
level; Lee et al. (2021), who offer mobile banking to rural-urban migrants in Bangladesh (to both
the urban migrant and to the sending rural household); Wieser et al. (2019), who randomize the
roll-out of mobile money agents in rural Northern Uganda, and our own companion paper (Aggar-
wal, Brailovskaya and Robinson 2020), which studies the impact of mobile money (pooled across
both subtreatments).7Our study adds to this literature by randomizing basic access at the indi-
vidual level in a country where mobile money infrastructure already existed but where takeup was
still modest, and by measuring a number of outcomes via our survey modules. Moreover, while
the vast majority of the existing literature focuses on the impact of mobile money on resilience
5Several other studies offer different accounts to different treatment groups (i.e. Brune et al. 2016; Dupas and
Robinson 2013b), or (more rarely) offering a basic account and an incremental account with different features, such
as a commitment account (John 2020). Other studies offer accounts to respondents who already have basic accounts
at a bank (such as Ashraf, Karlan and Yin 2006), which arguably isolates the incremental effect of the new account,
even though the account itself is not experimental.
6For example, see Dalton et al. (2020) who randomized merchants in Kenya into having a smartphone app that
allowed them to accept electronic payments. By the endline - about 2 years later - a quarter of the control ﬁrms had
adopted the technology on their own.
7There have been a number of interventions which layer other ﬁnancial interventions on top of basic mobile
money, such as labeled accounts (Aker et al. 2020, Dizon, Gong and Jones 2020, Lipscomb and Schechter 2018),
automatic deposits (Blumenstock, Callen and Ghani 2018) or interest-bearing accounts (Batista and Vicente (2020a)).
de Mel et al. (forthcoming) layer mobile money on top of basic bank accounts to enhance the ease of making deposits,
but their intervention is hampered by very low take-up. See Suri (2017) and a research brief by the Gates Foundation
(BMGF, 2020) for an overview.
5(via a reduction in the transaction costs of transfers), the effects in our study are driven primarily
by savings. In fact, we observe little effect on interpersonal transfers from the mobile money treat-
ment and only two-thirds of the mobile money treatment respondents ever made an interpersonal
transfer, while more than 80% reported using their mobile money accounts for long-term savings.
This result is likely attributable to the fact that the treatment was at the individual level and so did
not change mobile money access for the risk-sharing networks of treated respondents; we believe
that interpersonal transfer effects would likely be present in a larger expansion of the network.
Nevertheless, by muting the channel of interpersonal transfers, our study shows that mobile money
can be effective in mobilizing savings. These effects will likely only be larger as telcos develop
more sophisticated ﬁnancial products.
Third, our experiment was designed to carefully measure effects on downstream outcomes.
While there have been a number of recent studies of savings (including several that look at boxes
or mobile money speciﬁcally),8only a few of them ﬁnd effects on downstream outcomes such
as business investment and personal expenditures (Dupas and Robinson 2013 a), health invest-
ment (Dupas and Robinson 2013b), educational expenditures (Prina 2015; Jack and Habyarimana
2018), labor supply (Callen et al. 2019), self-reported ﬁnancial well-being (Kast and Pomeranz
2018; Prina 2015), risk coping (Jones and Gong 2020), and debt (Kast and Pomeranz 2018; Aker
et al. 2020). However, most of these studies ﬁnd outcomes on only one of several potential out-
comes, while other studies ﬁnd no effects at all.9An obvious reason why effects may be hard to
detect is that statistical power is hampered by low take-up.10For example, a tabulation in Dupas
et al. (2018) ﬁnds that in many studies only 20-30% of people ever use accounts, and much lower
percentages (rarely larger than 20%) “actively” use accounts (usually deﬁned as making more than
a few deposits). But in this study, usage is dramatically higher: within the study period, at least
8A partial listing of papers that include locked savings boxes include Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006), Karlan and
Linden (2014), Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2019), Francis (2018)„ Karlan and Zinman (2018), and Aker et al. (2020),
among others. Those looking at mobile money accounts as a savings device include Blumenstock, Callen and Ghani
(2018), Jack and Habyarimana (2018), Dizon, Gong and Jones (2020), and Lipscomb and Schechter (2018).
9See Table 3 in Prina (2015) and Figure 5 in Dupas et al. (2018) for a summary of the effects found in these
studies.
10This problem is often exacerbated by the fact that different people choose to spend money on different things,
leading treatment effects to become diffused.
694% of people used the box at least once and at least 91% used it at least 5 times; for mobile money
accounts, the ﬁgures are 73% and 59%.
Finally, we provide a direct comparison between boxes and mobile money accounts as savings
devices, and their subsequent impact on downstream outcomes. The design of these two savings
devices could potentially have important ramiﬁcations for their efﬁcacy as savings devices - for
example, boxes are physically proximate, which would make it easier to make deposits, but would
similarly encourage withdrawals; the hassle costs of visiting an agent could deter mobile money
deposits, but also discourage withdrawals. In line with this, we ﬁnd that boxes are clearly used
more – the value of deposits was about 3.5-5 times higher in boxes, while withdrawals were also
higher. We detect no signiﬁcant effects on downstream effects by treatment modality. This suggests
that both options can be effective in this setting, but the current project was not set up to comment
on their relative efﬁcacy in impacting savings or downstream outcomes.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the experiment and the data.
Section 3 presents results and Section 4 discusses threats to validity. Section 5 concludes.
2 Experimental Design and Data
2.1 Context and sampling
The experiment took place with a representative sample of small entrepreneurs operating in Blan-
tyre, the second largest city in Malawi. While Blantyre is an urban center with a population just
over 1 million, the outskirts of the city contain farmland. Blantyre contains 26 wards and 392 enu-
meration areas (EAs). To construct a sample with coverage across the city, we randomly selected
77 EAs (3 each in 25 wards, and 2 from a 26th ward that had only 2 EAs), and aimed to census all
businesses in these wards.
Market structure is heterogeneous across EAs – the number of businesses ranged from 0 to
1,649 (mean 104, median 48).11Because of the high number of businesses in some EAs, it was not
11Two EAs contained no small businesses. One was an industrial area and the other was farmland.
7logistically possible to census every business in those EAs. We therefore decided to divide EAs
between those with more than 100 and those with less than 100 businesses. In the smaller EAs, we
censused all businesses; in the larger EAs, we counted all businesses but only censused a randomly
selected subset of approximately 40% of businesses.12We counted a total of 9,848 businesses and
classiﬁed 8,078 (82.1%) of these as small businesses.13We attempted to conduct a census survey
with 3,857 businesses and completed surveys with 2,842 (74%).14
After the census, we imposed additional exclusion criteria. First, we excluded any business
with more than 2 employees (6% of the census list). Second, we excluded businesses in which
the business owner was a mobile money agent (3%) to prevent confounding the mobile money
treatment. Third, we excluded businesses in which the owner was not actively involved in running
operations (deﬁned as working there at least 5 days per week) since such owners would not be
able to reliably answer business-related questions (9%). Fourth, we excluded businesses that were
planning to shut down within 6 months (before the project was slated to end – 16%).15
Once we had a sample of businesses that met our criteria, we imposed two other exclusion
criteria, using data that had been collected either at the census or prior to the baseline survey. First,
we removed all polygamous households, which amounted to 5% of the sample. Second, since
we initially planned to collect surveys with paper-and-pencil logbooks (we eventually changed to
phone surveys), we excluded business owners who were illiterate (about 20% of the sample) and
those whose eyesight prevented them from reading a printed page (about 10% of the sample).
These exclusion criteria left us with approximately 1,640 eligible businesses from which we
drew our ﬁnal sample, stratiﬁed by ﬁnancial access (deﬁned by having either a mobile money or
bank account) and self-reported distance to the nearest mobile money agent (deﬁned as above or
12Since we counted all businesses, we have sampling weights for all EAs.
13We excluded several classes of businesses in this exercise since they were unlikely to qualify as a small business.
This included gas stations, clinics, hospitals, banks, microﬁnance institutions, manufacturing plants, warehouses,
wholesalers and supermarkets.
14Of the 1,012 (26%) businesses that were not censused, 552 (14%) refused to participate (either before or after
we were able to explain the study), 346 (9%) were permanently closed, 114 (3%) were not reached (either because the
shop was closed after 3 visits or the owner was under 18 years old).
15This high turnover rate is indicative of the level of churn in these types of businesses. Some businesses are
seasonal and business closure is common.
8below the sample median). In drawing the sample, we chose to oversample businesses connected
to the electricity grid: while 26% of eligible businesses were connected to the grid, we sampled
35%.16We replaced respondents who could not be found (about 6.5%) or refused to participate
(another 6.5%) with randomly chosen backups, ultimately yielding a sample of 801 businesses,
which we randomized into the various treatment arms.17
2.2 Experimental design
The experimental design is summarized in Web Appendix Figure A2 and the timeline of project
activities is shown in Web Appendix Figure A3. As discussed below, the experimental design
cross-cut the provision of savings accounts with the frequency of surveying.
2.2.1 Savings account treatment
We offered two types of savings products: metal lockboxes and mobile money accounts. The
lockboxes were similar to those offered in prior studies - they had a deposit slit in the top, and
a latch that could be locked. The boxes were produced by a local artisan and cost about $3.40.
Respondents were also given a lock and key, worth about $1. While a sizeable minority of people
(22%) had lockboxes at baseline, these were of lower quality than the project boxes as they were
typically made of wood or cardboard, and either could not be locked or had to be broken to be
opened. Finally, as in Dupas and Robinson (2013b), respondents were given a passbook to record
withdrawals and deposits, so that they could track the balance without having to open their box(es).
Respondents were also encouraged to use the project account(s) to save towards their savings goal.
Those in the mobile money treatment received mobile money accounts with Airtel Malawi, the
leading telecom company in Malawi with just over 50% market share. The accounts were identical
to those already commercially available, with several important differences. First, we reimbursed
16This decision was made to improve the power of the related paper, Brailovskaya (2018), which utilizes some of
the data in this experiment to calculate the effect of power outages on business outcomes.
17See Web Appendix Figure A1 for the geographic distribution and spread of the various treatment arms across the
city of Blantyre.
9withdrawal fees for the duration of the project.18Second, in pilot work, we found that knowledge
of mobile money was limited. Some respondents were not fully aware of fees or lacked basic
knowledge about how to access and use mobile money accounts. To address this, we developed
training modules on how to use the accounts, which were administered at the time of account-
opening.19Third, as with the boxes, we encouraged people to use the accounts to save towards
their goals. While we view each of these elements as relatively light-touch actions that could easily
be independently implemented by the telco, the combined mobile money intervention does differ
from status-quo commercial mobile money accounts available at the time in Malawi.
One of the key features of the project is to measure the effects of having an incremental account.
Therefore, all respondents in the savings device treatments were further randomized into receiving
one or multiple of the savings device in question. For the box respondents, those in the single
account treatment group were offered only one box, while those in the multiple account group
were offered 3 lockboxes. However, people were allowed to take less than 3 boxes if they wanted,
and in fact some people did this – 24% took only 1 box, 33% took 2 boxes, and 42% took 3 boxes
(1% did not take any boxes).20To differentiate the boxes, they were painted different colors –
everyone received a silver box, while the second and third boxes were painted black and brown
respectively. For those in the multiple box groups, the project passbooks allowed for separate
tracking of deposits and withdrawals for each box.
In the mobile money treatment, respondents in a single mobile money group were offered only
1 account, while those in multiple account group received were given a choice to get up to 2 mobile
money accounts. Each account had a separate SIM card and associated phone number due to the
fact that the existing mobile money product offered exactly one account within a single phone
number. To encourage people to use these with minimal hassle, the respondents were provided
18Fees were reimbursed weekly by making transfers equivalent to the fee amount to each account through a batch
process. Therefore, respondents had to incur fees and then wait to be reimbursed, and so our treatment is not identical
to a policy in which withdrawals were actually free. The average fee for transactions observed in our sample would
have been about 5%.
19This module, along with surveys, can be found on the authors’ websites.
20It it surprising that some people chose to take less than 3 (since they were free). We can only conjecture that
people might have felt guilty about taking boxes that they did not intend to use.
10a dual-sim phone, discussed below. As with the boxes, the mobile money accounts were labeled
as silver or black on the mobile money interface of respondents’ phones, but during surveying we
referred to those accounts by the last 4 digits of the account phone number.
During baseline, we asked all respondents about their savings goals. At the time when accounts
were opened (which was about 2 months after baseline), those in the treatment groups were en-
couraged to use the project account(s) to save towards their savings goal. Speciﬁcally, we asked
respondents to write their savings purpose on a piece of paper, which was then attached to the lid
on the inside of their project boxes for the box treatment, while those in the mobile money account
treatment, were asked to keep it with them. Summary statistics of savings purposes are reported
in Web Appendix Table A1. Column 1 shows purposes elicited at baseline for the entire sample,
while the next 4 columns show purposes elicited at account opening. Goals are heterogeneous: at
baseline, sizeable fractions listed business reinvestment, general consumption, and emergencies,
while others listed a variety of other goals including land, durable goods, and education. Given
the heterogeneity in goals, it is likely that accounts would have impacts on a variety of different
outcomes.
2.2.2 Phone surveys
A primary goal of this project was to measure the effect of savings devices at high frequency. To do
this, we opted to measure outcomes using high-frequency phone surveys (described in more detail
in section 2.3). To implement this effectively, we gave everyone in our sample a basic feature
phone, but with dual SIM capability (worth about $12). Even though 95% of the sample already
had a phone at baseline, we decided to give out new phones because we were concerned that the
phones people already owned were of low quality and might break or need to be replaced prior
to the end of the experiment. Moreover, in order to successfully implement the multiple mobile
money accounts treatment, we needed people to have phones to have two slots for SIM cards,
which are not commonly used.
Since it is possible that the high-frequency survey itself is a treatment (for example, by focusing
11attention on measured outcomes), we randomly split the sample into two groups: only one was
administered the high-frequency phone survey (which we call the “HFPS”). To measure the effect
of surveying itself, we administered two monitoring surveys to the entire sample, so that we could
compare responses between those given high frequency surveys and those who were not. In Section
4, we utilize the HFPS randomization to examine the effect of regular surveying on outcomes
measured in the monitoring surveys but ultimately ﬁnd no discernible impact.
2.3 Data
We utilize information from administrative data as well as a number of different types of surveys to
conduct our analysis. At the start of the project, we conducted a baseline survey, which contained
questions on household and demographic characteristics, business outcomes, savings, cash ﬂows,
and related measures. We also administered a short “intake survey” to all respondents, about
2-3 months after the baseline survey. For those in the treatment groups, survey administration
coincided with the handing out of the boxes/opening of the mobile money accounts. This survey
included versions of many of the questions that would later constitute our main surveys, recalled
over the 3 previous days. These pre-treatment values are used as control variables, making all
regressions ANCOV A (McKenzie 2012).
We have two main sources of data to measure treatment effects: high-frequency phone surveys
(HFPS) and two monitoring surveys (all surveys are on the authors’ webpages). The HFPS mea-
sured business outcomes and labor supply at the daily level, and household expenditures, transfers,
savings, credit, shocks and related outcomes at the weekly level. The HFPS was conducted in two
waves, one in September-October 2017 (covering 8 weeks) and another in February-March 2018
(covering 6 weeks). In Wave 1, respondents were called twice per week, i.e., every 3-4 days. In
one of the weekly interviews, the respondent was administered a “short” survey which took about
15 minutes and which asked about business outcomes over the past 3 days (day by day). The
other “long” survey took about 40 minutes and included all the questions in the short call, but also
added a recall module for other outcomes that were expected to be rarer or more memorable and
12thus could be reliably remembered over a week. These included shocks such as household illness
and funerals, expenditures, deposits and withdrawals from various saving sources,21and transfers
given and received. For example, for deposits, a short survey which was administered on say, a
Wednesday, would ask the respondent the amount of deposits they made in each savings place on
each of the preceding 3 days, i.e., on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday; while a long survey done on
that day would ask the same set of questions for each of the preceding 4 days.22Long-survey-only
questions, such as expenditure on food, were asked for each of the preceding 7 days. Due to bud-
getary constraints, respondents were called only once per week in Wave 2 and were administered
only the “long” version of the survey.
Respondents were randomized into which days they were to be called, and this day remained
unchanged throughout the project.23Respondents were able to pick the time of day when they
wished to be called. To encourage compliance, respondents were given US $2 in airtime for each
week of the survey and were also enrolled into a lottery in which there was a 1/4 chance of winning
an additional US $3. Airtime was sent directly to the respondents’ phones after each phone call
was completed.24We control for lottery payments in all HFPS regressions. If a respondent did not
answer the phone, she was called at least twice more that day (3 times total). If the respondent was
still unreachable, a make-up call was scheduled for the following day. During this call, we asked
for information for the preceding 4 days in order to reconstruct the lost day.
The other surveys used to calculate treatment effects are called the “monitoring surveys.” These
were conducted twice, after each round of the HFPS, in January 2018 and March 2018. These were
also done over the phone, but included the entire sample. These surveys took approximately 75
minutes to complete, and included questions similar or identical to the HFPS, though over a longer
21We collapse information on savings into 7 categories: (1) formal accounts in banks, MFIs, or SACCOs, (2)
savings groups (ROSCAs or VSLAs), (3) non-project mobile money, (4) non-project boxes, (5) project mobile money,
(6) project boxes, and (7) cash at home. For cash at home, we asked about money in a “secret place at home” since
this was the most effective way of asking about this in pre-testing. Within each type 1-4 and 7, we only asked about
total savings and did not ask about possible multiple accounts.
22The speciﬁc question for savings was “How much did put in a {source} for saving purposes on {day}?
23Respondents were allowed to change the day of the survey at the outset of the project but only 1 of 401 respon-
dents ultimately changed the day.
24Respondents were enrolled in the lottery even if they were not reached for a speciﬁc call, but they did not receive
the US $2 payment for survey completion.
13recall period – for example, outcomes like labor supply were measured at the daily level over a
week-long look back period, while deposits and withdrawals were measured at a monthly level for
a 2-3 months-long lookback period. Rarer events, such as a loan, were measured cumulatively for
the entire period between survey rounds. The surveys also included several other questions, such
as those about self-reported ﬁnancial security, land purchases, and tuition payments. The second
monitoring survey (the endline survey) included additional debrieﬁng questions about people’s ex-
perience with the accounts, pressures to share money and experiences with the surveys themselves.
Respondents were compensated $2 USD via airtime per survey round.
As an independent veriﬁcation of lockbox usage, we conducted an unannounced in-person
“lockbox check” at the respondents’ businesses with a random sub-sample in the box groups in
December 2017. During this visit, we ﬁrst asked a number of questions about usage of the project
boxes, including cumulative deposits and withdrawals since the start of the project as well as the
current balance. After the survey, enumerators requested to visually inspect the box (as in Dupas
and Robinson 2013b) in order to verify the balance. Seventy-nine percent of respondents who we
interviewed were willing and able to open at least one of the boxes.25
Finally, we implemented a long term follow-up survey in September 2019, about 18 months af-
ter the conclusion of the study, to track long-term usage of the accounts. We contacted a randomly
selected subsample of 200 participants drawn from the treatment groups only (the control group
was not included) for a short phone survey to measure if they were still using the accounts.
In addition to all these surveys, we have access to administrative data from the telco on all the
transactions made on the project mobile money accounts for the duration of the project (July 2017
- April 2018) as well as for 15 months after (until July 2019).
25Of the remaining 21%, 5.4% could not open the box because they did not have the key with them, 9.4% refused
to open the box or travel home to show the box to the ﬁeld ofﬁcer, 2.4% did not have access to the boxes at box checks,
3.3% respondents with boxes were not checked because the respondent could not travel home with the ﬁeld ofﬁcer on
the day of the survey.
142.4 Attrition
Attrition from our full sample of 801 respondents is shown in Web Appendix Table A2. Columns
1-4 show attrition during the HFPS, with the odd columns showing whether a respondent appears
at least once and the even columns showing the percentage of calls that were successfully com-
pleted. In Round 1, 99% of respondents completed at least one survey and 89% of calls were
made; in round 2, survey completion fell to 84% and 74%, respectively. While not unexpected,
lower compliance in round 2 points to the problem of conducting phone surveys in general, as
people lose their phones, change phone numbers, or become fatigued with the surveys. We do
not ﬁnd any differences in attrition across the various treatment groups and the coefﬁcients on the
treatment indicators are not signiﬁcant for any of the surveys. However, HFPS respondents were 7
percentage points less likely to complete a ﬁrst monitoring survey, which might be because HFPS
respondents were more likely to be fatigued by the surveying process. Survey completion for the
second monitoring survey is balanced across HFPS and non-HFPS respondents. In total, 761 of
801 sampled respondents ultimately appear in our analysis sample.
2.5 Summary statistics and randomization check
Summary statistics and a check of randomization balance are presented in Table 1 (from the base-
line survey) and Web Appendix Table A3 (from the intake survey). From Table 1 Panel A, 46% of
the sample is male and has 9 years of education. Ninety-three percent of respondents have an iron
roof on their homes and the average value of household assets is $873. Panel B shows statistics
on business outcomes. Sixty-eight percent of the businesses are in retail, with the remainder pre-
dominantly in services, which includes occupations such as barbershops, tailoring, and welding.
These businesses are very small: average weekly proﬁts are about $19 per week and the average
ﬁrm has only $293 in equipment and inventory. Nevertheless, these respondents are better off than
the average Malawian.26
26According to the World Bank, GNI per capita was $340 in 2017 in Malawi. In the 2016 Malawi Integrated
Household Survey, only about half the households reported having iron sheets as the material of their roof.
15Panel C shows statistics on savings. Average savings across all sources was $120 at baseline,
split across 2.5 savings places.27We observe that people already engage in physical separation of
cash for different purposes: the average respondent has 2.4 goals and saves up for these goals in
different places. In particular, 78% of people have separate saving places for different purposes,
and only 35% save for more than 1 purpose in a single savings place. The most common saving
place is keeping cash at home, reported by 82% of respondents. Saving groups (VSLAs and
ROSCAs) are used by 52% of the sample, and 47% report using mobile money accounts to save.
Thirty percent of the sample have access to a bank account and 22% save in saving boxes. Note
that a sizable minority of the sample already saves in lockboxes; our take-up rates suggest that the
project lockboxes were seen as being of higher quality and were preferred to the original boxes.
Sixty two percent of the sample have access to a mobile money account, deﬁned as either owning
one or using someone else’s. About half of the respondents have their own accounts at baseline.
In columns 2-4, we present p-values from F-tests of joint equality between the two box treat-
ments and control, the two mobile money account treatments and control, and all four groups
together. The samples appear to largely be balanced - of the 21 variables in the table, the p-value
for the joint test across all groups is below 0.1 for just 1 variable - the dummy for saving in a bank
account. We also ﬁnd some evidence of imbalance within the subtreatments. For the box treat-
ments, we ﬁnd p-values below 0.1 between the box and control group for having a mobile money
account and saving in a box (the probability of savings in a box is 0.22 in control, 0.23 in the one
box group, and 0.12 in the multiple box group). For the mobile money account treatments, we ﬁnd
p-values below 0.1 for whether the household farms, value of assets, and a dummy for whether the
household saves in a bank account.28
27We did not ask whether people had more than one savings account, within a certain group. So, if a household
held multiple bank accounts or participated in multiple VSLAs, they may have more savings places than we measure.
28We also examine balance on the variables measured in the intake survey in Web Appendix Table A3. The majority
of the characteristics suggest comparability of groups.
163 Results
3.1 Take-up
Our primary measure of usage is the value of deposits, i.e., the inﬂow of cash into the account,
irrespective of the length of time this cash is held in the account. By deﬁnition, this is a ﬂow
ﬁgure, instead of a stock measure like the balance. While either measure will provide a sense of
account usage (and indeed results are similar using other measures of usage including withdrawals
and balance), we prefer deposits because accumulating a balance, in and of itself, was not the
intended use of these accounts. Rather, we envisioned that the accounts could be used to save
up for larger purchases, and therefore, we expected people to withdraw money eventually. Our
expectation is that beneﬁts should primarily accrue only after these withdrawals were made and
were followed by the intended purchases, implying that the balance itself is not very informative –
observing a low balance may be because usage was low, or simply because a withdrawal was made
recently. For this reason, much of the prior literature has also focused on deposits.29
Figure 1 shows CDFs of deposits into the single and multiple devices. While administrative
data would be the preferred data source for this analysis, we lack such data for the lockboxes,
and we therefore show results for different data sources in different panels. In each Panel, we
show results separately for boxes and mobile money accounts. Panels A and B show data from
the surveys (Panel A is the monitoring survey and Panel B is the HFPS). In both, we observe
higher deposits among the multiple box group than the single box group, but no difference in
deposits between those receiving one or multiple mobile money accounts. In Panel C2, we use
administrative data from the telco for mobile money users, and ﬁnd no difference in usage (if
anything, usage for multiple mobile money accounts appears to be lower, at least in the left tail).
Table 2 presents summary statistics. Panel A uses records from account opening. As expected,
nearly all respondents who were offered an account chose to open one. Of those offered multi-
ple boxes, only 76% took more than 1 box and only 42% took 3 (despite the boxes being free).
29For example, Dupas and Robinson (2013a) and Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2019) report results for the value of
deposits, while papers like Prina (2015) and Dupas et al. (2018) show both stocks and ﬂows.
17However, for mobile money accounts, take-up of a second account was much lower (only 29%),
which helps to explain the results in Figure 1, which show no effect of multiple accounts. The
telco was only able to link one account to each SIM card, and so using multiple accounts required
people to switch between accounts. Even though people had access to dual-SIM phones, many
respondents reported feeling that it was cumbersome to use more than one account, and so used
only one. We therefore do not expect to ﬁnd differential effects of these two treatment groups
on downstream outcomes, and the multiple mobile money account treatment can be thought of as
similar or identical to the single mobile money account treatment.
Panel B1 displays measurement of cumulative usage from the date of receiving the box until
the in-person lockbox check in December 2017, about 5 months later. As discussed above, at
this visit, we veriﬁed balances but had to rely on self-reports for deposit and withdrawal activity.
Self-reported usage of boxes was nearly universal: 94-97% of people used a box at least once, and
91-92% at least 5 times. This level of take-up is far higher than in many prior studies, including
several in Malawi with banks (Dupas et al. 2018 ;Brune et al. 2016) or VSLAs (i.e. Ksoll et al.
2016). Our preferred measure of usage, the value of deposits, is also substantial: mean deposits
were $23 per month in the single box group and $31 in the multiple box group (about 34% higher
than the single box group).
Panel B2 show cumulative usage from administrative data from the telco. The evidence sug-
gests lower usage than the boxes, though ﬁgures are still substantial. About 67-79% of respondents
made at least one mobile money deposit, and between 49% and 70% made more than 5. The aver-
age value of deposits was about $9 per month.
In Table 3, we regress the value of deposits (measured in different data sources) on an indicator
for receiving multiple accounts (as well as other important background covariates). Across the
three measures, we consistently observe that deposits in the multiple account group were no differ-
ent in the case of mobile money, but were statistically signiﬁcantly higher for boxes, with a magni-
tude of 24% in the lockbox check, 48% in the HFPS and 25% in the monitoring surveys. While the
difference in point estimates across measures is not particularly meaningful (since deposits were
18measured over different windows and may reﬂect seasonal changes in savings behaviors), these
results all point to higher savings from the introduction of an additional box.30These regressions
also conﬁrm that for the mobile money account groups, receiving a second account did not cause
an increase in usage.
3.2 Treatment effects
The main analysis for this paper is organized around a pre-analysis plan.31We pre-speciﬁed the
following outcomes: savings, credit, labor supply, household expenditures, and business outcomes
(however, the plan does not speciﬁcally explicate how these variables are to be deﬁned). For both
the HFPS and monitoring surveys, we report results from two intent-to-treat speciﬁcations. Both
of our empirical speciﬁcations were pre-speciﬁed, and are given by Equations (1) and (2) below.32
In Equation (1), we analyze the effects of each of our 4 main treatments (one box, multiple box,
one mobile money account, multiple mobile money account) separately:
Yist=q1+q2LB1
i+q3LBmult
i+q4MM1
i+q4MMmult
i+tLt+ms+dt+hHF+lXi+eist (1)
In our second speciﬁcation, we pool the single and multiple account treatments together, to
study the effects of having any box or any mobile money account:
30Among background covariates, we ﬁnd some evidence that people with higher baseline savings or that had bank
or mobile money accounts saved more. We ﬁnd some evidence that people who are more “taxed” by their networks
(i.e., people who at baseline reported giving transfers but not receiving them) and people with more assets use boxes
more; women use their boxes less. We ﬁnd that distance to mobile money agents is associated with lower mobile
money deposits, which is in line with the hypothesis that transaction costs discourage usage. We don’t ﬁnd any
meaningful heterogeneity by other demographic characteristics.
31The PAP can be found at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2449.
32Note that our speciﬁcations are similar but not identical to those written in the PAP. In particular, we add 3
ﬁxed effects that were not pre-speciﬁed. They are (1) whether the respondent won the airtime lottery, (2) whether
the respondent was sampled for the HFPS (for monitoring survey outcomes only), and (3) the date of the survey
(monitoring survey) or outcome (HFPS). The results are not sensitive to these controls but including these ﬁxed effects
seem preferable due to questions about whether the lottery or HFPS has an effect, and to control for possible time
trends.
19Yist=d1+d2LBi+d3MM i+kLt+ms+dt+hHF+rXi+eist (2)
In Equations (1) and (2), LBiandMM iare dummies for the lockbox or mobile money account
treatment, while superscripts 1andmult in Equation (1) denote the single and multiple account
treatments respectively.
In both equations, Yistis an outcome for individual iat time tin strata s,Ltis an indicator of
airtime lottery wins (measured either daily or weekly), depending on the measurement window of
the outcome variable, and msis a strata ﬁxed effect. dtis a ﬁxed effect for the date of the interview
in the case of monitoring survey regressions, and for the date of the outcome in question for HFPS
regressions. hHFis a ﬁxed effect for whether the respondent was sampled for the HFPS surveys,
and is therefore estimated only for the monitoring survey regressions. Xiis a vector of controls,
which includes the mean of the dependent variable (over the day covered by the intake survey),
making the speciﬁcation ANCOV A, as well as a set of other controls that were imbalanced at
baseline.33Standard errors are clustered at the individual level, and the regressions are estimated
with population weights.
All HFPS regressions are at the day-level, i.e., we utilize the 3-4 day look-back period in the
surveys to convert the data into a daily panel. Monitoring survey outcomes vary in how they are
deﬁned across outcomes. We provide detailed explanations for each outcome in the notes for
relevant tables. We present two versions of all main tables, one for the HFPS and one for the
monitoring surveys. In these tables, we report results from Equations (1) and (2) in separate panels
- A and B. All monetary values are winsorized at 5% and expressed in USD (at 700 MWK to 1
USD).
The panels provide separate sets of information. Panel A tests whether the second account had
an effect, by performing a test of equality between one and multiple accounts. This is particularly
useful for savings outcomes (Tables 4 and 5). However, because each treatment arm is of modest
33We include these controls at the suggestion of a referee. Results without these controls are included in Appendix
E. Results are similar but slightly stronger with controls.
20size, the pooled regressions in Panel B provide more power for testing the separate question of
whether accounts affected downstream outcomes (whether multiple or single). The main tables
are limited to only pre-speciﬁed outcomes. We present naive p-values in the main tables, and
sharpened q-values in Web Appendix Tables A5 and A6 (following Anderson 2008).34We also
collected some non-pre-speciﬁed outcomes of interest, and show results for these in the Appendix.
3.3 Savings
We present effects of treatment accounts on savings in Tables 4 (HFPS) and 5 (monitoring surveys),
where our dependent variable is daily deposits. In both Tables, Column 1 shows effects on savings
in the project accounts, which are unsurprisingly statistically signiﬁcant since the control group
had zero savings in those accounts by design. In Columns 2-5, we estimate the effect of treatment
on savings in all boxes (or mobile money accounts), including non-experimental accounts.
We discuss the lockbox ﬁrst. In both surveys, we ﬁnd that providing a single lockbox signif-
icantly increases total box savings; that providing multiple lockboxes increases box savings by
more, and that the difference between treatment groups is signiﬁcant. The effects are sizeable: sin-
gle and multiple boxes increase box savings by $0.49 and $1.26 respectively in the HFPS (which
is sizeable, even relative to total deposits of $2.43 per day – Column 9). In the monitoring surveys,
the ﬁgures are $0.47 and $0.75 respectively, on a base of $1.53. Turning to the mobile money
treatment, we ﬁnd clear evidence of usage but at a lower level than for the boxes. Total mobile
money deposits increase by $0.11-$0.18 in the HFPS and $0.10-$0.12 in the monitoring surveys.
To provide some evidence on crowdout, we show effects on other savings places in Columns 6-
8 (as well as Columns 3 and 5). As expected, in both surveys, we observe a statistically signiﬁcant
decline in cash at home for the lockbox group – in the status quo, many people keep cash at home
in a secret location, and in the treatment group they moved some of this money into the box. We
34We correct p-values across all 19 pre-speciﬁed outcomes. We also adjust for the number of regressors. At one
extreme, since there are 4 individual treatment arms, there are 76 hypotheses for the individual regressors. At the
other, there are only 2 tests per regressions for regressions in which we pool observations within box and mobile
money account treatments.
21also observe declines in some other categories such as mobile money deposits and savings groups.
Column 9 shows total deposits, in all savings sources. For the single box group, the treatment
effect on total deposits is statistically insigniﬁcant in both surveys (and actually negative in the
HFPS). For the multiple box group, the treatment effect is $0.84 in the HFPS and $0.49 in the
monitoring surveys (signiﬁcant at 10% and 5%, respectively). In both surveys, we reject equality
of the treatments. When we pool the two box treatments (Panel B), we see positive point estimates
but with t-stats just over 1. For mobile money, we ﬁnd weaker evidence of an increase in total
deposits: because the second mobile money account was not used much, our preferred test is the
pooled treatment (Panel B), which actually has a negative point estimate in Table 4 and a positive,
insigniﬁcant coefﬁcient in Table 5.35
While we do not ﬁnd strong evidence of an increase in total savings, this is not uncommon in
the prior literature, largely due to power. Here too, the standard error on total savings (for boxes) is
10-30% of the control mean, so that conﬁdence interval includes large values. It is common in this
literature to not ﬁnd effects on total deposits, even in cases where there is evidence of downstream
effects. Thus, the ultimate indicator of usage remains downstream outcomes. Second, even if total
deposits did not increase, it is possible that moving money from an insecure place like cash at
home to the experimental accounts would be beneﬁcial.36
3.4 Labor supply, business outcomes and credit
In Tables 6 (HFPS) and 7 (monitoring surveys), we examine pre-speciﬁed outcomes related to
labor supply, business success, and credit. Labor supply (columns 1-6) is disaggregated between
the main business, secondary occupations, and farming. In both Tables, we observe negative point
35In Web Appendix B, we measure savings effects on other measures of usage - withdrawals (Tables B1 and B2),
balance (Table B3), and net deposits (Tables B4 and B5). As discussed above, we expected effects on both deposits
and withdrawals, and we ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant effects for total withdrawals in the monitoring surveys (though
not the HFPS) for all treatments.
36We show heterogeneity analysis by 3 pre-speciﬁed covariates in Appendix D, Tables D1 and D2. These are
(1) pressure to share resources (i.e., if they are “taxed”, which we deﬁne as giving but not receiving transfers); (2)
gender; and (3) displaying hyperbolic preferences in incentivized time preference questions using the convex budget
set methodology of Andreoni and Sprenger (2012). Many of these coefﬁcients and F-tests are insigniﬁcant so we do
not discuss them in the interest of space, and do not perform heterogeneity analysis by these characteristics.
22estimates on labor supply in the main business, though the effect is stronger in the HFPS where
pooled regressions for mobile money and all accounts show consistent decrease in hours worked.
We ﬁnd strong evidence that hours in farming increased – a ﬁnding that is robust even in the
sub-treatments (implying that the reduction in the main business was put into farming). We also
ﬁnd that the effects on farming hours are consistently larger (by a factor of at least 2), albeit
insigniﬁcant, for the multiple box group than they are for the single box group, suggesting that
greater savings in the multiple box treatment impacted downstream outcomes. Also consistent
with the decline in labor supply, we observe negative coefﬁcients on business proﬁts and revenue
(Columns 7-8). This effect is similar in magnitude across HFPS and monitoring surveys (point
estimates are 10-15% of the control mean), though is only signiﬁcant for the pooled mobile money
treatment in HFPS.
The labor supply and business results suggest an increase in investment in farming, and a
reallocation of labor away from the main business, which would be consistent with the marginal
return to farming exceeding that of the main business. While we can only speculate as to why this
might be, a possibility might be that returns to farming are risky or will only be realized in the
future, and so respondents concentrate labor supply in daily business which provides immediate
cash at relatively low-risk. Boxes or mobile money accounts may help people build up a buffer that
allows them to mitigate this behavior. This ﬁnding is related to several recent papers that ﬁnd labor
supply effects of an easing of ﬁnancial constraints, such as Fink, Jack and Masiye (2020), who
ﬁnd that providing credit to smallholder farmers decreases off-farm labor and increases own-farm
labor. Our ﬁnding that saving accounts cause a reallocation of labor supply is related to Callen
et al. (2019), who ﬁnd that Sri Lankan households who were given access to deposit collection for
interest-bearing accounts decrease their hours of leisure and increase labor supply.
Given that we detect effects on labor supply in farming, we examine a few other farming-related
outcomes in Appendix Table A7. This analysis is restricted to 3 outcomes which were measured
in only the monitoring surveys: renting land, buying land, and expenditures on farm inputs. Point
estimates for all treatments are positive, though signiﬁcant only for the boxes. The effects are
23large: respondents in the box groups are about 4 percentage points more likely to buy land (against
a control mean of 2%) and about 9 percentage points more likely to rent (against a control mean of
5%). For farming inputs, we ﬁnd effects of the order of 25% of the control mean.
Finally, we ﬁnd evidence of an increase in credit to customers (measured only in the monitoring
surveys – Table 7, Column 11), but no change in loans taken out (Columns 9-10 in Tables 6 and
7). For credit to customers, we ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant effects for two treatments and border-
line signiﬁcant ones for the other two (t-stats of 1.4), with effect sizes ranging from $0.10-$0.17,
equivalent to 43-73% of the control mean of $0.23. This result suggests that increased liquidity
may have been passed on to customers as a way of expanding business in a highly competitive
environment. Casaburi and Reed (2019) show a similar ﬁnding, though in the different setting of
traders buying cocoa from farmers.
3.5 Expenditures
Tables 8 and 9 show effects on various expenditure categories. All outcomes are expressed in daily
terms. Since there are several treatments and several types of expenditures, we start with total
expenditures (the last column in each table). In both surveys, we ﬁnd sizeable, positive coefﬁcients
for boxes. The coefﬁcient is signiﬁcant at 10% in Table 8 but not signiﬁcant in Table 9 (with a
t-stat of about 1.2). The mobile money coefﬁcients are also positive, though not signiﬁcant. We
also examine spending on individual categories in the remaining columns. While many of the
coefﬁcients are positive, the strongest evidence of an effect is school spending in the HFPS.
3.6 Effect of accounts on ability to cope with shocks
One of our pre-speciﬁed outcomes was to test whether accounts reduced susceptibility to shocks.
Appendix Tables A8 and A9 show effects of the accounts on inter-personal transfers and loans
(please note that these outcomes were not pre-speciﬁed). While several coefﬁcients are positive,
they are modest and largely insigniﬁcant. Usage data from the telco (shown in Appendix Table
A10) is consistent with this pattern. While the average respondent deposited close to $120 over
24the study period, they only sent about $14 and received about $12. Panel B of the table indicates
that, by contrast, people used the accounts for savings more than transfers. Web Appendix Tables
A11 and A12 regress our set of pre-speciﬁed outcomes (Table A11) or whether a disease is treated
promptly (Table A12) on health shocks and an interaction between those shocks and treatment. We
ﬁnd no evidence of an improvement in risk-coping. While this result is in some contrast to much
of the existing literature which does ﬁnd improved resiliency as a result of mobile money, it could
be that effects on these types of common health shocks is smaller than on bigger events.
3.7 Long-term usage
The results in much of the paper are for relatively short-term usage. Do people continue to use
the accounts for a longer period? To shed some light on this, we collected a long-term usage
survey in September 2019 (26 months after the accounts were ﬁrst opened; 18 months after the
endline survey; and 16 months after the ﬁnal fee reimbursements were made for the mobile money
group). We supplemented the information collected through this survey with long-term usage data
(up until August 2019) from the telco. Results are summarized in Appendix Table A14 (Panel A
for the survey and Panel B for the telco data).
For lockboxes, we ﬁnd that almost everyone still had access to their boxes. Over 60% of box
recipients are still using it, and over 50% made a deposit in the past month. Deposit amounts are
sizeable ($14-$19 in the past month). For mobile money accounts, as during the study period,
usage is lower than that for the boxes, but meaningful. Across the single and multiple account
treatments, 40% reported still using the account and 30% reported having made a deposit in the
past month. The reported deposits in the past month are $9, similar to the reported monthly average
of deposits during the study period. The telco data corroborates this pattern of sustained usage,
with 50% of the respondents having made at least one deposit after the study concluded.
254 Threats to validity
A possible concern with our analysis is that our program effects are almost entirely based on sur-
vey responses. This is unavoidable in this context, since these small businesses do not have digital
records of activity (like barcode scanners) and most businesses this small do not keep detailed
ﬁnancial records, (i.e., McKenzie and Woodruff 2017). Moreover, some outcomes (like expendi-
tures) can typically only be captured in a survey. Thus, while this research would be impossible
without relying on surveys, their use does raise some questions which we address in this section.
We dedicate a separate empirical Appendix C to present all our analyses in this respect.
One type of concern would be experimenter demand effects or social desirability bias – i.e.
that respondents felt pressure to answer questions in a certain way, because they believed that
those responses would be viewed more favorably either in the context of the experiment or because
they constitute appropriate behavior in general. Our read of the literature is that existing research
suggests that such effects are modest in many settings (i.e. De Quidt, Haushofer and Roth 2018;
Mummolo and Peterson 2019; Dhar, Jain and Jayachandran 2018); moreover, such effects would
have to be differentially present by treatment. Even signaling social desirability would be difﬁcult
for some outcomes, since the effects on some key outcomes (such as the decline in labor supply or
the increase in spending) would have been unlikely to be perceived as desirable.
For a few savings-related outcomes, it is possible for us to explore the possibility of experi-
menter demand effects, because we have objective measures of actual usage. In particular, for the
lockbox groups, we physically veriﬁed balances at the lockbox check; for the mobile money ac-
count groups, we can observe true usage in the telco’s administrative data. We start with reporting
integrity checks for the mobile money account group, which are presented in Appendix Table C1.
Here, we check correlations between the survey and the administrative data for a binary measure
of making a deposit over any given period as well as for the amount deposited. The panels are
organized in order of time period – Panel A is at the day level, Panel B at the week level, and Panel
C is cumulative over the time period. In each regression, the coefﬁcients are statistically signiﬁcant
but point estimates are smaller than one. Point estimates are also monotonically increasing in the
26time period – the coefﬁcient on total deposits is 0.45 at the day level, 0.65 at the month week level,
and 0.82 cumulatively. We interpret these results as suggestive that respondents might have mixed
up the exact dates of transactions, but generally truthfully reported on their savings behavior.
At the lockbox check visit, we ﬁrst asked respondents questions about usage of the lockbox, and
then asked to inspect the box right away. In case the box was stored at the respondent’s home, we
requested them to travel with us immediately to their home to show us the box (so that there was no
opportunity to manipulate the amount in the box). There is undeniable selection into participating
in this check – for example, respondents who lived far away or who had a high opportunity cost of
time would be less likely to travel to their home. In total, out of those who agreed to participate
in a survey (without anticipating a lockbox check), 79% of people agreed to show us the box.37
For those who opened the box, we regress the observed amount on the reported amount in Web
Appendix Table C2. Pooling all boxes and individuals together, we ﬁnd a coefﬁcient very close to
1 (1.07), suggesting that reporting is, on the whole, accurate. Panels B and C run these regressions
separately for the groups offered one box and multiple boxes. We ﬁnd a pooled coefﬁcient of 0.88
for one box and 1.13 in multiple boxes, meaning that for any given amount reported in the survey,
people in the multiple box group actually had more in the box, potentially suggestive of difﬁculty
remembering balances across multiple places. Thus, while we would view any differences in
reporting behavior across treatment groups to be minimal, if anything they would work against
ﬁnding larger survey measures of savings of multiple boxes. goal38
We plot the amount in the box against the amount reported in Web Appendix Figure C1. Panel
A shows all values, while Panel B focuses only below the 75th percentile (since there are some
very large values). As can be seen, the relationship is strong, but many values do not lie on the 45
degree line. We ﬁnd that 50% report the exact sum in the box, 37% over-report, and 14% under-
report. Thus, there is some evidence of over-reporting, but there does not seem to be evidence that
37The differences in self-reported balances between those who showed lockboxes and who who did not was about
-$11 ($30 for those who showed the box vs. $41 for those who did not). The p-value of this difference is 0.37.
38It is possible that there exist incremental experimenter demand effects for multiple accounts (i.e. respondents
may have felt compelled to report positive usage for each account separately). We do not view this as likely, since we
observe no incremental reported effect of the second mobile money account (which we now was not used, from the
administrative data).
27this would have substantially biased our results.
A separate concern with our study is that the HFPS itself changed behavior or reporting. We
examine this in Web Appendix Table C3 where we examine whether estimated treatment effects
on the monitoring surveys differ between HFPS respondents and non-respondents. In all speciﬁ-
cations, a joint test of the signiﬁcance of the interaction terms yields a p-value well over 0.05.39
5 Discussion and Conclusion
People throughout the world save up simultaneously for multiple goals of varying amounts and
duration. A simple strategy for saving concurrently for several purposes might be to create multiple
physically separated accounts, but this may be challenging in developing countries like Malawi
where two thirds of the adult population lacks even a single bank account (see the 2017 Findex
– Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2018). In this paper, we experimentally vary the number of accounts
that respondents are given, and we ﬁnd that entrepreneurs who receive multiple lockboxes saved
about 30% more. By contrast, providing a second mobile money account had no effect, because
of technical challenges. These results strongly suggest that a simple policy of providing multiple
accounts with labeled purposes may cost-effectively increase savings, as long as the accounts are
simple to use.
In addition, we ﬁnd robust evidence that getting access to savings accounts had strong impacts
on downstream outcomes. We observe that entrepreneurs who received savings accounts invested
more in farming (possibly by substituting labor supply away from their small business), increased
expenditures, and gave out more credit to customers. However, we do not ﬁnd differential impacts
of an additional box on downstream outcomes (the effect of an additional mobile money account is
expected to be minimal based on take-up). While this could be for power reasons, it is also possible
39Another concern is that effects might have been partly driven by the lottery payments. To explore this, we interact
each of our treatments with a dummy for having received a lottery payment, and run regressions with ﬁxed effects at
the individual level. We code the lottery win as being relevant if it was won in the previous period. Results are
presented in Web Appendix Table D3. We ﬁnd modest effects of the lottery in the control group: we see no effect on
labor supply, though we observe evidence of an increase in revenues. We see some evidence of a differential labor
supply response in the treatment group, but the sign of the treatment effect is not consistent.
28that the ﬁrst box was often used for immediate expenses while the second box was for longer-term
goals, and so effects would take longer to manifest. This is purely speculative however.
Our results lend support to the optimism around mobile money, and provide new evidence
that mobile money can be effective as a tool for mobilizing savings (above and beyond its value
as a transfer system). However, our work does leave some important questions open for future
research. In our experiment, we waived withdrawal fees, provided training, and encouraged people
to save for their goals. Each of these components was light-touch, and we conjecture that they had
a modest effect on usage; however, the evidence on this is not conclusive. For the withdrawal
fees, we examine how usage changed in the period after fees were reimbursed (May 2018) in
Web Appendix Figure A5. We observe a decline in activity shortly after fees were removed,
but a resumption of activity in the following months. The training we provided was very basic
and consisted mostly of basic literacy on how to use mobile money accounts. This is something
agents are already supposed to be doing, but in practice this training is not provided. Finally, we
conjecture that simply encouraging people to save for their goals would not have been effective in
isolation, but perhaps the combined effect of encouragement and mobile money was more effective
than mobile money alone. Future work might explore these channels more deeply.
29References
Aggarwal, Shilpa, Valentina Brailovskaya, and Jonathan Robinson. 2019. “Daily In-
come, Labor Supply and Multiple Accounts: A Mobile Money Field Experiment with
Micro-Entrepreneurs in Malawi.” AEA RCT Registry, https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.2449-2.1.
https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.2449-2.1.
Aggarwal, Shilpa, Valentina Brailovskaya, and Jonathan Robinson. 2020. “Cashing In (and
Out): Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Mobile Money in Malawi.” AEA Papers and
Proceedings, 110: 599–604.
Ainslie, George. 2001. Breakdown of will. Cambridge University Press.
Aker, Jenny C, Melita Sawyer, Markus Goldstein, Michael O’Sullivan, and Margaret Mc-
Connell. 2020. “Just a bit of cushion: The role of a simple savings device in meeting planned
and unplanned expenses in rural Niger.” World Development, 128: 104772.
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early
intervention: A reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.”
Journal of the American statistical Association, 103(484): 1481–1495.
Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. 2012. “Estimating time preferences from convex bud-
gets.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3333–56.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the mast: Evidence
from a commitment savings product in the Philippines.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
121(2): 635–672.
Batista, Catia, and Pedro C Vicente. 2020a. “Improving access to savings through mo-
bile money: Experimental evidence from African smallholder farmers.” World Development,
129: 104905.
30Batista, Catia, and Pedro C Vicente. 2020b. “Is mobile money changing rural Africa? Evidence
from a ﬁeld experiment.” Unpublished.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2004. “Willpower and personal rules.” Journal of Political
Economy, 112(4): 848–886.
Blumenstock, Joshua, Michael Callen, and Tarek Ghani. 2018. “Why do defaults affect behav-
ior? Experimental evidence from Afghanistan.” American Economic Review, 108(10): 2868–
2901.
BMGF. 2020. “The Impact of Mobile Money on Poverty: Research Brief.”
Bradley, Alice. 1923. 50 Family Budgets. Woman’s Home Companion.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2016. “Facilitating savings for
agriculture: Field experimental evidence from Malawi.” Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 64(2): 187–220.
Callen, Michael, Suresh De Mel, Craig McIntosh, and Christopher Woodruff. 2019. “What
are the headwaters of formal savings? Experimental evidence from Sri Lanka.” The Review of
Economic Studies, 86(6): 2491–2529.
Casaburi, Lorenzo, and Tristan Reed. 2019. “Interlinked Transactions and Competition: Exper-
imental Evidence from Cocoa Markets.”
Dalton, Patricio, Haki Pamuk, Ravindra Ramrattan, Daan van Soest, and Burak Uras.
2020. “E-Payment Technology and Business Finance: A Randomize Control Trial with Mo-
bile Money.”
de Mel, Suresh, Craig McIntosh, Ketki Sheth, and Christopher Woodruff. forthcoming. “Can
Mobile-Linked Bank Accounts Bolster Savings? Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial
in Sri Lanka.” The Review of Economics and Statistics.
31Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, Saniya Ansar, and Jake Hess. 2018.
The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring ﬁnancial inclusion and the ﬁntech revolution.
The World Bank.
De Quidt, Jonathan, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth. 2018. “Measuring and
bounding experimenter demand.” American Economic Review, 108(11): 3266–3302.
Dhar, Diva, Tarun Jain, and Seema Jayachandran. 2018. “Reshaping adolescents’ gender atti-
tudes: Evidence from a school-based experiment in India.”
Dizon, Felipe, Erick Gong, and Kelly Jones. 2020. “The Effect of Promoting Savings on Informal
Risk Sharing Experimental Evidence from Vulnerable Women in Kenya.” Journal of Human
Resources, 55(3): 963–998.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013a. “Savings constraints and microenterprise de-
velopment: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 5(1): 163–92.
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013b. “Why don’t the poor save more? Evidence
from health savings experiments.” American Economic Review, 103(4): 1138–71.
Dupas, Pascaline, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson. 2019. “The effect of savings ac-
counts on interpersonal ﬁnancial relationships: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment in rural
Kenya.” The Economic Journal, 129(617): 273–310.
Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal. 2018. “Banking the
Unbanked? Evidence from three countries.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
10(2): 257–97.
Fink, Gunther, B Kelsey Jack, and Felix Masiye. 2020. “Seasonal Liquidity, Rural Labor Mar-
kets, and Agricultural Production.” American Economic Review, 110(11): 3351–92.
Francis, Eilin. 2018. “Paying to Repay? Experimental Evidence on Repayment Commitment.”
32Jack, William, and James Habyarimana. 2018. “High hopes: Experimental evidence on saving
and the transition to high school in Kenya.”
Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2014. “Risk sharing and transactions costs: Evidence from
Kenya’s mobile money revolution.” American Economic Review, 104(1): 183–223.
John, Anett. 2020. “When Commitment Fails: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Management
Science, 66(2): 503–529.
Jones, Kelly, and Erick Gong. 2020. “Precautionary Savings and Shock-Coping Behaviors: The
Effects of Promoting Mobile Bank Savings on Transactional Sex in Kenya.” Unpublished.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2018. “Price and control elasticities of demand for sav-
ings.” Journal of Development Economics, 130: 145–159.
Karlan, Dean, and Leigh L Linden. 2014. “Loose knots: Strong versus weak commitments to
save for education in Uganda.”
Kast, Felipe, and Dina Pomeranz. 2018. “Savings Accounts to Borrow Less-Experimental Evi-
dence from Chile.”
Koch, Alexander K, and Julia Nafziger. 2016. “Goals and bracketing under mental accounting.”
Journal of Economic Theory, 162: 305–351.
Ksoll, Christopher, Helene Bie Lilleør, Jonas Helth Lønborg, and Ole Dahl Rasmussen. 2016.
“Impact of Village Savings and Loan Associations: Evidence from a cluster randomized trial.”
Journal of Development Economics, 120: 70–85.
Lee, Jean N., Jonathan Morduch, Saravana Ravindran, Abu Shonchoy, and Hassan Zaman.
2021. “Poverty and Migration in the Digital Age: Experimental Evidence on Mobile Banking in
Bangladesh.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 13(1): 38–71.
33Lipscomb, Molly, and Laura Schechter. 2018. “Subsidies versus mental accounting nudges:
Harnessing mobile payment systems to improve sanitation.” Journal of development economics,
135: 235–254.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shaﬁr, and Jiaying Zhao. 2013. “Poverty impedes
cognitive function.” science, 341(6149): 976–980.
McKenzie, David. 2012. “Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments.”
Journal of development Economics, 99(2): 210–221.
McKenzie, David, and Christopher Woodruff. 2017. “Business Practices in Small Firms in De-
veloping Countries.” Management Science, 63(9): 2967–2981.
Mummolo, Jonathan, and Erik Peterson. 2019. “Demand effects in survey experiments: An
empirical assessment.” American Political Science Review, 113(2): 517–529.
Prina, Silvia. 2015. “Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment.”
Journal of development economics, 115: 16–31.
Soman, Dilip, and Amar Cheema. 2008. “"The Effect of Partitions on Controlling Consump-
tion,".” Journal of Marketing Research, 45(6): 665–673.
Soman, Dilip, and Amar Cheema. 2011. “Earmarking and partitioning: Increasing saving by
low-income households.” Journal of Marketing Research, 48(SPL): S14–S22.
Suri, Tavneet. 2017. “Mobile money.” Annual Review of Economics, 9: 497–520.
Suri, Tavneet, and William Jack. 2016. “The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile
money.” Science, 354(6317): 1288–1292.
Thaler, Richard H. 1999. “Mental accounting matters.” Journal of Behavioral decision making,
12(3): 183–206.
34Wieser, Christina, Miriam Bruhn, Johannes Philipp Kinzinger, Christian Simon Ruck-
teschler, and Soren Heitmann. 2019. “The Impact of Mobile Money on Poor Rural House-
holds: Experimental Evidence from Uganda.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, ,
(8913).
Zelizer, Viviana A. 1994. “The creation of domestic currencies.” The American Economic Review,
84(2): 138–142.
35A1. Boxes A2. Mobile Money
B1. Boxes B2. Mobile Money
C1. Boxes (Visual Balance Check) C2. Mobile Money (Telco Data)Panel A. High Frequency Phone Surveys
Panel B. Monitoring Surveys
Panel C. Objective Measures
Notes: Data sources are high frequency phone surveys (Panel A),  monitoring surveys (Panel B), and 
lockbox check / telco data (Panle C). Monetary values are in US D and CDF shows only below 95th 
percentile. Cumulative usage is calculated over 3.5 months, 4 m onths, 6 months and 10 months for 
Panel A1/A2, B1/B2, C1 and C2, respectively.Figure 1. Cumulative distributions of deposits
36Table 1. Summary Statistics and Randomization Check
(1) (2) (3) (4)
BoxesMobile 
moneyAll 
treatments
Male 0.46 0.63 0.90 0.84
Household Farms 0.71 0.97 0.039** 0.10
Years of Education 9.05 0.97 0.32 0.59
(2.83)
Land Owned (Acres) 0.66 0.75 0.87 0.86
(1.18)
Value of Durable Assets 872.60 0.36 0.06* 0.14
   and Livestock (1547)
House has iron roof 0.93 0.26 0.79 0.22
Owns a cell phone 0.94 0.28 0.71 0.46
Has mobile money account 0.56 0.048** 0.64 0.19
Distance to closest mobile 11.32 0.62 0.44 0.69
   money agent (minutes) (14.25)
Panel B: Business
=1 if Retail 0.68 0.82 0.39 0.49
Average Weekly Revenue 66.37 0.50 0.82 0.78
(99.00)
Average Weekly Profit 18.77 0.94 0.81 0.97
(23.20)
Value of equipment 199.10 0.92 0.32 0.22
   and inventory (401.20)
Panel C: Savings Total cash savings 119.80 0.96 0.17 0.47
   (balance) (196.70)
Saves in:
   Mobile money 0.32 0.38 0.65 0.70
   Bank account 0.30 0.36 0.044** 0.059*
   VSLA / ROSCA 0.52 0.55 0.97 0.86
   Secret place at home 0.82 0.57 0.75 0.79
   Savings box 0.22 0.085* 0.58 0.28
Observations 761
Notes: Means are population weighted. Monetary values are winsorized at 1% and 
expressed in USD. In Columns 1 and 4, standard deviations in parentheses; in the other columns, standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Full Sample
Panel A. Demographic information and asset ownershipControl 
Meanp-value  for joint equality
37Table 2. Take-up of project accounts
(1) (2) (3) (4)
One boxMultiple 
boxesOne 
accountMultiple 
accounts
Panel A. Initial take-u p June 2017
Took at least one accoun t 0.99 0.99 1.00 0.98
If offered multi ple accounts: took > 1 accou n - 0.76 - 0.29
If offered multi ple boxes: took 3 boxe s - 0.42 - -
Observation s 160 161 160 160
Panel B1. Lockbox check visit in December 2017
Reported at least 1 deposit10.94 0.97
Reported at least 2 de posits 0.94 0.95
Reported at least 5 de posits 0.91 0.92
Reported value of de posits (monthl y avera ge 23.39 31.30
(30.58 )(36.18 )
Reported number of de posits (monthl y avera ge 9.83 14.20
(10.74 )(13.45 )
Reported value of withdrawals (monthl y avera ge 16.46 23.96
(24.95 )(31.37 )
Reported number withdrawals (monthl y avera ge 1.48 2.61
(3.52) (4.32)
Observation s 121 120
Verified balanc e 17.98 16.46
(28.21 )(27.39 )
Observation s 94 99
Panel B2. Telecom administrative data (July 2017 - A pril 2018 )
Made at least 1 de posit 0.79 0.67
Made at least 2 de posits 0.79 0.56
0.70 0.49
Total value of de posits (monthl y avera ge 8.72 9.34
(12.25 )(15.56 )
Number of de posits (monthl y avera ge 1.11 1.06
(1.36)(1.42)
Total value of withdrawals (monthl y avera ge 9.09 10.34
(13.55 )(18.13 )
Number of withdrawals (monthl y avera ge 1.18 1.19
(1.49)(1.75)
Avera ge Dail y Balanc e 3.21 2.79
(5.42)(5.40)
Observation s 160 160Box groups Mobile money
Notes: See text for discussion of data sources. Means are presented, with standard deviations in 
parentheses. Verified balance is only reported for respondents who have agreed to show and open their lockboxes. Refer to Appendix Table C2 for correlations between reported and verified balances and text for explanations/procedures for the lockbox check.
1All deposit measures are self-reported.
38Table 3. Determinants of Account Usage
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
In-person 
lockbox 
checkHFPS 
surveysMonitoring 
surveysTelecom 
administrative 
dataHFPS 
surveysMonitoring 
surveys
Multi ple account s 37.25* 52.15** 23.45** 9.57 -6.27 0.23
(20.54 )(21.11 ) (11.19 ) (15.36 ) (6.89) (4.30)
Other Covariates
Time to nearest 12.72 -15.54 -3.31 -65.16* -16.18 -14.09
  agent (hours) (25.01) (22.64) (15.07) (35.04) (12.78) (9.81)Femal
e -96.15** -33.26 -29.99 30.69 -4.68 -4.73
(45.57 )(46.36 ) (24.70 ) (33.83 ) (14.98 ) (9.47)
Marrie d -54.28 -28.47 -17.83 10.87 3.67 -2.05
(38.59 )(38.96 ) (20.80 ) (28.78 ) (12.51 ) (8.06)
Female * marrie d 47.05 2.02 4.24 -42.73 -3.14 -2.65
(50.55 )(52.29 ) (27.43 ) (39.44 ) (17.77 ) (11.04 )
Inverse hyperbolic sine of 6.33 13.39* 4.43 5.49 3.88* 3.96***   monetary savings (6.38) (7.10) (3.62) (4.36) (2.11) (1.22)Log assets 22.45** 7.51 5.15 7.57 1.89 2.43
(8.75) (8.23) (4.78) (6.27) (2.97) (1.76)
"Taxed" (i.e. gives money 56.06** 16.8 18.94 -9.2 7.78 2.12   but does not receive) (22.37) (22.35) (11.95) (16.35) (7.37) (4.58)
Observations 238 159 317 319 159 319
Mean (1 account group) 116.9 70.11 68.7 87.75 32.5 23.91Std. dev. (1 account group
)152.90 108.30 83.47 122.70 45.58 35.50
Notes: Values are in USD and winsorized at 5%. Columns 1-3 are for the lockbox groups only and 
Columns 4-6 are for the mobile money groups only. Regresions also control for age, household size, and having a mobile money account, box, or savings account at baseline. See text for discussion of data sources. Deposits are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Lockbox Mobile money
Cumulative deposits  measured in:
39Table 4. Treatment effects on deposits (high frequency phone survey s
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Deposited 
into any 
lockbo xValue of 
depositsDeposited into 
any mobile 
mone y accoun tValue of 
depositsCash at 
homeBank 
accountsSavings 
groups
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.77*** 0.49*** 0.49*** -0.08** -0.13** -0.61*** 0.01 -0.13* -0.19
(0.12) (0.05) (0.13) (0.04) (0.06) (0.18) (0.10) (0.07) (0.34)
Multiple lockboxes 1.58*** 0.62*** 1.26*** -0.07* -0.13** -0.57*** 0.03 -0.07 0.84*
(0.28) (0.05) (0.27) (0.04) (0.06) (0.17) (0.13) (0.08) (0.45)
One mobile mone y 0.30** * -0.04 -0.14 0.16** * 0.19** 0.26 -0.12 -0.09 0.16
   account (0.09) (0.05) (0.10) (0.04) (0.08) (0.31) (0.10) (0.07) (0.39)
Multiple mobile money 0.31*** -0.03 -0.13 0.11** 0.11 -0.28 -0.03 -0.06 -0.38
   accounts (0.10) (0.05) (0.11) (0.05) (0.08) (0.18) (0.09) (0.06) (0.31)
p-value:  One box = multiple box 0.006*** 0.011** 0.005*** 0.78 0.90 0.78 0.90 0.41 0.033**
p-value :  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.97 0.77 0.89 0.37 0.39 0.045** 0.48 0.69 0.16
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 1.16*** 0.55*** 0.85*** -0.07** -0.13** -0.59*** 0.02 -0.10 0.31
(0.17) (0.04) (0.17) (0.03) (0.06) (0.16) (0.09) (0.06) (0.32)
Mobile Money 0.29*** -0.04 -0.15 0.14*** 0.15** 0.02 -0.08 -0.08 -0.09
(0.08) (0.04) (0.09) (0.04) (0.07) (0.23) (0.07) (0.06) (0.31)
p-value : Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.36 0.68 0.22
Observations 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526
Number of Businesses 390 390 390 390 390 390 390 390 390
Control Mea n 0.00 0.25 0.35 0.20 0.24 1.04 0.29 0.45 2.43
Control SD 0.00 0.43 0.82 0.40 0.68 1.80 2.76 0.82 3.93
Notes: All results are converted to daily averages. Monetary variables in USD and winsorized at 5%. Col 1: Experimental account is the mobile 
money or box, depending on the treatment group, and equals 0 for the control group. Cols 2-5 include project and non-project lockboxes / mobile money. Col 8: Savings groups include VSLAs and ROSCAs. Col 9: Total deposits is the sum of the other columns, as well as other less common 
types of savings. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Value of 
deposits into 
experimental 
accoun
tFirst Stage Other savings sourcesTotal 
Value of 
Deposits
40Table 5. Treatment effects on deposits (monitoring survey s
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
Deposited 
into any 
lockboxValue of 
depositsDeposited into 
any mobile 
money accountValue of 
depositsCash at 
homeBank 
accountsSavings 
groups
Panel A. Individual Account s
One lockbox 0.63*** 0.61*** 0.47*** -0.10* -0.05 -0.23*** -0.01 -0.08 -0.03
(0.06) (0.05) (0.08) (0.06) (0.04) (0.06) (0.07) (0.10) (0.18)
Multiple lockboxes 0.90*** 0.58*** 0.75*** -0.07 -0.05 -0.30*** 0.17 -0.22** 0.49**
(0.09) (0.05) (0.10) (0.06) (0.04) (0.06) (0.12) (0.11) (0.23)
One mobile money account 0.23*** -0.04 0.01 0.21*** 0.11** (0.01) 0.28** -0.16 0.24
(0.04) (0.05) (0.06) (0.06) (0.04) (0.07) (0.12) (0.10) (0.19)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.22*** 0.00 -0.03 0.22*** 0.11** -0.07 0.11 -0.10 0.12
(0.04) (0.05) (0.06) (0.06) (0.05) (0.07) (0.08) (0.10) (0.19)
p-value:  One box = multiple box 0.008*** 0.50 0.019** 0.48 0.93 0.054* 0.11 0.16 0.026**
p-value :  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.79 0.45 0.45 0.95 0.93 0.40 0.064* 0.48 0.51
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.76*** 0.60*** 0.60*** -0.08* -0.05 -0.26*** 0.08 -0.15 0.22
(0.06) (0.04) (0.07) (0.05) (0.04) (0.06) (0.08) (0.09) (0.17)
Mobile Money 0.22*** -0.02 (0.02) 0.21*** 0.11*** (0.04) 0.20** -0.13 0.17
(0.03) (0.04) (0.05) (0.05) (0.04) (0.06) (0.09) (0.09) (0.17)
p-value : Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.12 0.79 0.75
Observations 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321
Number of Businesses 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722
Control Mean 0.00 0.30 0.25 0.36 0.18 0.30 0.23 0.54 1.53
Control SD 0.00 0.46 0.62 0.48 0.38 0.55 0.98 0.93 1.80
Notes: All results are converted to daily averages. Value of deposits was measured over the past 2 months in the monitoring surveys. Col 1: 
Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group, and equals 0 for the control group. Cols 2-5 include project and 
non-project lockboxes / mobile money. Col 8: Savings groups include VSLAs and ROSCAs. Col 9: Total deposits is the sum of the other columns, as 
well as other less common types of savings. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, Value of 
deposits into 
experimental 
accountOther savings sources
Total 
Value of 
DepositsFirst Stage
41Table 6. Treatment effects on labor supply and business outcomes (high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
=1 if 
workedHours=1 if 
workedHours=1 if 
farmedHours
Panel A. Individual Account s
One lockbo x -0.08** -0.78** -0.02 -0.91 0.02 0.22** -0.31 -0.48 -0.04 0.49
(0.03)(0.40) (0.04) (0.93) (0.02) (0.11) (0.32) (0.99) (0.05)(0.44)
Multi ple lockboxe s 0.00 0.14 0.03 2.33 0.07*** 0.46** -0.32 -0.63 -0.01 0.01
(0.03)(0.37) (0.05) (2.07) (0.03) (0.18) (0.37) (1.12) (0.05)(0.33)
One mobile mone y accou n -0.05 -0.54 0.02 -1.40* 0.09*** 0.52*** -0.49 -0.16 0.03 0.19
(0.03)(0.41) (0.04) (0.85) (0.03) (0.16) (0.32) (1.06) (0.05)(0.31)
Multi ple mobile mone y accoun t -0.06 0.15 -0.01 -0.59 0.00 0.08 -0.50 0.31 -0.06 -0.14
(0.04)(0.56) (0.04) (0.85) (0.02) (0.10) (0.35) (1.14) (0.05)(0.32)
p-value:  One box = multiple box 0.012** 0.024** 0.29 0.092* 0.055* 0.19 0.97 0.90 0.57 0.31
p-value :  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.82 0.24 0.51 0.23 0.005*** 0.01** 0.98 0.71 0.081* 0.31
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes -0.04 -0.35 0.01 0.71 0.05*** 0.33*** -0.32 -0.56 -0.02 0.25
(0.03) (0.33) (0.04) (1.30) (0.02) (0.11) (0.29) (0.86) (0.04) (0.31)
Mobile Money -0.05* -0.25 0.01 -1.05 0.04** 0.32*** -0.49* 0.05 -0.01 0.05
(0.03) (0.39) (0.04) (0.79) (0.02) (0.11) (0.29) (0.90) (0.05) (0.27)
p-value : Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.68 0.78 0.98 0.15 0.88 0.91 0.48 0.50 0.67 0.52
Observat ions 31417 31416 4597 4597 4533 4533 26031 26201 4536 4624
Number of Businesse s 391 391 390 390 390 390 391 391 390 390
Control Mea n 0.81 8.21 0.18 1.78 0.06 0.20 3.37 11.86 0.33 0.97
Control S D 0.39 4.67 0.38 7.23 0.23 1.20 3.59 15.78 0.47 4.24
Notes: The main business outcomes (in Columns 1-2 and 7-8) were measured at the daily level. Labor supply in secondary occupations, farming, 
credit (Columns 3-4, 5-6 and 9-10) are presented over a week. There are fewer observations for profits/revenues (compared to main business) 
because this was only asked for the past 4 days in the second round of HFPS (labor supply was asked for a 7 day recall). Credit includes digital 
loans, VSLAs, ROSCAs, banks, MFIs and moneylenders. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Took out 
loanValueCredit Taken
1Labor Supply
ProfitsMain Busines s Other occupation s Farmin gBusiness outcomes
Revenues
42Table 7. Treatment effects on labor supply and business outcomes (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
=1 if 
workedHours=1 if 
workedHours=1 if 
farmedHours
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbo x -0.04 -0.28 -0.02 -0.69 0.05 0.77 -0.47 -2.36* 0.00 1.44 0.14*
(0.03)(0.40) (0.03) (0.81) (0.05)(0.56)(0.36)(1.30) (0.05)(1.15) (0.07)
Multi ple lockboxe s -0.03 -0.49 0.08* 1.42 0.10* 1.65** -0.26 -1.17 -0.04 1.49 0.14*
(0.03)(0.41) (0.04) (1.32) (0.06)(0.71)(0.35)(1.20) (0.06)(1.76) (0.08)
One mobile mone y accou n -0.07* -0.95** 0.03 1.31 0.09 1.62*** -0.52 -1.94 0.02 1.18 0.10
(0.04)(0.48) (0.04) (1.04) (0.05)(0.62)(0.35)(1.24) (0.05)(1.29) (0.07)
Multi ple mobile mone y account s -0.03 -0.44 0.01 0.35 -0.02 0.88 -0.45 -1.31 (0.02)0.04 0.11
(0.04)(0.40) (0.03) (0.82) (0.05)(0.67)(0.35)(1.25) (0.05)(1.19) (0.08)
p-value:  One box = multiple bo x 0.63 0.61 0.02** 0.088* 0.46 0.29 0.58 0.34 0.41 0.98 0.99
p-value :  One m.m. = multiple m.m .0.34 0.29 0.63 0.42 0.036** 0.34 0.83 0.59 0.50 0.37 0.83
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes -0.03 -0.38 0.03 0.31 0.07* 1.18** -0.37 -1.79* 0.00 1.44 0.14*
(0.03) (0.35) (0.03) (0.89) (0.04) (0.49) (0.31) (1.08) (0.05) (1.15) (0.07)
Mobile Money -0.05 -0.71* 0.02 0.83 0.03 1.27** -0.49 -1.67 0.01 0.65 0.10*
(0.03) (0.37) (0.03) (0.73) (0.04) (0.51) (0.31) (1.10) (0.04) (1.07) (0.06)
p-value : Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.52 0.28 0.93 0.60 0.35 0.87 0.62 0.89 0.35 0.87 0.93
Observation s 9247 9247 1319 1319 1321 1319 1306 1315 1321 1321 1315
Number of Businesse s 722 722 722 722 722 722 720 721 722 722 718
Control Mea n 0.74 7.35 0.13 1.82 0.24 2.05 3.02 10.07 0.67 5.57 0.23
Control SD 0.44 5.08 0.33 8.34 0.43 5.76 3.37 13.51 0.47 10.71 0.54Credit Taken
Took out 
loanValue
Notes: Labor supply in the main business (columns 1-2) was measured at the daily level (for 7 days prior to the survey date), other variables were 
measured over the past week. Labor supply in secondary occupations, farming, credit (Columns 3-4, 5-6 and 9-10) are presented over a week. Profits and revenues (columns 7-8) are measured at the weekly level, but are converted to daily averages. Credit to customers (column 11) is measured over a month 
but converted to daily averages. Credit includes digital loans, VSLAs, ROSCAs, banks, MFIs and moneylenders.  See text for regression specification. 
All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Labor Supply
Main Business Other occu
pation s Farmin g
Profits RevenuesCredit to 
CustomersBusiness outcomes
43Table 8. Treatment effects on expenditures (high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Staple 
foodsPersonal 
expense sHousehold 
expense sSchool 
expense sTotal 
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.11 0.06 0.06 0.14*** 0.58*
(0.12) (0.06) (0.08) (0.05) (0.34)
Multiple lockboxes 0.03 0.00 0.10 0.15** 0.42
(0.13) (0.08) (0.10) (0.06) (0.41)
One mobile money account 0.00 0.02 0.16 0.11* 0.47
(0.14) (0.07) (0.10) (0.06) (0.42)
Multiple mobile money accou n-0.03 -0.02 -0.04 0.02 -0.10
(0.13) (0.07) (0.07) (0.04) (0.34)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lock b0.50 0.42 0.67 0.94 0.71
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.80 0.49 0.063* 0.15 0.18
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.07 0.03 0.08 0.14*** 0.51*
(0.11) (0.06) (0.07) (0.04) (0.30)
Mobile Money -0.01 0.00 0.07 0.07* 0.22
(0.12) (0.06) (0.07) (0.04) (0.32)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.36 0.63 0.90 0.094* 0.34
Observations 4522 4536 4536 4536 4536
Number of Businesses 390 390 390 390 390Control Mean 1.47 0.50 0.54 0.22 3.93Control SD 0.90 0.59 0.91 0.58 2.87
Note: Expenditures are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and are 
expressed in daily values. Total expenditures include the other columns in addition to other categories not shown here. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), imbalanced characteristics at baseline, date fixed effects, and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.  Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
44Table 9. Treatment effects on expenditures (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Staple 
foodsPersonal 
expensesHousehold 
expensesSchool 
ExpensesHoliday 
SpendingTotal 
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.14 0.10 0.36** 0.01 0.01 0.73
(0.14) (0.10) (0.17) (0.06) (0.01) (0.45)
Multiple lockboxes 0.18 0.05 0.07 -0.04 0.00 0.25
(0.15) (0.10) (0.18) (0.07) (0.01) (0.50)
One mobile money account 0.20 0.12 0.21 0.01 0.02 0.69
(0.16) (0.10) (0.18) (0.07) (0.01) (0.49)
Multiple mobile money account s-0.01 0.14 0.12 -0.01 0.01 0.30
(0.14) (0.10) (0.17) (0.06) (0.01) (0.48)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbo x0.76 0.62 0.089* 0.40 0.47 0.30
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.17 0.88 0.57 0.67 0.53 0.41
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.16 0.08 0.23 -0.01 0.00 0.50
(0.13) (0.09) (0.16) (0.06) (0.01) (0.41)
Mobile Money 0.10 0.13 0.18 0.00 0.01 0.52
(0.13) (0.09) (0.15) (0.06) (0.01) (0.42)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.57 0.48 0.68 0.76 0.31 0.96
Observations 1317 1320 1320 1321 1321 1321
Number of Businesses 722 722 722 722 722 722
Control Mean 1.88 0.72 0.98 0.41 0.06 5.34
Control SD 1.28 0.87 1.46 0.62 0.09 3.73
Note: Expenditures in columns 1-3 are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and are 
expressed in daily values. Education and holiday spending (columns 4-5) are measured over a few months prior to the survey and converted to daily values for comparability. Total expenses include the other columns in addition to categories shown here. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), imbalanced characterstics at baseline,  date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
45Web Appendix A - Main Appendix Figures and Tables
Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile 
Money in Malawi
Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson
46Web Appendix Figure A1. Map of Blantyre with Treatment Assignme nt
Notes: GPS coordinates are shown with added random noise for vi sibility.
47Web Appendix Figure A2. Experimental Design
Full 
Sample
(801)
MM 
Accounts
(321)Boxes 
(320) 0Control
(160)
1 Box
(160)Multiple 
Boxes
(160)
HF
(80)Non-HF
(80)HF
(80)Non-HF
(80)1 MM
(160)Multiple 
MM
(161)
HF
(80)Non-HF
(80)HF
(81)Non-HF
(80)HF
(80)Non-HF
(80)
482017 Jan
Feb
Mar Census
Apr
May
Jun
Jul Intake Survey (N=800) Account Opening (N=640)
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec In Person LockBox Check (N=241 )
2018 Jan Midline (N=800 )
Feb
Mar High Frequency Phone Survey, Round 2 (N=400)
Apr Monitoring Survey 2 (N=800)
2019 Sep Long-term Follow-up (N=200)Baseline (N=800)
High Frequency Phone Survey, Round 1 (N=400)
Mobile Money Withdrawal Fees are 
ReimbursedWeb Appendix Figure A3. Project and Survey Timeline
No activitiesMay 2018-Aug 
2019
49Web Appendix Figure A4. Mobile money usage over time
Panel A. Cumulative usage: Deposits and Withdrawals
Notes: Data taken from administrative data from telecom company  for mobile money accounts. Panel A 
shows average (per-person) cumulative deposits, withdrawals and  net deposits (the difference) over 
time. Panel B shows average deposits and withdrawals during the  study period. The values are daily 
averages collapsed into 2 week periods. Panel C shows running b alances. The dashed line represents 
the date at which withdrawals stopped being reimbursed. Panel B. Deposits and Withdrawals (averages per day, smoothed o ver 2 week period)
Panel C. Running Balance (averages per day, smoothed over 2 wee k period)
50Web Appendix Table A1. Savings goals
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
One boxMultiple 
boxesOne mobile 
moneyMultiple 
mobile money
Expand business, start new business, 
  or invest in inventory
General consumption 0.40 0.03 0.16 0.04 0.08Emergencies 0.40 0.11 0.43 0.18 0.21Buying land 0.18 0.25 0.28 0.26 0.22Durable goods 0.11 0.08 0.12 0.02 0.03Children's education 0.12 0.12 0.24 0.09 0.16Home improvement 0.07 0.04 0.13 0.04 0.04Home expenses (rent, utilities, etc.) 0.07 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.03Agriculture 0.04 0.04 0.08 0.01 0.03Observations 801 159 160 160 156Savings goals listed at 
baseline (all 
respondents)
Notes: The unit of observation is the individual. List is restricted to goals that were named by at least 5% of people at 
baseline. At baseline (in column 1), goals were measured by asking respondents about their current savings in various sources. If the amount saved in a source was non-zero, respondents were asked about what the savings were for. Savings goals listed for treatment accounts
0.64 0.33 0.55 0.36 0.49
51Web Appendix Table A2. Attrition
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Completed at 
least 1 surveyPercentage 
completedCompleted at 
least 1 surveyPercentage 
completed
One lockbox 0.00 -0.02 0.00 -0.03 0.01 0.00
(0.02) (0.04) (0.06) (0.06) (0.04) (0.04)
Multiple lockboxes -0.04 -0.05 0.03 -0.01 -0.01 0.05
(0.02) (0.04) (0.06) (0.06) (0.04) (0.04)
One mobile money 0.00 0.03 0.04 0.06 0.05 0.04
(0.02) (0.04) (0.06) (0.06) (0.04) (0.04)
Multiple mobile money -0.01 -0.06 0.03 0.00 -0.02 0.02
(0.02) (0.04) (0.06) (0.06) (0.04) (0.04)
High Frequency Surveys -0.07** -0.03
(0.03) (0.03)
Observations 400 400 400 400 801 801
Control Mean 0.99 0.89 0.84 0.74 0.86 0.78
Notes: See text for discussion of surveys and Figure A3 for a project timeline. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate 
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.High Frequency Phone Surveys (HFPS) Monitoring Surveys
Round 1 
(September-October 2018)Round 2 
(March 2018) Completed round 1 
(January 2018)Completed round 2
(April 2018)
52Web Appendix Table A3. Summary statistics and randomization check from intake survey
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
1 Box = 
Multi Box 
= 01 MM = 
Multi MM 
= 0Joint 
equality1 Box = 
Multi Box 
= 01 MM = 
Multi MM 
= 0Joint 
equality
Average hours worked 7.70 0.54 0.42 0.60 8.13 0.63 0.32 0.62
(3.88) (3.82)
Average profits 4.27 0.45 0.18 0.35 4.57 0.71 0.43 0.67
(5.74) (6.05)
Hours farmed 0.03 0.69 0.12 0.04** 0.01 0.76 0.27 0.098*
(0.16) (0.10)
Total value of deposits to savings 3.40 0.11 0.16 0.081* 3.37 0.34 0.66 0.60
(6.01) (5.47)
Total value of withdrawals from savi n2.14 0.11 0.18 0.016** 2.38 0.46 0.41 0.34
(5.09) (6.30)
Average Food expenditures 1.56 0.72 0.90 0.90 1.60 0.98 0.88 0.97
(1.16) (1.11)
Average Total expenditures12.49 0.95 0.54 0.82 2.40 0.74 0.66 0.86
(1.79) (1.45)
Net transfers to friends and family 0.17 0.072* 0.21 0.21 0.34 0.12 0.041** 0.14
(1.12) (1.25)
Net transfers to spouse -0.16 0.82 0.39 0.73 -0.07 0.49 0.69 0.68
(0.16) (0.07)
Observations 761 392
Note: Variables are converted to daily values. Means are population weighted. Randomization check_intake is performed only for 
businesses that appear in the analysis sample (i.e. completed a monitoring survey or at least one phone survey). Monetary values are 
winsorized at 1% and expressed in USD.
1Expenditures measured at the intake survey are a subset of those in later surveys, and include food, personal items, household items, and 
transportation. Full Sample HFPS sample only
Control 
Meanp-value for F-test of joint equality
Control 
Meanp-value for F-test of joint equality
53Web Appendix Table A4. Take-up of project accounts, survey responses 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
One boxMultiple 
boxesOne 
accountMultiple 
accounts
Panel A. HFPS (covering approximately 3.5 months in total)
Made at least 1 transaction 0.94 0.91 0.79 0.63
Total value of deposits (monthly average) 20.03 33.27 32.13 25.68
(30.96) (43.31) (45.41) (39.12)
Total value of withdrawals (monthly average) 4.23 14.04 23.21 16.58
(10.80) (39.40) (36.22) (29.76)
Observations 80 80 80 80
Panel B. Monitoring surveys (covering approximately 4 months in total)
Made at least 1 transaction 0.81 0.83 0.59 0.56
Total value of deposits (monthly average) 34.91 47.60 25.38 25.68
(44.00) (64.44) (39.50) (39.12)
Total value of withdrawals (monthly average) 23.39 32.52 19.94 16.58
(35.02) (47.66) (35.07) (29.76)
Observations 160 161 160 160Box groups Mobile money
Notes: See text for discussion of data sources. Means are presented, with standard deviations in 
parentheses. The value of deposits and withdrawals are winsorized at 5% level.
54Web Appendix Table A5. FDR-adjusted q-values for pre-specified outcomes (high frequency phone survey)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
One boxMultiple 
BoxesOne mobile 
MoneyMultiple 
Mobile 
MoneyAll Accounts BoxesMobile 
money
Savings
Total Value of Box Deposits 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.16 0.23 0.002*** 0.001*** 0.11
[0.008***] [0.001***] [0.59] [0.72] [0.009***] [0.001***] [0.30]
Total Value of Mobile Money Deposi t0.038** 0.041** 0.022** 0.17 0.89 0.026** 0.022**
[0.26] [0.26] 0.163 [0.59] [0.99] [0.12] 0.118
Total Value of Deposits 0.57 0.064* 0.68 0.22 0.68 0.34 0.76
[1.00] [0.31] [1.00] [0.71] [0.99] [0.59] [1.00]
Business Outcomes=1 if worked in main business
0.019** 0.99 0.17 0.17 0.069* 0.13 0.089*
[0.16] [1.00] [0.59] [0.59] [0.24] 0.334 [0.29]
Hours in Main Business 0.049** 0.70 0.20 0.79 0.34 0.29 0.53
[0.28] [1.00] [0.66] [1.00] [0.81] [0.55] [0.81]
=1 if worked secondary occupation 0.64 0.51 0.67 0.80 0.86 0.87 0.89
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.99] [1.00] [1.00]
Hours in Other occupations 0.33 0.26 0.1* 0.49 0.82 0.58 0.18
[0.90] [0.77] [0.45] [1.00] [0.99] [0.89] [0.41]
=1 if farmed 0.17 0.004*** 0.006*** 0.77 0.002*** 0.008*** 0.027**
[0.59] [0.057*] [0.066*] [1.00] [0.009***] [0.053*] [0.12]
Hours Farming 0.043** 0.01** 0.001*** 0.38 0.001*** 0.003*** 0.004***
[0.26] [0.096*] [0.031**] [0.92] [0.009***] 0.034** [0.034**]
Business Profits 0.34 0.39 0.13 0.15 0.13 0.28 0.09*
[0.91] [0.92] [0.57] [0.59] [0.38] [0.55] [0.29]
Business Revenues 0.63 0.57 0.88 0.78 0.74 0.52 0.96
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.99] [0.81] [1.00]
Expenditures
Food 0.37 0.82 0.98 0.81 0.77 0.51 0.93
[0.92] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.99] [0.81] [1.00]
Personal 0.38 0.97 0.75 0.73 0.78 0.65 0.95
[0.92] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.99] [0.95] [1.00]
Household 0.48 0.31 0.11 0.58 0.22 0.27 0.33
[1.00] [0.87] [0.48] [1.00] [0.56] [0.55] [0.59]
Education 0.002*** 0.011** 0.059* 0.56 0.002*** 0.001*** 0.082*
[0.037**] [0.096*] [0.31] [1.00] [0.009***] [0.007***] [0.29]
Holiday ---- - - -
---- - - -
Total 0.089* 0.30 0.26 0.77 0.19 0.097* 0.50
[0.41] [0.87] [0.77] [1.00] [0.53] [0.29] [0.81]
Credit
Value of loans received 0.27 0.98 0.54 0.67 0.54 0.41 0.84
[0.77] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.99] [0.77] [1.00]
Value of credit to customers ---- - - - -Individual treatments
Notes: Naïve p-values are presented first, with q-values in square brackets. Standard errors are adjusted using the procedure in Anderson 
(2008). Regressions are population weighted. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Pooled
55Web Appendix Table A6. FDR-adjusted q-values for pre-specified outcomes (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
One boxMultiple 
BoxesOne mobile 
MoneyMultiple 
Mobile 
MoneyAll Accounts BoxesMobile 
money
Savings
Total Value of Box Deposits 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.86 0.57 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.78
[0.001***] [0.001***] [1.00] [1.00] [0.001***] [0.001***] [0.89]
Total Value of Mobile Money Deposit s 0.27 0.23 0.013** 0.025** 0.39 0.20 0.006***
[1.00] [1.00] [0.41] [0.62] [0.67] [0.73] 0.175
Total Value of Deposits 0.87 0.037** 0.22 0.55 0.21 0.21 0.31
[1.00] [0.75] [1.00] [1.00] [0.57] [0.73] [0.81]
Business Outcomes
=1 if worked in main business 0.21 0.44 0.087* 0.45 0.12 0.24 0.11
[1.00] [1.00] [0.86] [1.00] [0.54] [0.73] [0.67]
Hours in Main Business 0.48 0.24 0.046** 0.28 0.095* 0.28 0.057*
[1.00] [1.00] [0.76] [1.00] [0.54] [0.81] [0.67]
=1 if worked secondary occupation 0.56 0.065* 0.37 0.69 0.34 0.41 0.43
[1.00] [0.86] [1.00] [1.00] [0.67] [0.85] [0.85]
Hours in Other occupations 0.40 0.28 0.21 0.67 0.38 0.73 0.26
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.67] [0.89] [0.73]
=1 if farmed 0.28 0.085* 0.11 0.61 0.16 0.092* 0.43
[1.00] [0.86] [1.00] [1.00] [0.54] [0.67] [0.85]
Hours Farming 0.17 0.021** 0.009*** 0.19 0.004*** 0.016** 0.014**
[1.00] [0.62] [0.38] [1.00] [0.051*] [0.20] [0.20]
Business Profits 0.20 0.46 0.14 0.20 0.13 0.23 0.11
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.54] [0.73] [0.67]
Business Revenues 0.07* 0.33 0.12 0.30 0.088* 0.1* 0.13
[0.86] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.54] [0.67] [0.70]
Expenditures
Food 0.32 0.22 0.21 0.97 0.27 0.21 0.43
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.67] [0.73] [0.85]
Personal 0.29 0.62 0.23 0.17 0.18 0.36 0.13
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.54] [0.81] [0.70]
Household 0.038** 0.69 0.23 0.46 0.16 0.15 0.25
[0.75] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.54] [0.73] [0.73]
Education 0.83 0.55 0.87 0.82 0.92 0.83 0.99
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.84] [0.89] [0.89]
Holiday 0.41 0.98 0.13 0.45 0.30 0.61 0.18
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.67] [0.89] [0.73]
Total 0.1* 0.62 0.16 0.54 0.18 0.22 0.22
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.54] [0.73] [0.73]
Credit
Value of loans received 0.68 0.74 0.40 0.87 0.60 0.68 0.56
[1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [1.00] [0.67] [0.89] [0.89]
Value of credit extended to customers c 0.053* 0.086* 0.19 0.14 0.023** 0.018** 0.091*
[0.76] [0.86] [1.00] [1.00] [0.20] [0.20] [0.67]
Notes: Naïve p-values are presented first, with q-values in square brackets. Standard errors are adjusted using the procedure in Anderson 
(2008). Regressions are population weighted.*, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Individual treatments Pooled
56Web Appendix Table A7. Treatment effects on other measures of farming activity
(1) (2) (3)
=1 if bought 
land=1 if rented 
land
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbo x 0.02 0.09* 8.13
(0.02) (0.05) (4.94)
Multi ple lockboxe s 0.06** 0.09* 7.10
(0.03) (0.05) (5.55)
One mobile money account 0.03 0.06 10.92**
(0.03) (0.05) (4.93)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.04 0.03 1.83
(0.02) (0.04) (4.47)
p-values  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.12 0.93 0.85
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.80 0.46 0.039**
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.04* 0.09** 7.61*
(0.02) (0.04) (4.47)
Mobile Money 0.03 0.05 6.79
(0.02) (0.04) (4.18)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.80 0.25 0.82
Observations 645 646 1302
Number of Businesses 645 646 719
Control Mean 0.02 0.05 27.67
Control SD 0.13 0.21 40.90
Notes: All regressions control for strata, date fixed effects and are probability 
weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Land
Farm 
inputs
57Web Appendix Table A8. Treatment effects on transfers (high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Received 
transferValueGave 
transferValue
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbo x 0.06 0.37 0.06 1.18
(0.06) (1.19) (0.06) (1.03)
Multi ple lockboxe s 0.00 -0.15 0.07 0.64
(0.05) (1.00) (0.06) (0.91)
One mobile money account 0.05 1.13 0.11* 0.80
(0.06) (1.30) (0.06) (0.87)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.05 -0.40 0.06 0.30
(0.06) (1.11) (0.07) (0.78)
p-values  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.26 0.26 0.98 0.65
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.93 0.93 0.46 0.55
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.03 0.13 0.07 0.92
(0.05) (0.95) (0.05) (0.76)
Mobile Money 0.05 0.45 0.09 0.59
(0.05) (1.03) (0.05) (0.71)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.61 0.61 0.60 0.66
Observations 4536 4536 4536 4536
Number of Businesses 390 390 390 390
Control Mean 0.38 5.48 0.59 5.05
Control SD 0.49 12.42 0.49 8.23Interpersonal transfers
Notes: Transfers include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments and do not include survey 
compensation. Variables are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and converted to daily averages. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), baseline characterstics, assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
58Web Appendix Table A9. Treatment effects on transfers (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Received 
transferValueGave 
transferValue
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox -0.05 -0.03 -0.05 0.02
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.05)
Multiple lockboxes -0.11** (0.03) -0.02 0.00
(0.06) (0.08) (0.06) (0.05)
One mobile money account -0.03 -0.06 (0.01) 0.06
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.05)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.02 (0.01) (0.04) 0.02
(0.06) (0.07) (0.06) (0.05)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.32 0.32 0.66 0.76
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.40 0.40 0.68 0.41
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes -0.08* -0.03 -0.03 0.01
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.04)
Mobile Money (0.01) -0.04 (0.02) 0.04
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.04)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.072* 0.072* 0.81 0.45
Observations 1321 1321 1321 1321
Number of Businesses 722 722 722 722
Control Mean 0.58 0.43 0.59 0.26
Control SD 0.49 0.73 0.49 0.39
Notes: Transfers include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments and 
do not include survey compensation. Variables are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and converted to daily averages. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), baseline characterstics, assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Survey date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Interpersonal transfers
59Web Appendix Table A10. How did respondents use their mobile money accounts?
Panel A. Airtel Transactional History (July 2017 - April 2018)
Used Mobile Money to Deposit/Withdraw Cash 0.95
Average Amount Deposited 117.96
(149.82)
Average Amount Withdrawn 130.51
(176.00)
Used Mobile Money to make transfers 0.67
Transfers Sent 14.08
(25.99)
Transfers Received 12.29
(29.41)
Used Mobile Money to make payments 0.72
Transactions Made 10.07
(16.70)
Observations 246
Panel B. Debriefing questions about mobile money 
Used Mobile Money for longer-term savings 0.83
Used Mobile Money to store money temporarily 0.12Observations 259
Notes: Panel A comes from Airtel administrative data. Data is restricted to accounts 
with non-zero usage. Panel B comes from responses collected during a debriefing section of the endline survey, at the conclusion of the project. Data is restricted to the mobile money treatment group in the experiment. 
60Web Appendix Table A11. Effect of accounts on coping with health shoc k
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Experimenta
l AccountsAll 
sourcesMedical 
ExpensesFood TotalHours 
workedTotal 
income
Panel A. Respondent sick
Respondent sick -0.86 - -1.09 1.80*** 1.06** 3.57*** -0.39 0.09
(1.42) - (1.29) (0.48) (0.42) (1.20) (0.74) (2.09)
1 Box * respondent sick 4.98* -0.54 -2.42 -0.9 -0.23 -3.67 0.23 -1.04
(2.71) (1.01) (2.22) (0.58) (0.64) (2.31) (0.89) (2.95)
Multiple Box * respondent sick -1.83 0.84 -0.24 -0.4 0.08 0.71 -0.37 0.21
(1.99) (0.79) (2.13) (0.59) (0.83) (2.06) (0.96) (2.37)
1 MM * respondent sick 2.41 0.39 -1.43 0.09 -1.46* -0.94 -0.85 0.72
(1.83) (0.54) (1.95) (0.70) (0.75) (2.58) (0.95) (2.48)
Multiple MM * respondent sick 1.97 0.41 0.23 -0.76 -2.01*** -3.72* -0.53 -2.73
(2.02) (0.86) (1.75) (0.52) (0.61) (2.09) (0.90) (2.47)
p-values  Joint significance interaction ter
m0.039** 0.48 0.52 0.28 0.92 0.18 0.75 0.88
Observations 4543 4538 4538 4543 4529 4543 4543 4543Number of businesses 391 391 391 391 391 391 391 391Control Mean -0.12 0.00 12.04 0.49 10.27 27.36 8.77 25.19
Control SD 11.08 0.00 23.55 1.58 6.26 20.36 4.87 20.95
Panel B. Household member sick
Household member sick 2.22 -0.27 -0.33 2.52*** 1.48** 5.72*** -1.25* 1.22
(2.25) (0.23) (1.23) (0.36) (0.74) (2.12) (0.69) (1.58)
1 Box * household member sick -3.92 0.62 -1.78 0.73 -1.15 -2.72 1.14 -2.32
(2.87) (1.03) (2.01) (0.55) (0.88) (2.61) (0.83) (1.94)
Multiple Box * household -1.32 -0.56 0.39 -0.53 -0.45 -2.79 2.01** 0.61   member sick (2.45) (1.00) (2.27) (0.49) (0.86) (3.06) (0.79) (2.35)
1 MM * household -0.14 0.35 1.77 -0.10 -1.91** -2.86 1.04 -4.04
   member sick (3.14) (0.69) (2.47) (0.47) (0.92) (2.76) (0.83) (2.62)
Multiple MM * household -1.51 -0.75 -2.75 -0.48 -0.91 -2.42 1.48* -2.93   member sick (2.56) (0.79) (2.49) (0.47) (0.89) (3.11) (0.83) (2.34)
p-values  Joint significance interaction ter
m 0.33 0.72 0.60 0.066* 0.36 0.54 0.034** 0.26
Observations 4543 4538 4538 4543 4529 4543 4543 4543
Number of Businesses 391 391 391 391 391 391 391 391Control Mean -0.29 0.00 11.52 0.40 10.09 26.35 8.67 24.81Control SD 10.64 0.00 21.64 1.38 6.10 19.18 4.87 20.55
Notes: Regression are at the week level. Fixed effects regressions with survey date fixed effects. Regressions are population weighted. 
Transfers include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments. Net transfers and withdrawals are positive for inflows and 
negative for outflows. 
Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Net transfers 
across all 
sourcesExpenditures Labor supply & income Net deposits
61Web Appendix Table A12. Effect of accounts on treating illness
(1) (2)
Panel A. Respondent sick
One lockbox 0.02 -0.17*
(0.07) (0.09)
Multiple lockboxes 0.06 -0.04
(0.06) (0.09)
One mobile money account -0.06 0.05
(0.06) (0.08)
Multiple mobile money accounts -0.04 -0.08
(0.07) (0.10)
p-values
  Joint significance all accounts 0.44 0.036**Observations 500 500Number of businesses 249 249Control Mean 0.83 0.78Control SD - -
Panel B. Household member sick
One lockbox -0.07 -0.03
(0.05) (0.07)
Multiple lockboxes 0.02 0.12*
(0.05) (0.07)
One mobile money account -0.08 0.1
(0.06) (0.06)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.05 0.12*
(0.04) (0.07)
p-values
  Joint significance all accounts 0.04** 0.092*Observations 614 614Number of businesses 260 260Control Mean 0.95 0.74Control SD - -
Notes: Regressions are restricted to observations in which the respondent (or 
a household member was sick). The dependent variable in column 1 is an indicator for treating an illness fully, and the dependent variable in column 2 is an indicator for treating the illness immediately. All regressions control for strata and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.=1 if fully 
treated illness=1 if treated 
immediately
62Web Appendix Table A13. Treatment effects on prevalence of sickness
(1) (2)
=1 if member of 
household sick in 
past week=1 if respondent sick 
in past week
One lockbox 0.01 0.02
(0.03) (0.03)
Multiple lockboxes 0.02 0.01
(0.03) (0.02)
One mobile money account 0.01 0.03
(0.02) (0.03)
Multiple mobile money accounts -0.02 -0.02
(0.02) (0.02)
Observations 4543 4543
Number of businesses 391 391
Control Mean 0.12 0.12
Notes: Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. All 
regressions control for strata and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
63Table A14. Long-term usage of accounts
(1) (2) (3) (4)
One boxMultiple 
boxesOne 
accountMultiple 
accounts
Panel A. Survey conducted in September 2019
Still has access to at least 1 account 0.94 0.97 0.64 0.74
Still uses the account 0.69 0.56 0.39 0.44
Reported  at least 1 deposit in the last 1 month 0.60 0.44 0.28 0.29
Value of deposits in the past 1 month 14.40 18.87 9.27 9.02
(27.85) (39.89) (23.21) (23.34)
Reported at least 1 withdrawal in the last 1 month 0.37 0.33 0.28 0.35
Value of withdrawals in the past 1 month 5.89 6.95 6.49 7.76
(15.42) (15.57) (16.21) (19.34)
Has a non-zero balance in the account 0.53 0.51 0.33 0.32
Current Balance in the account 31.57 13.63 7.28 9.87
(82.84) (27.59) (18.95) (24.25)
Observations 35 39 36 34
Panel B. Telecom administrative data (June 2018-August 2019)
Made at least 1 deposit after June 2018 - - 0.53 0.54
Value of Deposits (monthly average) - - 5.93 7.17
- - (12.40) (13.83)
Average Running Monthly Balance - - 1.80 1.71- - (3.32) (3.38)
Observations 160 160Box groups Mobile money
Notes: In Panel A, data comes from the follow up phone survey conducted in September 2019 and 
collected information on usage in the past 1 month with a randomly selected 200 participants. About 72% of the random sample was reached. Attrition rates were not different between groups. In Panel B, data comes from the administrative Airtel data for all subjects in the mobile money group. The value and number of deposits and withdrawals are winsorized at 5% level.
64Web Appendix B - Additional Measures of Savings
Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile 
Money in Malawi
Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson
65Web Appendix Table B1. Treatment effects on withdrawals (high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Cash at 
homeBank 
accounts
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.19*** 0.16* -0.07 -0.06 0.25 0.19
(0.07) (0.09) (0.05) (0.19) (0.20) (0.34)
Multiple lockboxes 0.46*** 0.48*** (0.04) -0.40** 0.11 0.25
(0.12) (0.16) (0.06) (0.18) (0.23) (0.40)
One mobile money account 0.29*** -0.06 0.18** 0.13 0.32 0.57
(0.08) (0.06) (0.07) (0.26) (0.35) (0.47)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.23*** -0.07 0.07 -0.24 0.16 -0.13
(0.06) (0.07) (0.06) (0.16) (0.18) (0.31)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.042** 0.092* 0.62 0.037** 0.55 0.88
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.47 0.78 0.17 0.072* 0.57 0.073*
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.32*** 0.31*** -0.06 -0.22 0.18 0.22
(0.07) (0.09) (0.05) (0.17) (0.18) (0.32)
Mobile Money 0.26*** -0.07 0.13** -0.03 0.25 0.25
(0.05) (0.06) (0.06) (0.20) (0.25) (0.36)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.43 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.19 0.75 0.92
Observations 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526
Number of Businesses 390 390 390 390 390 390
Control Mean 0.00 0.15 0.16 0.76 0.39 1.69
Control SD 0.00 0.81 0.65 1.96 6.10 6.74Withdrawal 
Value from 
experimental 
accountTotal Value of withdrawals 
from other savings sourcesTotal Value 
of 
Withdrawals
Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Value of withdrawals was measured over the past 7 days. All regressions control for 
strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), baseline characteristics, assignement to high 
frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date and date survey fixed effects are included in Panel A and B, respecitvely. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Total value of 
lockbox 
withdrawalsTotal value of 
mobile money 
withdrawals
66Web Appendix Table B2. Treatment effects on withdrawals (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Cash at 
homeBank 
accounts
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.47*** 0.41*** -0.02 -0.13*** 0.08 0.32**
(0.07) (0.08) (0.03) (0.04) (0.07) (0.13)
Multiple lockboxes 0.77*** 0.69*** 0.02 -0.16*** 0.19 0.77***
(0.08) (0.09) (0.03) (0.05) (0.13) (0.19)
One mobile money account 0.23*** 0.07 0.13*** 0.03 0.15 0.42***
(0.04) (0.06) (0.04) (0.06) (0.10) (0.15)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.18*** 0.02 0.08** -0.07 0.12 0.19
(0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.05) (0.08) (0.12)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.042** 0.092* 0.62 0.037** 0.55 0.88
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.47 0.78 0.17 0.072* 0.57 0.073*
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.61*** 0.54*** 0.00 -0.15*** 0.13 0.53***
(0.06) (0.07) (0.03) (0.04) (0.08) (0.13)
Mobile Money 0.20*** 0.04 0.11*** -0.02 0.13 0.31***
(0.03) (0.05) (0.03) (0.05) (0.08) (0.12)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.95 0.049**
Observations 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321
Number of Businesses 722 722 722 722 722 722
Control Mean 0.00 0.15 0.12 0.19 0.16 0.62
Control SD 0.00 0.49 0.29 0.41 1.24 1.60
Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Withdrawals were measured over the past 2 months. All regressions control for 
strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), baseline characteristics, assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date and date survey fixed effects are included in Panel A and B, respecitvely. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Value of 
withdrawals 
from 
experimental 
accountTotal value of 
lockbox 
withdrawalsTotal value of 
mobile money 
withdrawalsTotal value of withdrawals from other savings sourcesTotal value 
of 
withdrawals
67Web Appendix Table B3. Treatment effects on balances (monitoring surveys only)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Project 
lockboxesAll lockboxesProject Mobile 
moneyAll mobile 
money accountsCash at 
homeBank 
accountsSavings 
groups
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 48.94*** 47.81*** 0.30 -4.40 -7.92** -8.38 4.76 26.93
(7.27) (7.51) (0.97) (3.52) (3.90) (15.10) (6.42) (20.98)
Multiple lockboxes 57.27*** 56.29*** 0.35 -3.74 -10.02*** 8.58 -2.54 45.72*
(6.78) (7.04) (1.17) (3.51) (3.45) (21.31) (7.36) (24.30)
One mobile money account -0.62 17.04*** 10.04*** 3.55 -0.20 25.81 -6.97 35.77
(2.98) (5.72) (2.76) (4.22) (4.17) (23.18) (5.82) (26.49)
Multiple mobile money accounts -0.05 10.55* 16.28*** 9.00** 0.49 10.00 -5.51 18.21
(2.39) (5.52) (3.26) (4.31) (4.26) (16.46) (6.59) (21.33)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.40 0.39 0.97 0.81 0.42 0.34 0.28 0.42
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.86 0.35 0.11 0.19 0.86 0.40 0.79 0.46
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 52.90*** 51.75*** 0.41 -4.02 -8.91** -0.71 1.31 35.62*
(5.05) (5.40) (0.87) (3.25) (3.45) (15.93) (5.98) (19.40)
Mobile Money -0.57 13.75*** 12.98*** 6.11 0.18 17.74 -6.09 26.97
(2.16) (4.39) (2.29) (3.73) (3.74) (17.88) (5.58) (21.05)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.16 0.10 0.60
Observations 647 647 646 647 644 632 647 647
Number of Businesses 647 647 646 647 644 632 647 647
Control Mean 0.00 3.50 0.00 12.17 13.60 38.04 22.98 94.76
Control SD 0.00 15.47 0.00 27.12 24.76 108.40 45.24 126.90Balance in Lockboxes Balance in other savings sources
Total 
Balance
Note: Balances were measured as of the date of the endline survey only.  All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake 
survey survey (where applicable), baseline characteristics, date of the survey fixed effects, assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.Balance in Mobile Money
68Web Appendix Table B4. Treatment effects on net deposits (evidence from high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Cash at homeBank 
accounts
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.63*** 0.43*** -0.10* -0.36*** -0.05 0.04
(0.09) (0.10) (0.06) (0.09) (0.07) (0.23)
Multiple lockboxes 1.10*** 0.96*** -0.09* -0.34*** 0.00 0.63*
(0.17) (0.19) (0.05) (0.11) (0.13) (0.32)
One mobile money account 0.13** -0.11 0.01 0.10 -0.01 0.00
(0.06) (0.08) (0.06) (0.16) (0.09) (0.24)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.21*** -0.09 0.03 -0.13 0.00 -0.11
(0.07) (0.09) (0.07) (0.12) (0.08) (0.23)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.01*** 0.007*** 0.78 0.75 0.73 0.093*  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.33 0.84 0.77 0.13 0.87 0.65
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.86*** 0.68*** -0.10* -0.35*** -0.03 0.33
(0.11) (0.12) (0.05) (0.09) (0.08) (0.23)
Mobile Money 0.16*** -0.11 0.02 -0.01 0.00 -0.06
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.12) (0.07) (0.20)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.002*** 0.001*** 0.79 0.083*
Observations 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526 4526
Number of Businesses 390 390 390 390 390 390
Control Mean 0.00 0.28 0.15 0.48 0.27 1.68
Control SD 0.00 0.71 0.58 1.16 2.44 3.22
Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Deposits and withdrawals were measured over the past 7 days. All regressions control for 
strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), baseline characterstics, assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Net Deposits 
to 
experimental 
accountTotal lockbox net 
depositsTotal mobile 
money  net 
depositsNet Deposits from other 
savings sources
Total Net 
Deposits
69Web Appendix Table B5. Treatment effects on net deposits (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Cash at homeBank 
accounts
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.25*** 0.16*** -0.03 -0.11*** -0.04 -0.02
(0.04) (0.05) (0.02) (0.03) (0.05) (0.10)
Multiple lockboxes 0.28*** 0.18*** -0.05** -0.14*** 0.02 0.00
(0.04) (0.06) (0.02) (0.03) (0.07) (0.11)
One mobile money account 0.04 -0.02 -0.01 -0.04 0.13* 0.12
(0.03) (0.04) (0.03) (0.03) (0.08) (0.11)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.06** -0.03 0.03 -0.01 0.03 0.03
(0.02) (0.04) (0.02) (0.04) (0.05) (0.09)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.01*** 0.007*** 0.78 0.75 0.73 0.093*  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.33 0.84 0.77 0.13 0.87 0.65
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.26*** 0.17*** -0.04** -0.12*** -0.01 -0.01
(0.03) (0.04) (0.02) (0.03) (0.05) (0.08)
Mobile Money 0.05** -0.03 0.01 -0.03 0.08 0.08
(0.02) (0.03) (0.02) (0.03) (0.06) (0.09)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.002*** 0.001*** 0.044** 0.24
Observations 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321
Number of Businesses 722 722 722 722 722 722
Control Mean 0.00 0.13 0.07 0.13 0.16 0.55
Control SD 0.00 0.41 0.23 0.29 0.55 0.85Note: All results are converted to daily averages. Deposits and withdrawals over the past 2 months in the monitoring surveys. All 
regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), baseline characteristics, assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Survey date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Net Deposits 
to 
experimental 
accountTotal lockbox net 
depositsTotal mobile 
money  net 
depositsNet Deposits from other 
savings sources
Total Net 
Deposits
70Web Appendix C - Assessing Possible Threats to Validity
Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile 
Money in Malawi
Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson
71Web Appendix Figure C1. Reporting vs. verified lockbox balances
Panel A. Verified vs. reported balance (all boxes)
Panel B. Verified vs. reported balances (below 75th percentile)
Notes: The y-axis is the amount actually found in the lockbox during the check in December 2018 and 
the x-axis is the amount reported as the balance (prior to open ing the box).  260 Respondents were 
assigned to the lockbox check group, and 241 completed pre-lock box check survey, 215 consented to 
show us the lockbox, 190 consented to open the lockbox .  Panel A shows all boxes, Panel B shows 
only those below the 75th percentile for both measures. About 5 0% of users reported the exact 
balance in the boxes, 14% under-reported, and 37% over-reported . 
72Web Appendix Table C1. Correlations between Self-Reports and Administrative Data for Mobile Money Groups
(1) (2)
=1 if deposit appears in 
telco dataValue of deposits in telco 
data
Values reported in HFPS survey
Panel A. Day Level
=1 if reported a deposit 0.344*** -
(0.01) -
Total value of reported deposits - 0.452***
- (0.02)
Observations 3,704 3,704
Number of respondents 156 156
Mean of dependent variable 0.0473 0.314
SD of dependent variable 0.212 2.14
Panel B. Week Level=1 if reported a deposit 0.525*** -
(0.02) -
Total value of reported deposits - 0.653***
- (0.02)
Observations 1,851 1,851
Number of respondents 156 156
Mean of dependent variable 0.226 2.4
SD of dependent variable 0.418 6.707
Panel C. Cumulative over entire HFPS periodTotal value of reported deposits - 0.823***
- (0.049)
Observations 294
Number of respondents 156
Mean of dependent variable 18.17
SD of dependent variable 32.42
Panel D. Long Term Usage Survey=1 if reported a deposit in the last month 0.600***
(0.09)
Total Value of Deposits in the last month 0.445***
(0.07)
Observations 70 70
Number of Respondents 70 70
Mean of dependent variable 0.201 2.738
SD of dependent variable 0.4 7.702
Notes: Independent variables are from high-frequency phone surveys. Dependent variables are from administrative 
data of mobile money transactions from the telecom company. The regressions are run without a constant term. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.  *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Mobile money transaction data from telecom 
73Web Appendix Table C2. Correlations between reported and verified balances in boxes
(1) (2) (3) (4)
All Boxes 
(pooled)Silver Black Brown
Panel A. All box groups
Self Reported balance in survey 1.073 0.93 0.812 1.367
(0.02) (0.01) (0.09) (0.01)
p-values  Beta = 1 0.002*** 0.001*** 0.035** 0.001***
Observations 190 185 65 46Panel B. One box group
Self Reported balance in survey 0.878 - - -
(0.02) - - -
p-values  Beta = 1 0.001***
Observations 94 - - -Panel C. Multiple box group
Self Reported balance in survey 1.127 0.993 0.812 1.367
(0.03) (0.01) (0.09) (0.01)
p-values  Beta = 1 0.001*** 0.60 0.035** 0.001***
Observations 96 91 65 46Independently Verified Balance in Boxes
Note: Regressions are run with a constant term. 260 Respondents were assigned to the 
lockbox check group, and 241 completed pre-lockbox check survey, 215 consented to show us the lockbox, 193 consented to open the lockbox. 
74Web Appendix Table C3. Does high frequency surveying affect reporting?
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
=1 if 
workedHours=1 if 
farmedHours
HFPS 0.06 -0.21 0.00 0.20 -0.14** -1.04 0.39 0.76 -8.54*
(0.04) (0.27) (0.05) (0.60) (0.07) (0.65) (0.48) (1.82) (4.86)
One lockbox 0.72*** -0.09 0.01 0.11 -0.07 0.04 -0.06 -1.67 4.07
(0.09) (0.26) (0.04) (0.54) (0.07) (0.70) (0.58) (2.00) (5.25)
Multiple lockboxes 1.02*** 0.41 -0.04 -0.69 0.00 0.83 -0.12 0.03 1.39
(0.13) (0.32) (0.04) (0.57) (0.09) (0.76) (0.50) (1.60) (5.70)
One mobile money account 0.25*** 0.17 -0.08 -1.07 0.04 1.31 -0.03 -1.67 4.17
(0.06) (0.30) (0.06) (0.72) (0.08) (0.92) (0.53) (1.66) (5.55)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.28*** 0.40 0.00 -0.59 -0.06 0.36 -0.04 -1.19 2.91
(0.06) (0.28) (0.04) (0.55) (0.07) (0.76) (0.51) (1.78) (5.33)
Interactions
One lockbox*HFPS -0.19 0.14 -0.10 -0.87 0.26*** 1.45 -0.78 -1.43 2.30
(0.13) (0.37) (0.07) (0.79) (0.10) (1.23) (0.71) (2.57) (6.37)
Multiple lockboxes*HFPS -0.25 0.19 0.04 0.43 0.19 1.70 -0.21 -2.56 0.67
(0.17) (0.43) (0.07) (0.85) (0.12) (1.50) (0.71) (2.31) (6.90)
One mobile money account*HFPS -0.03 0.14 0.03 0.24 0.09 0.61 -0.94 -0.53 1.28
(0.08) (0.38) (0.08) (0.93) (0.11) (1.28) (0.70) (2.54) (6.69)
Multiple mobile money accounts*HFPS -0.13 -0.58 -0.05 0.33 0.07 1.01 -0.80 -0.21 -1.77
(0.08) (0.37) (0.07) (0.86) (0.09) (1.22) (0.67) (2.52) (6.66)
p-values
  Joint significance of interaction terms 0.23 0.22 0.18 0.46 0.093* 0.69 0.57 0.74 0.98
Observations 1321 1321 9247 9247 1321 1319 1306 1315 1321
Number of Businesses 722 722 722 722 722 722 720 721 722
Control mean 0.00 1.53 0.74 7.35 0.24 2.05 3.02 10.07 37.41
Control sd 0.00 1.80 0.44 5.08 0.43 5.76 3.37 13.51 26.12
Notes: Deposits (columns 1-2), business earnings (columns 7-8) and total expenditures (column 9) are measured over the past week and converted to daily values. Labor supply in the main business (columns 3-4) is measured at the daily level in the past 7 days prior to the survey date. Farming is presented over a 
week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is the only way to present the extensive margin. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), baseline characterstics, date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and 
are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
1Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.Savings
Main businessLabor supply
Farming Total value of 
deposits into 
experimental 
account1Total 
DepositsProfits RevenuesBusiness outcomes
Total 
expenditures
75Web Appendix D - Additional Pre-specified Analyses
Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile 
Money in Malawi
Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson
76Web Appendix Table D1. Heterogeneity by pre-specified characteristics (high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Interacted variable Taxed Female Hyperbolic Taxed Female Hyperbolic
One lockbox 0.67*** 0.95*** 0.76*** 0.05 0.05 -0.68**
(0.14) (0.21) (0.14) (0.49) (0.56) (0.35)
Multiple lockboxes 1.32*** 1.77*** 1.49*** 0.45 0.91 0.63
(0.27) (0.41) (0.31) (0.52) (0.69) (0.52)
One mobile money account 0.16 0.40** 0.32*** -0.16 -0.58 0.04
(0.10) (0.16) (0.11) (0.53) (0.44) (0.46)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.31*** 0.37** 0.25** -0.34 -0.86* -0.75**
(0.11) (0.15) (0.11) (0.37) (0.49) (0.36)
X -0.04 -0.03 -0.06 -0.46 -0.46 -0.85**
(0.11) (0.10) (0.14) (0.44) (0.39) (0.35)
One lockbox * X 0.21 -0.36 0.03 -0.52 -0.48 2.35**
(0.28) (0.26) (0.33) (0.69) (0.67) (1.12)
Multiple lockboxes * X 0.67 -0.42 0.42 1.04 -0.15 0.67
(0.60) (0.51) (0.64) (1.00) (0.82) (0.94)
One mobile money account * X 0.35* -0.17 -0.15 0.77 1.55** 0.15
(0.21) (0.21) (0.21) (0.79) (0.74) (0.62)
Multiple mobile money accounts * X -0.03 -0.08 0.27 -0.35 0.98 1.54**
(0.22) (0.20) (0.26) (0.72) (0.61) (0.68)
p-values
  Joint significance of accounts for X = 0 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.61 0.086* 0.012**
  Joint significance of interaction terms 0.36 0.43 0.72 0.29 0.094* 0.063*
Observations 4536 4536 4536 4536 4536 4536
Number of businesses 390 390 390 390 390 390
Control Mean for X = 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.56 2.32 2.47
Control SD 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.63 2.49 4.31
Notes: Each column is a separate regression of the outcome on the treatments, the given variable, and the interactions between 
the treatments and variable. The coefficient labeled as "X" is the variable, and the interactions "account * X" are the 
interactions. The variable "taxed" is equal to 1 if the respondent gave money at baseline but didn't receive. Deposits are measured over the past week and converted to daily values. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), baseline characteristics, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date fixed effects are included.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.Total value of deposits into 
experimental account1 Total value of deposits
77Web Appendix Table D2. Heterogeneity by pre-specified characteristics (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Interacted variable Taxed Female Hyperbolic Taxed Female Hyperbolic
One lockbox 0.54*** 0.72*** 0.66*** -0.09 -0.19 0.07
(0.07) (0.10) (0.08) (0.22) (0.28) (0.23)
Multiple lockboxes 0.81*** 1.01*** 0.90*** 0.22 0.36 0.25
(0.10) (0.13) (0.10) (0.32) (0.36) (0.27)
One mobile money account 0.28*** 0.25*** 0.21*** 0.35 0.11 0.19
(0.06) (0.06) (0.05) (0.27) (0.29) (0.24)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.18*** 0.24*** 0.23*** 0.04 -0.22 0.11
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.23) (0.28) (0.23)
X -0.08* 0.02 0.01 -0.13 -0.45 -0.21
(0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.29) (0.28) (0.26)
One lockbox * X 0.26* -0.19 -0.21* 0.59 0.56 0.11
(0.14) (0.13) (0.12) (0.44) (0.38) (0.39)
Multiple lockboxes * X 0.25 -0.2 0 0.45 0.03 0.63
(0.19) (0.19) (0.22) (0.50) (0.48) (0.65)
One mobile money account * X -0.1 -0.03 0.09 -0.03 0.41 0.63
(0.08) (0.08) (0.10) (0.41) (0.39) (0.44)
Multiple mobile money accounts * X 0.13 -0.04 -0.06 0.14 0.58 -0.34
(0.11) (0.09) (0.13) (0.43) (0.39) (0.37)
p-values
  Joint significance of accounts for X = 0 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.48 0.49 0.90
  Joint significance of interaction terms 0.02** 0.66 0.43 0.67 0.53 0.20
Observations 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321 1321
Number of businesses 722 722 722 722 722 722
Control Mean for X = 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.53 1.62 1.63
Control SD 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.91 1.62 1.89Total value of deposits into 
experimental account1 Total value of deposits
Notes: Each column is a separate regression of the outcome on the treatments, the given variable, and the interactions between 
the treatments and variable. The coefficient labeled as "X" is the variable, and the interactions "account * X" are the 
interactions. The variable "taxed" is equal to 1 if the respondent gave money at baseline but didn't receive. Deposits are measured over the past week and converted to daily values. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), baseline characteristics, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Survey date fixed effects are included.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.
78Web Appendix Table D3. Heterogeneity by account ownership (high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (4) (5)
Interacted variableOwned 
Lockbox at 
BaselineOwned 
Mobile 
Money 
Account at 
BaselineOwned 
Lockbox at 
BaselineOwned Mobile 
Money 
Account at 
Baseline
One lockbox 0.66*** 0.61*** -0.4 -0.14
(0.14) (0.14) (0.40) (0.42)
Multiple lockboxes 1.54*** 1.34*** 0.81 0.18
(0.32) (0.32) (0.52) (0.45)
One mobile money account 0.34*** 0.26** 0.16 0.37
(0.10) (0.12) (0.46) (0.50)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.32*** 0.27* -0.52 -0.01
(0.11) (0.15) (0.36) (0.44)
X 0.03 -0.01 0.07 0.61
(0.13) (0.13) (0.45) (0.48)
One lockbox * X 0.52 0.35 0.91 -0.13
(0.34) (0.25) (0.76) (0.71)
Multiple lockboxes * X 0.19 0.46 -0.04 1.11
(0.71) (0.56) (0.96) (0.87)
One mobile money account * X -0.23 0.14 -0.17 -0.4
(0.23) (0.19) (0.77) (0.73)
Multiple mobile money accounts * X -0.17 0.14 0.7 -0.65
(0.26) (0.20) (0.80) (0.63)
p-values
  Joint significance of accounts for X = 0 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.067* 0.86
  Joint significance of interaction terms 0.45 0.50 0.53 0.15
Observations 4536 4536 4536 4536
Number of businesses 390 390 390 390
Control Mean for X = 0 0.00 0.00 2.36 2.14
Control SD 0.00 0.00 4.30 2.54Total value of deposits 
into experimental Total value of deposits
Notes: Each column is a separate regression of the outcome on the treatments, the given variable, 
and the interactions between the treatments and variable. The coefficient labeled as "X" is the variable, and the interactions "account * X" are the interactions. The variable "taxed" is equal to 1 if the respondent gave money at baseline but didn't receive. Deposits are measured over the past week and converted to daily values. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), baseline characteristics, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date fixed effects are included.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1Experimental account is the mobile mone y or box , dependin g on the treatment group.
79Web Appendix Table D4. Heterogeneity by account ownership (monitoring surveys)
(1) (2) (4) (5)
Interacted variableOwned 
Lockbox at 
BaselineOwned 
Mobile 
Money 
Account at 
BaselineOwned 
Lockbox at 
BaselineOwned Mobile 
Money 
Account at 
Baseline
One lockbox 0.62*** 0.57*** 0 0.11
(0.08) (0.08) (0.20) (0.20)
Multiple lockboxes 0.90*** 0.64*** 0.28 0.12
(0.09) (0.12) (0.25) (0.29)
One mobile money account 0.26*** 0.14*** 0.28 0.14
(0.05) (0.05) (0.22) (0.27)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.21*** 0.20*** -0.05 0.27
(0.05) (0.06) (0.20) (0.24)
X 0 -0.07 0.04 0.42
(0.06) (0.05) (0.38) (0.28)
One lockbox * X 0.02 0.1 0.57 -0.01
(0.14) (0.12) (0.53) (0.38)
Multiple lockboxes * X 0.02 0.45*** 0.62 0.42
(0.25) (0.16) (0.77) (0.44)
One mobile money account * X -0.17* 0.17** 0.24 0.35
(0.10) (0.08) (0.54) (0.40)
Multiple mobile money accounts * X 0.06 0.05 0.71 -0.34
(0.11) (0.08) (0.54) (0.38)
p-values
  Joint significance of accounts for X = 0 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.42 0.86
  Joint significance of interaction terms 0.37 0.048** 0.10 0.042**
Observations 1321 1321 1321 1321
Number of businesses 722 722 722 722
Control Mean for X = 0 0.00 0.00 1.50 1.15
Control SD 0.00 0.00 1.86 1.17Total value of deposits 
into experimental Total value of deposits
Notes: Each column is a separate regression of the outcome on the treatments, the given variable, 
and the interactions between the treatments and variable. The coefficient labeled as "X" is the variable, and the interactions "account * X" are the interactions. The variable "taxed" is equal to 1 if the respondent gave money at baseline but didn't receive. Deposits are measured over the past week and converted to daily values. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), baseline characteristics, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Survey date fixed effects are included.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
80Web Appendix Table D5. Effects of receiving random payments (high frequency phone surveys)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
=1 if 
workedHours=1 if 
farmedHours
Received a random payment last period - -0.72 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.06 0.60 3.56** -0.65
- (0.74) (0.01) (0.15) (0.01) (0.08) (0.50) (1.64) (0.64)
1 Box * Received a random payment -1.47** 0.50 0.02 0.46* -0.03 -0.11 1.10 3.28 -0.01
(0.75) (1.50) (0.02) (0.24) (0.02) (0.10) (0.71) (2.49) (1.43)
Multiple Box * Received a random payment 0.18 2.15 0.05 0.54* -0.01 0.01 0.63 3.70 0.55
(0.68) (1.39) (0.03) (0.29) (0.02) (0.12) (1.07) (3.70) (1.12)
1 MM * Received a random payment 0.35 2.27 -0.02 -0.48* 0.03 0.38* 1.00 4.70* -0.31
(0.40) (1.54) (0.03) (0.27) (0.03) (0.21) (0.68) (2.61) (1.13)
Multiple MM * Received a random payment -0.46 3.40 0.08** 0.93** 0.02 0.21 0.53 2.41 -0.49
(0.54) (2.85) (0.03) (0.46) (0.02) (0.14) (0.87) (3.33) (1.33)
p-values
  Joint significance all account interactions 0.18 0.22 0.039** 0.011** 0.22 0.20 0.42 0.25 0.97Observations 3808 3808 30460 30459 3806 3806 3854 3862 3808
Number of businesses 384 384 392 392 383 383 385 385 384
Control Mean 0.00 14.69 0.81 8.14 0.03 0.12 21.87 75.77 25.94
Control SD 0.00 17.42 0.40 4.71 0.18 0.78 16.66 80.75 18.81
Notes: Regressions include individual fixed effects. Deposits (columns 1-2), business earnings (columns 7-8) and total expenditures (column 9) are measured over the 
past week and converted to daily values. Labor supply in the main business (columns 3-4) is measured at the daily level in the past 7 days prior to the survey date. Farming is presented over a week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is the only way to present the extensive margin. All regressions control for 
individual fixed effects, strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), baseline characteristics, date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group.Savings Labor supply Business outcomes
Total 
expendituresValue of 
deposits into 
experimental 
account1Total 
value of 
depositsMain business Farming
Profits Revenues
81Web Appendix E - Results without baseline controls
Saving for Multiple Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile 
Money in Malawi
Shilpa Aggarwal, Valentina Brailovskaya and Jonathan Robinson
82Web Appendix Table E1. Treatment effects on deposits (high frequency phone surveys), specification without baseline controls
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
=1 if deposited 
into any 
lockbox2Total lockbo x
deposits2=1 if deposited 
into any mobile 
money account3Total mobile 
money deposits3Cash at homeBank 
accountsSavings 
groups4
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.75*** 0.49*** 0.45*** -0.06 -0.11* -0.66*** -0.01 -0.16* -0.32
(0.13) (0.05) (0.14) (0.04) (0.06) (0.17) (0.10) (0.09) (0.36)
Multiple lockboxes 1.59*** 0.62*** 1.28*** -0.05 -0.10 -0.53*** 0.03 -0.07 0.95*
(0.29) (0.05) (0.28) (0.04) (0.07) (0.18) (0.13) (0.08) (0.49)
One mobile money account 0.35*** -0.04 -0.10 0.18*** 0.22** 0.29 -0.13 -0.09 0.24
(0.09) (0.05) (0.11) (0.05) (0.08) (0.32) (0.10) (0.07) (0.40)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.30*** -0.04 -0.16 0.14*** 0.14* -0.29* -0.06 -0.08 -0.46
(0.09) (0.06) (0.10) (0.05) (0.08) (0.18) (0.09) (0.07) (0.32)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.006*** 0.014** 0.004*** 0.63 0.83 0.31 0.80 0.35 0.012**
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.68 0.94 0.61 0.49 0.39 0.028** 0.58 0.95 0.065*
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 1.16*** 0.55*** 0.84*** -0.05 -0.10* -0.60*** 0.01 -0.11 0.29
(0.17) (0.05) (0.17) (0.03) (0.06) (0.16) (0.09) (0.07) (0.36)
Mobile Money 0.32*** -0.04 -0.14 0.16*** 0.18*** 0.03 -0.10 -0.09 -0.09
(0.08) (0.05) (0.09) (0.04) (0.07) (0.23) (0.07) (0.06) (0.32)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.32 0.65 0.26
Observations 4534 4534 4534 4534 4534 4534 4534 4534 4534
Number of Businesses 391 391 391 391 391 391 391 391 391
Control Mean 0.00 0.25 0.35 0.20 0.24 1.04 0.29 0.45 2.43
Control SD 0.00 0.43 0.82 0.40 0.68 1.80 2.76 0.82 3.93
Notes: All results are converted to daily averages. Value of value of deposits was measured over the past 7 days. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent 
variable during the intake survey (where applicable), date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details).  All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
1Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group, and is mechanically 0 for the control group.
2Includes non-project lockbox
3Includes non-project mobile money accounts
4Savings groups include VSLAs and ROSCAs.
5Total deposits is the sum of the other columns, as well as other less common types of savings (such as safekeeping with shopkeepers or friends).Value of 
deposits into 
experimental 
account1First Stage Value of deposits into other savings source s
Total 
Value of 
Deposits5
83Web Appendix Table E2. Treatment effects on deposits (monitoring surveys), specification without baseline controls
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
=1 if 
deposited into 
any lockbox2Total lockbox 
deposits2=1 if deposited into 
any mobile money 
account2Total mobile 
money 
deposits2Cash at homeBank 
accountsSavings 
groups4
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.63*** 0.63*** 0.48*** -0.10* -0.05 -0.23*** -0.05 -0.10 -0.07
(0.06) (0.05) (0.08) (0.05) (0.04) (0.06) (0.07) (0.10) (0.20)
Multiple lockboxes 0.93*** 0.60*** 0.78*** -0.06 -0.03 -0.27*** 0.21* -0.20* 0.59**
(0.09) (0.05) (0.11) (0.06) (0.04) (0.06) (0.12) (0.11) (0.24)
One mobile money account 0.26*** -0.03 0.04 0.24*** 0.13*** 0.00 0.33*** -0.13 0.32
(0.04) (0.05) (0.07) (0.06) (0.05) (0.07) (0.12) (0.11) (0.22)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.20*** 0.00 -0.05 0.22*** 0.10** -0.07 0.05 -0.12 0.06
(0.04) (0.06) (0.06) (0.06) (0.05) (0.07) (0.08) (0.11) (0.21)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.004*** 0.45 0.011** 0.42 0.70 0.22 0.019** 0.33 0.003***
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.26 0.54 0.15 0.75 0.56 0.24 0.008*** 0.90 0.18
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.77*** 0.62*** 0.63*** -0.08 -0.04 -0.25*** 0.07 -0.15 0.25
(0.06) (0.04) (0.08) (0.05) (0.04) (0.06) (0.08) (0.10) (0.19)
Mobile Mone y 0.23*** -0.02 0.00 0.23*** 0.12*** (0.03) 0.20** -0.12 0.20
(0.03) (0.05) (0.06) (0.05) (0.04) (0.07) (0.09) (0.10) (0.19)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.15 0.73 0.71
Observations 1323 1323 1323 1323 1323 1323 1323 1323 1323
Number of Businesses 723 723 723 723 723 723 723 723 723
Control Mean 0.00 0.30 0.25 0.36 0.18 0.30 0.23 0.54 1.53
Control SD 0.00 0.46 0.62 0.48 0.38 0.55 0.98 0.93 1.80Notes: All results are converted to daily averages. Value of deposits was measured over the past 2 months in the monitoring surveys. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the 
dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
1Experimental account is the mobile money or box, depending on the treatment group, and is mechanically 0 for the control group.
2Includes non-project lockbox and/or mobile money accounts.
3Savings groups include VSLAs and ROSCAs.
4Total deposits is the sum of the other columns, as well as other less common types of savings (such as safekeeping with shopkeepers or friends).Value of 
deposits into 
experimental 
account1First Stage Value of deposits into other savings sources
Total 
Value of 
Deposits5
84Web Appendix Table E3. Treatment effects on labor supply and business outcomes (high frequency phone surveys), specification without baseline controls
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
=1 if 
workedHours =1 if worked Hours=1 if 
farmedHours
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox -0.08** -0.83** -0.02 -0.90 0.02 0.20* -0.37 -0.54 -0.03 0.41
(0.03) (0.42) (0.04) (0.92) (0.02) (0.11) (0.33) (0.96) (0.05) (0.45)
Multiple lockboxes 0.00 0.13 0.05 2.53 0.08*** 0.51*** -0.30 -0.64 0.00 -0.07
(0.03) (0.36) (0.05) (2.05) (0.03) (0.19) (0.39) (1.12) (0.05) (0.36)
One mobile money account -0.05 -0.55 0.03 -1.23 0.09*** 0.56*** -0.42 -0.13 0.04 0.13
(0.03) (0.42) (0.04) (0.82) (0.03) (0.17) (0.34) (1.07) (0.05) (0.33)
Multiple mobile money accounts -0.06 0.09 0.00 -0.46 0.00 0.13 -0.58* 0.34 -0.05 -0.23
(0.04) (0.58) (0.04) (0.82) (0.02) (0.11) (0.33) (1.15) (0.05) (0.34)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.014** 0.024** 0.20 0.073* 0.025** 0.10 0.86 0.93 0.025** 0.10  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.75 0.27 0.45 0.23 0.007*** 0.016** 0.64 0.72 0.007*** 0.016**
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes -0.04 -0.37 0.02 0.84 0.05*** 0.35*** -0.34 -0.59 -0.02 0.17
(0.03) (0.33) (0.04) (1.29) (0.02) (0.12) (0.30) (0.85) (0.04) (0.33)
Mobile Money -0.06* -0.28 0.02 -0.88 0.05** 0.36*** -0.49* 0.08 0.00 -0.03
(0.03) (0.40) (0.03) (0.76) (0.02) (0.12) (0.29) (0.91) (0.04) (0.29)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.66 0.81 0.98 0.14 0.98 0.94 0.56 0.46 0.64 0.52
Observation
s 31472 31471 4605 4605 4541 4541 26086 26256 4544 4632
Number of Businesses 392 392 391 391 391 391 392 392 391 391
Control Mean 0.81 8.21 0.18 1.78 0.06 0.20 3.37 11.86 0.33 0.97
Control SD 0.39 4.67 0.38 7.23 0.23 1.20 3.59 15.78 0.47 4.24Labor Supply Business outcomes Credit Taken1
Notes: The main business outcomes (in Columns 1-2 and 7-8) were measured at the daily level. Labor supply in secondary occupations, farming, credit 
(Columns 3-4, 5-6 and 9-10) are presented over a week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is the only way to present the extensive margin. There are fewer observations for profits/revenues (compared to main business) because this was only asked for the past 4 days in the second round of HFPS (labor supply was asked for a 7 day recall). All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), 
date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details).  All monetary variables are expressed in USD 
and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
1Credit include digital loans and loans from VSLAs, ROSCAs, banks, microfinance institutions, and moneylenders.ValueMain Business Other occupations Farming
Profits RevenuesTook out 
loan
85Web Appendix Table E4. Treatment effects on labor supply and business outcomes (monitoring surveys), specification without baseline controls
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
=1 if 
workedHours =1 if worked Hours=1 if 
farmedHours
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox -0.04 -0.26 -0.02 -0.62 0.05 0.81 -0.42 -2.21* 0.01 1.29 0.14*
(0.03) (0.40) (0.03) (0.79) (0.05) (0.59) (0.37) (1.30) (0.05) (1.14) (0.08)
Multiple lockboxes -0.01 -0.29 0.09** 1.51 0.09 1.64** -0.16 -0.95 -0.03 1.43 0.17*
(0.03) (0.41) (0.04) (1.23) (0.06) (0.69) (0.36) (1.19) (0.06) (1.81) (0.09)
One mobile money account -0.06 -0.83* 0.04 1.20 0.11* 1.92*** -0.44 -1.84 0.02 1.40 0.13*
(0.04) (0.48) (0.04) (1.05) (0.06) (0.66) (0.35) (1.23) (0.05) (1.31) (0.07)
Multiple mobile money accounts -0.03 -0.49 0.02 0.55 -0.03 0.89 -0.47 -1.31 0.00 -0.10 0.10
(0.04) (0.40) (0.03) (0.80) (0.05) (0.72) (0.35) (1.26) (0.05) (1.22) (0.08)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.47 0.93 0.015** 0.068* 0.52 0.28 0.48 0.30 0.46 0.93 0.75  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.49 0.48 0.67 0.59 0.013** 0.20 0.92 0.65 0.61 0.26 0.77
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes -0.03 -0.27 0.03 0.42 0.07 1.21** -0.29 -1.60 0.01 1.29 0.14*
(0.03) (0.35) (0.03) (0.85) (0.05) (0.51) (0.31) (1.08) (0.05) (1.14) (0.08)
Mobile Money -0.05 -0.67* 0.03 0.88 0.04 1.44*** -0.46 -1.62 0.01 0.71 0.11*
(0.03) (0.37) (0.03) (0.73) (0.05) (0.55) (0.31) (1.09) (0.05) (1.09) (0.06)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.38 0.21 0.80 0.63 0.51 0.67 0.49 0.98 0.51 0.67 0.80
Observations 9261 9261 1321 1321 1323 1321 1308 1317 1323 1323 1317
Number of Businesses 723 723 723 723 723 723 721 722 723 723 719
Control Mean 0.74 7.35 0.13 1.82 0.24 2.05 3.02 10.07 0.67 5.57 0.23
Control SD 0.44 5.08 0.33 8.34 0.43 5.76 3.37 13.51 0.47 10.71 0.54Credit to 
Customers
Notes: Labor supply in the main business (columns 1-2) was measured at the daily level (for 7 days prior to the survey date), other variables were measured over the past 
week. Labor supply in secondary occupations, farming, credit (Columns 3-4, 5-6 and 9-10) are presented over a week since this is how it was measured in the surveys and it is the only way to present the extensive margin.  Profits and revenues (columns 7-8) are measured at the weekly level, but are converted to daily averages. Credit to customers (column 11) is measured over a month but converted to daily averages. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake 
survey  (where applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
1Credit include digital loans and loans from VSLAs, ROSCAs, banks, microfinance institutions, and moneylenders.Main Business Other occupations Farming
Profits RevenuesTook out 
loanValueLabor Supply Business outcomes Credit Taken1
86(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Staple 
foodsPersonal 
expensesHousehold 
expensesSchool 
expensesTotal 
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.13*** 0.38
(0.12) (0.07) (0.08) (0.05) (0.36)
Multiple lockboxes 0.05 0.00 0.11 0.16*** 0.53
(0.13) (0.08) (0.10) (0.06) (0.43)
One mobile money account 0.03 0.03 0.17* 0.13** 0.57
(0.14) (0.08) (0.10) (0.06) (0.44)
Multiple mobile money accounts -0.03 -0.04 -0.05 0.01 -0.22
(0.12) (0.07) (0.07) (0.04) (0.34)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.90 0.48 0.55 0.60 0.75  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.65 0.28 0.039** 0.05* 0.071*
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.06 0.03 0.08 0.14*** 0.45
(0.11) (0.06) (0.07) (0.04) (0.32)
Mobile Money 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.08* 0.21
(0.12) (0.06) (0.07) (0.04) (0.34)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.52 0.61 0.92 0.16 0.47
Observations 4530 4544 4544 4544 4544
Number of Businesses 391 391 391 391 391
Control Mean 1.47 0.50 0.54 0.22 3.93
Control SD 0.90 0.59 0.91 0.58 2.87
Note: Expenditures are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and are expressed in daily 
values. Total expenditures include the other columns in addition to other categories not shown here. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), date fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Web Appendix Table E5. Treatment effects on expenditures (high frequency phone surveys), 
specification without baseline controls
87Web Appendix Table E6. Treatment effects on expenditures (monitoring surveys), specification without baseline controls
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Staple foodsPersonal 
expensesHousehold 
expensesSchool 
ExpensesHoliday 
SpendingTotal 
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox 0.13 0.11 0.35** 0.00 0.01 0.65
(0.14) (0.10) (0.18) (0.07) (0.01) (0.48)
Multiple lockboxes 0.19 0.09 0.14 (0.03) 0.01 0.50
(0.16) (0.10) (0.18) (0.07) (0.01) (0.51)
One mobile money account 0.25 0.15 0.26 0.04 0.02* 0.93*
(0.16) (0.11) (0.18) (0.07) (0.01) (0.51)
Multiple mobile money accounts -0.03 0.13 0.09 -0.04 0.01 0.16
(0.14) (0.10) (0.17) (0.07) (0.01) (0.51)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.69 0.85 0.19 0.64 0.90 0.74  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.058* 0.79 0.31 0.16 0.33 0.12
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.15 0.10 0.25 -0.02 0.01 0.58
(0.13) (0.09) (0.16) (0.06) (0.01) (0.43)
Mobile Money 0.12 0.14 0.19 0.00 0.01 0.58
(0.13) (0.09) (0.16) (0.06) (0.01) (0.45)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.73 0.60 0.61 0.69 0.39 0.98
Observations 1319 1322 1322 1323 1323 1323
Number of Businesses 723 723 723 723 723 723
Control Mean 1.88 0.72 0.98 0.41 0.06 5.34
Control SD 1.28 0.87 1.46 0.62 0.09 3.73
Note: Expenditures in columns 1-3 are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and are expressed in daily values. Education 
and holiday spending (columns 4-5) are measured over a few months prior to the survey and converted to daily values for 
comparability. Total expenses include the other columns in addition to categories shown here. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey  (where applicable), date of the survey fixed effects, assignment to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are 
winsorized at 5%. Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. 
88Web Appendix Table E7. Treatment effects on transfers (HFPS), without baseline controls
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Received 
transferValue Gave transfer Value
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbo x 0.03 -0.30 0.07 1.03
(0.06) (1.24) (0.06) (1.05)
Multi ple lockboxe s 0.01 -0.12 0.09 1.01
(0.06) (1.12) (0.06) (0.93)
One mobile money account 0.06 1.03 0.12** 1.17
(0.06) (1.33) (0.06) (0.91)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.05 -0.66 0.07 0.34
(0.07) (1.14) (0.07) (0.80)
p-values  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.68 0.68 0.72 0.99
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.85 0.85 0.41 0.35
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes 0.02 -0.21 0.08 1.02
(0.05) (1.00) (0.05) (0.80)
Mobile Money 0.05 0.28 0.10* 0.80
(0.06) (1.07) (0.06) (0.74)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.42 0.42 0.60 0.78
Observations 4544 4544 4544 4544
Number of Businesses 391 391 391 391
Control Mean 0.38 5.48 0.59 5.05
Control SD 0.49 12.42 0.49 8.23Interpersonal transfers
Notes: Transfers include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments and do not include survey 
compensation. Variables are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and converted to daily averages. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
89Web Appendix Table E8. Treatment effects on transfers (monitoring surveys), without baseline controls
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Received 
transferValue Gave transfer Value
Panel A. Individual Accounts
One lockbox -0.05 -0.05 -0.04 0.02
(0.05) (0.08) (0.06) (0.05)
Multiple lockboxes -0.11* 0.00 (0.01) 0.03
(0.06) (0.08) (0.06) (0.06)
One mobile money account -0.01 (0.03) 0.00 0.08
(0.05) (0.08) (0.06) (0.05)
Multiple mobile money accounts 0.01 (0.02) (0.03) 0.01
(0.06) (0.08) (0.06) (0.05)
p-values
  One lockbox = multiple lockbox 0.38 0.38 0.66 0.78
  One m.m. = multiple m.m. 0.75 0.75 0.61 0.23
Panel B. Pooled Lockboxes and Mobile Money Accounts
Boxes -0.08* -0.02 -0.02 0.03
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.04)
Mobile Money 0.00 -0.03 (0.02) 0.05
(0.05) (0.07) (0.05) (0.04)
p-values
Lockbox = Mobile Money 0.054* 0.054* 0.85 0.60
Observations 1323 1323 1323 1323
Number of Businesses 723 723 723 723
Control Mean 0.58 0.43 0.59 0.26Control SD 0.49 0.73 0.49 0.39
Notes: Transfers include gifts and loans, and both cash and in-kind payments and do not include survey 
compensation. Variables are measured over the 7 days prior to the survey and converted to daily averages. All regressions control for strata, a measure of the dependent variable during the intake survey (where applicable), assignement to high frequency group and are probability weighted (see in the text for details). Survey date fixed effects are included. All monetary variables are expressed in USD and are winsorized at 5%.Standard errors clustered at individual level in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
90