  
 
 
Tetra Tech International Development  
Summative Programme Performance 
Report – SPRING Monitoring & 
Evaluation  
March 2020  
SPRING Independent Evaluation Team  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 |  
 Table of Contents   
1. Evaluation Context and Purpose  ................................ ................................ ................  1 
1.1. Context of the evaluation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  1 
1.2. Overall structure of the evaluation  ................................ ................................ ..........................  1 
1.3. Purpose of this evaluation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 2 
1.4. Users of the evaluation and communicating the findings  ................................ .......................  2 
1.5. Changes from the Terms of Reference  ................................ ................................ ...................  3 
1.6. Structure of the report  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  3 
1.7. Focus of this report on the PPE  ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
2. Context of SPRING  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 4 
2.1. SPRING Context  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  4 
2.2. SPRING background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  5 
2.3. SPRING Programme overview  ................................ ................................ ...............................  5 
3. Evaluation Methodology  ................................ ................................ .............................  8 
3.1. Overview of evaluation design  ................................ ................................ ................................  8 
3.2. Ethical considerations and independence, conflicts of interest within and disputes between 
the M&E team members  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  11 
3.3. Challenges and limitations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 12 
4. Findings ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  12 
4.1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  12 
4.2. Relevance  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  15 
4.3. Effectiveness  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  25 
5. Lessons and recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................  43 
5.1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  43 
5.2. Lessons and recommendations  ................................ ................................ ............................  44 
Annex A: SPRING M&E Partner: Revised Terms of Reference (August 2016)   
Annex B - Theories of Change  
Annex C - Revisions to the SPRING M&E Evaluation Framework  
Annex D. SPRING businesses and how they  targeted girls  
Annex E - Evolution of the SPRING Theory of Change  
Annex F: Value for Money Analysis  
Annex G – Comparison of SPRING with other Programmes  
Annex H: List of stakeholders interviewed  
Annex I: List of References  
Annex J – Evaluation Methodology  
  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 |  
 
Client Name: Department for International Development  
Project Name: SPRING Monitoring & Evaluation  
Contract Number: PO 7117  
March 2020  
Tetra Tech International Development Ltd  
The Malthouse 1 Northfield Road Reading Berkshire RG1 8AH United Kingdom  
T (+44) (0) 1189 566 066 F (+44) (0) 1189 576 066 www.tetratecheurope.com  
Registered Office: 1 Northfield Road Reading Berkshire RG1 8AH Uni ted Kingdom  
Registered in England No. 3799145 Vat Number: GB 724 5309 45  
 
This document has been approved for submission by Tetra Tech International Development Project 
Director, based on a review of satisfactory adherence to our policies on:  
• Quality manag ement;  
• HSSE and risk management;  
• Financial management and Value for Money (VfM);  
• Personnel recruitment and management;  
• Performance Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)  
 
Heidi Ober  
Principal Consultant  
Signature:   
 
 
 
  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 |  
 Abbreviations and Acronyms  
BPE Business Performance Evaluation  
BoP Bottoms of the Pyramid  
BAF Business Assistance Fund  
CM Country Manager  
CRS  Capital Raising Strategy  
DFID  Department for International Development  
DFAT  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  
EoC End of Cohort  
HCD  Human Centred Design  
IE Impact Evaluation  
IP Implementing Partner  
KDHS  Kenyan Demographic  and Health Survey  
KSh Kenyan Shillings  
KII Key Informant Interview  
KPI Key Performance Indicator  
M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  
NGO  Non-Government Organisation  
NCD  Non-communicable diseases  
PDF Prototype Development Fund  
PPE Programme Performance Evaluation  
PPI Poverty Probability Index  
SEL Social and Emotional Learning  
SMS  Short Message Service  
STEM  Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths  
ToC Theory of Change  
ToR  Terms of Reference  
USAID  United States Agency for International Development  
USD  United States Dollar  
VfM Value for Money  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | i 
 Executive Summary  
The SPRING context  
SPRING was a five -year programme funded by the Department of International Development (DFID), 
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the Australian Department of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT). Dono rs also included the Nike Foundation, which funded the 
programme until February 2018. SPRING aimed to transform the lives of adolescent girls by working 
with businesses to develop products  and services which would help them keep safe, learn, earn and 
save,  and have greater wellbeing. The SPRING accelerator identified businesses which could 
improve the lives of girls and provided mentoring support, limited finance, and expertise in business 
growth, design, innovation and marketing to help drive their busines s models forward.  
The programme was implemented by a consortium of partners led by the Palladium Group, including  
a SPRING CEO and core project team based in London; fuseproject1, an international design and 
brand development firm and experts in Human -centered  design (HCD), who were in charge of the 
overall accelerator design; a team of global thematic experts; and a range of professionals (e.g. legal, 
marketing, and financial advice) supporting the implementing businesses with their expertise.  
The SPRING  programme ran from July 2014 to September 2019. The programme supported four 
cohorts of businesses in nine countries in two different geographic areas in Eastern Africa (Ethiopia, 
Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda  and Rwanda) and South Asia (Bangladesh, Pakistan, N epal and 
Myanmar). By the end of its last cohort, SPRING had worked with 75 businesses, and reached 
2,534,214 adolescent girls.  
The context of the SPRING evaluation  
This is the final summative  evaluation report of one of three evaluation components of the SPRING 
programme, the Programme Performance Evaluation.  
Evaluation design and methods  
This evaluation report assesses the extent and manner of the SPRING implementation, iteration and 
adaptation. We applied a theory -based2, mixed methods approach to gather relevant data, drawing on 
evidence from the on -going evaluation over a period of five years3. During this time, we worked 
closely with the implementing partner (IP) of SPRING but retained our independence, playing a role of 
a “critical friend”. We a lso reported regularly to the donors, both independently and together with the 
IP. 
We developed a n Evaluation Framework in line with the OECD DAC criteria during the Inception 
Phase, which has been periodically reviewed, refined and updated to ensure that the evaluation 
remains relevant  to the intended users4. These revisions to the Evaluation Framework took into 
account changes implemented by the IP both through programme learning and the more formal 
revision of its programme Theory of Change.  
Throughout the five -year evaluation period we gathered data from a range of sources, conducted 
interviews with IP members, we reviewed programme documentation and communications, and we 
sat as observers in meetings, both internal IP meetings and IP -donor meetings. To  produce this 
report, we have drawn on our earlier reports and conducted additional independent interviews with 
 
1 Founded in 1999 by Yves Béhar, fuseproject  is an award -winning design agency based in San Francisco. It employs an integrated approach to 
design which is delivered through a range of services: industrial design, environmental design, brand identity, packaging, UI  and UX. fuseproject 
believes that design should be a positive force for social and environmental change.  
2 A theory based evaluation is an evaluation approach rather than a method. It explores the extent to which a conceptual model worked (or did not 
work) and presents reasons why this was  the case. In the case of SPRNG, the conceptual model was that private businesses could use HCD to 
develop products and services to improve the lives, safety, health, education and livelihoods of vulnerable girls, by better understanding their 
needs and de veloping products and services to meet these needs. Also see Coffey, SPRING Monitoring and Evaluation: Inception Report, 
Version 2, September 2015, pp.14 -16 
3 Reference is often made to earlier reports. These should be available on both devtracker  and on DEC .   
4 The final iteration of the Framework was agreed to in August 2018.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | ii 
 donor representatives and businesses. In addition, we have used the IP’s own reported data and had 
independent access  to much of their programme  data.  
In January 2020, we presented the draft findings of this report to the donors in a workshop attended 
by DFID and USAID  representatives. They provided feedback and asked questions which has 
allowed us to further refine the findings and lessons  prese nted in this report.  
The purpose of this report  
This report answers the Evaluation Framework questions which are relevant to the PPE, with the 
remaining questions to be addressed in the Summative BPE evaluation report and the Impact 
Evaluation reports. Th is report will help inform programming decisions by both DFID and USAID, and 
other donors and stakeholders globally which are involved in innovating and designing programmes 
aimed at empowerment, especially those focused on girls.  
Key findings  
How successfully did SPRING target businesses to achieve programme goals? AND To what 
extent has SPRING adapted and with what effect?  
Businesses for each cohort were selected in four separate processes. SPRING adapted its selection 
process for businesses  in each cohort, refining its selection criteria based on its own reflection and 
learning from the previous cohort. Following Cohort 1 the identification for application and potential 
selection became a more focused process, using local knowledge  and expertise.     
The programme went through several iterations where it identified and selected businesses at various 
stages of growth. Cohort 1 identified mainly new entry level businesses, while Cohort 2 moved 
towards working with more mature business es. Cohort 3 identified early stage growth businesses 
which had some market traction. Cohort 4 opted for businesses in later stage growth, but which were 
still sufficiently nimble to change implementation strategies based on their prototype HCD related 
research but mature enough to have market reach and traction to meet programme needs.   
The original business  case suggested that the private sector players “partner” with NGOs, and while 
this process was not implemented completely, SPRING did partner with a mix of business ventures, 
with over three quarters of their 75 businesses classified as “for profit”. A number of these businesses 
had participated in other accelerators, but applauded SPRING for its unique characteristics, including 
a longer period of tim e for engagement, the inclusion of HCD as a tool and methodology, and a form 
of support for each business, tailored for its needs.  
How successfully has SPRING targeted adolescent girls? AND To what extent has SPRING 
adapted and with what effect?  
As part of  its initial country -based work, and to assist with the business selection process, SPRING 
conducted a “girl landscaping” process. This intensive primary research activity highlighted girls’ 
needs and challenges in the cohorts’ countries. This foundation g reatly assisted in the business 
selection process , and in the businesses prototype development process.  
While the age range of the targeted girls remained the same, the definition of this demographic 
changed as the programme evolved. Initially the program me was designed to target Bottom of the 
Pyramid (BoP) girls. It became evident that these girls often had very little economic power and 
influence , and while they might benefit from the programme objective, it would be hard to reach at 
scale within the programme  lifespan. As a result, the programme shifted its focus from BoP girls to a 
broader category of “vulnerable” girls, with no clear definition of vulnerability, rather recognising that 
vulnerability can result from a number of causes including socio -economic status, as well as religious 
and cultural environments. In addition, many business prototypes targeted girls outside the SPRING 
age parameters. As a result, SPRING might have under -reported its actual reach on individuals.   
In identifying businesse s to impact on girls’ lives, the programme reflected, learned and refined its 
selection. In early  cohorts, it soon bec ame evident that using the programme would not achieve 
targets within the lifespan. Focus then shifted to businesses using prototypes bene fitting girls as end 
users – either as direct decision makers or as beneficiaries through what was termed gatekeepers.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | iii 
 Many SPRING businesses had not previously considered girls as a unique market segment and were 
grateful for this exposure. However, man y found that the parameters imposed by SPRING were 
constraining (adolescent girls between the ages of 10 -19), and instead used the SPRING process to 
benefit these girls as part of another demographic (e.g. “youth or young people” or “school going 
children”  including boys, “families” including girl children, “younger women” including recipients older 
than 19). As a result, SPRING might have benefitted populations unidentified and unrecorded by the 
programme.   
The effect of SPRING adapting is seen in a numbe r of programme areas including : 
• The identification of what types of businesses are most suited to partner with the programme ; 
• The changing of the type of girls and the role these targeted girls were expected to play in 
relation to the businesses ; 
• How the p rogramme could most effectively utilise its Prototype Development Fund (PDF) 
offering ; and  
• The reorganisation of the face -to-face interactions, allowing businesses to have more 
opportunities to refine their prototype . 
All of these changes to the programme  allowed it to more effectively reach its target number of 
beneficiaries and businesses, on time and within budget, while continuing to provide the businesses 
with a consistently high level of quality inputs.  
How effectively were the different SPRING acce lerator experience inputs designed and 
delivered, to help businesses refine their business model, product, or service?  
SPRING consistently received high satisfaction ratings from its participants regarding its inputs and 
support. The highest ratings were r eceived for the face to face encounters with IP staff at bootcamps, 
and for the inputs of which the businesses were previously unaware, such as HCD.  One area that 
received lower ratings was the HCD research activities which were carried out by an outsourc ed 
company from Cohort 2 onwards, following which SPRING implemented processes to improve this 
delivery5.  
SPRING partially assisted its businesses in the testing and design of their prototypes with funding 
through its Prototype Development Fund (PDF). Rat her than allocating an equal amount to 
companies, from Cohort  2, SPRING required businesses to “pitch’ for their funding, dropping the 
average PDF value in each cohort by just over a third.  
Did SPRING represent good value for money?  
SPRING was a unique programme, as it had three main components: a girl programme, an HCD 
programme and a business accelerator.  It is therefore difficult to compare the programme to any other 
for the purposes of determining value for money. However, the ongoing adaptati on of SPRING did not 
result in increased programme management costs, with the costs following a typical project trajectory 
over time and remaining within the overall budget.   
Lessons learned and recommendations  
High level lessons learned  and associated re commendations from the evaluation are presented here. 
For each recommendation, we also suggest the relevant audience, including donors, programme 
implementers and the wider development community.  
Lesson 1: The private sector can develop products and services needed by girls  
SPRING’s underlying hypothesis was that private sector players could profitably play a role in 
providing products and services to girls assisting in their economic empowerment.  We think that part 
of this hypothesis has been  proven  to be correct. SPRING has shown that it is possible to reach girls, 
using private sector stakeholders. The basic hypothesis of engaging “the private sector to develop 
 
5 For more information on programme improvements in this areas see Coffey, SPRING Programme Performance Evaluation Report, Coho rt 2, 
March 2018.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | iv 
 and distribute commercially viable products has been proven.  However, it remains to be seen if these 
products “…enhance a girls’ economic  opportunities”6. 
 
Recommendation  Audience  
The private sector has the capability and the appetite to reach 
vulnerable populations in ways that benefit the beneficiaries as 
well as benefitting the business profitably. This method of 
reaching and benefitting vulnerable populations should be 
explored more and used where appropriate.  Donors; programme 
implementers; broader 
community  
 
Lesson 2: Ensure targets allow flexibility to encourage innovation, iteration and learning  
SPRING was required to deliver quantitative targets which were conceived before the programme had 
gained traction. The programme  delivered its targets, but we think that this focus on targets impeded 
its ability to innovate and pivot. These constraints inf luenced the programme in three ways:  
• The programme worked with businesses which could quickly reach a large number of girls over 
a short period of time;  
• SPRING may have chosen to partner with businesses that had a greater girl reach rather than a 
deeper g irl impact  due to the mandate to achieve targets ; and  
• After achieving its girl reach target the programme displayed was less risk averse, working with 
more innovative businesses that might have impacted girls in a different or a deeper manner.  
The need to  report against targets might also have impacted on the programme underreporting on its 
true reach. For example, the target age parameters were arbitrary (10 -19). Many businesses reached 
girls outside of these parameters, but only reported girls within the  parameters to SPRING, possibly 
under reporting the programme’s reach.  
An example of weighted targets might include allocating weights to different age groups and to the 
anticipated depth of impact  of a prototype. An example of weighted logframe targets c an be found in 
the Section 5.2.2, Table 6 in the main body of the report.  
Recommendation  Audience  
When calling on programmes to be innovative and dynamic 
more nuanced method of programme progress should be 
implemented rather than applying rigid targets and parameters.   
For example: In SPRING’s instance a weighting could have 
been applied to adolescent girls aged 10 -19 with a lighter 
weighting applied to beneficiaries outside these parameters.  Donors; broader community  
Allow the programme to use flexible parameters to report true 
programme reach and allocate adequate resources for this.  
 
Lesson 3: Economic empowerment takes time and resources , especially  to deliver at scale.  
The original programme design sought to economically empower girls by placing assets within their 
control . SPRING opted instead to identify girls as direct end users of products and services working 
with businesses which developed prototypes to reach girls in various ways. Reaching girls as value 
chain contributors was challenging, and the programme struggled with this as a means to achieve its 
programme targets. As a result, SPRING refined its selection process and identified businesses that 
would best match the programme’s outcomes and objectives.  
 
6 Assets to adolescent girls’ initiative, Business Case, Policy Division, DFID, June 2013.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | v 
  
Recommendation  Audience  
Economically empowering girls as value chain workers takes 
time and effort, and potential scale is significantly smaller. 
Programme designers need to take this into account in future 
programmes.  
The recommendation of flexible, perhaps weighted targets, 
might be applied here as well (Lesson 2), allowing SPRING to 
claim a higher weighting for a value chain beneficiary because 
of a deeper level of impact.  A girl targeted as a consumer might 
have attracted a lesser weighting.   Donors; broader community  
 
Lesson 4: Deeper impact might be more efficient, with a narrower geographic focus  
SPRING was designed to be implemented across East Africa and South Asia allowing for greater 
exposure and learning opportunity. But the alternating movement between regions for  consecutive 
cohorts meant the programme was not able fully exploit the opportunity to build on its previous 
cohort’s momentum.  
Additional countries were added to Cohorts 3 and 4, increasing the complexity of the programme’s 
operations. Programme resources  were diluted across a large number of businesses in diverse 
countries with dissimilar contexts.  
 
Recommendation  Audience  
Programmes should explore the opportunity of increasing the 
depth of interventions by narrowing their geographic focus and 
allowing them to more easily build on earlier achievements.  Donors; programme 
implementers  
 
Lesson 5: Fast is not always best  
SPRING shortened its implementation cycle from twelve to nine months, for efficiency7, and “doubled 
up” Cohorts 2 and 3 overlapping  their implementation by several months.  This impacted on the 
programme’s ability to reflect and iterate. Businesses also reported feeling pressurised to learn and 
apply HCD principle and to innovate their pro totypes in a shorter period of time.   
 
Recommendation  Audience  
A learning programme requires time for reflection, drawing 
lessons and iteration. Future programmes need to set aside 
time and resources for this process.  
Programme implementers  Businesses were central to SPRING’s goal of reaching girls. 
Shortening the timelines of providing technical assistance to 
them, might undermine the effectiveness of this pathway. 
Programmes might consider a longer period of engagement with 
businesses to en sure effective uptake and reach.  
 
 
7 For more informatio n please see, Coffey, SPRING Programme Performance Evaluation – Cohort 1 Review , May 2016.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | vi 
 Lesson 6: Resource adequately to make best use of and clearly understand the local 
environment  
SPRING operated centrally from London and relied heavily on its Country Managers  (CM) . The CM 
roles were originally envisaged as part time positions but  evolved into a more central position but 
remained inadequately resourced. Good results were seen with a combination of local and 
international country managers  working in tandem.  
Girl landscaping  helped the programme and the businesses understand the needs of girls in the 
target countries. However, girl landscaping limited its scope to the areas that girls (and their 
immediate circles) were aware of. It might have broadened its scope to consider i ssues which the girls 
were not necessarily aware of, but which impacted on them, for example, regulatory issues. This 
would have fed into business prototype development. Understanding this as a shortcoming in earlier 
cohorts might have refined the landscap ing updates in later cohorts.  
 
Recommendation  Audience  
Programmes which rely heavily on local resources need to 
adequately plan and resource these representatives.  
Programme implementers  Landscaping should be an essential part of programmes of this 
nature, as it aided greatly in various phases of implementation.  
Landscaping should be updated and revised to include areas 
reflecting previously unforeseen challenges.  
 
Lesson 7: Regular face -to-face engagements between the programme and businesses add 
value  
SPRING’s implementation  altered considerably and several, more regular meetings between the 
businesses and the IP were added. All stakeholders reported that these mee tings added value. 
However, for HCD iterative purposes specifically, shorter, more focused  touchpoints later in the 
programme may have been valuable, but expensive, due to having to fly in international expertise.  
 
Recommendation  Audience  
More frequent face -to-face engagements with participants might allow for 
better, more focused iterations of their prototypes.  
Programme 
implementers  Recognising significant travel costs for international expertise, future 
programmes might consider buildi ng more local, internal capacity on 
methodologies like HCD, and embedding capacity in the local environment.  
 
Lesson 8: Improvement comes from regular reviews, real time learning and adaptive 
management   
SPRING altered its business selection criteria and processes assessing which types of businesses 
were best suited to absorb and learn from both its HCD methodology, and which were best suited to 
develop innovative  offerings for adolescent girls. Idea stage  businesses have insufficient traction and 
mature businesses have insufficient focus to be able to engage with a programme like SPRING.  
SPRING changed the PDF model in Cohort 2, offering less PDF money and encouraging businesses 
to invest in their own pro totype development . Prototype sales revenue was greater in Cohorts 2 and 3 
than for Cohort 1 businesses over a similar period. All of these changes were made as a result of 
regular reviews and adaptive management based on lessons.  
 Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | vii 
 Recommendation  Audience  
Review selection criteria on a regular basis, and if needed, refine these for a 
more constructive and deliverable match.  
Programme 
implementers  Accelerators seeking innovative partners need to identify businesses which 
have substance beyond an idea and the ability to commit, innovate and make 
decisions quickly. Ideally the businesses will be at growth stage.  
When offering businesses funds for development implement three limitations:  
• Ring fence the range of possible expenditure;  
• Make businesses compete for the funding; and  
• Suggest and encourage the businesses to invest their own resources 
(both financial and non -financial) in their own prototype development.  
 Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 1 
 1. Evaluation Context and Purpose  
1.1. Context of the evaluation  
SPRING was a five -year programme funded by the Department of International Development (DFID), 
the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the Australian Department of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT). Donors also included the Nike F oundation, which funded the 
programme  until February  2018. SPRING aimed to transform the lives of adolescent girls by working 
with businesses to develop products and services which would help them keep safe, learn, earn and 
save, and have greater wellbeing. The SPRING accelerator identified businesses which  could 
improve the lives of girls and provided mentoring support, limited finance, and expertise in business 
growth, design, innovation and marketing to help drive their business models forward.  
The programme was implemented by a consortium of partners led  by the Palladium Group. The 
consortium included : a SPRING CEO and core project team based in London; fuseproject8, an 
international design and brand development firm and experts in HCD, who were in charge of the 
overall accelerator design; a team of globa l thematic experts; and a range of professionals (e.g. legal, 
marketing, and financial advice) supporting the implementing businesses with their expertise.  
The SPRING programme ran from July 2014 to September 2019. The programme supported four 
cohorts of businesses in nine countries in two different geographic areas in Eastern Africa (Ethiopia, 
Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda) and South Asia (Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal and 
Myanmar). By the end of its last cohort, SPRING had worked with 75 businesses, a nd achieved its 
goal of reaching 200 ,000 girls9 by reaching 2,534,214 adolescent girls10. 
Coffey is the independent Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Partner for the SPRING  Accelerator. 
Focusing on both learning and accountability, Coffey  aimed to fill the ga ps in the international 
knowledge base around what works (and what does not) and why in promoting the economic 
empowerment of adolescent girls.  
1.2. Overall structure of the evaluation  
SPRING implemented its vision through engaging with businesses through fou r cohorts. This 
evaluation gathered evidence  through three components11, applied to each cohort. The evaluation 
methodology is explained in more detail in Section 3 , but the three evaluation components are:  
• The Programme Performance Evaluation (PPE) . This aimed to assess the effectiveness of the 
programme, provide regular recommendations to the Implementing Partner (IP) to adapt the 
SPRING design and delivery between cohorts, and to synthesise findings and lessons learned 
on programme design and delivery.  
• The Business Performance Evaluation (BPE) . This component assessed the business 
performance (e.g. in terms of sales, investment readiness, and number of girls reached) of each 
delegate and how this changed as a result of participation in SPRING. It also ge nerated lessons 
about what works and what does not for businesses to reach adolescent girls.  
• The Impact Evaluation (IE)  used longitudinal and (where possible) quasi -experimental 
evaluation designs to assess to what extent adolescent girls have benefitted from SPRING 
products, services, or income -generation opportunities. The IE covered two SPRING businesses 
per cohort with tailored research at baseline before the launch of the SPRING  prototype and an 
 
8 Founded in 1999 by Yves Béhar, fuseproject is an award -winning design agency based in San Francisco. It employs an integrated approach to 
design which is deliver ed through a range of services: industrial design, environmental design, brand identity, packaging, UI and UX. fuseproject 
believes that design should be a positive force for social and environmental change.  
9 SPRING, Beyond Good Intentions: Building Busin esses to Benefit Girls. London, 16 -17 September 2019.  
10 The significant overachievement in this target is due to three businesses, one of which (a TV show) was individually responsi ble for a reach of 
1,641,200  girls 
11 At the time of writing, the PPE has be en concluded, the BPE is nearing completion, and the IEs are in their final stages of data collection.  For 
ease of comprehension we have chosen to describe all the phases in the past tense.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 2 
 endline study after the prototype had been delivered. The timeframe for each IE was tailored to 
the business specifics.  
Through these three components, taking a theory -based approach, we interrogated the SPRING 
Theory  of Change (ToC) , Annex B. SPRING was designed and expected to reflect an innovative and 
iterative implementation model, responding to a refined understanding of its operational context. This 
approach resulted in different iterations of its programme level theory and enabled us to explore whic h 
aspects of SPRING worked well, which worked less well, and the reasons for these variations.  
The ToC’s original focus on getting “direct economic assets to girls” was broadened to include a wider 
range of products, services, and business opportunities. These included economic, digital, sanitary, or 
otherwise life -enhancing products; childcare, mobile health advice or other services; or income -
generating opportunities12. Girl beneficiaries were reached either directly as purchasers, service 
providers or mi cro-entrepreneurs, or employees; or indirectly as beneficiaries within a customer 
household. The evaluation is guided by an Evaluation Framework , which identified the core evaluation 
questions to be answered as part of the evaluation. The core questions we re mapped to t he OECD  
DAC criteria, and to the relevant evaluation component, (PPE, BPE or IE). A set of sub -questions 
were developed for each evaluation question. These sub -questions are revisited and refined during 
the course of the evaluation,13 but the core questions remained intact.  Coffey ’s Evaluation Framework 
is outlined in Annex C.  
The evaluation assessed  whether SPRING had achieved its objectives by delivering the types of 
change set out in the ToC. The M&E of SPRING ran parallel with programme im plementation and will 
continue until June 202 1 to capture longer -term impacts  of the SPRING programme .  
1.3. Purpose of this evaluation  
This is the final summative evaluation report of one of three evaluation components of the SPRING 
programme, the PPE. 
The PP E is an evaluation of SPRING’s overall performance over the course of its four cohorts, to 
assess the effectiveness of the programme’s design and implementation. To do this we assess ed the 
relevance, efficiency and effectiveness of the programme to work with t he 75  overall participating 
businesses to develop interventions to increase adolescent girls’ ability to learn, earn save, stay 
healthy and stay safe.  As such, the summative PPE report assesses to what extent:  
• SPRING selected and targeted businesses to ac hieve the programme goals;  
• The different SPRING accelerator experience inputs were designed and delivered;  
• SPRING adapted and with what effect; and  
• The programme represented good value for money.  
In answering these  questions, the PPE aims to:   
• Assess  the effectiveness of the programme design and delivery process;  
• Document  the programme’s journey, including adaptations and lessons learned;  
• Capture  recommendations that can inform the design of similar future programmes; and  
• Generate  transferable knowledge about what works for policymakers and practitioners regarding 
reaching adolescent girls.  
1.4. Users of the evaluation and communicating the findings  
The main  users of the findings of this report will be SPRING donors: DFID, USAID and D FAT. Early 
findings of this ev aluation were presented to the  donors at a workshop in London in January 2020.  
Feedback and suggestions from this session have been incorporated into this summative report.  
 
12 Coffey, PPE Cohort 1 - Review.  
13 The final iteration of the e valuation framework was agreed in August 2018, and is attached in Annex C.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 3 
 Other  stakeholders who may find the lessons and rec ommendations useful and might incorporate 
these into their own plans and strategies include:  
• The wider international donor community;  
• Potential  investors with an interest in girls and women;  
• Future  girl-focused programmes and projects;  
• Business  accelerato r programmes looking to increase social impact; and  
• Independent  social enterprises with a gender focus.  
1.5. Changes from the Terms of Reference  
The iterative nature of SPRING resulted in the development of an adaptive evaluation approach  for 
the M&E . As SPRING went through several adaptations, the evaluation requirements had to be 
adapted accordingly. The Evaluation Framework of the PPE was revised in 2018, after Cohort 2, to 
reflect a shift in the focus for the PPE from learning for adaptation towar ds generating more 
widespread learning about programme design14.  
As a result  of SPRING programme iteration and the adaptive evaluation strategy, changes were made 
to the original Terms of Reference15 for M&E and include:  
• Reporting timelines for the product  effectiveness and the consumer satisfaction surveys were 
revised;  
• The IP, in consultation with the donors, changed the cohort length from 12 to nine months 
resulting in a more compressed evaluation process;  
• The addition of Cohort 4 also required adjustmen ts in the timelines; and  
• After the completion of the Cohort 2 PPE report it was agreed, in consultation with the donors, to 
produce summative PPE and BPE reports rather than to provide separate PPE and BPE reports 
for both Cohorts 3 and 4; and  
• To add a nu mber of thematic studies in addition to the BPE evaluation.  
1.6. Structure of the report  
The structure of this report follows the core questions pertinent to the PPE according to the OECD -
DAC criteria upon which our Evaluation Framework16 is designed. The repo rt is structured in seven 
sections:  
• Following the Executive Summary  
• Section 1: Evaluation context and purpose  provides an overview of  Coffey ’s evaluation of the 
SPRING accelerator, including the evaluation context and its three main components. This 
section also identifies actual and potential users of the evaluation and outlines how findings 
might be useful to them. This section highlights any changes to the original Terms of Reference 
and explains the structure of the report.  
• Section 2: Context of S PRING  outlines the context and rationale behind SPRING’s design and 
purpose, the contextual challenges it faced, as well as its iterative nature in responding to these 
challenges. In this section we outline the changes of the programme by tracking the evol ution of 
SPRING’s ToC. We will compare SPRING with other programmes that focus on business 
acceleration and girls, to highlight its adaptive nature. This assessment will focus on the different 
programmes’ processes, rather than their outcomes and impact, a nd will be a light touch 
comparison, given the secondary nature of the data we ha d available.   
• Section 3: Evaluation methodology  summarises the overall evaluation presenting the 
Evaluation Framework and questions, and identifies which ones are relevant to  the PPE, and 
 
14 SPRING Evaluation Concept Note, April 2018.  
15 SPRING M&E Partner: Revised Terms of Reference (August 2016) – Section 4.  The original Terms of Reference for the evaluation are in  
Annex A.   
16 Coffey, SPRING Evaluation Framework, Annex C.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 4 
 which ones are more relevant for the BPE. It also outlines how these have changed over the 
course of the evaluation.  The Evaluation Framework and Questions are included in Annex C. 
The full evaluation methodology is contained in Annex J. The  annex outlines the role of different 
stakeholders in the evaluation process, and outlines all challenges, risks, limitations and 
mitigation strategies, as well as ethical considerations and conflicts of interest, in the interests of 
transparency.  
• Section  4: Findings.  This section is divided in three sub -sections referring to OEDC/ DAC 
evaluation criteria of relevance , effectiveness  and efficiency . Our findings are introduced by 
matching the framework evaluation questions against the ToC, illustrating wher e some 
evaluation question s are more relevant to the BPE process.  
• Section 5:  Lessons learned and recommendations.  This section will draw on findings to 
present lessons learned and advance recommendations to guide the conceptualisation, design  
process and implementation of future business accelerator programmes, or social enterprises 
with a girl focus.  
There  are 10 annexes  attached to the report including : 
• Terms of Reference for the evaluation , 
• SPRING’s Theories of Change,  
• Coffey ’s Evaluation Framework ,  
• Summary table of SPRING businesses and how they targeted girls ,  
• The Evolution of SPRING’s ToC,  
• SPRING’s Value for Money Analysis ,  
• Comparison of SPRING with other programmes  
• List of Respondents  
• List of Re ferences, and  
• Evaluation Methodology  
 
1.7. Focus of this report on the PPE  
This report focuses explicitly on the PPE,  the evaluation component dealing with  implementation of 
the SPRING  programme,  its changes, how these changes shaped  the programme’s effectiveness and 
efficiency  and the resultant p rogrammatic learning. This report is also a summative report and so 
draws on the findings of the Cohorts 1 an d 2 PPE reports , and on original data collected during 
Cohorts 3 and 417. 
2. Context of SPRING  
To provide texture to the findings in this report, this section briefly outlines the rationale and 
background  to SPRING’s design and its implementation process.  
2.1. SPRING Context  
The SPRING Business Case estimated that around 250 million adolescent girls (i. e. girls aged 10 -19 
years) are living in poverty worldwide18, and that women, generally, are estimated to own less than 
10% of the world’s property19. The SPRING Business Case suggested that access to assets (e.g. 
physical or financial  resources, livestock, technology, insurance or savings) can contribute to the 
 
17 This includes Bootcamps  Reports, End of Cohort reports, BPE case studies, KIIs, sustainability and bootcamp interviews.  
18 The Girl Effect Accelerator, https://unreasonablegroup.com/initiatives/girl -effect -accelerator/  
19 Commission for Legal Empowerment of the Poor , ‘Making the Law work for everyone’ . Coffey, SPRING M&E Inception Report,  (2008)  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 5 
 economic empowerment20 of these girls and promote growth. Simultaneously, there have been few 
initiatives supporting girl’s economic empowerment, and as such, there is scarce evidence of what 
works and  what doesn’t with regards to providing adolescent girls with access to sustainable 
economic assets.21  To address this gap in knowledge, the Business Case pinpointed the need to 
ensure that the programme identified “cost effective, sustainable and scalable  products, services, and 
distribution methods for economically empowering girls”22. 
The delivery mechanism for the programme was identified as private sector stakeholders, “to develop 
and distribute  commercially viable products and services for … girls that  enhance … girls’ economic 
opportunities…”23 
2.2. SPRING background  
SPRING was a five -year programme funded by DFID, USAID and DFAT. Donors also included the 
Nike Foundation, which funded the programme  until February 201824. The accelerator aimed at 
supporting the economic empowerment of adolescent girls in developing countries through the design 
of innovative products, services, and business models that can help girls increase their earnings, 
savings, learning, safety and well -being, and that can encourage wider  investment in girls as a viable 
market segment.  
The SPRING  programme ran from July 2014 to September 2019. SPRING set out to combine  HCD 
with an operational focus on the design of products and services. The programme was originally 
conceived to test the hypothesis of whether the private sector can play a role in fostering socio -
economic development, and more specifically, in empowering adolescent girls.  
The programme was implemented by a consortium of partners led by the Palladium Group . The 
consortium i ncluded: a SPRING CEO and core project team based in London; fuseproject , an 
international  design and brand development firm and experts in HCD, who were in charge of the 
overall accelerator design; a team of global thematic experts; and a range of profess ionals supporting 
the implementing businesses with their expertise.  
The programme supported four cohorts of businesses in nine countries in two different geographic 
areas in Eastern  Africa (Ethiopia, Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda) and South Asia 
(Ban gladesh, Pakistan, Nepal and Myanmar). By the end of its last cohort, SPRING had worked with 
75 businesses , through which the programme reached a total of 2,534,214 adolescent girls25. 
Annex D provides a summary overview of how each of the SPRING businesses  reached girls through 
their SPRING supported prototype.  
2.3. SPRING Programme overview  
The core of each SPRING Cohort was a nine -month accelerator programme.  As outlined in Table 1, 
Cohort 1 included businesses in Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda in 2015, and expanded into South Asia 
(Bangladesh, Nepal and Pakistan) from September 2016 to August 2017 for Cohort 2. Implementation 
of Cohort 3  in East Africa (Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, and the add ition of Tanzania and 
Ethiopia)  concluded with an End of Cohort event in February  2018.  Cohort 4 ran from March 2018 to 
January 2019 and worked with 20 businesses in South Asia (including the original Cohort 
2 countries  with the addition of Myanmar).  
Table 1. Overview of SPRING Cohorts, Timelines  and Target Countries  
Cohort   Timelines   Target countries   Number o f 
businesses   
 
20 Where economic empowerment is defined as a process that inc reases people’s access to and control over economic resources, and 
opportunities including jobs, financial services and other productive assets (from which one can generate an income), skills development. DFID, 
Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative: Busine ss Case, Policy Division, 2013. ( http://iati.dfid.gov.uk/iati_documents/4787590.odt )  
21 DFID, Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative: Business Case, Policy Division, 2013.  
22 DFID, Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative: Business Case, Policy Division, 2013.  
23 DFID, Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative: Business Case, Policy Division, 2013.  
24 SPRING Annual Report, September 2018 – Final.   
25 SPRING, Beyond Good Intentions: Building Businesses to Benefit Girls. London, September 2019.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 6 
 Cohort 1   Jul 2015 – Mar 2016   Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda    18  
Cohort 2   Sep 2016 – August  2017  Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan   18  
Cohort 3   May 2017 – Feb 2018   Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda   
Plus: Ethiopia, Tanzania   19  
Cohort 4   Mar 2018 – Jan 2019   Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan,  
Plus: Myanmar   20  
 
2.3.1.  SPRING Programme activities  
SPRING  iterated an implementation model which had eight key phases, illustrated in Figure 1  below.  
The programme adapted its implementation model over its four cohorts.  The adaptation and the 
reasons for this is explored in more detail in the Relevance section. The eight phases were:  
• Landscaping  
• Outreach  / Awareness raising  
• Selection  
• Touchpoint  1 / Bootcamp 1  
• Research  in Context / Prototyping  
• Touchpoint  2 / Bootcamp 2  
• Tailored  support  
• Touchpoint  3 / End of Cohort / Close out.   
The eight phases are illustrated  below . 
Figure  1: SPRING implementation phases  
 
Landscaping  - the activities for the programme began with a girl ’s landscaping study26 - an in -depth 
primary and secondary research  process . These studies sought to “understand girls’ lives in context – 
through their eyes  and their aspirations [hoping] that by listening to girls and their parents, [to provide] 
a window into girls' lives for future work to understand girls, meet their needs and support their 
aspirations.”27 The rationale for these studies were to provide the SPRING IP, the donors and the 
businesses with recent, relevant and focused  data regarding girls’ challenges and needs in each of 
the target countri es. This would aid in the selection of business es for each cohort and would aid the 
businesses in the identification and development of their SPRING prototype.   
Outreach / Awareness raising  - A broad call for businesses interested in working with SPRING t o 
develop girl specific prototypes was then issued, and was followed by selection.  
 
26 In depth studies were  conducted for Cohorts 1 and 2 which were then supplemented for the additional countries in Cohorts 3 and 4.  
27 SPRING, Pakistan girl landscaping report , February 2019.  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 7 
 Selection  – where applications were screened through a number of steps. The selection process 
evolved throughout the programme  timeframe and is analysed in Section 4 : Findings but  involved two 
types of landscaping.  
• As mentioned above, a n initial step was the Business Landscaping  - to lay the groundwork for 
accelerator design and outreach, involving interviews and meetings with various stakeholders 
within the landscape (e.g. investors, the private sector, regulatory bodies, academic parties, 
local government  organisations, local SPRING offices) . This was a key initial step towards 
building a pipeline of businesses and inform ing the locally led, more in -depth and ongoing 
outreach that took place in the lead up to SPRING’s formal selection process.  
• Participant landscaping  involved  in-depth visits / interviews with shortlisted SPRING participants  
to understand their challenges and potential opportunities to address girls’ n eeds through a 
SPRING prototype to inform selection and accelerator design.  
Businesses  were selected after going through this process.  
Bootcamp 1  - After concluding business selection, SPRING facilitated a first face to face session28 
with businesses calle d bootcamp .  This two -week event introduced the businesses to the SPRING 
programme, the stakeholders, the HCD process, and focused  them on girls’ needs.  The purpose 
behind the bootcamp was to assist the businesses with identifying and developing a girl focused  
product or service (the SPRING prototype) which the business, throughout the remainder of the 
SPRING process, would then be able to test, refine, develop and provide as a commercial offering.  
Research in Context / Prototyping  – Between  bootcamps, businesses researched their prototype 
thinking using an HCD process and were assisted in this process by SPRING funded consultants.  
Bootcamp 2  - The results of this research were then presented at Bootcamp 2 where the pr ototype 
was further refined. F inancial assistance was provided to businesses, primarily in the form of the PDF 
grant.  Funding decisions for each business  for the PDF  were  made by the SPRING consortium, 
based on each businesses’ needs and capacity, with bus inesses submitting funding applications 
following Bootcamp 2.  Funding was  limited to prototype development rather than allowing a business 
to spend it on wider business operations.  Not all businesses were successful in their full PDF 
requests, with 14/18 businesses successfully applying for funding in Cohort 2, and 17/19 in Cohort 3. 
Funding amounts ranged from £23,000 to  £74,000 for Cohort 2, £14,000 to £79,000 for Cohort 3 and 
from £16,240 to £57,654 for Cohort 429.  
Tailored Support  - Throughout the accel erator programme, businesses received continuous 
technical assistance through consortium  partners  and their local CMs. They received both global and 
locally based support with regards to investment readiness.  
End of Cohort  - After a period of implementatio n, businesses were then invited to an end of cohort 
event for final reflection and learning in addition to further guidance on how to further develop their 
prototypes.  Some businesses were provided with additional technical support by SPRING partner 
organ isations between and after the bootcamps.   
All businesses retained contact with the IP for at least a year after the end of the cohort  event , 
reporting on figures relating  to girls reached and prototype sales.   
Coffey in consultation  and cooperation with  the IP, retained contact with a number of businesses in 
each cohort, gathering data for the purposes of the BPE and IE components of the evaluation.   
2.3.2.  SPRING learning and review  
SPRING was designed and implemented as a learning and iterative programme. T he business case30 
called for the programme  to catalyse innovation, to promote innovative products and to gather 
evidence to test an untested assumption.  SPRING’s adaptive processes and the challenges it faced 
 
28 Cohort 1 had a selection camp and a single Bootcamp.  Subsequent cohorts had two bootcamps. Significant changes were made in the 
SPRING offering between Cohort 1 and the remainder of the programme.  These are explored in more depth in the Relevance secti on.  
29 SPRING Master Dataset.  
30 DFID, Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative: Busin ess Case, Policy Division, 2013.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 8 
 in this area are explored in Section 4 : Findin gs under the evaluation question, “ To what extent has 
SPRING adapted and with what effect? ”   
However, it is important to note that the IP implemented a policy to reflect, learn and adapt , although 
this was not a priority area in the programme’s early implementation  stages. Coffey  played an active 
role in this process providing regular and ongoing feedback separately to both the donors and to the 
IP, playing the role of a ‘critical friend ’ to the latter.  Amongst other areas, changes were made in:  
• The selection of businesses;  
• The provision  of prototype development funding;  
• The structure  and format of the cohorts;  
• The structure  and format of the bootcamps and end of cohort events; and  
• The manner  in which progress of businesses was assessed and tracked.  
All these efforts attest to the spirit of organisational learning and the manner in which SPRING 
embraced  this component  of lea rning and review .  
Reflection and learning opportunities varied in size, scope and purpose – from daily reflections and 
adaptations shared between core staff at bootcamps, to formal annual reviews and donor workshops . 
At these donor workshops, corrections in strategic direction were  unpacked and debated, sometimes 
resulting  in programme pivots.  Interestingly, SPRING utilised its own promoted methodology as a 
reflective mechanism , using HCD principles to assess business’ opinion and engagement regarding 
bootcamps, and then to make changes to the bootcamp design and format .  The programme not only 
exposed businesses to and encouraged them to use HCD as a tool for prototype programme design 
and iteration , SPRING itself used this methodology to reflect on, lear n from and adapt its own 
programme offerings.    
HCD process on our end informed the programme design…And, so, first time we 
did one boot camp and then we realised, having…watching the way that the 
participants left boot camp from cohort one and the challe nges they were having, 
we recognised we needed another touch point… So, the programme redesign was 
the result of an HCD approach on our end, [now] they develop solutions  here, they 
test them, and then they get to come back and refine based on the insights,  which 
is the whole point31. 
3. Evaluation Methodology  
This section contains a summary of the evaluation methodology. The full methodology is provided in 
Annex J. In addition, each contributing report speaks in detail to the methodology followed in that 
specific report. This section briefly outlines the overall methodology and its revisions, before providing 
more detail  regarding the PPE specific methodology. We end th e section by outlining the limitations, 
challenges and mitigation measures we implemented during this research.  
3.1. Overview of evaluation design  
3.1.1.  Description of the overall SPRING evaluation methodology  
Our evaluation focusing  on learning and accountability, aimed to fill gaps in the international 
knowledge base around what works and why (and what does not work, and why) in transforming the 
lives of adolescent girls by creating sustainable markets for life -enhancing products and services. This 
was keeping with the vision expressed in the original Business Case supporting the design and 
implementation of SPRING, “DFID will also invest in research, monitoring and evaluation to build the 
 
31 KII respondent, May 2017.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 9 
 evidence base and test the theory of change around the role of assets in girl s’ economic 
empowerment”32.   
The evaluation gathered  and synthesised evidence using three components illustrated in Figure 2:  
• The PPE assessed the effectiveness of the programme design and delivery, tracked and 
recorded changes at the programme level, the reasons for these changes and, to the extent 
possible, their impact on programme implementation;  
• The BPE assessed the SPRING businesses as a mechanism for learning lessons and 
understanding “what is happening and why”, how businesses have adapted as a resu lt of 
SPRING, and how this has helped or hindered their success in reaching adolescent girls;  
• The IE contributed evidence to understand the effects of products and services introduced  by 
SPRING -supported businesses on the socio -economic circumstances of adolescent girls, and to 
establish the extent to which SPRING has enabled girls to enhance their earning, learning, 
savings, and safety and well -being.  
Using these three components, th e evaluation adopted a theory -based approach , meaning that the 
evaluation design and implementation were framed by the SPRING ToC33 which enabled us to 
explore which aspects of SPRING worked well, which were less successful, and the reasons for these 
“succe sses” and “failures”.  This approach also allowed us to adapt the implementation of our own 
evaluation strategy in response to SPRING’s iterative, learning nature.   
We developed an Evaluation Framework during the Inception Phase, which aligned to the OECD  
DAC criteria. As the programme evolved and changed, our evaluation needed to adapt  these  in 
response.  
The evaluation ran in parallel with programme implementation and continued beyond the programme 
closure in June  2019. Maintaining  contact with most busi nesses after SPRING ended, we assessed 
the sustainability  of changes that businesses have made due to their involvement in SPRING to 
capture longer -term impacts of the programme.  
Figure 2: The three components  of the SPRING evaluation design  
 
3.1.2.  Revision of  the evaluation strategy and framework  
After Cohort 2, we proposed a revised evaluation plan34 based on findings and lessons learned from 
the PPE and BPE activities for Cohorts 1 and 2 and the further development of the IE. Th is plan also 
 
32 DFID, Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative: Business Case, Policy Division, 2013.  
33 Coffey, SPRING Monitoring and Evaluation: Inception Report, Version 2, September 2015, pp.14 -16 
34 Coffey, Independent Evaluation of SPRING: Revised Evaluation Plan, August 2018  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 10 
 included revisions  to the Evaluation Framework, which set out the evaluation questions, sub -
questions and sourc es of evidence used to answer each question35. The revised evaluation strategy  
reviewed the evaluation timeframes and proposed changes . After inclusive consultation and 
consideration by all the stakeholders we revised the deliverables and timelines original ly agreed 
during inception. The revised list, accepted by the donors in December 2018, includes:  
• A summative  PPE report ; 
• A summative  BPE report ; 
• Five thematic  reports focusing  on cross cutting themes across all cohorts and all businesses; 
and 
• A final synthesis report.  
3.1.3.  Relationship between the evaluation and other programme stakeholders  
Throughout the programme, we maintained a strong working relationship with key SPRING 
stakeh olders including the donors and the IP. We communicated with DFID, USAID and the Nike 
Foundation , and later DFAT , on any changes or concerns related to the M&E  of SPRING, and donors 
had an opportunity  to comment on all deliverables. We also engaged with th e IP in regular meetings, 
observations of IP activities in country, and consultations on updates to the SPRING ToC and 
refinements of the SPRING logframe.  
While ensuring that the independence of the evaluation was kept at all times, we presented the IP 
with feedback on early  findings, commented on annual and bi -annual reports and reviewed their 
interim findings to on a regular basis. This allowed them to draw on these learnings and data, to 
improve their implementation process.  
The summative PPE triangula tes data and evidence from several different sources. Data collection 
methods and tools are detailed in Table 2 and a full list of respondents is attached in Annex H . 
Table 2: PPE data collection activities and their purpose  
Data collection activities  Purpose of data collection activities  
Key Informant Interviews (KIIs)  
IP Team Members  (27 respondents)  To clarify the processes used to deliver the 
programme and identify procedural strengths and 
weaknesses, aspects that could be improved, and 
lessons learned.  
To determine the extent of VfM.  
Donors  (10 respondents)  To clarify the rationale and expectations around the 
initial design of SPRING, gather feedback on the 
processes and performance of SPRING, document 
key decisions -makin g processes and points and 
assess the alignment of priorities between different 
donors.  
‘10 Minute  Chats’  (Cohorts 3 and 4)  (with 
businesses)  (73 respondents)  To gather  ‘change  stories’  from each  business  to 
document  businesses’ perceptions of the techni cal 
assistance provided by SPRING and of their 
participation in SPRING as a programme overall.  
Documentation review and analysis  
Programme documents supplied by the IP 
(full list in Bibliography)  
Programme documents drafted by the M&E 
Team for earlier learning and reflection.  To assess SPRING processes and activities and 
their contributions to reaching SPRING objectives; 
including selection processes, targeting, provision of 
technical assistance, the programme’s adaptability.  
 
35 The revised evaluation framework is in Annex C.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 11 
 Other, similar programmes that support the 
empowerment of adolescent girls  To compare SPRING in its design and delivery to 
other programmes.  
Observation of Boot Camp activities 
(Cohorts 3 and 4)  To assess relevance and effe ctiveness of 
programme activities in terms of identifying and 
addressing the grantees’ needs . 
Findings from event -based  surveys  (all 
businesses)  during  Boot Camp  1 and 2,  
and End of Cohort  events, published in 
previous reports36 To capture  feedback and perspectives  of businesses 
throughout  the duration  of the Cohort,  on satisfaction  
with the programme  performance . 
Meta -analysis  
Review of all data from the PPE, BPE and 
IE reports  To assess the overall effectiveness and delivery of 
SPRING programme design, delivery and technical 
assistance . 
Value for Money (VfM) assessment – review of programme financial data  
Mapping of existing secondary data and 
reporting  To examine whether SPRING delivered value for 
money, addressing evaluation questions around 
efficiency and cost -effectiveness to provide 
recommendations on how to best generate value on 
a programme such as SPRING . Identification of possible cost drivers  
Collection of necessary primary and 
secondary data via KIIs wi th IPs and 
donors  
 
3.2. Ethical considerations and independence, conflicts of interest 
within and disputes between the M&E team members  
Coffey adheres to industry’s ethical research standards and has thorough research ethics, and child 
protection and safeguarding policies in place. Concept notes on each of our impact evaluations speak 
specifically to relevant  ethical protocols followed by both ou r own field teams as well as those of our 
research partners. Our safeguarding policies are regularly reviewed37. In summary, our ethics 
protocols covered the following principles and procedures:  
• Do no harm principles, which require the protection of respond ents from any risks that may 
arise from their participation in research activities and postulate that no undue burden or stress 
is placed on them;  
• Child protection procedures during field work, which require that children are only 
interviewed with written  authorisation of their caregiver, and never photographed without the 
caregiver’s explicit consent. In addition, we developed Girl Safety Protocols which is fully 
compliant with international gui ding concepts and principles. Our local research partners 
adhered to the ESOMAR code of conduct38; 
• Safeguarding  procedures for engaging with vulnerable individuals;  
• Protocols to obtaining informed consent from any respondents participating in data collectio n 
activities , including caregivers as well as children;  
 
36 These should be available on both devtracker  and on DEC .   
37 Our last review of safeguarding protocols and procedures was carried out in January 2020.  
38 ESOMAR is a worldwide association for market, social and opinion researchers. Founded in 1948 ESOMAR began as a 
regional association within Europe. The association currently includes over 5,000 members from over 130 countries. The 
following are key fundam entals of the code:  
(1) Researchers shall conform to all relevant national and international laws; (2) Researchers shall behave ethically and sha ll not do anything 
which might damage the reputation of social / market research; (3) Researchers shall take s pecial care when carrying out research among 
children and young people; (4) Respondents’ cooperation is voluntary and must be based on adequate, and not misleading, infor mation about the 
general purpose and nature of the project when their agreement to par ticipate is being obtained and all such statements shall be honoured; (5) 
The rights of respondents as private individuals shall be respected by researchers and they shall not be harmed or adversely affected as the 
direct result of cooperating in a researc h project; (6) Researchers shall never allow personal data they collect in a social research project to be 
used for any purpose other than social research; (7); Researchers shall ensure that projects and activities are designed, car ried out, reported and 
documented accurately, transparently and objectively; and (8) Researchers shall conform to the accepted principles of fair com petition.    Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 12 
 • Guidelines  for creating a safe and encouraging atmosphere in which young persons in 
particular feel comfortable and at ease in participating in the study;  
• Conventions  for anonymising sensitive data, applying additional disclosure controls, and 
storing data safely and securely.  
We took a gender -sensitive approach to our fieldwork by liaising with gender experts within our 
pool of thematic experts , and in consultation with our local research partners to  ensure that research 
instruments and fieldwork protocols were gender sensitive.  
3.3. Challenges and limitations  
Challenges  and limitations to the PPE were identified during inception, a nd mitigation strategies  were 
proposed. As part of the annual review proces s, the challenges, limitations and mitigation strategies 
were reviewed and updated. In each concept note prepared before a unique research activity we also 
reviewed these, with an emphasis on those issues specific to the context. We provide a reflection on  
the original limitations, challenges and strategies and adaptations of these , in terms of their adequacy 
and effectiveness  in Annex J.  
4. Findings  
4.1. Introduction  
This section presents the findings  from the PPE Summative Report.  
The first section reviews  the final version of the SPRING ToC against the OECD  DAC criteria.  We  
then present findings regarding the programme’s overall design and implementation in terms of its 
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency.  We conclude the section by briefly comparing SPRING to 
other businesses accelerators39.   
The BPE Summative Report  answers questions related to effectiveness from the business 
perspective, and sustainability. The IE reports speak to the impact  of the programme on the lives of 
girls.  
4.1.1.  Purpose and evolution of SPRING’s ToC  
While the overall logic of the original programme ToC remains largely intact, a number of significant 
changes were made resulting in the iteration presented below. SPRING was an  experimental 
accelerator testing new hypotheses, including one that by creating sustainable markets for life -
enhancing products and services, the lives of adolescent girls would be transformed. These products 
and services would help girls keep safe, learn , earn, and save without harm. It was thought that 
successful businesses and the investment they stimulate would lead to a broader shift in markets that 
would enable girls and their communities to end the cycle of poverty. SPRING’s ToC’s primary 
purpose wa s to serve as a tool for iteration, reflection and learning, which it did. However, in practice, 
its use was more fluid, serving more than one purpose, with differences from cohort to cohort. This is 
in line with what is commonly thought the most effective  ways of using a ToC which is: when it 
combines both approaches, and when it is kept flexible, not prescribed40. 
The SPRING ToC was used as a tool to document changes in programme design  and adapted as 
programme thinking evolved41. This ma de mapping the evolution of the ToC a useful exercise for 
mapping documented changes in programme thinking42. However, during the first two cohorts , 
innovation in programme design was not always sufficiently translated to ToC revisions. This process 
did impro ve over the lifetime of the programme . This change f ollow ed our Cohort 2 PPE report 
 
39 This comparison was not included in the evaluation framework, however, the donors expressed interest in seeing a comp arative view.   
40 Vogel Isabel, Review of the Use of ‘Theory of Change’ in International Development,  
http://www.theoryofchange.org/pdf/DFID_ToC_Review_VogelV7.pdf , 2012  
41 Annex  B presents all iterations of the SPRING TOC.  
42 Annex E presents a comprehensive evolution of the SPRING TOC, showing how iterations reflected changes in programme emphasis.    Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 13 
 recommendation43 that SPRING more regularly record changes and details relating to the 
implementation o f the programme level ToC . This was recommended to give the programme 
opportunities to reflect on the planned route of implementation and the rationale for variations to this 
route, and to provide background to test programme changes and iterations against the ToC 
assumptions.  
The SPRING ToC was also used to drive programme implementation, including innovation. Each 
year, the ToC was reviewed and refined through annual workshops to integrate programme learning 
related to ToC assumptions and causal links . It was also used  to reflect changes in programme 
design and implementati on. As the programme moved towards its conclusion, the implementation 
became less experimental and adaptive , and there was a decreased focus on programme level 
learning . Subsequently ToC changes became more subtle.  
4.1.2.  Linking SPRING’s ToC to the OECD DAC Cri teria 
Figure 3 indicates the specific areas of the SPRING ToC which speak to the separate OECD DAC 
criteria. In Figure 3 , the two blocks  representing Effectiveness, speak to the PPE level “top down” 
perspective and the BPE “bottom up” perspective.   
Relevance and Effectiveness both appear within the programme level of the T oC. Relevance speaks 
to the design and implementation thinking, while  Effectiveness speaks to the manner in which the 
programme made this design operational, interacted with businesses and adapted to changing needs 
and circumstances . Efficiency, which is not reflected on the T oC, speaks to the proficiency in which 
the programme implemented  its operations in relation to its budget .
 
43 In 2017  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 14 
  Figure 3: Linking SPRING’s  ToC to the OECD DAC Criteria  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 15 
 4.2. Relevance  
Given the pu rpose of SPRING to impact on girls’ lives using businesses’ products and services, the selection and 
mentoring of the businesses, guiding  programme decision makers through a process of understanding girls’ 
needs was central to the success of the overall pr ogramme. This section explores the ways in which SPRING 
selected businesses, the evolution of the business selection process between cohorts and lessons learnt, and the 
extent to which SPRING was successful in identifying business needs to provide tailored  support guiding 
businesses to achieve SPRING goals. We then examine the extent to which SPRING successfully engaged 
businesses which could identify and work with adolescent girls, the ultimate targeted SPRING beneficiaries.  
A1 How successfully did SPRING  target businesses to achieve programme goals?  
A.1.1 How, and in what ways, did SPRING select businesses to achieve programme goals?  
At the programme level, selecting “quality businesses” was essential for SPRING in demonstrating effects around 
girls’ product development through  an accelerator, further leading to businesses recognising adolescent girls as a 
viable market segment and acc elerators recognising the value of gender focus and HCD approach44. Businesses 
were, in effect, the “implementation tools of SPRING”45 – the programme logic reflected that sustainable, 
innovative solutions to improve the economic life of adolescent girls wou ld be applied as a result of commercial 
motivations. In general, SPRING implemented a range of activities (Figure 4) to identify and select the 
businesses and design the cohort accelerator activities accordingly46.  
Figure 4: SPRING’s business selection  process  
 
Towards a more informed approach to business selection  
As an iterative programme, the selection process of SPRING evolved between cohorts based on reflections and 
improvements of the programme’s internal processes. Overall, the selection process be came more informed 
by experience after Cohort 1  (see Table 3), changing from a broad outreach strategy, generating wide interest 
in the business landscape followed by a pitch camp (Cohort 1) , to more targeted , invited  selection of businesses . 
This was then supplemented by a series of interviews between  the business decision makers and SPRING 
technical experts resulting in a narrower pipeline  of more selected candidates (Cohort 2 and onwards):  
The biggest changes occurred between Cohort 1 and Cohort 2, moving from casting a wide 
net and having a pitch contest for Cohort 1 to more targeted country -based curation of a 
pipeline, from Cohort 2 onward.47  
A much more involved, much more hands -on, much more curated selection process from 
Cohort 2 onward versus Cohort 1 .48 
 
44 SPRING, Proposed SPRING TOC, March 2019  
45 Coffey, SPRING Cohort 2 PPE Revised, March 2018, p. 17  
46 Coffey, SPRING M&E Framework March 2019. The phases of selection are outlined in detail in Section 2.2  
47 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D399  
48 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D409  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 16 
 These changes to the business selection process were driven by programmatic learning which found that 
selecting the most appropriate businesses for a programme such as SPRING was more effective through a 
process of multiple and direct interactio ns with potential businesses early in the selection process, rather than 
one-off procedures such as the “pitch camp” in Cohort 149. 
Cohort 1 included several early stage businesses, some of which faced issues in clearly defining their own 
business model , and whose ability to reach scale was limited50. One IP member pointed out that the selection of 
early -stage businesses had been the consequence  of a gap in the market for girl -centred businesses at growth -
stage51. Following Cohort 1, SPRING made the f ollowing changes to the selection process to attract businesses 
with the greatest potential to scale:  
• The fuseproject team joined the SPRING team in the landscaping and selection process. While CMs and 
SPRING evaluated businesses against their girl focus,  fuseproject focused on their business pre -position ;  
• Selection became more reliant on CMs’ in-country networks to identify suitable candidates and encourage  
application. This was also a consequence of the realisation that online advertising of the program me, as a 
standalone , was not working;  
• Businesses had been selected against criteria of : a) viability; b) potential for impact; c) strength of leadership 
and team . Additional criteria were added for Cohort 2 including: i) scale potential; ii) interest in girls; iii) 
innovation; iv) strength of supporting team; and v) alignment to SPRING’s objectives ; 
• The programme shifted its focus away from start -ups and validation stage businesses towards ventures at 
growth  stage and mature businesses. This s hift resulted in selecting business with a diminished girl focus. 
Later cohorts included larger numbers of businesses targeting girls as part of broader target groups, 59 out 
of 75 participants, while only 16 developed girl -specific interventions52; 
• The realisation  of the challenging nature of reaching girls in the value chain encouraged a shift away from, 
but not exclusion of value chain propositions; and  
• SPRING  streamlined the application process creating a simpler website, and processing applications on a  
rolling basis.  
For Cohorts 3 and 4, the emphasis on a curated pipeline of strong applicants was maintained with incremental 
adjustments aimed at further strengthening the curated approach, such as the introduction of a bootcamp 0 to 
support businesses al ready prior to application  stage in Cohort 4. As one IP respondent reflected:  
“I think what we realised was that we needed a much more curated approach to reaching out 
to businesses and reaching out to the right businesses to get them on board. They needed  a 
lot more hand holding before they even got to the application stage. So, they were identified, 
nurtured, even before they applied.” 53 
Table 3: Selection process differences between Cohorts 1 to 4  
Cohort 1  Cohort 2  Cohort 3  Cohort 4  
Outreach emphasis on 
generating wide 
interest, including 
applications “outside 
the box”, and meeting 
targets for quantity of 
applications.  Greater emphasis on 
engagement of country 
managers in curating a 
pipeline of strong 
applicants.  
Prioritisation of quality 
over quantity 
applicants.  Shorter application 
window of four weeks 
due to the Christmas 
holidays.  
Similar to Cohort 2, 
with continued focus on 
targeted pipeline 
development by the 
regional team  Bootcamp 0 to support 
businesses prior to 
application stage  
Businesses completed 
online applications.  Application forms 
streamlined, using a Same as Cohort 2  Same as Cohort 2  
 
49 Coffey, SPRING Cohort 2 Synthesis Report, May  2018  
50 Coffey, SPRING Quarterly Report, 2016.  
51 KII with SPRING IP Team Member.  
52 Coffey BPE Thematic Report Narrow Vs Broader Targeting, November 2019.  
53 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D385  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 17 
 more responsive and 
simpler website.  
Primary source of final 
selection took the form 
of a Selection Camp, 
where 50 shortlisted 
businesses pi tched 
their ideas. All 50 
shortlisted busi nesses 
subject to corporate 
due diligence, but no  
confirmatory research  
conducted on 
perceptions of business 
or risks of the sector.  A rolling shortlisting 
process was applied, 
using the application of 
scores thro ugh 
(telephone) interviews, 
with subject -matter 
experts.  
Final selection 
decisions made at 
Selection Workshop, 
subject to due 
diligence.  Similar to Cohort 2, but 
with an expanded 
selection workshop 
(two days instead of 
one) to allow greater 
time for discus sion and 
debate  Same as Cohort 3  
 
However, as noted by several IP respondents, the curated approach could have been strengthened further by 
limiting selection to a smaller  number of businesses rather than the target of 20 businesses per cohort as 
required by the donors:  
 “[…]  if you compa re that to [another accelerator] where they would have sometimes between 
five and eight per cohort, I just thought … what we could have done with like eight 
businesses  and just  totally nurtured and just totally hand holding  on those businesses. That 
would be really great.”  54 
“So we might have some lessons about the selection process and about how best to do that 
[…] go for quality over quantity, and not force a specific number of businesses, if you don’t 
have enough right fit businesses maybe not to then fi ll the cohort.” 55 
This highlights that for a programme such as SPRING, an emphasis of quality over quantity metrics in business 
selection may have benefitted the process.  
Understanding the local context rather than adopting a “one size fits all” approach was an important learning point 
in Cohort 156, which led to CM s being identified as key drivers behind the more curated approach to business 
selection . This is due to CM s being able to contribute local knowledge to the process. This meant that from  
Cohort 2 onwards, CM s moved from being largely administrative coordinators to having a more important role in 
business selection, which included identifying businesses, curating the business pipeline, and contributing to the 
final selection workshop.57 
We realised that country managers were in the best position to really understand the different 
players in the market and who might be a suitable candidate. So [we were] putting more 
emphasis on that sort of local process. 58 
However, a minority opinion shared by some interviewees was that as the role of CM became more important, 
additional bias might have  been introduced to the selection process as CM might have been more likely to put a 
business forward if it appealed to them . 
It felt like it really was a ques tion of how well a country manger liked a business. (…) A 
question of whether they liked the business or even liked the entrepreneur themselves, really 
influenced of how much of a business case they made for that business to get money. 59 
The tight timefram es, within which SPRING operated , were identified by IP respondents as a challenge to the 
iterative nature of the programme and their ability to reflect and implement new learning as new Cohorts were 
 
54 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D385  
55 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D397  
56 Coffey, SPRING C2 PPE Revised, March 2018  
57 C2 Selection Lessons Learnt and Feedback (fuse)  
58 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D397  
59 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D384  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 18 
 introduced. This also affected the ability to make infor med changes to selection and potential redesign of the 
process, if required . It would have been easier  had there been  more time available . 
SPRING had to deliver so quickly that maybe it would have been better to be able to do one 
cohort, learn from the mistakes or improve or even just build on any successes, at the time. 
Take stock, redesign, implement, learn. Redesign, implement, learn. But that would have 
been difficult, I mean we still tried to do it but on SPRING it’s difficult because sometimes we 
had cohorts running in parallel. […], you can take the learning from one and move it to the 
other, but what you can’t do it sit back, take stoc k, decide and then introduce it to a new 
cohort because you’re already halfway through. So, with hindsight, it would be nice if SPRING 
was a bit longer timeframe possibly, so that we could have done things with a little bit of 
breathing space. 60 
The types of businesses suitable for SPRING evolved  
The type of businesses that were considered suitable or desirable for SPRING also changed between cohorts 
(see Table 4): 
• Cohort 1 focused  on start -ups, the idea -stage and validation stage businesses ;  
• Cohort 2 emphasised  businesses’ growth orientation, maturity and the commercial orientation of NGOs ; 
• Cohort 3 moved away from large established and mature businesses to businesses with a track record that 
had moved  beyond prototype conceptualisation ; and  
• Cohort 4 was a more inventive and experimental cohort, given that logframe targets ha d already been 
achieved , with scope to more innovatively look at processes and girl impact (such as trafficking, public 
spaces , etc. ).  
 
Table 4: Differences in scoring criteria and types of businesses between cohorts 1 -4 
Cohort 1  Cohort 2  Cohort 3  Cohort 4  
Scoring criteria based 
on viability, potential for 
impact, and strength of 
leadership and team  Scoring criteria 
expanded to include 
viability, scale potential , 
interest in girls, 
innovation, leadership, 
strength of supporting 
team, and alignment to 
SPRING’s objectives  Same as Cohort 2  Some scoring criteria 
changed to include 
viability, need or 
desirability of the 
prototype, feasibility to 
deliver prototype, scale 
potential, girl impact 
potential, innovation, 
leadership  
A number of start -up 
businesses / concepts 
included in the mix, 
with a focus on idea -
stage or validation 
stage businesses.  Application of different 
criteria (growth 
oriented, mature  
businesses, 
commercial oriented 
NGOs)  Move away from large 
established, mature 
businesses (corporate) 
to businesses with a 
track record who have 
moved beyond 
prototype 
conceptualisation  More inventive and 
experimental cohort. 
(Had already achieved 
reach o f targets).  
Looked at processes 
and girl impact in 
different ways 
(trafficking, public 
spaces).  
 
Table 5, next page, provide s a more detailed overview of business selection per cohort in terms of number of 
businesses selected, region, stage of the busin ess (early, growth, mature) and type of business (for profit, not for 
profit and other, e.g. hybrid). It shows that in terms of business stage, in particular, the programme evolved from 
an overemphasis of early stage businesses  in Cohort 1, to an even spli t between early stage, growth and mature 
businesses in Cohort 2, and an even split between early and growth stage businesses in Cohort 3, with less 
emphasis on mature businesses. For Cohort 4, there was a larger amount of businesses at growth stage. 
 
60 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D383  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 19 
 Throug hout the cohorts, the split in proportions between for profit and not for profit / hybrid businesses remained 
the same.  
Table 5: Differences between cohorts by number of businesses selected, regions, stage of businesses and types of 
businesses  
Cohort  Numb er of 
businesses 
selected  Region  Stage of 
businesses  Type of 
businesses  
C1 18 East Africa  early: 11  
growth: 6  
mature: 1  for profit: 14  
other: 4  
C2 18 South -East Asia  early: 6  
growth: 6  
mature: 6  for profit: 14  
not for profit: 2  
other: 2  
C3 19 East Africa  early: 8  
growth: 8  
mature: 3  for profit: 15  
not for profit: 3  
other: 1  
C4 20 South -East Asia  Idea: 3  
early: 7  
growth: 10  for profit: 15  
not for profit: 1  
other: 3  
 
After Cohort 1, it was found that the amount of ‘early -stage’ businesses in the cohort risked SPRING not meeting 
its targets, which is why an even split between early -stage, growth and mature businesses was emphasised in 
Cohort 261. The move away from selecting a larger number of mature businesses between Cohorts 2 and 3 was 
based on programmatic learning that maturity was not always the best fit for SPRING. The reason for this was 
that some of the larger businesses were perceived as  being “less responsive” to challenges which  their 
participation in SPRING brought about. This was mainly linked to a lack of commitment and lack of buy -in to 
SPRING processes from business decision makers and willingness to submit to SPRING’s “hands on” 
approach62. As noted by a number of CM, assessing the commitment of entrepreneurs and their motivations for 
participating in SPRING should have been emphasised strongly in selection decisions.  
(…) the attitude of the entrepreneurs that is the most important factor of all. And what I mean 
by that is are they open -minded to learning and feedback? Are they really committed to 
innovating and prototyping? Or are they just doing this because they think they can get a bit of 
free money or status, you know, being lin ked to a donor -funded project, etc? Really, really 
digging deep for what is their motivation and commitment levels and so on, because it is a 
really big commitment63. 
This is not to say that the internal capacity of businesses to absorb programme support wa s not considered 
central in the selection process, and that more mature / larger businesses were, in theory, more likely to possess 
the necessary talent required to do so , and more than some of the businesses selected. This capacity to absorb 
programme sup port was key.  
(…), the place that I feel like a lot of these companies fall short is talent. I think that our ability 
to provide TA was limited by the fact that they couldn’t even absorb it in some cases. And that 
what they really needed was not just an ou tsider to build a financial model, they needed 
somebody inside. (…) in some cases,  we were trying to give support to a really busy 
 
61 Coffey, SPRING C2 PPE report  
62 Coffey, SPRING C2 PPE report  
63 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D413  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 20 
 overstretched entrepreneur,  and I think had we had the ability to help them with talent, that 
would have been a missing piece . 64 
As the programme learned between cohorts, the metrics for business selection were adjusted to reflect the need 
of leadership commitment and business capacity to absorb SPRING support. Notable changes were introduced in 
Cohort 2, expanding the criteria  for Cohort 1 (medium sized businesses, social component, expansion goals, etc.) 
to criteria such as business longevity, profitability, strength of the supporting team, leadership and history of 
innovation.  
Importantly, the existence of a defined prototype  became central to selection of businesses to ensure that 
SPRING support was delivered as efficiently and effectively as possible. While the selection criteria for Cohort 3 
remained the same as in Cohort 2, the criteria changed for Cohort 465 with special e mphasis on the proposed 
prototype, including criteria such as need / viability of the prototype. This means that the prototype had to be  
viable to compete and that there was a well -evidenced, real need for it in the market, feasibility (that the business 
had potential to deliver the prototype), and girl impact potential rather than the previous metric of “interest in girls”.  
Curating the business selection process and adjusting metrics to reflect the types of desirable businesses to 
select was overall successful  but it may have prevented SPRING from picking up outliers. And while these outlier 
businesses might not have been immediately obv ious candidates for selection, they might have contributed 
additional learning to SPRING as programme.  
I would say, although that was hugely successful, I’d say the one challenge to that is that it 
prevents you from necessarily picking up sideliners or out liers that could add a huge bit of 
value. Obviously, we still broadly advertise the core of applications, so we were able to get 
some really great individual organisations that we hadn’t reached out to beforehand, but I 
think that there’s a certain level o f open -mindedness that gets constrained when you do a 
curated outreach. 66 
Girl landscaping guided but may have limited the IP ’s understanding of relevant sectors and selection   
Girl landscaping informed  the selection process by providing the IP with an und erstanding of the local contexts 
and sectors . This was done  by highlighting girls’ needs and challenges in the cohorts’ countries. The girl 
landscaping then informed the IP’s selection of businesses67.  
But [girl landscaping] didn’t so much help with design  but it helped guide selection. So, the 
county managers were able to understand from the girl landscaping the needs of girls in those 
countries and therefore if they were being approached by businesses who weren’t really 
meeting those needs. 68 
I think the landscaping was useful to understand country by country, kind of what the real hot 
button issues are for girls and take that into consideration when we select their businesses. 69 
Girl landscaping provided a contextual overview and highlighted girls’ existi ng needs, rather than identify 
solutions to potential problems. It did this  by engaging with girls themselves . However, a slightly wider scope for 
landscaping may have identified issues and problems that restricted or impeded girls’ economic empowerment 
but which girls themselves were not yet aware of or had not yet identified. For example, legislation might prev ent 
younger girls opening their own bank accounts, affecting their ability to make their own economic decisions 
without the assistance of an economically empowered partner (older relative). Respondent girls might not have 
perceived this as a restriction,  but its identification might have influenced the selection of businesses or the 
development of prototypes which required girls to have access to their own accounts.  
The girl landscaping  was thoroughly conducted but its scope may have limited the IP’s visio n in terms of breadth 
of innovation in the following ways:  
• Analysing the nature of the problem for girls in particular sectors and countries;  
 
64 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti,D393  
65 Coffey, SPRING Cohort 4 Evaluation Criteria, selection process  
66 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D399  
67 As will be seen later, the landscaping assisted the sele cted businesses in their conceptualisation and design of prototypes.   
68 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D383  
69 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D397  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 21 
 • Estimating of the scale of the number of girls that could be reached by a solution;  
• Determining the benefits they  could derive; and  
• The specific girls to target with the solution70. 
The IP did not repeat girl landscaping for countries already covered in a previous cohort as the IP considered that 
the previously identified  needs were likely to be still relevant. The  IP did; however , conduct some higher -level 
scoping for the additional country added to both Cohorts 3 and 4.   
A.1.2 How successfully has SPRING identified the needs of businesses to achieve programme goals?  
This section presents findings on how SPRING hel ped businesses improve their (anticipated) offerings by 
providing or facilitating access to appropriate technical assistance. The technical assistance was matched to the 
businesses’ needs  to avoid missed opportunities such as businesses dropping out due to  limited capacity to 
deliver on SPRING goals or not realising their full potential to contribute to the programme. This was done 
through participant landscaping .  
SPRING underwent  a number of changes in implementation from its original design, particularly in regard to the 
pathways , to achieving the main objective of improving the economic lives of adolescent girls. The preferred 
pathways were driven and affected by the tension of SPRING as to whether it was a:  
• A business accelerator  promoting businesses  to focus on girls as a potential market ; 
• A girl-focused  programme , using businesses as vehicles to impact on their economic lives;  
• An HCD initiative , promoting HCD  as a means  to assist businesses to more readily engage with girls as a 
market; meeting their needs and improving their lives 71. 
As an iterative programme, the identification of business es’ needs evolved through SPRING cohorts. This 
evolution involved balancing the process of identifying individual business needs with considerations of support 
that the programme , as an accelerator , could offer. There was also a profound shift from girl focus  (how the 
businesses could impact on girls) to business focus (how the businesses could impact on the programme) as 
SPRING progressed. The process of participant landscaping  during selection was noted by some IP respondents 
as central to identifying busine ss needs. They found it particularly successful in Cohort 4 due to the introduction 
of participant landscaping visits with all businesses and the addition of bootcamp 0. The introduction of these 
improvements strengthened the curated approach to business s election (see section 4.2) , allowed the 
programme to explore challenges and needs of businesses , and clarified alignment with SPRING goals prior to 
the start of the Cohort.  This all enabled SPRING  to offer tailored support for diverse needs.  
The diagnosin g needs process, that was part of what participant landscaping was supposed 
to do. And I think we did a better job with Cohort 4 because we had these participant 
landscaping visits with all businesses that ended up in the cohort. So we had pretty detailed 
discussions with them about what their challenges were and what they were wanting to work 
on through SPRING. And also adding boot camp zero gave us a chance with the select few 
businesses to explore this further. And to really understand how we could devel op a prototype 
that addressed their needs but also SPRING’s goals.72 
As echoed in the quote above, Bootcamp 0 in Cohort 4 proved particularly successful in supporting businesses in 
developing a hypothesis around their products and identifying their needs fo r prototype -development already in 
advance of the cohort. This further highlights the added benefits of a more hands -on, curated business selection 
process  in identifying business needs.  
Improvements to the process of diagnosing business needs throughout t he programme centred, in particular, on 
greater considerations around  sustainability and scale -ability of the businesses and the identification of particular 
types of businesses that were most likely to effectively absorb SPRING support, such as businesses  with 
developed operations systems, in -house expertise, and growth -potential.  
Overall, SPRING supported businesses in refining their needs and moving away from over -emphasising the need 
for monetary support, focusing instead on clearly defining their busin esses and refining their business models. 
Importantly, as one IP respondent reflected, SPRING succeeded in tailoring business support, which was linked 
 
70 see IP documents, girl grid  
71 see SPRING Cohort 2 PPE Report, March 2018, Section 2.1.2  
72 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D397  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 22 
 to the large size of the SPRING team being able to identify and adjust the offer as required. This gave businesses 
more focused development based on reflected  support.  
All the businesses needed money, they all gave you a million and one reasons why they 
needed money and so that was something that they all came in with. But beyond that … what 
I observed was really the need to help them actually understand what their business does. 
Really refining the business model and thinking even before they build a prototype, really 
helping them to refine actually this is the business. And I think all of them  came in with the 
intention that oh, I knew that. I know exactly what I want and what I need from you guys. And, 
as time went on, you saw that change gradually.73 
Businesses identified the longer duration of their participation in SPRING as a key differenti ating factor from other 
business support programmes with regards to business needs . The length of time of face to face engagement, as 
well as the post cohort support provided, set the programme apart.  The effectiveness of this combination of 
support was a pparent in Cohort 4.  The offer in Cohort 4 was thought to be the best tailored to address different 
needs , yet also worst in terms of providing continuous support to the businesses since it coincided with the end of 
the SPRING programme:  
But basically, t he older businesses in the cohorts ranking, the different the needs are. 
Because they are more evolved, because they grew more, so Cohort 4 will have really boot 
camp related needs … defining a prototype, defining a go to market strategy, having 
marketing campaigns... Whereas Cohort 1, 2 and then 3 they have already launched a 
product, they know how it’s going, they need to maybe look into expansion into another 
country, or they need investment to scale or these kind of things.  
So, it was quite diverse, an d I think the short fall of SPRING, for Cohort 4, [was] program me 
support kind of. Because the end of SPRING is too soon after the end of Cohort 4 
program me. So, there is just no time for them to unfold and then actually express needs. 
Whereas Cohort 2 and  3… we have continued supporting them across the whole length of 
SPRING74. 
As was the case for business selection, CM were central to tailoring support to adequately address business 
needs by providing local knowledge . The programme itself facilitated th at process by being flexible to 
accommodate changes to CM  roles , since, just as in the case of business selection, the personal relationship 
between a business and a CM was crucial in also ensuring that business needs were adequately identified and 
addressed.  
A2 How successfully has SPRING targeted adolescent girls?  
This section explores what worked and did not work well in SPRING trying to match businesses with their target 
girl audiences, how it assisted businesses to reach and address the needs of girls, a nd what type of support 
proved useful or less useful.  
A.2.1 How have SPRING businesses targeted adolescent girls?  
SPRING faced challenges regarding what worked in trying to match businesses with their target girl audiences. In 
particular , the programme st ruggled in defining the target audience and targeting different “types” of adolescent 
girls through businesses.  
One challenge for SPRING was demonstrating that meeting girls’ needs was a viable market for businesses. This 
aspect was important for developi ng appropriate prototypes and the IP provided opportunities for businesses to 
directly engage with their potential girl customers when designing a product . One respondent stated : 
We proved that there is a viable market in serving the needs of girls. … prov ing that there is a 
market here and … the businesses found that too … talking to girls really empowered the 
businesses.75 
 
73 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D387  
74 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D408  
75 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D388  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 23 
 In the early stages of SPRING, the end beneficiaries (girls) were defined as Bottom of the Pyramid (BOP) girls 
and aged 10 -19. This evolved after Cohort 2, when the definition was broadened to “vulnerable girls” to ensure 
that businesses had a viable custo mer base, as BOP girls and their families had little buying power to be a viable 
business target.  However, the age range of 10 -19 remained the same. It was found that the selected age rage is 
wide, and evidence suggests that businesses struggled to addres s needs of girls throughout this range. They 
often opted for smaller age ranges when developing their prototypes76. Further it was found that the age limit of 
19 was rather arbitrary, considering that in some countries the everyday realities of girls aged 1 9 varied to those 
in other (e.g. in terms of pregnancy, marriage) countries. Moreover, some businesses met the needs of 22 -year-
old women with prototypes that were targeted to 19 -year olds, but these were not counted since they were out of 
the age range. O ne IP respondent noted that given the breadth of both, the socio -economic and age definition of 
the end beneficiaries, applying “exclusion” criteria instead of “inclusion” criteria to the definition might have been 
more suitable to achieve SPRING goals.  
Some IP respondents also noted that the most successful businesses, in their opinion, employed broader 
targeting than what was defined by SPRING. This resulted in focus on issues that affected girls disproportionately 
but may not have been strictly girl -focused in their prototype design.  
My understanding is that the kind of initial concept was products for girls. And it quickly 
became clear that there weren’t businesses to accelerate there nor where there really market 
opportunities. And I think the understa nding is that the kind of challenges that we were 
focusses on solving, disproportionately impact girls. Access to clean water impacts everybody 
in the town in rural Bangladesh, but girls are disproportionally impacted because they are the 
ones that have to  go fetch water. They are the ones that have to spend time boiling water. 
They are the ones who miss school because of it. So sometimes there were issues specific to 
girls – menstrual health, maternal health. Sometimes there were challenges that 
disproport ionately impact girls despite the fact that they’re pervasive.77 
This highlights  the finding  that restricting the target audience to girls in specific age brackets (parameters) was 
not useful to businesses from a commercial viewpoint, which wanted to reach girls beyond these brackets. 
Additionally , offering solutions that can disproportionately impact girls and young women at different ages , yet are 
not specifically targeted at them , can be beneficial . For the SPRING programme, the requirement that businesse s 
only report on these pre -defined parameters has also led to potentially recording a lower overall reach.  
SPRING businesses targeted adolescent girls in a number of roles (value chain, purchasers, end users, 
consumers) and ways (specific and broader targ eting, targeting through stakeholders and gate keepers, targeting 
through technology), which each presented unique opportunities and challenges to the businesses. They are:  
• Reaching girls in the value chain proved particularly challenging for many business es. In Cohort 1, 
many business prototypes had a primary focus of targeting girls in the value chain as opposed to consumers 
or service users. However, the challenges of legal age barriers (restricted working practices in some 
countries for those under the age of 16 or 18), and cultural barriers (lack of maturity or experience of girls, 
lack of motivation  or interest to work, lack of adequate resources to work) which businesses faced led to 
SPRING moving away from business prototypes with this as a primary f ocus. However, SPRING still 
encouraged businesses to engage girls as both producers and users of their products and services where 
possible.  
• HCD was considered crucial in helping businesses to understand girls  and their gatekeepers and 
develop the right strategies to attract and retain girls in the value chain78.  In other sectors, such as 
technology79, HCD also proved crucial to enable businesses understand users and increase the relevance 
and uptake of their technological products.  
• Age restrictions  may have  limited SPRING’s ability to match businesses with their target audience in 
this sector, furthe r highlighting that reconsideration of the age brackets would have benefitted the 
programme.  Restrictions such as  reaching girls below the ages of 16 and 17 was more difficult as they 
often lack access (to their own phone ), legal restrictions (where minor s had limited agency and decision -
 
76 see Working with girls in different age groups: lessons learned fro m SPRING, BPE Thematic Reports, Draft, p. 15: “The experience of sampled BPE businesses 
showed that girls’ needs, experiences and barriers can broadly be divided into the 10 -15 and 16 -19 sub -groups.  
77 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D388  
78 Coffey, Working with g irls in the value chain: lessons learned from SPRING, BPE Thematic Reports, October 2019  
79 Coffey,  Reaching girls through technology: lessons learned from SPRING, BPE Thematic Reports, October 2019  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 24 
 making ability in these areas) , and the novelty of technological solutions in developing countries (and thus 
the issue of trust) . 
• Reaching girls through stakeholders and gate keepers proved challenging  as stakeholders work ing 
with girls are often resource constrained . This  meant that businesses had to keep prices low through 
efficient service  delivery, using technology, having lean staffing models, or providing services for free 
through grants or other revenue streams. Howe ver, hiring relatable and motivated frontline workers was 
found crucial for reaching girls through stakeholders, with buy -in facilitated by having strong shared 
objectives with the business or product80.  
A.2.2 How has SPRING helped businesses strengthen th eir targeting of adolescent girls?  
This section explores which avenues of SPRING support were useful and less useful in helping businesses 
strengthen their targeting of adolescent girls.  
To target adolescent girls, SPRING assisted businesses in a number o f ways, such as through offering business 
support, legal support, marketing support, research into understanding the target group, and funding such as the 
Prototype Development Fund (PDF). According to IP respondents, the most fundamental aspect of SPRING in 
targeting adolescent girls was HCD. This was mainly attributed to HCD providing businesses with an 
understanding of girls which, in turn, helped them refine their products, and was considered a sustainable aspect 
of the programme.  
This finding is reiter ated by data from respondents when asked which aspects of SPRING they regarded as most 
useful (Figure  5).  Across  all cohorts, over 90% of respondents were satisfied or very satisfied with the offering of 
HCD  and understanding girls’ needs.  
In line with the iterative nature  of the SPRING programme, the delivery of HCD evolved throughout the cohorts, 
with additions of new modules to address needs identified in previous cohorts, thus contributing not only to the 
businesses, but also the development of the programme itself . 
I think the businesses at the end were better equipped to incorporate it and understood it 
better because we’ve been through the whole process with them. They saw the benefit of 
research which is …  fundamental to HCD. … I would like to think that as we got better and 
more nuanced in the way that we delivered it. They [the businesses] developed a more 
nuanced understanding of it as well.81 
Figure 5: Level of satisfaction of support provided by SPRING  
 
 
 
80 Coffey, Reaching  girls through stakeholders: lessons learned from SPRING, BPE Thematic Reports, November 2019  
81 Coffey, SPRING Atlas Ti, D388  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 25 
 End of cohort survey results , with business es, consistently show that learning how to apply HCD received positive 
feedback, followed  by design support (to develop a prototype) and understanding girls’ needs. Businesses found 
HCD particularly  critical in helping them to change their thinking about girls through the use of the research -in-
context phase . HCD  allow ed them to test assumptio ns and provide more insights on girls and their needs through 
customer touchpoints  while in the design and development phase of their prototypes.  
It is important to note that b usinesses also valued design  support in terms of branding which they believe  helped 
them to reach more girls, and noted that thinking about the user journey more broadly enabled  them to better 
understand the consumers  of their products (e.g. purchasers – for example, parents, and end users), rather than 
narrowly focusing on end users  as girls.  
However, one interviewee  opined that the programme’s offering re garding  girls’ needs could have been 
strengthened. This would have better equipped businesses to enhance their understanding of girls’ needs and 
develop customised, in depth solutions. In their opinion the girl landscaping  research was insufficient to truly 
inform individual businesses about their specific girl customer . 
As explored in section 4.1.3 , girl landscaping did provide businesses with an in -depth understanding of the 
experiences and needs of girls in the cohort countries. However, given the pre -defined a reas of focus (education, 
work, saving, investment, social norms)  from the programme design , it may have also limited businesses in their 
ability to develop prototypes which might have addressed unidentified needs and targeted adolescent girls which 
would meet the needs  of the SPRING programme’s target audience, yet were not captured by girl research.  As 
previously stated, i n some instances, girls may not yet be aware of their own needs which businesses may have 
been able to : i) educate and inform them of these needs ; and ii) provide means to meet these needs through their 
SPRING prototype.   
4.3. Effectiveness  
4.3.1.  How effectively were the different SPRING accelerator inputs designed and delivered, to help 
refine their business model, product or service?  
The effect iveness of SPRING’s technical assistance is measured based on the extent to which participants were 
able to: i) refine their prototypes  and business models; ii) understand girls’ needs; iii) launch their prototypes; and 
iv) increase businesses’  investment readiness. This report looks at SPRING’s effectiveness in delivering inputs to 
the businesses, and not at how effectively these inputs were absorbed or implemented. We cover the latter in the 
BPE Summative report.   
In this section , we examine the extent  to which SPRING’s various inputs assisted the businesses  to refine their 
girl focused  prototype.  We also assess the appropriateness of SPRING’s interactions with businesses throughout 
Cohorts 1 to 4.  Our analysis  is divided in three sections, each focusing on a specific type of support provided by 
SPRING, which are:  
• Core Technical assis tance : SPRING provided a wide range of technical support to participating 
businesses in the form of technical assistance, HCD, and investment readiness support.  
• Financial assistance : SPRING provided businesses with financial support to develop their proto types in the 
forms of prototype funding, Business Assistance Fund and Capital Raising Support.   
• Additional support : SPRING provided various forms of support catered to the needs of individual 
businesses. These include in -kind, pro -bono technical and advis ory services, and mentoring.  
Overview of businesses’ satisfaction with SPRING Inputs  
According to businesses, the two most significant contributions of SPRING were its HCD methodology 
and the enhancement of their understanding of adolescent girls as a ta rget group. In the end of cohort 
surveys, the SPRING businesses82 provided feedback on the delivery of the different SPRING inputs.    
Out of 70 respondents , all of them reported receiving HCD support, while 67 out of 72 received the PDF, 49 out of 
68 received investment readiness support, and 37 out of 60 received additional support in the form of one -to-one 
mentoring or technical consulting. Business responses are summarised in Figure 6.  
 
82 This number excludes Cohort 4 participant FZM which dropped out from the programme after Bootcamp 1.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 26 
 HCD and girl -specific modules were the two inputs which participants appreciated the most: all except three 
businesses were very satisfied or satisfied with the support received, (Figure 6). Similarly, 48 of the 50 
businesses which provided feedback on PDF , in the end of cohort survey , were either very satisfied or satisfied 
with the level of funding received. The picture was more mixed for support to core business operations, 
investment readiness and design support, with the highest number of unsatisfied or ve ry unsatisfied respondents. 
Among these, design support had the highest number of businesses which were unsatisfied or very unsatisfied , 
22 out of 72.  
Given the anonymity of the survey data we are not able to state conclusively the businesses reasoning fo r 
providing these low ratings.  However, an examination of the End of Cohort interview transcripts provides  some 
possible reasons. These are illustrated below.  
Regarding Investment Support:  “I think our challenge now is that we fall into a gap where [SPRI NG] feels like… 
[They] just don’t have really the contacts that I think are appropriate for you  [the business] .”83 
Regarding the PDF:  “I felt that was the weakest part of the process. I appreciate that it was a juggling act 
between different organisations f or the money, but I wasn’t really given useful guidance on why or how I needed 
to get it to a particular [funding] level.”84 
Regarding core business support:  “I think probably where it fell a little bit short was … in terms of just more of 
the business supp ort now, running the business, so just getting support around getting that right”85. 
Regarding PDF funding:  “So, for instance, research I felt was a little underfunded”86  
“I think the process of allocating funding I think was a little bit…it was suboptimal”  87. 
Figure 6. Summary of inputs received by SPRING businesses88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effectiveness of Core Technical Assistance  
The core technical assistance provided by SPRING aimed at increasing businesses’ understanding of girls’ needs 
and their ability to develop a sustainable prototype able to reach scale. The majority of businesses interviewed 
reported great satisfaction with  the level of girl research and HCD support provided, while feedback regarding the 
level of in -country assistance and investment readiness support was more mixed.  
Technical Assistance delivered by the Technical Director  
 
83 C3 EOC KII, Business 5.  
84 C3 EOC KII, Business 5.  
85 C3 EOC KII, Business 3.  
86 C4 EIC KII, Business 18.  
87 C4 EIC KII, Business 5.  
88 Coffey, SPRING, End of Cohort surveys. 2015, 2016,2017,2018.  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 27 
 SPRING’s Technical Director carried  out extensive in -country research prior to the bootcamp to deliver girl 
landscaping sessions at Bootcamp 1, which provided businesses with a snapshot into girls’ conditions and 
struggles across participating countries. According to feedback, for 61 businesses out of 65 respondents , the 
tailored girl research sessions enhanced business’ understanding of girls’ nee ds.  
“She [the Technical Director] took us through a very interesting session on understanding 
girls. […] And there were specific area or sp ecific elements that we never thought about that 
are so critical. […]. So, I think it’s all about understanding girls and how to engage them. So, I 
think that was very relevant.” 89 
Technical Assistance delivered by fuseproject through HCD  
HCD is at the hea rt of SPRING.  In cohorts 3 and 4, 16 businesses90 (out of 38) identified this as the most 
important aspect  of SPRING.  This user-centred approach to product development is based on the  idea that an in -
depth understanding of people allows  products and servic es to be designed to meet users’ needs and desires91. 
Box 1 , next page,  outlines SPRING’s HCD approach.  
Within SPRING, HCD provided a framework for businesses to carry out research and create solutions to 
adolescent girls’ needs and challenges. SPRING’s HCD curriculum was delivered by fuseproject . SPRING itself 
was shaped around the principles of HCD , in order to  deliver assis tance tailored to businesses’ needs, and the 
process evolved as SPRING moved forward.  For example, in Cohorts 3 and 4, the girl landscaping process 
became more focused  on the needs of businesses selected to participate in those cohorts.  
I think that’s a really positive direction of travel to really take the primary research that they’re 
doing and try to adapt it more and more closely to what the businesses actually need rather 
than giving them a descriptive landscape of the lives of adolescent girls, whic h, for some of it, 
that is important because a lot of times people running these businesses in those countries 
don’t have that much of a frame of reference so it’s important to have that contextual 
information but tailoring it to the businesses makes it re ally more effective.92 
  
 
89 C2 Case Study Tool HCD  
90 This was 9 businesses in Cohort 3 and 7 business es in Cohort 4 (End of Cohort Surveys). Data about the Most Significant Contribution was not gathered for 
Cohort 1 and 2.  
91 SPRING, Building Businesses for Girl Impact. Integrating Human -centred Design. Accessible at: http://www.springaccelerator.org/wp -
content/uploads/2019/09/4.Building -businesses -for-girl-impact -Integrating -HCD_web.pdf . 
92 Transcript 517, PPE KII.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 28 
  
  Box 1: SPRING’s Approach to Human Centred Design  
HCD entails close scrutiny of the different types of users who interact with a service, product or system . This  is 
done through observations of users’ everyday lives, interviews an d product testing. User research translates 
into product  refinements based  on feedback and knowledge gathered. The process of designing, testing and 
improving a product or service continues even after its “launch”, so that it is improved based on inputs from 
more users as it scales.  
At the programme implementation level , HCD  was at the centre of the SPRING curriculum offered to 
programme participants. The methodology offered by the fuseproject team involved five phases:   
• Research:  to identify key consumer groups and document their needs and desires;  
• Storytelling and synthesis:  to develop journeys to understand consumer experiences;  
• Write design challenges:  to develop design challenges to solve consumer needs;  
• Brainstorm solutions o r new ideas:  to revise your value proposition based on learnings;  and 
• Prototype solutions:  to build prototypes and test their viability in the market.   
As shown in  diagram , delivery of the HCD curriculum took place through a series of intensive and practi cal 
workshops that occurred at Bootcamp 1. Human centred research (“Research -in-Context” phase), then, took 
place over a period of three months with the support local researchers. The second bootcamp represented the 
opportunity for turning the prototype id ea into a viable model.  
HCD curriculum as part of the S PRING programme timeline  
 
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 29 
  
Figure 7: Usefulness of bootcamp modules and sessions: mean ratings (out of 5)93 
 
 
The fuseproject team reported that the HCD curriculum underwent significant changes over time, and that by 
Cohort 4 “no module had stayed the same”94. SPRING’s interactive methodology , which required businesses to 
apply HCD to analyse their business models in front of the class , proved challenging with an audience that was 
more use d to lecturing formats. This also reflected some cultural differences between international or Western -
educated and local participants , with the first feeling more at ease with interactive sessions95. While the HCD 
curriculum underwent continuous refinement s, its delivery method – linked to fuseproject’s assumption about 
effective learning methodologies – was not refined to address this.  
The “Research -in-Context” phase received several criticisms when it was introduced for the first time in Cohort 2. 
One Co hort 2 business, though positive about the girl research overall, pointed out that the external researcher 
hired to support  them with girl -research was not aware of the local context96. Two Cohort 2 businesses were very 
critical of the girl research process, ‘’The research execution was a disaster.’’97 In particular, one business stated 
that the researchers were unreliable, unresponsive, and poorly organised. Another business highlighted that 
researchers failed to properly inform girls about the resear ch, and girls failed to show up98. Another business from 
the same cohort in Pakistan99, while being positive of the researcher, was critical of the logistics company 
coordinating the research:  
‘’…the logistics company that was arranging all of this, I was e xtremely unhappy with them…I 
think their coordination was awkward, they wasted a lot of time, they could have definitely 
given us access to more girls, research could have been a lot more extensive and a lot more 
productive.’’100  
 
93 Bootcamp Surveys. This data was not collected for Cohort 1. For the sake of comparability, data was presented only for the mod ules were feedback from all three 
cohorts was available.   
94 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII - AFP35.  
95 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII - AFP35.  
96 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – 21807.   
97 C2 PPE KII - 20722  
98 C2 Case Study.  
99 C2 PPE KII - 21679  
100 C2 PPE KII - 21679  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 30 
 This failure in implementat ion process was communicated to SPRING and the programme ensured that the 
process was improved in the following cohorts.  
HCD application and business satisfaction  
The vast majority (73 out of 75) respondents reported being very satisfied or satisfied with  the benefits of 
applying HCD to their business operations and their ability to target their intended audiences.  According 
to respondents, HCD was a unique feature of SPRING, which allowed them to rethink their approach to product 
design. Most businesses s aw HCD as a completely new way of thinking about the business and the product from 
a user’s point of view. Others defined it as “ building a product with the customer for the customer ”101 and as an 
“empathy -based learning process ”102. Another defined it as “ designing for the people and with the people, and 
then using the feedback to perfect the design ”103.  
In two cases, HCD was the main factor attracting participants to SPRING, who applied to the programme to 
improve their interaction with users. There is anecdot al evidence that among the businesses which specifically 
targeted girls after SPRING104, continuing to use HCD for prototype refinement had an important role in 
understanding users, the competitive landscape and the stakeholder ecosystem105.  
Most respondents (39 out of 63) had a level of HCD understanding prior to SPRING, thanks to participation in 
other programmes. Having an understanding of HCD increased through the cohorts, with 14 Cohort 4 businesses 
reporting either a fairly good understanding of HCD prio r to SPRING, as shown in Figure 8. This might be an 
indication that the HCD methodology was growing increasingly popular, but the increased awareness cannot be 
attributed to SPRING.    
Figure 8: Business understanding of HCD before SPRING   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, businesses reported that previous experience of HCD  tended to be applied in an unstructured way, and 
SPRING provided a systematic and well -devised guide for carrying out HCD 106. Busine sses commented on how 
SPRING HCD was different from other HCD training they had received107, namely that SPRING’s approach was:  
 
101 Business 2.  
102 Business 3.   
103 136 C3_BPE_HCD.  
104 An in -depth analysis of business girl targeting can be found in the Coffey BPE Th ematic Report on Narrow or Broad Targeting (November 2019).  
105 BPE Sustainability interviews.   
106 C3 BPE Tool 2.  
107 The comparison between how HCD was taught during SPRING and within other programmes is explored in Annex G.  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 31 
 • More structured:  The HCD process was well designed and organised. The curriculum was high -quality and 
helped businesses test pre -existing concepts and assumptions in a formal way ;  
• More comprehensive:  Businesses had gaps in their HCD knowledge before SPRING. For example, 
although they applied certain steps of HCD, they had not properly tested their assumptions about users ; and  
• More applicable:  Prior HCD work was more theoretical than practical, and SPRING helped to increase the 
applicability of the concepts businesses already knew.  
Ways in which HCD research supported business to understand girls’ needs  
Following SPRING’s  technical assistance, nearly three quarters ( 47 out of 65 ) of the businesses interviewed felt 
they improved their understanding  of girls’ needs thanks to SPRING108. Specific ways in which businesses have 
applied HCD  principles, and their effect on their business models and prototypes will be further explored in the  
BPE Summative Report.  
Figure 9: SPRING influence on business’ understanding of adolescent girls (%)  109  
 
 
According to businesses, the benefits of this HCD process included:  
• Helping businesses tap into underserved and unknown, ‘invisible’ girl markets;  
• Helping businesses refine their existing girl focus to deepen their impact among this target group; and  
• Helping businesses understand girls in context: their motivations, lifestyles and influences/ influencers. This 
knowledge was key for businesses to improve targeting and decision -making.  
HCD research and its application was highlighted by the businesses as particularly important both during the 
cohort and in the prototype roll -out phase. Almost all (30 out of 33) businesses in Cohort 1 and 2110 reported that 
they were still applying HCD principles one year after participation. In some cases, businesses continue d 
applying HCD after the “Research -in-Context” phase, to a conduct iterations and revisions of their prototypes in 
response to issues highl ighted by the prototype testing , as highlighted by a business in Cohort 4:  
“We thought that these girls are looking for flexible job opportunities … and they really want to 
earn some money. So, we invited them, we had to train them about digital payments … and 
we realised that they are not [ready]…they want to do something but they’re not actually ready 
 
108 Coffey, SPRING End of Cohort Questionnaires. 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018.    
109 Coffey, SPRING End of Cohort Questionnaires. 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018.    
110 Coffey, SPRING End of Cohort Surveys. 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018.   This question was not asked for Cohort 3 and 4.  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 32 
 for a sales job.  A sales job requires more commitment …, which was not there in the girls at 
that stage.”111 
For SPRING , while HCD was a key factor in attracting businesses to the programme , this was not always related 
to achieving a better understanding of girls. On the co ntrary, some businesses were more focused on achieving 
scale and improving business performance. As explained by one SPRING team member:  
“One draw of businesses coming into SPRING was having access to this project as a really 
world -class, international, human -centred design boutique firm and normally, that technical 
assistance would cost them a lot of money, and so they were attracted to SPRING to be able 
to benefit from  [this] .. . But perhaps, for some businesses, they were more keen on gr owing 
the commercial side of their business than the [girl] impact side, and I think that’s also normal 
and to be expected and not necessarily a bad thing, but if I had to be forced to think about 
where there were some tensions, as you’re asking me to thin k, yeah, probably the tension 
between commercial growth and success and impact specifically on girls. That was 
sometimes hard to reconcile.”112  
This was seen as,  despite increasing businesses’  understanding of girls, SPRING’s businesses struggled to 
develop  solutions able to reach girls at scale . The  majority of SPRING businesses (49 out of 75, see Figure 1 0) 
each reached less than 10,000 girls aged 10 -19, while only four tech -based prototypes each reached more than 
25,000 adolescent girls, with three of the se being responsible for each reaching more than 100,000 girls.   
The tension between the girl focus and scalability is further explored in the BPE Summative report (forthcoming).  
Figure 1 0: Girls  reached by SPRING prototypes (n) 113  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Potential improvements to HCD delivery  
Despite positive feedback on the importance of HCD for prototype development and iteration, businesses  
suggested improvements , particularly on its delivery style . Four businesses114 did not have a  clear understanding 
of HCD after participation. They struggled with the definition of the concept and its components . One business 
 
111 5. C4 Tool 2 - HCD Journey.docx.   
112 C2.3 -3 Implementation HCD .docx  
113 SPRING KPI forms and SPRING master dataset , 2015 -2019  
114 Coffey, SPRING C2 -4 Case studies, 2017 -19 
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 33 
 thought HCD was related to graphic design115, while another associated it with design thinking116. One 
respondent117 suggested  that the SPRING team did not have a fully clear picture of HCD, and that their CM 
lacked experience of HCD prior to SPRING. Recommendations included ensuring CM receive enough 
information and material prior to Bootcamp 1. Others suggested providing HCD materi al to businesses 
themselves prior to the bootcamp. Some businesses advised having additional iterations of HCD in between and 
after bootcamps.  
Effectiveness of in -country technical support to help businesses refine their business model, product or 
service  
The centrality of the role of CM emerged during SPRING.  As a result, we have separated in-country support in to 
two categories: i) the role of CM ; and ii) all other in -country support provided. This took the form of mentoring and 
guidance by CMs, and SPRI NG identified technical  experts provided pro -bono and in -kind support to businesses . 
The type of support provided through both of these channels includes tailored technical expertise, investment 
readiness advice, legal counselling, financial modelling, con nection to international and local networks, as well as 
emotional and psychological support. This was done to ensure local ownership and contextual relevance.  
Effectiveness of in -country support: Country Managers, a key source of business support  
Busines ses were positive on SPRING’s in -country assistance, (See Figure 1 1 and 1 2), especially on the one -on-
one support provided  by CM.  Seventy percent ( 25 out of 35 ) of Cohort 1 and 2 respondents were either very 
satisfied or satisfied with the mix of  global and local support received, while two third ( 25 out of 38 ) of Cohort 2 
and 3 respondents were either very satisfied or satisfied with SPRING’s support to their businesses’ core 
operations.  
There were significant differences of satisfaction per cou ntry and  this reflects the relationship developed between 
the businesses and the CM as well as the effectiveness of the manager’s support. CM support was more 
appreciated by smaller and/or less mature businesses.  
In-country support (CM and technical mentor s) was central to the SPRING across the board . According to 
businesses, the ongoing , tailored and personalised support offered by SPRING was a key programme strength, 
setting it apart from other accelerators. Several businesses mentioned CM support as bein g particularly helpful118.   
Only o ne Cohort 4 business reported being very unsatisfied with the support received from their CM119.  
Figure 1 1: Businesses' satisfaction  with mix of global and local support provided (%) (Cohorts 1 & 2)  
 
CM were tasked with providing focused support to strengthen the specific skills and capacities businesses 
needed to develop  and market  their prototypes . Thus, CM support was tailored to bu siness needs, but also varied 
depending on the resources available to the CM120, with each bringing different t ypes of expertise and networks.  
This led to a diverse offering  per country and resulted in varied  feedback and experiences between  businesses. 
 
115 C3 Business 4.  
116 C3 Business 5.  
117 C2 Business 6.  
118 453 C4 PPE EOC – 41918, 2018.  
119 End of Cohort Survey, Cohort 4, 2018.  
120 Coffey, PPE Cohort 1 End of Cohort Report, 2016.   
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 34 
 For example, while South Asian countries each had  a specific CM  per country , some CM in East Africa were 
responsible for multiple countries . This affected the experience of Cohort 3 businesses in those countries, who 
felt that they would have required more lo calised and context -specific support (see the limitations section below). 
Across previous cohorts as well, several SPRING businesses reported that CM support was crucial. According to 
a Cohort 2  business, CM were :  
"Really important. Completely hands -on, real guiders and advisors to the businesses every 
step of the way. And, also, I think, a critical friend to … check things and to give them the 
tough love when they need it, particularly around budget building and workplan building and 
saying do you really need this or have you thought about this?"121 
Figure 1 2: Businesses’ satisfaction  with SPRING’s  support to business operations (%) (Cohort 3 & 4)  
 
Country Managers: types of support provided  
CM provided different types of hand -on support, helping businesses with diverse aspects of their prototype 
development . Each CM brought different areas of expertise and a different added value. Some CM were able to 
draw on their technical knowledge and netwo rks to support businesses  in highly relevant areas. While it was 
highlighted by several businesses  that having local CM was important, it seems that the combination of 
international and local expertise was particularly effective in the case of Nepal.  
SPRI NG participants mentioned several reasons why CM support was important and contributed to their 
prototype development  and launch . These included: i) practical support in prototype development; ii) 
communication support; iii) access to networks; iv) technic al expertise ; and v) emotional and psychological 
support. The combination of this type of support helped businesses strengthen their prototypes and business 
offering, improve their investment readiness and access to additional sources of grant funding, and increase their 
girl understanding.  
In summary : 
• CM provided practical support in prototype development ; for example, keeping track of deadlines, 
applying for funding, and supporting with pitch decks and time management. Several businesses described 
CMs as  ‘critical friends’ who helped them develop and iterate their prototypes, and stay on track of their 
targets.  
• CM served an important communication function , acting as a ‘bridge’ between businesses and SPRING. 
They were responsible for checking in with bus inesses and facilitating communications with the SPRING 
team, including on additional business needs and concerns. Businesses particularly appreciated the post -
bootcamp support received in the form of in -person meetings or progress updates, which helped th em stay 
on track:  
“The country manager has been very helpful in helping us navigate with SPRING. We often 
didn’t really know what to expect, what kind of stuff we can ask for. So, the country manager 
often kind of nudged us. Do you need this? Do you need that? For example, legal support, we 
 
121 SPRING C2 PPE KII - AIP10.  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 35 
 weren’t really thinking about it. Also, during the boot camps, he was very helpful in kind of 
setting expectations from before, what to expect in each of the sessions, how to really plan 
for…before going into the service design session, h ow to really be prepared for it. So, he’s 
constantly been in the loop, which has been helpful.”122 
This is especially important considering that the SPRING offering was considered too short by many participants. 
Communicating frequently with the CM also helped businesses make the most of opportunities within SPRING, 
for example  applying for additional funding. Regular follow -ups with the businesses were also important for 
SPRING as a way to keep track of the progress made by businesses and streaml ine communications. Despite 
this, several businesses  highlighted that the CM support in the post bootcamp phase was insufficient, as 
highlighted in the limitations section below.  
CM also helped businesses access local and international networks. CM helped  businesses navigate the 
country context;  e.g. working with local authorities  or accessing local donors and government agencies. This was 
more prevalent in South Asia, especially in Pakistan and Nepal.  CM also helped businesses raise their 
international investment  profile or apply to donor funding. Several businesses pointed to the successful formula of 
having one international  and one local CM , as was the case in Nepal . In some cases, CM with highly relevant 
technical expertise , for example business lendin g, were able to provide high -quality advice and support to 
businesses, helping  them adapt and iterate their prototypes and business models. This was especially helpful 
given the need to continue mak ing prototype adaptations following s bootcamps . Several bu sinesses appreciated 
the market information provided by the CM, who had useful insights on market trends and competition. Some CM 
also supported businesses in their financial modelling.  
“(The Country Manager) was there to support fully in implementing the  whole thing, plus he 
was giving us so many insights about our competitors, cause [he] has… he has so much 
information about the markets, especially the lending space. So, he’ll come here, flood us with 
a lot of information. So, we see what to pick and how  to better our product."123 
Several businesses mentioned that having frequent communication and interaction with the CM played an 
important emotional and psychological  role, particularly given the highly stressful prototype launch period. Having 
a contact in  the country made businesses feel that they were still  a valued  part of SPRING . 
CM support: limitations and potential improvements  
Business feedback on the effectiveness of different inputs, (Figure s 11, 12 and 13 ), shows that business 
interaction with CMs varied across cohorts . In Cohort 3, where Ethiopia and Rwanda  did not have a specific 
Country Manager, SPRING businesses expressed a need for more local experts with a better understanding of 
the context and who could provide more ongo ing follow -up.   
"SPRING … did a really good job in making themselves available to support us after boot 
camp … but I think it would be nicer to have a more involved in -country support system as 
well"124  
Some respondents mentioned that CM did not have enoug h time to dedicate to the high number of businesses 
participating in SPRING . Although post -bootcamp support was considered useful, these businesses required 
even more follow -up, and additional tailoring to their individual needs. This was considered partic ularly important 
given the short but intensive length of time spent at bootcamp and the extensive need for more iteration and 
testing after the end of cohort, when businesses would have continued to require support in the form of more one -
to-one, regular  meetings with CM over the course of the year.  
Effectiveness of in -country support: Other types of support  
Other forms of in -country support were mentioned  by businesses . In ten instances , businesses praised SPRING 
for providing pro -bono and tailored suppo rt in areas of priority to their work. When they were mentioned125, this 
was remarked as having  high-quality technical advice provided, including trainings as diverse as HR 
management, financial and tax training, and investment readiness courses , all of which were highlighted as useful 
 
122 501 C4 PPE BC2 - 41273 20180815.  
123 C3_BPE_Case Study : Most Significant Change  
124 SPRING C2 PPE KII – 21679.  
125 Please note that businesses were not asked explicitly about other forms of in -country support, but only a general question about in -coun try TA.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 36 
 to continue supporting prototype development and strengthen the business model. For example, one business 
mentioned the  importance of being connected to technical experts who supported the team to develop their pit ch 
deck, as well as legal experts. Others mentioned support received in financial modelling and understanding of 
budgets and taxation126: 
“[Redacted] was great with taxation. There’s this class on taxation that she put together that 
was truly phenomenal. Und erstanding taxation, understanding obligations, when you can and 
cannot pay tax, what you can and cannot pay tax on. That was phenomenal. How to organise 
your books, who to talk to when you’re talking about taxation…So that was phenomenal, and 
she got some  really super experienced tax lady from one of the big auditing firms and she 
spent an afternoon with us, and we were asking all sorts of , questions about taxation. 
[Redacted] put us in touch with a great mentor, a local mentor .”127 
4.3.2.  Effectiveness of financi al assistance and investment readiness support  
Investment readiness  
Investment readiness support provided through SPRING was aimed at improving business es’ access to 
investment opportunities , primarily to grow and scale the business . Support included128:  
• Online courses on capital through Duke’s University CASE Business School;  
• Coaching from the Investment Director;  
• Regional support with Regional Investment Advisor (Cohort  4 only);  
• Financial modelling support through Deutsche Bank and independent mentors ;  
• Production of executive summaries, and pitch decks, professional headshots taken at bootcamp; and 
• Networking opportunities to attract direct investment (including the EOC event, dinners) and/or fostering 
inter-personal and pitching skills.  
Figure 1 3: SPRING businesses’ satisfaction with investment readiness support (%)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business feedback on investment readiness support  
In Cohort 1 , investment readiness support was made available to all businesses ; however , given that most Cohort 
1 businesses were early stage or social enterprises , they ended up attracting more grants than other forms of 
investment. From Cohort 2 onwards, the investm ent readiness approach was reconceptualised to provide 
support , on a one -on-one basis in Bootcamp 2 , to a selection of businesses deemed investment -worthy by the 
Investment Director129. It should be noted that , given the different growth stages among busines ses, start-up or 
 
126 439 C1 PPE KII - 11451 20160321.  
127 439 C1 PPE KII - 11451 20160321.  
128 SPRING Year 3 Annual Report, 2017, p.21.  
129 SPRING Year 3 Annual Report, 2017, p21.  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 37 
 social enterprises were likely to have been disadvantaged because support was provided based on their 
likelihood to raise capital. As such, it favoured more mature and commercial ventures. In total, 49 businesses 
received investment readin ess through SPRING.  As a result,  29 businesses reported attracting 110 investment 
transactions attributable to SPRING with almost  half of these transactions (54) in the form of grants, while the 
remaining ones were in the forms of equity or bank loans. Du ring SPRING, 27 businesses improved their 
investment readiness criteria130. SPRING businesses attracted a total sum of £38,098,524 in external investment. 
Less than half of this (45%) was SPRING -attributable131, (See Figure 1 4). 
Figure 1 4. SPRING external investment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Of the 49 businesses which received investment readiness support during their participation in SPRING132, just 
over half reported being either very satisfied or satisfied with the level of investment support re ceived, (Fig ure 13).  
There was varied business feedback on the standard of investment readiness support received. Across the 
cohorts, businesses which received support and provided positive feedback praised how support:  
• was tailored to business needs and  increased their awareness on the importance of anticipating their future 
needs as well as being “investment ready”133;  
• tried to improve business models to strengthen the business case for capital raising134; 
• helped businesses raise capital and attract other investment by connecting them to investors135;  
• helped businesses to recruit staff which could dedicate time and expertise to seek additional funding136; and  
• helped businesses improve their pitch decks137. 
One business praised the same CM for linking them with potential global investors138, while two others praised 
the CM’s prompt responsiveness and willingness to help.  
However, a small number of businesses reported negative experience in terms of the support received . Two 
businesses reported various delays in re sponsiveness to emails139, insufficient training and limited contact time 
 
130 Data from SPRING documentation on Investment Readiness accessed via SPRING’s Google Drive Folder. Businesses which received i nvestment readiness 
supported are those who demonstrated an improvement in their investment readiness criteria score. The investme nt readiness criteria score was determined for 
businesses from Cohort 2 onwards. The score is calculated on a scale from 0 to 20 against 10 criteria.  
131 SPRING attribution was determined through businesses’ KPI form and an assessment by the SPRING team.  
132 SPRING End of Cohort Surveys. 2015.2016.2017.2018  
133 444 C2 PPE KII – 21444, 440 C2 PPE KII – 21679, 537 C2 PPE KII – 20618, 135 C3_BPE_Tool 1 - Main SPRING Participant KII.docx, 500 C1 PPE KII – 11822, 
615 C1 BPE Follow Up – 11374.  
134 533 C1 BPE Follow Up – 10622, 543 C1 BPE Follow Up – 11822, 468 C2 PPE KII – 21521, 345 1 -a. C4 1 - Main Participant KII Part 2  
135 440 C2 PPE KII – 21679 419 C2 PPE KII – 20465, 62 C2_BPE_Tool 3, 500 C1 PPE KII – 11822, 531 C2 PPE KII – 21737, 121 C3_BPE_Topic Guide 1 , 531 C2 
PPE KII – 21737.  
136 532 C1 BPE Follow Up – 10622.  
137 496 C2 PPE KII – 20949.  
138 440 C2 PPE KII – 21679.  
139 461 C1 BPE Follow Up – 11232, 488 C1 BPE Follow Up – 11557.  
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 38 
 with the CM and/or the Investment Director. One business140 negatively compared the standards of investment 
readiness provided by SPRING with those provided by the other programmes, such as the USAID Partnership to 
Accelerate Entrepreneurship Initiative, which offered one year of free consultation with a private f irm. Such 
opposing feedback might be due more support being provided to some participants rather than others on the part 
of the SPRING team, or due to the success of these particular businesses realising their level of requested 
investment.  
Overview of fin ancial assistance provided to SPRING businesses  
Businesses received financial support from SPRING in the form of:  
• Prototype  development funding (PDF) available to all businesses;  
• Business Assistance Fund (BAF) – Introduced in April 2018, this consisted o f providing additional funding 
(up to £10,000) to SPRING businesses meeting specific criteria ;  
• Capital Raising Support (CR S), including monetary support towards fundraising/networking opportunities or 
conferences , and access to services such as pitch deck  creation, financial modelling ; and  
• Pro-bono support delivered by Deutsche Bank, Hogan Lovells and Du ke CASE Business School.  
Most businesses were satisfied with the level of financial assistance received, although the revision of the 
prototype funding  mechanism received contrasting feedback.  The Prototype Development Fund (PDF) was grant 
funding available to businesses following Bootcamp 2, to be used for prototype development. PDF represented 
16% of SPRING’s total programme spending and the total amount  of PDF disbursed to businesses was 
£2,865,406.37.  
While in Cohort 1 all businesses received the same amount of financial support (£50,000 ), from Cohort 2 onwards 
the PDF allocation mechanism was restructured, and businesses received different values  ranging from a 
minimum of £2,433 to a maximum of £74,949 (both Cohort 2 businesses). Across the whole programme, the 
average amount received by each business amounted to £38,205.42  (Figure 1 5). 
Figure 15: SPRING funded received by businesses - total per cohort  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The vast majority of respondents (48 out of 50) , who provided feedback on the PDF in the End of Cohort Survey , 
reported being either very satisfied or satisfied with the PDF received. In addition, while the grant funding 
allocated in Cohort  1 could be used by the businesses towards their wider business operations, PDF from Cohort 
2 onwards was tied to prototype de velopment, and businesses could not invest it in any other area. This change 
 
140 C1 PPE Main Participant Interview KII.   
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 39 
 in strategy received mixed feedback from respondents  with some in favour and others less so . According to one 
business the new mechanism was both appropriate and effective:  
“So, this is, I would say, the best thing what happened. Then fund I would say it might be 
bigger in the amount but the way the budget was prepared jointly, and the support amount 
identified I think’s very democratic."141   
In contrast,  five businesses142 perceived  the PDF amount as being too low, compared to their expectations. Two 
respondents mentioned lack of transparency or misunderstandings on how funding allocation worked, which led 
to some frustration. Some businesses felt that others may have received greate r funds due to their more 
charismatic  personalities, rather than the qualities of their prototypes143: 
” Yeah. It was weird but it was just quite…I don’t know why they choose to do it in this way, 
but it was just quite un -transparent [..] how decisions were being taken”144  
Thirty -six businesses received BAF funding – for a total value of £209,310  (Figure 1 5), enabling 11 businesses to 
achieve increased revenues, while another 11 reported increased ability to raise investment and 21 businesses 
reported being able to reach more users145. BAF was mostly employed by recipients to finance conferences, 
marketing support, upgrades in software and technology146. 
For the C RS, 27 businesses benefited - for a total value of £306,024 - during the lifetime of SPRING. Mo st 
businesses invested  CRS towards conferences and benefited from financial modelling sessions and pitch deck 
creation. Other support provided to SPRING businesses included  
• 57 businesses  received contributions to fund additional girl research;  
• 3 received  financial support for grant writing;  
• 27 received  Capital Raising Support; and  
• Pro-bono support – for the value of £ 9,491.48 – was delivered to the businesses in the form of legal 
assistance, financial modelling support and smart capital online courses.  
Ways in which SPRING businesses used PDF support  
PDF was allocated to business using a “ differentiated support mechanism ” based on the following criteria: a) 
business need; b) girl impact potential; c) prototype sustainability; and d) potential to leverage additional 
investment. From Cohort 2 onwards, funding could only be used towards prototype development , rather than 
to support overall  business operations. PDF was used by businesses to test and develop their prototypes in ways 
they would not have been able to without SPRING funding. Four small and emerging businesses reported that 
PDF support allowed them to test a protot ype idea and refine it147. This was a luxury that many businesses would 
not have enjoyed without SPRING’s  financial assistance148 and which allowed them to remain in business and 
test what worked and what did not with regards to their prototype .  
For one Cohor t 3 business and two Cohort 4 businesses, PDF represented SPRING’s  most significant 
contribution149. PDF allowed two of these businesses to employ a team to rebrand the company for entry in new 
markets . In a third  case, it allowed  the business to fund the de velopment and  distribution  of its app-based 
prototype150. Four other businesses reported that they employed PDF  to support the in -house team with research 
and product development , using SPRING funds to hire a wide range of experts including operation managers, 
research staff, developers, analysts, consultants, accountants and designers . Similarly, t hree businesses used 
PDF to buy equipment  and increase production capabilities . Finally, five businesses used their PDF to continue 
applying  HCD ; more specifically, to fund human -centred market research , so as to continue to refine their 
prototype idea. This indicates the importance of both PDF and HCD principles in prototype iteration.  
 
141 468 C2 PPE KII – 21521.  
142 208 C1 Cas e Study KII; 158 C3_BPE_Tool 1 – KII; 247 7. C4 BPE Tool 1; 270 13. C4 Case Study KII; 121 C3_BPE_Tool 1.  
143 C2 PPE KII - AIP10.  
144 346 C4 Main Participant KII Part 1.  
145 SPRING, BAF Qualitative Survey.   
146 Other uses include M&E support, professional mento ring, further product development, legal support.   
147 182 C2 Case Study; 468 C2 PPE KII; 649 C1 PPE KII; C1 Case Study BPE Follow Up.  
148 42 C2 _BPE_Tool 1.docx.  
149 SPRING Cohort 4  End of Cohort Survey. 2018  
150 SPRING Cohort 4 End of Cohort Survey  2018.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 40 
 Effectiveness of PDF funding  
Seventy  out of 75 participants r eceived financial support to launch a prototype from SPRING, 65 of which 
successfully launched a prototype.  All businesses in  Cohorts 1 and 4 received PDF support . For Cohort 2 and 3 , 
all businesses except  five receive d PDF funding . Four of the five busine sses who did not receive PDF , did not 
launch a prototype151. The remaining one who launched a prototype had already taken part in SPRING in Cohort 
1, when they received funding. Only five businesses who received PDF were not able to complete the launch of 
their prototype , during the programme lifespan .  
While in Cohort 1 , SPRING encouraged participants to launch a prototype within a year from participation, an 
iteration  in Cohort 2 reflected that  these timeline s for launch were not realistic.  M ost businesses would not have 
finalised their prototype model by the end of Bootcamp 2, and pressure to launch within a year lessened in later 
cohorts. We will provide an in -depth analysis of prototype launch times and constraints in the BPE Summative 
report.  
4.3.3.  Effectiveness: To what extent has SPRING adapted and with what effect?   
This section focuses on changes and adaptations to the programme’s structure and implementation, and it 
reflects on how these influenced the overall programme performance. During  its implementation, SPRING 
reflected on its operations, performance and direction on a regular basis, making changes to its selection process 
as well as its implementation. The changes regarding the programme implementation152 are presented below in 
chronol ogical order for cohorts 1 to 3.  
Adaptation and SPRING Theory of Change  
The programme underwent several adaptations, which reflect the experimental nature of the programme . Many of 
the adaptations took place after Cohort 1 in response to contingent challe nges  including  significant time 
constraints due to strict programme implementation timelines.153 A few  programme adaptations happened during 
the inception  period, before full programme implementation. These and additional challenges were reflected in 
SPRING’ s adaptation of their programme level ToC which we discuss at the beginning of Section 4  and comment 
on in more detail in Annex E.  
Inception Phase  
SPRING was designed as an iterative, experimental programme and changes were made to its implementation 
plan prior to  implementing Cohort 1. SPRING recognised that there was a limit to the number of changes they 
could effectively implement between and within cohorts. A number of respondents reported that pausing  allowed 
for greater reflection and deeper learning  together with changes  based on more reflection . Despite this, one IP 
respondent believed that they had long enough to learn and reflect :  
“I think that this has always been an idea that somehow SPRING didn’t have enough time to 
learn properly. We learn every day. […] What I think we’ve done now is we’ve run through at 
least two iterations of almost every element and process, of which there are about a dozen in 
SPRING. I think now is the time to leave it ‘cause you can’t sustain that pace forever an d, 
actually, there comes a point where you get diminishing returns.”154  
Changes to SPRING before Cohort 1 roll out  
The SPRING IP and the donors made changes to the programme design before the full roll out of Cohort 1. The 
main changes were:  
• A shift from i ncubator to accelerator:  Initially referred in the IP’s Terms of Reference (ToR) as an 
incubator for emerging ventures, SPRING became an accelerator for validation -stage businesses.  
• The dropping of the focus on the enabling context:  The SPRING Business Ca se envisaged the SPRING 
IP to set up partnerships to improve the enabling context within which SPRING businesses work. While this 
recognised the role of contextual constrains such as social norms, unfavourable regulatory frameworks and 
 
151 SPRING Master Dataset , 2019.  
152 Changes regarding the selection process are discussed in Section 4.1 above.  
153 It is worth noting that these compressed implementation time frames were not part of the original design, and implemented by the IP and agreed to  by the 
donors after a revision of the budget during the implementation of Cohort 1.  
154 C2 PPE KII – SPRING IP.   Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 41 
 market regulations , the IP and donors decided this was beyond the accelerator’s purposes and unfeasible to 
achieve within five years.  
• The inclusion of service provision and girls in the value chain : SPRING was originally planned as an 
intervention to provide girls with direc t physical, financial and economic assets. Before the first Cohort 1 
bootcamp , SPRING broadened its scope to include the provision of services and income -generating 
opportunities for girls, alongside physical girl -specific products. The change was in respo nse to findings 
reported by initial girl landscaping  studies in East Africa which highlighted a need for girls to earn and save. 
Donors have shown divergence over whether the broadened mission was in the programme’s favour. DFID 
raised concerns over what i t perceived as a “mission drift” that could pose a risk to the programme, while 
Nike Foundation and USAID considered it to be a wise and pragmatic decision. Diverging donor 
expectations about the programme’s primary value resulted in SPRING struggling to s elect the most suitable 
businesses. The emphasis on “depth of impact ” led to selecting more businesses working with girls in the 
value chain during the first two cohorts. Targeting girls as micro -entrepreneurs or direct employees might 
have had a deeper im pact on a girl’s life, but such interventions were proven to face more challenges in 
sustaining and achieving scale.   
Post -Cohort 1 Adaptations  
After Cohort 1 , there were several changes made resulting in the type of business selected to participat e in 
SPRING and on the way SPRING  interacted with these businesses. Changes and adaptation as a result of post 
Cohort 1 learning were implemented both before and during Cohort 2. These were:  
• SPRING shifted away from  BoP: Given SPRING’s geographi cal focus across two continents, a universal 
definition for BoP girls create d discrepancies among different contexts. Moreover, estimating BoP girl 
population was even more challenging in the instances of businesses lacking access to income data for the 
girl beneficiaries . SPRING also realised that it would have been unfeasible for all businesses to demonstrate 
that they target ed girls at the BoP155.  The BoP girl population is very challenging to reach through the 
private sector, as it can lack basic educati on and economic assets to access basic products and services156:  
• Following the shift away from the BOP girl target, SPRING left it to the businesses to target vulnerable girls 
on a case -by-case basis through proxy measurements and/or the Progress Poverty In dex (PPI) tool . This 
result ed in an increased focus on the lower to middle -income population  of girls .  
• The most profound adaptation to SPRING’s structure was the introduction of Bootcamp : Learning 
from Cohort 1 showed that HCD uptake was limited due to pa rticipants’ need for supplementary iterations of 
HCD after Bootcamp157. While in Bootcamp 1 , the focus was given to design thinking, the second bootcamp 
was designed to help businesses take up research insights upon which they could refine their prototype158. 
Two bootcamps provided important touch points between SPRING and the businesses, and supported 
prototype development.   The addition of the second bootcamp also allowed for the design -hub support to be 
better utilised, as it was based on user in sights:  
“It meant that the designers who design, design based on direct input from girls from the 
research.  So…it was a much more honest HCD experience because people were designing 
with insights on users.”159   
• This adaptation had implications for participants and for SPRING resources. While the addition of a second 
bootcamp helped  place a greater priority on the HCD process and prototype development, it served to 
alienate larger corporate businesses from the pro cess, who struggled with the amount of time needed for 
attendance at bootcamp s160.  
• SPRING planned to expand its cohort size to reach a larger number of businesses : But at the first 
Cohort 1 bootcamp , the IP decided against this.  They realised that the HCD methodology was driven by the 
intense interactions between participants, and that this dynamic would be diluted if more businesses were 
 
155 SPRING PPE End of Cohort Report 2016.  
156 418 C3 PPE – AND 26.  
157 463 C2 PPE KII - AFP35.  
158 KII with SPRIG IP.  
159 KII respondent 9.   
160 KII respondent 22.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 42 
 present. Any dilution might affect the quality of HCD delivery, so SPRING limited cohorts to 20 participants, 
and added Cohort 4161.  
• Grant funding changed after Cohort 1 : Each Cohort 1 participant received a grant of £50,000. However, 
concerns over the businesses’ exclusive interest in SPRING’s grants162 resulted in a shift towards a 
differentiated funding model requiring busi nesses to pitch for funding. This changed approach was 
summarised in the idea that : 
“fair support does not mean necessarily mean equal support”163.   
• Donors’ showed a positive view over the differentiated funding model, as they perceived that the new 
funding system allowed the programme to attract businesses that tended to be committed to the programme 
not uniquely because of the financial incentive. Th is change was met by mixed feedback from the 
businesses, including concerns over the transparency of the decision -making process and extensive due 
diligence requirements made budgeting rigid.  
• The role of CM became more defined , as a result of learning tha t businesses needed tailored and 
contextualised support .  These CM became a key source of contextual understanding for the SPRING team, 
providing local insights and continuous business follow -up. Their scope of work was also expanded to 
include tasks like business identification and recruitment.  
• Internal monitoring was limited during Cohort 1 : During Cohort 1 , the IP struggled to recruit a full -time 
M&E team164 resulting in a structural capacity gap within the team.  This was reflected in the absence of 
standardised oversight mechanisms. In addition, SPRING struggled to gather reliable data to track their own 
performance and that of the businesses . This was also due in part to  the businesses’ difficulty in developing  
appropriate girl impact indicators. SPRING  hired an M&E team; resulting in the development of monitoring 
tools, mandatory KPI forms and dissemination of findings.  
• Financial auditing increased : SPRING organised an internal review to increase the level of internal 
auditing at the end of Cohort 1. Th is led to more efficient budgeting processes for the businesses and more 
coherent mechanisms to manage funds.  
Post Cohort 2 Adaptations  
Cohorts 2 and 3 overlapped in implementation.  As a result, there was no time between cohorts for reflection and 
learn ing, and the SPRING team iterated  “on the go”, implementing changes in Cohort 3 as a result of perceptions 
of what might not have worked well in Cohort 2. These changes were:  
• Country scope was increased : Ethiopia was added as a Cohort 3 country, expanding the number of 
countries to eight.  
• Girl landscaping timing changed:  In earlier cohorts, girl landscaping  was conducted in country before the 
beginning of the programme.  From Cohort 3, girl research was carried out after business  selection to tailor 
it to specific business needs.  
“I think that’s a really positive direction of travel to really take the primary research that they’re 
doing and try to adapt it more and more closely to what the businesses actually need rather 
than giv ing them a descriptive landscape of the lives of adolescent girls, which, for some of it, 
that is important because a lot of times people running these businesses in those countries 
don’t have that much of a frame of reference so it’s important to have tha t contextual 
information but tailoring it to the businesses makes it really more effective.”165  
• KPIs forms became better developed:  The IP realised that businesses did not finalise prototype 
development before the end of Bootcamp 2, making it difficult to d evise tailored KPI indicators before 
prototype specifics were known. The IP worked with the businesses to redraft  the business specific KPI 
 
161 Coffey SPRING PPE Cohort 1 Review.  
162 505 C2 PPE KII - ADN02.  
163 SPRING Webinar, Beyond Good Intentions: Building Businesses to Benefit Girls. Ramona Liberoff, Senior Advisor, SPRING Accelerator, 16 -17 September, 
London.  
164 Coffey , SPRING  PPE End of Cohort Report 2016.  
165 517 C2 PPE KII ADN01.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 43 
 forms to better capture the story behind the evolution of the prototyping166. Since Cohort 3, these KPI forms 
were fin alised at the end of bootcamp 2 for completion and reporting by the businesses.    
Post Cohort 3 Adaptations  
Below are the adaptat ions that took place after Cohort 3. They were:  
• Country scope was increased:  Similarly, to after  Cohort 2, country scope was increased. Myanmar was 
added as a Cohort 4 country . This made nine countries for implementation  for SPRING . 
• Additional tailored investment readiness support was provided to a selection of businesses : 
Businesses were selected wi th the highest potential to raise investment or grant capital. To support the 
requirement  from businesses to move towards investment readiness and raise funding , and in continuity 
with the programme shift towards focusing on growth stage businesses able to  reach scale, the programme 
made several iterations focusing  on this aspect of supporting their businesses.  These adaptations included:  
o The creation  of the role of Regional Investment Support Managers;  
o On realising  that the programme would not allocate al l of its PDF budget (as a result of the pre -
Cohort 2 change in PDF funding), SPRING launched the  BAF which provided additional funding 
up to £10,000 for prototype development. This funding was made available to a selection of 
‘high -potential businesses’; a nd   
o Further assistance in capital raising support was provided which was also made available to a 
selection of businesses.  
While the Efficiency of SPRING through a Value for Money analysis is presented  in more detail in Annex F, the 
ongoing adaptation of  SPRING did not result in increased programme management costs, with the costs 
following a typical project trajectory over time, (See Figure 16) 
Figure 16. SPRING programme management costs as a percentage of all spending by year  
 
5. Lessons and recommendations  
5.1. Introduction  
Based on the PPE findings presented  in section 4 , in this section we present several learnings and 
recommendations. There is some overlap for the learnings, so they are presented with the flow of thinking: 
 
166 KPI forms were employed by the programme to substantiate the high -level analysis and own self -reporti ng of the programme at the end of each cohort. Graphs 
and figures produced by SPRING from the KPI forms contributed to inform log -frame trackers and were presented to the SPRING consortium on an annual basis.  
 
Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 44 
 programme design, pro gramme implementation, and working with businesses. Specific audiences have been 
identified for each of the recommendations.   
The programme did not work specifically with girls  but with businesses , therefore  lessons on achieving girl reach 
and impact will be discussed  in the Summative BPE report and in the Impact Evaluation reports . There are ; 
however , several learnings from a PPE perspective  which reference girls, and they are outlined in the sections 
below.  
5.2. Lessons and recommendations  
5.2.1.  Lesson 1: The private sector can develop products  and services needed by girls 
SPRING was conceptualised  as an innovative, iterative and dynamic programme. Its underlying hypothesis was 
that private sector players could play a role in providing products and services to girls, in a profitable manner, and 
that these would assist in improving girls’ economic empowerment.  We think that part of this hypothesis has 
been proven to be correct.  SPRING has shown that it is possible to reach girls, not just as direct participants  in a 
programme but as indirect beneficiaries, using private sector stakeholders. The basic hypothesis of engaging “the 
private sector to develop and distribute commercially viable products ” has been proven. However, it remains to be 
seen if these products  “…enhance a girls’ economic opportunities ”167. 
 
Recommendation  Audience  
The private sector has the capability and the appetite to reach 
vulnerable populations in ways that benefit the beneficiaries as 
well as benefitting the business profitably. This meth od of 
reaching and benefitting vulnerable populations should be 
explored more and used where appropriate.  Donors; Programme 
implementers; broader 
community  
 
5.2.2.  Lesson 2: Ensure targets allow flexibility to encourage innovation, iteration and learning.  
SPRING was required to deliver against very specific quantitative targets within a specified timeframe. While the 
programme managed  to deliver against its set targets, this constraint might have impeded on its ability to 
innovate and pivot in response to changing environments and unanticipated challenges and opportunities.  
Programme performance was measured against targets in a proje ct logframe which was conceived before the 
programme had started and gained traction. The programme reported against this logframe and negotiated 
changes with the donors  each year and these changes allowed the programme to present more robust, accurate 
data given its progress and learnings to date. However, the programme was not permitted to make more 
substantial changes to the logframe regarding its targets or its timeframes.  
In SPRING’s case, these  constraints influenced the programme in three ways:  
• It led the programme to work with companies which could quickly reach a large number of girls over a short 
period of time. While these businesses may have allowed for the programme to achieve its reach target, the 
depth of impact and the sustainability of this impact is likely minimal.  Three businesses account for 77% of 
the programme’s girl reach ;  
• These businesses, while providing numerical reach, may have had less impact on the targeted girls; and  
• The programme  learned from earlier cohorts in terms of its s election processes and procedures, recognising 
which internal aspects of a company best suited programmatic  needs .  However, SPRING’s choice 
regarding innovation or desired business only came to the fore in Cohort 4, when the programme became 
less risk ave rse, as a result of achieving its girl reach target .   
If these issues had been substantially addressed in the annual revision of the logframe, the programme may have 
had the leeway to more readily consider companies’ levels of innovation rather than their  potential for reach.  This 
 
167 DFID, Assets to adolescent girls’ initiative, Business Case, Policy Division, June 2013.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 45 
 might have been reflected in a logframe target that reflected a combination of reach, depth and sustainability of 
impact, rather than simply reach.   
SPRING required  businesses to target adolescent girls between the ages of 10 -19 (inclusive). The programme 
quickly realised that the age limits were quite arbitrary, other than to limit the target count to a subjectively defined 
youth market. Many businesses which were operating at either end of this age spectrum reached girls outsi de of 
these parameters, but only reported girls within the parameters to SPRING. In effect , this meant the programme 
may have underreported its reach and possibly its impact among girls and young women.   
An example of weighted targets might be the categor y of ‘adolescents ’ is a heterogeneous group with older 
adolescents often  having more in common with young women aged 20-24 than with younger girls .  Similarly, the 
depth of impact and possible sustainability of this impact, is reflected in a business’ prototype.  A simple example 
illustrating this is provided in the table below.  
Table 6: Example of weighted logframe targets  
 
Sector  
 
Sector weighting (Depth)  
# girls reached >10  
Age Weighting  
# girls reached 10 -19 
Age Weighting  
# girls reached 20+  
Age Weighting  
Weighted Reach  
Business A  Education  1 50 0,6 50 1 
 0,5 80 
Business B  Edutainment  0,1 7500  0,6 2500  1 
 0,5 700 
Business C  Retail  0,1 1000  0,6 1000  1 1000  0,5 210 
Business D  Value Chain  1,5 
 0,6 20 1 80 0,5 90 
 
Recommendation  Audience  
When calling on programmes to be innovative and dynamic , strict 
logframe targets might prevent a more experimental approach. In these 
instances, a more nuanced method of programme progress and 
achievement should be implemented.   
Donors; Broader community  To accurately reflect programme reach and impact, allo w the 
programme to report within flexible parameters. This flexibility could be 
given while continuing to accurately reflect the spirit of the programme.  
In SPRING’s instance , a weighting could have been applied to 
adolescent girls aged 10 -19 with a light er weighting applied to 
beneficiaries outside these parameters.  
 
5.2.3.  Lesson 3: Economic empowerment takes time and resources, especially to deliver at scale.  
The original programme design sought to economically empower girls by placing assets within their control  
through increasing their skills and employability, while recognising that other opportunities for economic 
empowerment were possible. SPRING moved away from targeting prototypes with girls as part of the value 
chain. One reason for this was t hat reaching girls as value chain contributors was challenging, and the 
programme struggled with this targeting of girls as a means to achieve its programme targets . Instead, the 
programme opted to identify girls as direct end users of products and service s.  
Similarly, as SPRING’s selection process was refined, the team became more aware of the type of businesses 
that would best match the programme’s outcomes and objectives. However, in terms of their programme targets, 
they were still obligated to work wi th a certain number of businesses per cohort. Decision makers in the team felt 
that, especially in the final cohort, with girl numbers having been attained, the programme may have had greater Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 46 
 impact by working more supportively with fewer businesses and wo uld have preferred to prioritise quality over 
quantity. However, in discussions with the donors, this was not permitted, as the targets were prescribed in the 
logframe.   
 
Recommendation  Audience  
Economically empowering girls as value chain workers takes time and 
effort, and potential scale is significantly smaller. Programme designers 
need to take this into account in future programmes.  
The recommendation of flexible, perhaps weighted targets, mi ght be 
applied here as well (Lesson 2), allowing SPRING to claim a higher 
weighting for a value chain beneficiary because of a deeper level of 
impact.  A girl targeted as a consumer might have attracted a lesser 
weighting.   Donors; programme 
implementers;  broader community  
 
5.2.4.  Lesson 4: Deeper impact might be more efficient, with a narrower geographic focus  
SPRING was designed  to be implemented across two regions, although the target countries changed  slightly, 
from those proposed in the Business Case. While implementing in both East Africa and South Asia allowed for 
greater exposure and learning opportunity, the time in-betwee n cohorts in the same region may have meant that 
the programme was not able fully exploit the opportunity to : i) build on its previous cohort’s momentum; and ii) 
leverage on advantages from earlier cohorts. While the programme did in fact try to facilitate  relations hips 
between businesses in different cohorts, more emphasis on this might have been a point of greater leverage .  
Similarly, extra countries were added to Cohorts 3 and 4, widening the pool from which SPRING could draw. This 
increased  the complexity of the programme’s operations and programme resources were diluted. This was due to 
a large number of businesses in dive rse countries with dissimilar contexts needing support. This resulted in the 
programme not fully being able to leverage off its past performance and might have impacted on its programme 
efficiencies.  
 
Recommendation  Audience  
Programmes should explore the  opportunity of increasing the depth of 
interventions by narrowing their geographic focus and allowing them to 
build on earlier achievements.  Donors; Programme 
implementers  
 
5.2.5.  Lesson 5: Fast is not always best  
SPRING opted to shorten its implementation cohort cycle from twelve to nine months, arguing that this was a 
more efficient allocation of resources. In addition, it “doubled up”, with Cohorts 2 and 3 overlapping in their 
implementation by several months. Bo th alterations to the timeframe impacted on the programme’s ability to 
reflect and iterate. Feedback from the IP speaks to the need for more time for reflection and learning.   
Similarly, SPRING introduced the largely unknown concept of HCD to its business es. The methodology used to 
communicate  and train businesses on HCD  was also largely unfamiliar. The programme received praise for 
introducing HCD innovation, but many businesses felt that a longer period to implement the new tool and 
methodology would hav e been useful. This might also have allowed some of the businesses to more accurately 
reflect on their prototypes, innovate, refine and re -implement their new products and services, perhaps boosting 
the programme’s reach and conceivably its impact.  
 
 
 Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 47 
 Recommendation  Audience  
A learning programme requires time for reflection, learning and iteration. 
Future programmes need to set aside time and resources for this process.  
Programme implementers  Businesses were central to SPRING’s goal of reaching girls. Shortening 
the timelines of providing technical assistance to them, might undermine 
the effectiveness of this pathway. Programmes might consider a longer 
period of engagement with businesses to ensure effective uptake and 
reach.  
 
5.2.6.  Lesson 6: Resource adequately to make b est use of and clearly understand the local 
environment  
A few months into its implementation , SPRING moved its central administrative role from one of the regions to 
London. This allowed the programme to more easily attract the high level staff it required , and to more regularly 
and more easily engage with donors. However, it also left the programme more vulnerable to local and regional 
challenges. SPRING resolved this issue by relying more heavily on its CM as in -country representatives and 
programme ambas sadors, a role far removed from their original more administrative position. However, the 
revised role was only awarded partial additional programme resources, leaving the CM as part -time resources, 
often performing a full -time role.   
Girl landscaping  played an essential role in mapping the environment in each country. This also provided  a solid 
foundation for the implementation team and the businesses to clearly identify needs and challenges faced by 
girls. Given that this was a new demographic for the ma jority of business participants, it was important. However, 
the girl landscaping  focused largely  on the  girls’ socio -economic environment. While this was adequate for 
programme learning in Cohort 1, it seemed inadequate for girls’ access to financial services and technology, and 
a reflection in the process might have expanded the scope of the landscaping to include legal and regulatory 
constraints of girls accessing technology, employment and financial services. This , in turn , would have assi sted in 
the business selection and prototype development phases.   
 
Recommendation  Audience  
Programmes which rely heavily on local resources need to 
adequately plan and resource these representatives.  
Programme implementers  Landscaping should be an essential part of programmes of this 
nature, as it aided greatly in various phases of implementation.   
Landscaping should be updated and revised to include areas 
reflecting previously unforeseen challenges.   
 
5.2.7.  Lesson 7: Regula r face-to-face engagements between programme and business add value  
SPRING’s implementation changed considerably between Cohorts 1 and 2 with the addition of the second 
bootcamp, allowing businesses to iterate their prototype ideas. And the addition of a b ootcamp 0 in Cohort 4 gave 
the IP an additional opportunity to engage directly with businesses, adding to their understanding of business 
needs. IP members  also reflected that an addition of a more formal alumni component would have been 
advantageous  for the programme .  
The duration of the first bootcamp was important in building cohesion between the business and the IP , and in 
providing peer support when introducing new concepts such as HCD. However, the programme might have 
benefitted from shorter, more focused  touchpoints later in the programme rather than a second two -week 
bootcamp. To some extent, this was adopted wi th bootcamp separated into a number of phases, with businesses 
from certain countries only attending for certain days.  Several respondents while satisfied with the quality of 
inputs provided, noted the intensity of the two weeklong bootcamps, and the over whelming amount of information 
provided. Post bootcamp follow -up on HCD might have assisted in greater or more fluid prototype iteration. It also 
might have saved programme costs if some of these concepts were introduced or facilitated by CM.  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 48 
  
Recommendat ion  Audience  
More frequent face -to-face engagements with participants might allow for 
better, more focused iterations of their prototypes.  
Programme 
implementers  Recognising significant travel costs for international expertise, future 
programmes might consider buildi ng more local, internal capacity on 
methodologies like HCD, and embedding capacity in the local environment.  
 
5.2.8.  Lesson 8: Improvement comes from regular reviews, real time learning and adaptive 
management   
SPRING altered its business selection criteria and processes throughout all four cohorts. By critically assessing 
earlier programme -business interaction, SPRING w as able to identify which types of businesses were best suited 
to absorb and learn  from both its HCD methodology and which were best suited to develop innovative offerings 
for adolescent girls. Both businesses at the idea and mature stages were not as succ essful, as committed or as 
invested as businesses categorised as growth stage. SPRING committed to working with some early growth 
stage businesses , but opted in Cohort 4, for a larger proportion of later growth stage businesses.  
The SPRING PDF model chang ed in Cohort 2, requiring businesses to use the funds exclusively for prototype 
development, to pitch and compete with other cohort businesses for funds, and to possibly contribute some of 
their own funding to prototype development. While less PDF money wa s allocated to Cohorts 2, 3, and 4 than to 
Cohort 1, the sales revenue generated for prototypes in Cohorts 2 and 3 was greater than that for Cohort 1 
businesses over a similar period.  This shows that some businesses, using less programme money achieved 
higher levels of return on investment, often supplementing PDF with their own business resources.   
 
Recommendation  Audience  
Review selection criteria on a regular basis, and if needed, refine these for a 
more constructive and deliverable match.  
Programme 
implementers  Accelerators seeking innovative partners need to identify businesses which 
have substance beyond an idea , and the ability to commit, innovate and make 
decisions quickly. Ideally the businesses will be at growth stage.  
When offering businesses funds for development implement three limitations:  
• Ring fence the range of possible expenditure;  
• Make businesses compete for the funding; and  
• Suggest and encourage the businesses to invest their own resources 
(both financial and non -financial) in their own prototype development.   
 
  Tetra Tech International Development – SPRING PPE Report  
 
Tetra Tech, March 2020 | 49 
  
Annexes  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -1 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Annex A: SPRING M&E Partner: Revised 
Terms of Reference (August 2016)  
Introduction  
The Department for International Development (DFID) leads the UK’s work to end extreme poverty,  the Nike 
Foundation works to ‘unleash the unique potential of adolescent girls to end poverty for themselves and for the 
world’ , and USAID’s goals are “ending e xtreme poverty and promoting the development of resilient, democratic 
societies that are able to realize their potential.”  
DFID , the Nike Foundation and USAID are working in partnership to address constraints to the economic 
empowerment of adolescent girl s in developing countries.  Economic empowerment is a high priority for both 
organisations – it is one of the pillars of DFID’s Strategic Vision for Girls and Women, a key commitment in 
DFID’s Business Plan, and ‘e xpanding girls’ direct access to economic a ssets’  is a key pillar of Nike Foundation’s  
Strategy.  USAID prioritizes gender equality, female empowerment and broad -based economic growth, for 
sustainable long -term development.  
This Terms  of Reference sets out the DFID , Nike Foundation  and USAID requirement for a Supplier  to implement 
the independent monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the SPRING Initiative.  
The consortium implementing the programme will be referred to as the ‘implementing partner’ and the 
independent M&E partner will b e referred to as the ‘M&E partner’.  
These Terms of Reference should be read in conjunction with the full Terms of Reference for the implementation 
contract (Annex E) and the Business Case for the  SPRING Programme  (Annex D).  
Revisions to the Terms of Refer ence  
SPRING is an experimental and adaptive programme  that has undergone some design changes during 
implementation  of the first of cohort.  The M&E requirements have also changed, reflecting both the changing 
nature of the Programme and through lessons lea rned from Cohort 1 about how the M&E Partner can better 
support programme implementation, undertake independent evaluation of the Programme and provide relevant 
learning to inform future programming.   
This document  was written at the end of the first coho rt of Implementation and sets out the terms of reference for 
the M&E Partner for the remainder of the Programme.  It reflects changes to the M&E approach agreed at a 
planning workshop with the donors and implementing team that took place on 23 -24 August 201 6.    
Changes to the Implementation of SPRING  
Before the start of Cohort 1, the SPRING team, in coordination with the donors, made a number of important 
changes to the programme design compared to what was originally outlined in the Business Case and SPRI NG 
Terms of Reference. These include:  
• Shortening of accelerator to nine instead of 12 months: The IP’s ToR originally suggested that each 
SPRING cohort phase should last twelve months, followed by a three -month  learning period in between 
cohorts. During I nception, the IP shortened the cohort from twelve to nine months. The reduced timescale, 
alongside the overlap of Cohort 2 and 3 activities, impacts the feasibility of completing some of the originally 
Planned M&E activities – in particular, the collecting  two rounds of Product Effectiveness and Consumer 
Satisfaction Surveys within the Cohort cycle. The Mid Term Review which was originally planned to be 
finalised by the end of Cohort 2, would not be completed in time to inform Cohort 3 and no longer coincid es 
with the true ‘mid -term’ of the programme. Therefore,  reporting timelines have been adapted.  
• Capping the cohort size at 20 businesses: As per the original SPRING ToR cohorts were meant to grow in 
size over the project’s lifetime. The first cohort was m eant to involve 18 businesses; the second at least 30; 
and the third at least 40 businesses.  Change of scope to focus on a minimum of 58 ventures with current 
committed resources (18 in Cohort 1, 20 each in Cohorts 2 and 3) and to fundraise for a Cohort 4  (additional 
20 ventures) was decided after the first bootcamp of Cohort 1. To maximize programme learnings, South 
Asia will be brought forward, and covered earlier through Cohort 2, with expansion into Tanzania and ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -2 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Ethiopia in Cohort 3, and Cohort 4 as a second cohort in South Asia and Myanmar. The addition of a fourth 
cohort will impact on the timelines and deliverables for the M&E partner, and as a result the reporting 
timelines have been refined to allow for adaptation and learning between cohorts.   
Other changes effecting M&E Design  
During first cohort an additional donor, the Australian Department of Foreign Affai rs and Trade (DFAT)  expressed  
interest in providing additional funding for the Programme.  Additional Funding will enable a fourth cohort  of 
activities in at least two countries. The Implementing Partner are tasked with raising additional funds to ensure a 
full fourth cohort covering four countries and supporting a minimum of 20 businesses. The extent of the fourth 
Cohort activities (both i mplementation and M&E activities) will be agreed by June 2017.  
Evaluation Objectives  
Role of the M&E Partner  
Owing to (i) the weak evidence base around interventions that work at scale and sustainably to increase girls’ 
access to assets, and (ii) the expe rimental nature of this initiative, it is critical to learn from both success and 
failure and to develop a body of evidence  on interventions that advance girls’ asset ownership . This body of 
evidence will inform businesses  on how/when to pivot their ventur es, whilst helping stakeholders, such as policy -
makers, practitioners, donors, businesses, investors, incubator/accelerator designers and civil society 
organi sations to understand the value of and most effective approaches to developing assets for girls168.  
This improvement  in the evidence base should  attract new donor and government investment and importantly, 
stimulate private sector investment to improve  girls’ access to and retention of economic assets.  
The M&E will assess the (i) business performance  and (ii) impact  of individual business ventures on girls, 
alongside the (iii) effectiveness of the overall programme . Through the e ffective packaging, communication and 
dissemination  of the evidence and lessons generated , both ‘successes’ and ‘failures’, in ways that are 
compelling and – most importantly – actionable for our varying audiences, this evidence base will aim to deliver 
significant development impact.  
SPRING Programme Design - Background & Context  
The SPRING initiative has been designed to test out how to overcome girls’ inability to own and retain economic 
assets . Whilst data on girls’ asset ownership is scarce, women are estimated to own less than 10% of the world’s 
property169, and there are an estimated 250 million adolescent girls living in poverty globally170. However, there is 
a lack of programmes  that aim to provide economic assets directly to adolescent girls at scale.  As a result, there 
is little evidence to demonstrate what  is (and is not) working to improve girls’ access to and retention of economic 
assets , thereby limiting support from scale investors who require compelling performance results.171  
SPRING  is an accelerator  that identifies and supports business  ventures  (referred to as “businesses” in this 
document)  producing  products that contribut e to girls’ economic empowerment.  Economic empowerment is 
defined as a process that increases girls’ access to and control over economic resources and opportunities. 
Selected  ventu res must have sustainable business models and demonstrate the potential for scale. In so doing, 
the accelerator  will:  
• Develop a pipeline of successful, scalable ventures that impact girls through the delivery of:  
• Products (e.g. economic, digital, sanitary  or otherwise life -enhancing products);  
• Services (e.g. childcare , mobile health advise, etc.) or   
• Business opportunities (i.e. ways of including girls in a business’ value chain).  
Girls can be reached either directly (as purchasers, service providers, micro -entrepreneurs) or indirectly (as users 
or beneficiaries  within a household).  
 
168 Key challenges around M&E in this programme are likely to include: learning from failure, removing the reporting burden 
from businesses , intellectual property owner ship particularly around commercially sensitive data, and using emerging lessons 
and evidence to influence a range of players.  
169Commission for Legal Empowerment of the Poor (2008) ‘ Making the Law work for Everyone’  
170http://www.girleffect.org/learn/faq  
171 See DFID Business Case for detail on the current lack of evidence base in this area  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -3 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
The focus will be on ventures innovating in one of the following ways: creating and implementing new  or 
improved/adapted processes, products, services, methods of delivery or other aspects of the business model 
(e.g. price -point , marketing etc.), in order to reach and impact girls.  
For full programme  background, please see refer to the SPRING Business C ase and Implementing Partner 
Terms of Reference .   
‘Economic Assets’  
For the purposes  of this initiative, we have worked with technical girl experts and defined an ‘economic asset’ as 
a product that addresses either one or both of the following problem sta tements:  
• Girls’ inability to learn and/or earn, without risk.  
For Example:  
• Income -generating products: solar powered mobile charging power blocks, solar powered cooler bags for 
beverage sales & distribution, micro -franchising products 172 
• Time and labour -saving products, giving girls time to earn/stay in school/return to school for future 
employment: low -cost solar lamps, foot -powered washing machines, low -cost bicycles, sanitary products, or 
Micro -franchising  
• Girls’ inability to save, invest and protect their  earnings/assets, without risk.  
For Example:  
• Financial products: innovative savings/remittance products (mobile money), micro -leasing, micro -insurance  
Early -Stage vs Scale Stage Businesses  
 In the original design, it was expected that each accelerator coho rt will be made up of 70 -80% early -stage 
(validation) venture  businesses and 20 -30% late -stage (scale) venture businesses.173 However, learning from 
Cohort 1 indicates that early stage businesses are less able to reach girls at scale, and need greater suppor t with 
basic business  start-up support, leaving less opportunities to focus on prototyping products for girl users. 
Therefore, it is expected that future Cohorts may target larger numbers of scale stage businesses, to ensure the 
target of reaching 200,000 girls is achieved, given the relatively high -risk nature of early -stage businesses.  
The Accelerator Design  
There  will be a minimum of 3 accelerator intakes, each lasting 9 months, with an additional 6 months of 
‘transitional  support’  for businesses. Durin g the 9 months, businesses will receive the following:  
• A grant of up to p to £50,000 GBP which, from Cohort two onwards, will be clearly tied to the purpose of 
prototyping  
• Access to a residential ‘Bootcamp’ in Nairobi or Kathmandu to include masterclasses  in key areas such as 
Business Model Development, KPI setting and M&E, Girl Safety and Technical Expertise, Partnerships, 
Human Centred Product and Business Model Design etc.  
• Access to Research & Human -Centred Design Hubs, during which businesses can prototype and workshop 
their business models and products with girls and experts in -the-field with HCD specialists, Fuse Project  
• Mentors – both an international and local mentor for regular support and advice  
• Ongoing technical assistance as and when requir ed in a variety of areas (business development, KPI 
reporting, partnerships, legal support, girl expertise and safety, marketing and branding etc.)  
• ‘Match -Making’ with NGOs, private and public -sector partners, to leverage existing local distribution and 
manufacturing channels and enabling environment programmes (e.g. safe -space programmes, youth clubs 
etc.) 
• Technical Assistance in investment readiness and master classes in presenting and pitching their business 
to investors  
• Opportunities provided to selecte d businesses to pitch to investors (i.e. through high profile events and 
forums)  
 
172 For example, see http://www.fairbourne.co/  
173 Please reference Acumen’s ‘Blue -print to scale’ report, identifying the 4 key stages of a social enterprise product development, from blueprint to validation,  
preparation and finally to scale.  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -4 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
• Access to an Annual SPRING Event at the end of each cohort, during which businesses share learnings 
from the cohort and celebrate achievements.   
• Business Performance Evaluat ions – to be received by a selection of businesses, enabling them to respond 
and pivot their ventures accordingly (KPI data collected by the Implementing Partner will be collected and 
analysed for all SPRING businesses).  
• M&E ‘Impact Evaluation’ for 3 years  – to be received by a small selection of businesses at the end of each 
cohort  
SPRING Country Focus , Number of Businesses and Programme Duration  
Businesses  may come from anywhere in the world, however their ventures must have a presence in one of 8 
selected countries . The country selection covers East Africa and South Asia in order to produce a robust body of 
evidence, whilst not spreading the Implementing P artner too thin, given the rigorous, local technical assistance 
businesses will require throughout the course of the programme:  
 
SPRING Cohorts  
1 2 3 4 
Kenya  X  X  
Uganda  X  X  
Rwanda  X  X  
Tanzania    X  
Ethiopia    X  
Bangladesh   X  X 
Pakistan   X  X 
Nepal   X  X 
Burma     X 
Total target countries  3 Up to 3  Up to 5  Up to 4  
Total target Businesses  18 20 20 20 
 
The prioritisation  of countries is based on previous scoping work carried out by Hystra, which mapped the 
locations of potential SPRING businesses throughout DFID’s 26 countries (excluding India and South Africa due 
to investment  restrictions from DFID). This mapping of pot ential SPRING businesses was then cross -referenced 
against the location of existing innovation hubs and the presence of vulnerable girls, thereby identifying areas 
with a wealth of potential businesses, an existing pool of innovation hubs and communities t o tap into, and a 
significant number of adolescent girls in need of support.  Uganda and Kenya were identified as countries with the 
greatest number of potential applicants, whilst Rwanda is the location for an existing Girl Hub office, with 
established NG O, public and private sector networks. These 3 countries were therefore chosen for Cohort 1, to 
ensure ease of initial launch and set -up, plus their proximity to one another allows for ease of travel amongst 
Implementing Partner Country Managers whilst the  programme is in ‘start -up’ phase. During the business 
selection process, a portfolio of business ventures with an even spread of product distribution in both rural and 
urban communities in each focus country will be chosen, to ensure a full body of eviden ce. Country coverage for 
Cohort 4 will be confirmed by June 2017 and  may include an additional country that fits with DFAT priorities, 
currently expected to be Myanmar.  
SPRING is resourced to support 58 businesses through three windows of competitive appl ications, and with 
additional donor  funding and if fundraising targets are met, this number will rise to a minimum of 78 businesses.  
The number of businesses per country will be broadly evenly distributed for each cohort, although the number 
and weighting of businesses per country will be dependent on the calibre of applications.  The expansion of the 
programme into additional countries will be subject to a review of the feasibility of geographic expansion after 
each cohort, taking account of how the programme is developing and shifts in co untry contexts.  
Whilst the entire  SPRING  programme will include up to 4 ‘cohorts’ of businesses, there will be 3 -4 months 
between the first two cohorts to review learnings and iterate accordingly.  Cohorts 2 and 3 will overlap, with 
Cohort 3 starting  before Cohort 2 is complete. A fourth Cohort with an additional 20 businesses will be ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -5 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
undertaken if sufficient funds are raised by the Implementing Partner, the total number of countries and 
businesses will be confirmed by June 2017. The entire programme will therefore last around 4 ½ years.  
Who Are the ‘Businesses’?  
The majority  of business applicants will be social entrepreneurs with ventures producing products with a social 
impact for girls. There may also be a small proportion of NGOs producing and distrib uting products with 
sustainable business models.  
The Implementing Partner  
Palladium is the lead Implementing Partner for SPRING, with a supporting consortium of experts in Human 
Centred Design and Incubation Development (Fuse Project), Partnership and Netw ork Development (Context 
Partners), and specialist advisors on social impact investment and working with girls.  The core implementing 
group for cohort 1 was initially based in Nairobi, with Country Managers located in each of the focus countries .  
For sub sequent cohorts the core implementing group will be based in London with team country managers in 
their respective countries.  
The Inception  Phase  for SPRING began in July 2014 . The  accelerator opened for applications in January 2015, 
select ion of business es took place in May 2015 and programme activities with the first cohort  started  in July 2015.  
Cohort 1 applicants graduated in March 2016.  
Targets  
The aim is to support  approximately 78 businesses over the programme lifetime  and reach  up to 200,000 girls  
with products that contribute to their economic and potentially wider empowerment outcomes.  The programme 
will take place over 5 years , starting in 2014, with ongoing M&E taking place over 8 years, ending in 2022 
(including 3 years of impact evaluation fo r a sample of ventures after the programme implementation has ended). 
The programme’s total implementation budget is £ 16,436,037  exclusive of any applicable UK VAT.  
The design phase  research indicates that accelerator activities for early -stage  ventures are resource intensive as 
they require  substantial technical assistance. The geographic spread was recommended to take account  of 
contextual variations that affect which economic asse ts are most beneficial for adolescent girls and how early -
stage business ventures reach scale.  The scale and scope of the programme is large for an experimental 
programme because a large initial investment was considered necessary to be able to observe re sults and collect 
evidence of successful strategies for adolescent girls to acquire and retain assets.   
Theory of Change  
Since the publication of the Business Case, SPRING has gone through several design changes. Its original focus 
on getting “direct econ omic assets ” was broadened to include a wider range of products (e.g. economic, digital,  
sanitary  or otherwise  life-enhancing products), services (e.g. childcare, mobile health advise, etc.) and business 
opportunities (i.e. ways of including girls in a bus iness’ value chain). It considers solutions that can reach girls 
either directly (as purchasers or participants) or indirectly (as users or beneficiaries within a household). This 
broadening of scope enabled SPRING to attract a larger number of applicant b usinesses with a diversity of 
product offering s.   
It will also be important  to distinguish its two underpinning theories:  
• the Action Theory that tells us how an intervention has worked to bring about the desired change (or indeed 
other changes, positive or negative)  
• the Causal Mechanism Theory that tells us why this is so.  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -6 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
 
Revised SPRING Theory of Change [revised April 2015]  
 
Links with other programmes or interventions: As described in the accompanying Business Case, this intervention 
is exp erimental in nature, and complements a range of DFID -supported programmes  including the World Bank 
Africa Gende r Innovation Lab , the Joint Ventures for Prosperity (JVP) programme , the Global Girls Research 
initiative (GGRI  is also Nike supported ), the Girls Education Challenge Fund  and Start Up!. Globally, however, 
there are few girls' economic empowerment initiatives , and the generation of adequate robust evidence through 
evaluation has not so far been achieved. This evalu ation aims to contribute much needed evidence and data on 
the effectiveness and impacts of innovation and incubation programmes aimed at girls’ economic empowerment.   
The Recipient  
The principal recipients of this service will be DFID, the Nike Foundation  and USAID . The Implementing Partner 
will benefit from recommendations and lessons generated by a review of programme level activities.  Selected 
businesses  of the programme  may also benefit from the on -going M&E which will deliver business -relevant, 
perfo rmance evaluations , and / or rigorous impact evaluations which will determine the impacts on girl recipients 
for a selection of businesses. Potential future investors in the business ventures are also an important audience.  
Evidence and lessons generated b y the programme will be publicly available, in order to both contribute to the 
global evidence  base on interventions to economically empower adolescent girls  and to stimulate investment in 
the space, with the aim of kick -starting a market for girls.  
In addition  to the programme  donors, implementers and participants (businesses, mentors and others), the 
principal users  of the evidence will be:  
• Policymakers and practitioners improving the economic and wider empowerment outcomes for girls and 
women, or suppor ting private sector development, social enterprise and private sector innovation.  
ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -7 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
• Current and potential businesses (early stage enterprises) and other businesses with an interest in girls and 
women and/or specific sectors, countries and business models inc luded in the programme.  
• Current and potential investors with an interest in girls and women and/or specific sectors, countries and 
business models included in the programme.  
• Other incubators, accelerators and challenge funds that can learn from the program me model.  
The scope and requirements  
Monitoring Requirements  
As will be detailed in the sections below (see specifically, Business Performance Evaluations and Governance 
Arrangements sections), the Implementing Partner is responsible for collecting most of the monitoring data. The 
M&E Partner will be responsible for  conducting quality assurance checks on this data and ensuring that it can be 
used as part of the evaluation.  It is a joint responsibility of the Implementing Partner and M&E Partner to update 
and review the programme logframe. The Implementing Partner ar e responsible for ‘owning’ and reporting 
against the logframe, drawing on M&E data where available.  
Evaluation Requiremen ts  
There are four main components of the evaluation activity, as illustrated in the diagram below.   
 
The M&E partner will be respon sible for the development and implementation of the evaluation methodologies to 
deliver each o f these components, a detailed approach and methodology for each component  is outlined in the 
SPRING M&E Inception Report (Finalised in November  2015). A Summary of each Component is provided 
below:  
Programme Performance Evaluation (PPE)174 
Purpose and Objectives of the PPE : The PPE focuses on assessing the effectiveness and delivery of SPRING 
as a whole. It will synthesise findings and lessons learned from the Impact Evaluation and Business Performance 
Evaluation  and provide regular recommendations to adapt the SPRING design and delivery between cohorts. 
This will also involve the M&E partner working closely with the Implementing Partner to provide regular  
recommendations for programme adaptation in order to achieve the greatest impact on SPRING Businesses  and 
ultimately, girls. The PPE is primarily a process evaluation.  
It will consider issues such a s the type of support provided to businesses, including appropriate amounts of 
capital and quality of technical assistance, and the  effectiveness of the implem entation team in  facilitation of 
private/ voluntary  sector partnerships,  enhancing business development and  creating markets for girls’ products.  
 
174 This evaluation will also be used to inform our decision on the continuation of the implementation contract wit h the appointed supplier . 
ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -8 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
The PPE will draw on all other components of the M&E framework175, and may use m eta-analysis drawing on 
quantitat ive and qualitative techniques to form summary conclusions.  
The PPE will also include the monitoring of ‘in -kind’ fundraising – assessing the effectiveness of the SPRING 
Implementing  Partner in raising funding from sponsors and, in particular, monitoring t he in -kind technical 
assistance contributions, which will need to be monetized in order to be matched -funded.  
PPE Evaluation Questions  
Impact Evaluation questions  Relevance  How successfully has SPRING identified and addressed business needs?  
Did SPRING select the right businesses to achieve the programme goals?  
To what extent has the design of SPRING met the needs of business businesses?  
How successfully is SPRING targeting adolescent girls at the BoP  
Who are the SPRING target girls?  
To what extent did SPRING encourage businesses to strengthen their focus on adolescent girls?  
How well did the programme encourage the engagement and participation of girls to inform 
product design or business model developments?  Effectiveness  Did SPRING enable businesses to develop prototypes that meet girls’ needs?  
What is Human -Centred Design in SPRING?  
What extent and how did the SPRING businesses absorb and apply HCD training?  
How could SPRING further improve the effectiveness of HCD?  
To what extent did in SPRING help businesses improve their investment readiness?  
How effective was the technical support provided in country?  
How effective was the SPRING Mentoring Support?  
How effective was the combination of local and global support?  
To what extent did participation in SPRING help businesses increase sales from their 
SPRING product, service, or business model?  
To what extent did participation in SPRING help businesses improve their reach of 
adolescent girls?  
Which (combi nation of) accelerator components were most effective in improving 
business performance?  
How effective was SPRING in comparison to other accelerators?  
How effective was the internal M&E of SPRING?  Efficienc
y Was SPRING delivered efficiently?  
Were accelerator activities delivered on time?  
Did SPRING leverage additional resources?  Learning  To what extent has SPRING adapted and with what effect?  
What does adaptation mean in the context of SPRING?  
Restructuring of the project Team and relocation from Nairobi to London  
Aspects of learning that SPRING could improve  
 
 
 ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -9 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Summary PPE Methodology: a detailed outline of the PPE methodology is provided in the SPRING M&E 
Inception Report (page 34 - 36), and the PPE Concept note in Annex A.  A summary of the data collection 
methods suggested are provided below:  
• Review and analysis of key programme docume nts collated by the IP  – Including Application Forms, 
Shortlisting Documents, Business Information Forms, Key Performance Indicators, and programme  
management documents..  
• Primary Data Collection  - The above -mentioned secondary data will be triangulated with primary data 
collection to account for a range of different perspectives when answering the evaluation questions.  This will 
include Semi Structured interviews with SPRING Donors, the Implementing Partner and other key 
stakeholders, SPRING businesses, and  observation of Key IP activities (i.e. Boot Camp). Surveys will be 
conducted with all SPRING businesses at the end of each Boot Camp, and at the end of the Cohort to 
capture the businesses’ initial expectations with regards to the accelerator support; the ir satisfaction with the 
support provided; and their progress during the cohort phase.  
• Programme Level Analysis of other Evaluation Components  - The Business Performance Evaluation 
and Impact Evaluations will generate additional data which will feed into t he PPE when available. This will 
include analysis of the KPI data reported to the Implementing Partner  for all businesses, and Baseline data 
(and if available endline data) collected from six businesses.  
The PPE will use all available information on a coh ort to assess all SPRING interventions affecting the SPRING 
businesses , including the selection process, technical assistance delivery, management, performance  and effects 
on girls.  
Summary of PPE Timelines : The PPE will provide a review at the end of each  cohort of businesses.  
Business  Performance  Evaluation (BPE)  
Purpose and Objectives of the BPE Component: These evaluations will provide a mechanism for learning 
lessons and understanding “what is happening and why”176 within the business es operations and performance.  
They aim to assess how the businesses have adapted as a result of SPRING, and how this has helped or 
hindered their success in reaching Adolescent Girls, whether SPRING has enabled them to create viable 
business models to deliver products and services that benefit girls. These evaluations will draw on a range of 
data collected by both the Implementing Partner and the M&E Partner.  
IP Responsibilities :   
• The Implementing Partner will support businesses to develop their own inform ation and monitoring systems 
aligned to their business needs, and their theories of change for benefitting adolescent girls. These will track 
core quantitative business performance metrics (KPIs) such as sales revenue, profits, new investment, 
unique custo mers, and girl beneficiaries. Potentially, if appropriate, they may include qualitative metrics such 
as the results of periodic consumer product testing. Businesses will develop the specific details of their 
monitoring systems with support from the Impleme nting Partner during the initial Bootcamp.  
• The Implementing Partner will also produce M&E guidance and tools to ensure consistent reporting and 
understanding of the IP M&E requirements across the cohort.  
M&E Partner Responsibilities:  
• The M&E Partner will  work with the Implementing Partner before the start of cohort 2 to review and refine 
the format of the KPI measurement forms and other ways in which business operations information will be 
collected.  
• The M&E Partner will analyse the KPI and business oper ations data collated by the Implementing Partner, 
to answer BPE evaluation questions. The M&E partner will also conduct spot -checks of this data for quality 
assurance purposes.  
• The M&E Partner will conduct case studies for one third of all businesses to a ssess how they adopt and 
apply the SPRING support provided to develop a viable prototype that meets girls’ needs.   
 
176 Werner, Alan (2004) A Guide to Implementation Research.  Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -10 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Key evaluation questions relevant to the BPE are shown in the table below:  
Evaluation questions   Sub-questions  BPE activity  
Analysis 
of KPI 
data & 
spot 
checks  Case 
studies  
Relevance  
How successfully  is SPRING 
targeting adolescent girls at the 
BoP?  How successfully did SPRING encourage 
businesses to strengthen their focus on 
adolescent girls?   ✓  
To what extent have SPRING businesses 
considered the needs  of adolescent girls at the 
BoP when developing their business models?   ✓  
Effectiveness  
Did SPRING enable 
businesses to develop 
prototypes that meet girls’ 
needs?  To what extent and how did the SPRING businesses 
absorb and apply HCD  training to develop a 
prototype that meets girls’ needs?   ✓  
To what extent have businesses improved their 
investment readiness?  ✓  ✓  
To what extent did participation in SPRING help 
businesses increase sales  from their SPRING 
product, service, or business model?  ✓   
To what extent did participation in SPRING help 
businesses improve their reach  of adolescent girls?  ✓   
What works in reaching adolescent girls at the 
BoP with products, services or business 
opportunities?   ✓  
What are the key contextual factors  that have 
helped or hindered businesses from reaching girls at 
scale?   ✓  
Sustainability  
Has SPRING stimulated new 
players and innovation to 
promote the continued growth 
of markets for products, 
services and business models 
benefitting girls, beyond the 
business ventures? (Source: 
ToR)  How many ventures are operating two years after  
they graduate from the cohort? (Sour ce: ToR)  ✓   
To what extent do businesses continue to focus on 
adolescent girls at the BoP after they graduate from 
the cohort?  ✓   
To what extent have business ventures increased to 
scale  and / or entered new markets?  ✓   
Learning  
What are the lessons learned 
from SPRING?  What are the challenges  that businesses faced in 
developing the 'right' products, services and 
business models to benefit girls and how where they 
overcome? (Source: ToR)   ✓  
What lessons can be learned  for future cohorts?   ✓  
 ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -11 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Summary of BPE Methodology: The methodology for the BPE component has been revised  following lessons 
learned from Cohort 1 – therefore, the SPRING M&E Inception Report (pages 36 – 40) no longer presents  an 
accurate reflection of the BPE methodology. A concept note outlining the rationale for the Cohort 1 design, and 
suggestions for Coho rt 2 amendments is included in Annex B.  
• Analysis and comparison  of quantitative Key Performance Indicators  and qualitative business 
operations data collated by the Implementing Partner from all businesses. The analysis will help answer the 
evaluation quest ions around whether or not businesses have: increased their sales (as a measure of their 
viability and potential to scale up); increased their reach of adolescent girls at the Base of the Pyramid; and 
whether they have  raised new investment. This analysis will be completed for all businesses, and will feed 
into the assessment of programme performance as part of the PPE component.  
• To ensure that the KPI data is of sufficient quality to be used in the evaluation, the M&E Partner will quality 
assure / spot -check a sample of data provided by businesses in each cohort 177. Areas of focus when 
conducting the spot check will include: Reviewing the tools and processes used by businesses to record and 
track data; clear and consistent use of beneficiary definitions; com pliance with SPRING reporting 
requirements; challenges faced in completing the KPI forms or recording data. Spot Checks  will be 
conducted with approximately  one third of businesses, if there are consistent issues with data quality across 
the selected busin esses, this may be extended to the full cohort of businesses. If the Spot Checks identify 
gaps or a need for additional support to accurately capture and report KPI data, this will be communicated to 
the Implementing Partner for further action. As part of the visit or during follow -up conversations  the M&E 
Partner may provide some advice on how to strengthen reporting going forward, where this is considered 
appropriate. This will be done in coordination with the Implementing Partner. Findings from the Spot Checks 
will be used to inform any necessary changes to the KPI forms of M&E Guidance Documents.   
• Detailed case studies  for approximately one third of businesses, assessing whether businesses have (or 
have not) used the support provided by SPRING to improv e their business performance and reach of 
adolescent girls, and how this has happened. Although part of the BPE, these case studies will provide 
valuable evidence and illustrations to the Programme Performance Evaluation. Case Study research will 
involve  a range of data collection methods, including a desk -based  review of documents collected by the IP 
(including KPIs), in -depth interviews with relevant stakeholders, and review of secondary data collected by 
businesses where available.  
• Follow up with Alumni  Businesses will form part of the Case Study Review (covering approximately one third 
of businesses), as many businesses may only see an increase in their sales, reach of girls, and girl impact 
after the cohort phase has ended, and the Implementing Partner  has committed to compiling KPI data for 
another two years after the end of a cohort which will enable the M&E partner to continue to monitor 
business progress.    
• Additionally, the M&E Partner will follow up with a selection of businesses one year after t hey have 
graduated to ensure longer -term changes are captured through qualitative interviews.  Following up with 
SPRING Alumni after graduation will also be important to capture whether SPRING has had a sustained 
impact on the business models (i.e. whether  businesses retain their focus on adolescent girls and continue  
to grow), and whether businesses have seen any replication effects or crowding -in of other market actors 
around providing girl -focused solutions.  In -depth phone Interviews will be conducted w ith the selected 
alumni businesses, this will primarily be with the one third of selected businesses selected for case studies, 
unless particularly interesting stories are identified within another business model not originally selected for 
the BPE Case St udy research.  
The M&E Partner will collate all data – from case study research and surveys, and that collated by the 
Implementing Partner - and compile a Business Performance Evaluation Report at the end of each Cohort. The 
reports will respond  to Evaluati on Questions (outlined above) around business performance, including the 
businesses success or failure to reach girls’, challenges faced by the businesses in developing and distributing 
products and services for girls, progress in growing and reaching girls at scale. Where feasible, the reports will 
provide recommendations on ways to iterate or pivot their ventures to better meet the needs of girls or  scale up 
their businesses.    
BPE Timelines : Revisions to the BPE Approach will be set out in a concise Concept Note and the selection of 
Businesses for Case Study Research will be agreed following Boot Camp 1 in each cohort. BPE Reports will be 
 
177 The timing and ability of the M&E partner to conduct spot checks is dependent on the Implementing Partn er ensuring businesses collect the data, report it to 
the IP, and pass the data on to the M&E team.  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -12 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
provided no later than 4 months after the end of each c ohort, with short follow up communication products with 
selected businesses 1 year after Cohort completion. The reports will form an annex of each Cohort Synthesis 
report.  
Impact Evaluations (IE) of a strategic selection of SPRING Businesses  
Purpose and O bjectives of the IE: The IE will assess whether adolescent girls have improved their economic 
and social outcomes as a result of accessing products  or services provided  by SPRING.  It will provide information 
on: 
• Girls  – have economic and social outcomes  for girls improved as a result of receiving products and assets 
delivered by the programme businesses? Outcomes include not just economic outcomes but also wider 
outcomes on safety, wellbeing and freedom from violence, early and forced marriage and female genital 
mutilation.  
• Markets  – have the businesses  stimulated new players and innovation in their markets to encourage 
investment in products that improve outcomes for girls?  
• Programme  - how well does the programme deli ver positive outcomes for girls through the delivery of direct 
assets or participation  within the value chain compared to other economic empowerment programmes 
targeted at girls?  
Key Evaluation Questions  answered through the IE : 
Impact Evaluation question s Effectiveness  To what extent have adolescent girls accessed SPRING products, services or business 
opportunities?  
What works in reaching adolescent girls at the BoP with products, services or business 
opportunities?  
What are the key contextual factors that have helped or hindered businesses from 
reaching girls at scale?  Impact  To what extent have girls improved their earnings and savings as a result of accessing 
products, services or business opportunities provided by SPRING business es? 
To what extent have girls improved their life and employability skills a as a result of 
accessing products, services or business opportunities provided by SPRING 
businesses?  
To what extent have girls improved their safety and well -being as a result  of accessing 
products, services or business opportunities provided by SPRING businesses?  
What are the key contextual factors that helped or hindered girls in accessing and using 
products, services and business opportunities provided by SPRING businesses ? 
To what extent have benefits experienced by girls and their household promoted the 
girls' broader economic empowerment?  
How well does the programme deliver positive outcomes for girls through the delivery of 
direct assets compared to other economic empowerment programmes targeted at girls?  
 
Summary IE Methodology: A detailed outline of the Methodology is provided in the S PRING M&E Inception 
Report (pages 41 – 45), and in the IE Concept Note for Cohort 1 in Annex C. A Summary is provided below.  
• Business Selection for IE: There will be a total of six SPRING Businesses selected for impact evaluations, 
with two in the first co hort, two in the second, and two in the third. Each Impact Evaluation will last a total of 
up to 3 years, with an additional 4 - 6 months up -front for evaluation design work.  A number of factors 
including, for example, the ability to trace the girls and r e-contact them in the future and the length of time in 
which the intended benefits are expected to be realised will determine the length of the impact evaluation for 
each specific business. The inclusion on Impact Evaluations for Cohort 4 will depend on av ailable budget 
and feasibility of timescales.  
• The selection of SPRING businesses to participate in impact evaluation will completed in consultation with 
the IP.  The selected businesses will be the stronger performing ones, most likely to reach scale, give n the 
need to collect data and follow up on outcomes for up to three years after the accelerator programme. It will ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -13 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
also be important to select businesses that will have a sufficiently deep impact on the girls to ensure it is 
traceable and detectable. For example, while access to clean, bottled water may improve a girls’ health 
outcomes, the specific improvement attribu ted to the SPRING product is likely to be too small to detect and 
distinguish.  
The selection should also maximise potential for learning fo r a broad range of future interventions. To 
achieve this the businesses selected for the Impact Evaluation should include a range of countries, 
market sectors and business models (including those that impact upon girls through different channels 
e.g. as us ers, indirect users or through participation in the value chain).  The M&E Partner will work 
with the IP to select business that upon a number of criteria including:   
• Business  and Product Stage  
• Potential  to reach scale  
• Girl impact  potential  
• Supporting bu sinesses to Measure Girl Impact: One of the lessons learned from Cohort 1 was that many 
businesses would have liked to capture some evidence of their impact on girls’ lives, to assess the 
effectiveness of their product, service, or business model, and to b e able to showcase their impact to 
potential investors . In response to this learning, the Implementing Partner will work with SPRING 
Businesses to develop and refine theories of change for each business , to ensure a clear understanding of 
the intended impa cts on girls. The Implementing Partner is planning to provide support to businesses during 
Bootcamp 1 to develop these theories of change, in addition to providing training in correctly measuring 
beneficiaries, and tracking data using the KPI forms.  
• The M &E partner will then support businesses to develop systems to accurately capture signs of early girl 
impact (using qualitative or quantitative methods, depending on the businesses’ resources and capacity). 
The M&E partner will deliver a collective training  session at Boot Camp 2 for all businesses on how to 
capture Girl Impact. Following this, a ‘help desk’ service will be provided by the M&E partner in the form of 
up to 1 day of remote support to businesses who are interested in developing appropriate meas urement 
systems and tools to capture girl impact stories. Encouraging businesses to collect this data will help the 
M&E partner’s selection of businesses to receive the Impact Evaluation, as well as the research design. This 
evidence can also help SPRING s howcase early signs of girl impact, while the summative findings from the 
M&E partner’s impact evaluations will only become available after a significant time delay.  
Data Collection Methods: The Impact Evaluations will be designed and tailored to the indi vidually selected 
business, but will include a mix of quantitative surveys , and qualitative in -depth interviews  and focus groups  
to both quantify changes in outcomes and explore how and why these have or have not come about. Surveys will 
include a standard  module of questions to ask across all six impact evaluations, with the remainder of questions 
tailored to the way in which the girl is intended to benefit, the type of product, service, of business engagement, 
the delivery mechanism, business model and se ctor of the business. Where available, primary data will be 
triangulated with secondary analysis of data collected by the businesses themselves if this exists.  This may 
include access to information on girls’ access to products and services.  
In order to evaluate the SPRING Impact on wider target markets , qualitative evidence will be collected through 
in-depth interviews with entrepreneurs within the relevant sector, covering a mix of factors, including product type, 
sector, and business model. Qualitative  data will be supplemented with relevant national economic statistics and 
data from the BPE.  
IE Timelines : The selection for the Impact Evaluation will take place towards the middle of the cohort to enable 
any ‘late bloomers’ that emerge during the accelerator programme to be included. This would be completed 
following the Second Boot Camp.  
Impact measurement support will be provided during Boot Camp 2, and up to 1 day per business of ‘Help Desk’ 
support from the end of Boot Camp 2 to the end of the Cohort.  
Timelines for completing Baseline and Endline data collection are dependent on each individual businesses 
and their progress in prototyping and disturbing their product / service, however, it is envisaged that Baseline 
Reports will be submitted at  the end of each Cohort for selected businesses, with Endline follow -up research 
completed up to 3 years after the Cohort.   
Effective packaging, dissemination and communication  
Disseminating the evidence and lessons learned to a wide range of stakeholders in relevant and compelling 
formats, to influence their activities and result in behaviour change.  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -14 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
The learnings must include both success and failures, ensuring internal and external audiences a re learning what 
has and has not worked  and importantly why, in an educative and transparent manner. Internal audiences include 
existing and potential businesses, implementing partner and funding partners. It will be critical for the M&E 
partner to reach d iverse audiences with engaging and innovative techniques to ensure engagement and uptake 
from varying audiences (policy makers, private sector investors, SPRING businesses etc.) e.g. dashboards, data 
visualisation, seminars, communicating to investors, pap ers, events etc.  
The M&E Partner should draw out the connections between all the evaluation components to capture the overall 
narrative  of the types of products that have the most potential to transform the lives of adolescent girls and how 
these products can be effectively developed, marketed and distributed at scale.    
Evaluation  Criteria:  draws on principles from recognised  international standards.  The questions and activities for 
each  of the evaluation components can be grouped under the OECD -DAC DCED  criteria, with an additional 
criterion for learning. An Evaluation Framework was developed during the Inception Phase and  will be regularly 
reviewed and refined to ensure the evaluation focus remains relevant to the intended users.  
Cross -cutting Issues:  The programme  has a focused  girls’ economic empowerment objective, so the evaluation 
will need to focus on gender impacts. The other cross -cutting issues that may be of particular relevance include:  
• Poverty:  while there is an explicit  attempt to target dis advantaged girls, it is not clear how far the 
interventions will reach the poorest, the M&E partner should assess how far the programme addresses the 
needs of the poorest and make recommendations to increase this impact in the business performance and 
programme evaluations.  
• Climate and environment:  it is anticipated that at least some of the business ventures will include products 
such as solar lamps  or other renewable energy technologies, as these are time and labour saving devices 
for girls.  The evaluat ion could assess whether encouraging the development of markets in these products 
has broader environmental implications.  
• HIV prevalence and other health outcomes:  there is a strong body of research evidence on the economic 
empowerment of women and girls leading to better health outcomes.   
Following the completion of each cohort of activities, the M&E partner will review progress in answering the 
evaluation questions, changes to the Implementation of SPRING, and lessons learned from activities completed  
to date to refine the M&E approach if required. Any changes to the approach will require approval from the Donor 
Partners. The Evaluation Questions and overall Evaluation Framework will be revisited and refined on a regular 
basis (no less than once per coho rt) to ensure the evaluation remains focused and relevant to the needs of the 
evaluation users.  
Data and methodology   
A Detailed Methodology for SPRING M&E can be found in SPRING M&E Inception Report (Pages 34 – 55). 
Where changes to the methodology  have occurred, these will be recorded in Bi -Annual Reports, and where 
necessary  detailed concepts notes, which are reviewed and approved by the Donor team.  
  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -15 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
 
Figure 1: Data  sets checklist  
DATA SETS  M&E 
Partner  Imp. 
Partner  Frequency of data collection  
Business Performance Evaluation: Business 
KPI Baselines   X Once per Cohort  
Business Performance Evaluation: Business 
KPIs   X Twice per cohort (start and end of 
cohort) and for two years after 
accelerator programme has ended  
Business Performance Evaluation: Business 
Operations Data   X Twice per cohort (start and end of 
cohort)  
 
Business Performance Evaluation: Qualitative 
Feedback on businesses    
X Twice per cohort (at six-month  
intervals)  
Business Performance Evaluation: Qualitative 
and quantitative case study data  X  Data collected on on -going basis 
during cohort  
Impact Evaluation Baselines  X  Once per Cohort  
Impact Evaluation Endlines  X  Up to three years after each cohort 
(timings dependent on the selected 
business).  
Satisfaction surveys of businesses to inform 
the PPE component  X  End of Boot Camp and end of Cohort  
Qualitative stakeholder interviews to inform the 
Programme Performance Evaluation  X  Once per cohort  
 
As can be seen from the table above, there are multiple sets of data to be collected from the business ventures 
and data will be collected on each indicator at least once every six months.  Innovations in data collection 
systems  to decrease the burden of r eporting are encouraged. The M&E partner should propose ways in which 
they would design this data collection process so that it is as light -touch as possible and not burdensome on the 
reporters.   
Governance arrangements  
The M&E team will report to the Do nor Management Team, which will include representation from DFID, the Nike 
Foundation  and USAID.  The Donor Management Team will have decision -making powers on a range of issues 
including budgetary matters, evaluation design, selection of impact evaluation s, timing of fieldwork, commenting 
on draft reports and communication.  
The M&E Team’s  day to day point of contact with the Donor Management Team will be the Economic Advisor 
managing the SPRING Programme  in DFID, with regular catch ups (monthly or other frequency) with DFID and 
USAID.  
In addition to the Donor Management Team, the SPRING P rogramme has an Advisory Group (see Annex F for 
programme  governance arrangements).  The Steering Committee is convened once every six months and will 
include external evaluation and results experts.  The evaluation team will be invited to participate  in the Advisory 
Group session for the Annual Review of SPRING, to provide highlights of findings from evaluation activities.     
Division of Labour between Implementing Partner and M&E Partner  
Given the requirement for ongoing collaboration between the Impleme nting Partner and M&E Partner, we 
propose the creation of a core Knowledge Management/M&E Management Team, consisting of key members of 
both parties, to meet regularly and discuss progress on all elements of business tracking, market assessment and ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -16 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
packagi ng/dissemination of learnings. This will ensure that both parties are aware of significant learnings in a 
timely manner to allow  for programme adaptation and to provide businesses with appropriate technical assistance 
as and when required.  
The Implementin g Partner, including  their country managers, will provide logistical support (excluding financial 
costs) to the M&E partner team as needed during the programme.   
The following  diagram illustrates the division of labour, along with shared responsibilities and deliverables of the 
Implementing Partner and M&E Partner , plus a proposed working structure:  
Reporting  
The following reporting  schedule  applies to the work set out above:  
Progress Reports  
Report  Summary of content  
Quarterly Reporting  Every Quarter the M&E partner will present progress in the previous quarter against each 
evaluation component, and plans / priorities for the next quarter. To reduce reporting burden, 
these will be presented in person or via video conference rather than as  a written report.  
Bi-Annual Reports (due 
every April)  The report will include: progress to date and activities planned for the next reporting period; 
review of monitoring data collection by the IP; results and recommendations, management 
issues such as contract amendments, personnel changes, or changes to the  evaluation 
strategy; financial management, spend to date and forecasted spend; risk management; 
lessons learned.  
Annual Reports (due 
every October)   The Annual Report will provide inputs into the SPRING Annual Review where relevant, and 
financial inform ation on contract expenditure to date will be reported.   
Evaluation Reports  
Midterm Review (March  
2017)  To ensure that results and findings to date are presented before the March 2017 break clause 
and start of Cohort 3, a report outlining the lessons and findings gathered to date will be 
submitted following the Annual Review in November 2016. This will provi de an overview of the 
changes implemented in Cohort 2 and the impact of these changes, satisfaction of SPRING 
businesses to date, and recommendations for Cohort 3 (due to start by March 2017).   
Cohort Synthesis 
Reviews178 
(up to 4 months after 
each cohort)   
A synthesis review of all available data will be provided no later than 4 months following the 
completion of each SPRING Cohort. This will be made up of a summary document outlining 
 
178 Note that during Cohort 1 separate reports were submitted for PPE, BPE, and IE. These will be consolidated into one report pe r year from Cohort 2 onwards  to 
reduce the overall number of reports produced for SPRING M&E.  M&E Partner
•M&E Plan (including evaluation 
questions & framework)
•Evaluation activities (PPE, BPE, 
IE)
•Feedback to IP to enable 
adaptation
•Refining Theory of Change
•Supporting design of KPI and BO 
forms
•QA and analysis of KPI and BO 
data
•Communicating Evaluation 
EvidenceJoint responsibilities
•Selecting grantees for evaluation 
activities
•Refining / Developing log frame
•Facilitating discussions about 
adaptation
•Packaging and dissemination of 
learningImplementing Partner
•Collecting & compiling KPI and 
business operations data
•Girl research 
•HCD tracker
•Investment readiness checklist
•Sharing project documentation
•Facilitating access to businesses
•Building grantee M&E capacity
•Qualitative research / knowledge 
products
•Branding and communications to 
draw in applications and 
awaneness of SPRING
•Reporting against DFID logframeANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -17 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
key findings and recommendations (approx. 20 pages), drawing in f indings from all evaluation 
components.  
Detailed findings for each component will form the annexes for this report – including:  
• Findings from the PPE process evaluation  to outline what worked 
well or could be improved in terms of the design and delivery o f 
SPRING  
• BPE Case Studies  detailing the business models, target markets, 
prototyping progress, challenges in reaching girls, lessons learned will 
be provided for one third of businesses.  
• Impact Evaluation findings  to date, p resenting the methodology 
used a nd findings of the impact evaluation baseline / endline research 
for selected businesses . 
Final Impact Synthesis 
Report  (2022)  A final report synthesizing all Impact Evaluation findings will be provided upon completion of 
the final Impact Evaluation.  
 
Other standard  reporting will involve  submission of the following to DFID  and USAID : 
• Accurate  financial forecasts for M&E contract spending due one month prior to milestone due dates   
• The inception  report was due no later than six months after the contract start date, the first draft was 
submitted in June 2015, and formally approved in November 20 15. 
Communication and dissemination of findings  
As outlined in the Requirements  section above, packaging, dissemination and communication of the evidence 
and lessons  learned to a wide range of stakeholders in relevant and compelling formats will be a key r ole for the 
evaluation.  
The learnings must include  both success and failures, ensuring internal and external audiences are learning what 
has and has not worked and importantly why, in an educative and transparent manner. Internal audiences include 
existing  and potential businesses , implementing partner and funding partners. It will be critical for the M&E 
partner to reach diverse audiences with engaging and innovative techniques to ensure engagement and uptake 
from varying audiences (policy makers, private sector investors, businesses  etc.) e.g.  dashboards, data 
visualisation, seminars, communicating to investors, papers, events etc . 
Constraints and dependencies  
All of the M&E activities must be complete by mid -2022 (see timeline below). The supplier will b e required to work 
closely  with the implementing  partner on all aspects of the M&E, including for example, drawing on self -reported 
business  monitoring data collated by the implementing partner, and using the digital platform and events 
managed by the implementing partner for the dissemination and communication of lessons and evidence.  
A contract will be issued for the full 8 year duration of the monitoring and evaluation activities, however, there will 
be two formal break points in the contract at the independent mid -term evaluation of the programme ( March  
2017) and at the end of the implementation phase (April 2018 or January 2019). Progressi on to subsequent 
phases will be subject to the outcomes of reviews, satisfactory performance of the Supplier and agreement to any 
revised work plans or budgets.  
DFID , in consultation with Nike Foundation, USAID and DFAT,  reserve the right to scale back or discontinue this 
programme at any point (in line with DFID  Terms and Conditions) if it is not achieving the results anticipated. 
Conversely, DFID  may also scale up or extend the life of the programme should it prove to be having a strong 
impact and has the  potential to yield better results.  ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -18 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Time frame  
The M&E for the (5 year) programme will take place over 8 years, involving 3 or 4 phases of impact evaluations (depending upon subsequent funding) which 
will track the cohorts of businesses , including beyond their ‘ business  programme’. The programme will support approximately 80 businesses  over the 3  or 4 
cohorts. The  following diagram sets out a revised timeline for the M&E. Endline data collection will be dependent upon the specific project.  Dates presented 
represent maximum duration from baseline to endline. Cohort 4 activities and timelines  are included for reference, but the level of inputs will be dependent on 
additional funding, and final cohort composition.  
 
Cohort 1
Cohort 2
Cohort 3
Cohort 4
Final synthesis and Close out
Timeline notes Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec JFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASOND
Evaluation Design and background research Throughout cohort
Process Review: Fieldwork and Surveys Throughout cohort
Data Analysis End of Cohort
PPE Findings Presentation / Report 1 month after Cohort
Mid Term Review Report Feb-17
Learning and Dissemination Post-Cohort
Final Synthesis (End of Programme) Oct-19
Selection of BPE businesses During Boot Camp 1
BPE Design and Approach1 month after Boot 
Camp
Case Study / other research conducted Throughout cohort + 
one yr
Anaysis and QA of KPI data 6 monthly 
Presention of findings and recommendations End of Cohort + 1 yr 
Selection of IE Businesses Boot Camp 2
Background review, evaluability assessments, 
and research design2 months after BC2
Baseline data collection (indicative) TBD prior to BC2
Baseline findings presented (indicative) TBD prior to BC2
Endline data collection (indicative) TBD prior to BC2
Endline findings presented (indicative) TBD prior to BC22020 2021PPE BPE2018 2019IEActivities2016 2017ANNEX A - REVISED TER MS OF REFERENCE (JUL Y 2016)  
ANNEX A -19 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Risks and challenges  
The main challenge to implementing the Monitoring and Evaluation(s) component is the complexity of managing 
multiple and overlapping processes with varied methodologies: varied depending on the purpose of the 
evaluation component and varied  depending on each business ’s initiative. Given the experimental nature of the 
program, the M&E partn er will need to be responsive as the program adapts and is implemented, for example, 
the spread of businesses  across different countries will not be pre -defined at the outset of the program and 
development of the M&E plan.  
Moreover, the M&E Partner  will n eed to work in a highly collaborative fashion with the Implementing Partner 
throughout the 5 year programme, ensuring the data collation process is working smoothly for businesses  and 
that programme learnings are shared in a timely fashion, enabling the Im plementing team to pivot accordingly.  
Some other risks and challenges that the M&E partner may face are that the business ventures might not survive 
the length of the programme as these are early stage businesses, some which may fail, so tracking effects over 
time will be difficult.  This risk is mitigated by trying to ensure that the most promising business ventures are 
selected for impact evaluation.   
Data Security  
A key priority for this programme will be to manage the security of businesses’ i ntellectual property , made 
available for the purposes of M&E. The proposal should set out how the M&E partner will work with the 
Implementing  Partner to build relationships of trust with businesses in order to be able to collect data and prote ct 
commercially  sensitive information and intellectual  property of the business ventures.  
Duty of Care  
The Supplier  is responsible for the safety and well -being of their Personnel  (as defined in Section 2 of the 
Framework Agreement)  and Third Parties affected by their activities under this Call-down contract, including 
appropriate security  arrangements. They will also be responsible for the provision of suitable security 
arrangemen ts for their domestic and business property.  
DFID will share available  information with the Supplier on security status and developments in -country where 
appropriate.  
The Supplier  is responsible for ensuring appropriate safety and security briefings for all of their Personnel working 
under this contract  and ensuring that their Personnel register and receive briefing as outlined above. Travel 
advice is also available on the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) website and the Supplier  must ensure 
they (an d their Personnel) are up to date with the latest position.  
Suppliers must develop  their Tender on the basis of being fully responsible for Duty of Care in line with the details 
provided above and the initial risk assessment matrix developed by DFID (see Annex G ). They must confirm in 
their Tender that:  
• They fully accept responsibility  for Security and Duty of Care.  
• They understand the potential risks and have the knowledge and experience to develop an effective risk 
plan.  
• They understand  that risks are  changeable over time and have the capability to adapt their risk plans in 
response to changing contexts  
• They have the capability to manage their Duty of Care responsibilities throughout the life of the contract  and 
across all programme countries, which ha ve varying levels of risk.   
Suppliers should note that the programme is proposing to operate in eight countries over the duration of the 
contract .  While evidence of capability is not required for each country separately, Suppliers should demonstrate 
capa bility relevant to the risk level for the countries confirmed for the first year (Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda) and 
for the country where risk level is currently highest (Pakistan).  The responsibilities of the Supplier on duty of care 
apply to all programme countries.   
The responsibilities  of the Supplier on duty of care apply to all programme countries, including those where the 
security  situation is volatile and s ubject to change at short notice . The Supplier is responsible for ensuring that 
appropriate arrangements, processes and procedures are in place for their Personnel, taking into account the 
environment they will be working in and the level of risk involved in delivery of the Contract.  ANNEX B - THEORIES OF  CHANGE  
ANNEX B -1 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Annex B - Theories of Change  
Version 1  
  
Key
SPRING activities/processes
Expected resultsIMPACTEntrepreneurs develop, market and distribute 
products to benefit girlsImproved business practices/ performance
Girls access products that enable learning, 
earning, saving, and saving labour time
Evidence  of success captured and communicated 
widely and provokes interest through demonstration 
effectsChallenge competition and support to 
entrepreneurs (direct funding, tech assistance,  
mentorship, linkages to investors, etc.)
Increased 
salesIncreased 
revenueIncreased 
external 
investment
Business growth and scalabilityExpansion 
to new 
marketsOUTPUTS
Girls' economic and broader empowerment -
brief definition (e.g. greater ownership and control of assets, voice, agency, etc.)OUTCOMESIncreased #  and scale of businesses 
focusing on products for girlsIncreased investment in 
products for girls
Market changes due to demonstration effectsInfluence of enabling environmentOutreach, M&E, and Communications
Increased 
regular 
earningsIncreased 
school 
attendance/ Reduced 
unpaid work 
timeIncreased 
savings  and 
asset base
Increased resources and economic opportunities for girls
Reduced poverty of women and girlsImproved perceptions of girls' worth, and g reater agency, voice, 
and decision making power of girlsCollaboration with other girls' 
empowerment initiatives to 
address enabling environmentANNEX B - THEORIES OF  CHANGE  
ANNEX B -2 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Version 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
ANNEX B - THEORIES OF  CHANGE  
ANNEX B -3 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Version 3  
 
 
 
ANNEX B - THEORIES OF  CHANGE  
ANNEX B -4 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Version 4  
ANNEX B - THEORIES OF  CHANGE  
ANNEX B -5 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Version 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -1 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Annex C - Revisions to the SPRING M&E 
Evaluation Framework  
An Evaluation Framework was developed during the Inception Phase, which has been regularly reviewed and 
refined to ensure that the evaluation focus remains relevant to the intended users. The Evaluation Framework 
sets out the evaluation questions, in addit ion to its corresponding sub -questions and indicators, as well as the 
sources of evidence used to answer each question.  
The Evaluation Framework has been updated to consider the findings and lessons learned from the Programme 
Performance Evaluation (PPE) and the Business Performance Evaluation (BPE) activities for Cohorts 1 and 2, 
the further development of the Impact Evaluation (IE), and the suggested changes to the evaluation proposed in 
the Revised Evaluation Plan (2018). Changes also take into account the revisions to the logframe and Theory of 
Change made by the Implementing Partner (IP) 179, as part of the ongoing programme refinement.  
A summary of the revised evaluation questions can be found in Table 1. A narrative summary of the changes to 
the evaluat ion questions and sub -questions follows, while the 2017 and revised 2018 evaluation questions and 
sub-questions are found in the pages after. For ease of reference, SPRING’s 2018 Theory of Change can be 
found in Annex A.  
 
Table 1: SPRING Revised Evaluation  Questions (August 2018)  
OECD -DAC 
Criteria   Evaluation Question  
Relevance  A1 How successfully did SPRING target businesses to achieve programme goals?  
 A2 How successfully has SPRING targeted adolescent girls?  
Efficiency  B1 Did SPRING represent good value for money?  
Effectiveness  C1 How effectively were the different SPRING accelerator experience inputs designed 
and delivered, to help businesses refine their business model, product, or service?  
 C2 To what extent has SPRING adapted and with what effect?  
 D1 How successful was the programme in enabling businesses to reach girls with 
market -based solutions (i.e. products or services) that can meet girls' needs?  
 D2 What works in reaching adolescent girls, with products, services, and business 
mode ls? 
Impact  E1 To what extent has access to products, services, and business opportunities provided 
by SPRING businesses resulted in improved outcomes linked to economic 
empowerment for adolescent girls?  
 E2 What have we learned about adolescent girls as end -users or beneficiaries in the 
value chain?  
Sustainability  F1 Do businesses continue to target adolescent girls beyond the accelerator's lifetime?  
 F2 Has SPRING supported a growing market for products, services, or business models 
benefitti ng adolescent girls?  
Narrative of revisions to the Evaluation Framework  
Relevance (Section A)  
No changes have been made to the two evaluation questions under Relevance; question A1 continues to focus 
on exploring the ways in which businesses are targeted by SPRING (and the relevance of SPRING to 
businesses, and vice versa) and is predominately explored through the PPE. Question A2 focuses on the ways in 
which SPRING targets adolescent girls, via businesses, and is explored by both the PPE and BPE.  
 
179 Finalised February 2018.  ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -2 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
The phr asing of question A1.1 has been streamlined to better focus on the selection process at the programme 
level. Question A2.1 has been reframed, not to focus on the alignment of definitions of target adolescent girls, but 
instead on exploring the different wa ys in which SPRING businesses have targeted adolescent girls. Question 
A2.2 then focuses on the ways in which SPRING has changed the way in which businesses target adolescent 
girls.  
Efficiency (Section B)  
Although this section is nominally about the OECD -DAC criteria of Efficiency, this section explores value for 
money (VfM), which goes beyond Efficiency. The evaluation question has been revised to focus more broadly 
and accurately on VfM. Previously, this section included questions on timely delivery and the leverage of 
additional funds. These questions have been converted into indicators, while the sub -questions focus more 
broadly on exploring the extent and ways in which SPRING has represented good value for money. Previously, 
this section included broad  learning questions, which have now been moved into Effectiveness.  
Effectiveness (Sections C and D)  
Questions under Effectiveness remain divided into two sections: Section C focuses on the effectiveness 
questions that examine SPRING’s conversion of inputs  into outputs,  which are explored through the PPE. Section 
D is framed by SPRING’s conversion of outputs to outcomes, as explored by the BPE.  
Section C  
Section C focuses on two evaluation questions. The wording of question C1 has changed to now more closely 
follow SPRING’s reframed Theory of Change. Therefore, the sub -questions under C1 track SPRING’s revised 
outputs, rather than focus on the delivery of inputs. In this sense, questions C1.1 – C1.4 focus on: the 
effectiveness of HCD to refine SPRING products, services, or business models; the effectiveness of SPRING 
technical assistance (TA) to better understand girls’ needs; the effectiveness of SPRING TA  to help launch 
prototypes designed to benefit girls; and the effectiveness of SPRING TA to help improve businesses’ investment 
readiness. Within each of these sub -questions, the effectiveness of the contribution of various SPRING inputs 
(e.g. bootcamp and  bootcamp structures, local and global mentors, the prototype development fund, etc) are, as 
relevant, examined as indicators for each sub -question.  
Section C also contains the programme learning and adaptation question previously included in Section B. T he 
evaluation question (now C2) has not changed, although the sub -questions in this section have been refined to 
more closely generate learning about the nature and process of SPRING’s adaptations and learning, rather than 
to simply understand if and in wh at ways adaptation has taken place. These changes reflect the increasing 
interest in generating transferable learning on SPRING as an adaptive programme.  
Section D  
The changes to Section D reflect much of the learning that took place after the evaluation a ctivities for Cohort 2. 
While previously, the evaluation questions focused on the extent to which businesses achieved their SPRING 
goals and whether SPRING enabled businesses to develop prototypes that met girls’ needs, these two questions 
have been subsum ed into one evaluation question that more closely focuses on SPRING’s achievement of its 
main outcome (as set out in the Theory of Change).  
Question D1 now examines the success of the programme in enabling businesses to reach girls with 
market -based solut ions (as set out in the Theory of Change), while sub -questions D1.1 and D1.2 focus 
on improvements to girl reach and sales performance respectively (as Theory of Change outcomes). 
These two sub -questions have been maintained from the previous iteration of the evaluation 
framework. Sub -question D1.3 incorporates SPRING’s outcome on businesses attracting new external 
investment, while D1.4 is a sub -question previously contained under question C1, which examines the 
combination of SPRING inputs that contribute  to reaching SPRING’s overarching outcome.  
Question D2 consolidates the previous two remaining Section D evaluation questions. It continues to reflect on 
what works to reach adolescent girls and includes several cross -cutting sub -questions that allow for comparison 
of various SPRING -developed solutions. These sub -questions focus on understanding what products, services, 
and businesses do (D2.1) and do not work (D2.2) to reach adolescent girls, as well as what challenges 
businesses faced in developing these  products (D2.3) and what were the key contextual factors that helped or 
hindered businesses (D2.4). The BPE’s thematic learning areas explored as indicators within question D2.1.  
Impact  
The Impact evaluation questions reflect the further development and evolution of the IE, with baseline data 
collection now underway for businesses from Cohorts 2 and 3 and endline for Cohort 1 businesses. The Impact ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -3 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
evaluation questions have been streamlin ed to now contain one overarching question that examines the impact of 
SPRING businesses’ products, services, or business opportunities, whereby the impact according to each pillar is 
examined at the sub -question level. In this way, each impact evaluation study will contribute to answering the 
overarching question.  
Sub-questions E1.1 – E1.4 look at each impact pillar in turn (earn, learn, save, and stay safe and healthy), while 
E1.5 is a cross -cutting question looking more specifically at well -being. Final ly, sub -question E1.6 is also a cross -
cutting question for each impact evaluation, that aims to link SPRING’s contribution and impact on businesses, to 
the impact that businesses have had on girls.  
As with Sections C and D, the second evaluation question in Section E is a learning question. It follows the 
previous iteration of the evaluation question of a similar nature, examining learning about girls in as end -
consumers or beneficiaries in the value chain.  
Sustainability  
The Sustainability evaluation que stions maintain their focus of sustainability at the level of SPRING’s impact on 
businesses (question F1), and the wider market -level changes initiated by SPRING and SPRING businesses 
(F2). For both, the sub -questions have been further refined to reflect t he development of the SPRING evaluation 
sustainability framework. Each of the sub -questions under F1 (F1.1 -F1.4) also now reflect the one -year timeframe 
(after the businesses’ graduation from the accelerator programme) after which sustainability will be as sessed.  
Question F2 has been refined to not examine the ‘extent’, but instead a qualitative examination of market -level 
changes. Whereas F2.1 had previous examined the extent to which SPRING businesses entered new markets 
(which is now instead reflected a s part of the indicators for the questions under F1) and F2.2 on a new or growing 
market, both sub -questions now look at market -level changes. F2.1 now examines imitation through copying (e.g. 
whereby competitors develop similar products, services, or busi ness models), while F2.2 examines imitation 
through crowding -in (e.g. whereby there are new entrants to the market, who replicate SPRING practices of 
recognising adolescent girls as a viable market).  
There is no longer an evaluation question which examine s the effects of SPRING communications outputs as 
contributing to wider ecosystem -level changes, and this was not something against which the evaluation could 
collect data.  
 ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -4 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Previous and revised evaluation questions  
Evaluation Questions (2017)  Component  
Revised Evaluation Questions (2018)  Component  
PP
E BP
E IE PP
E BP
E IE 
 Relevance                
A1. How successfully did SPRING target businesses to 
achieve programme goals?  A1. How successfully did SPRING target businesses to 
achieve programme goals?  
A1.1 Were the right businesses selected, and in the right 
way, to achieve programme goals?  A1.1 How, and in what ways, did SPRING select 
businesses to achieve programme goals?  
A1.2 How successfully has SPRING identified the needs of 
businesses to achieve programme goals?  A1.2 How successfully has SPRING identified the needs of 
businesses to achieve programme goals?  
A2. How successfully has SPRING targeted adolescent 
girls?  A2. How successfully has SPRING targeted adolescent 
girls?  
A2.1 How have SPRING and SPRING businesses defined 
target adolescent girls?  A2.1 How have SPRING businesses targeted adolescent 
girls?  
A2.2 To what extent did SPRING help businesses 
strengthen their focus on adolescent girls?  A2.2 How has SPRING helped businesses strengthen their 
targeting of adolescent girls?  
Efficiency                  
B1. Were SPRING inputs delivered efficiently and did they 
represent good value for money?   B1. Did SPRING represent good value for money?  
B1.1 Were accelerator activities delivered on time?  B1.1 To what extent did SPRING represent good value for 
money?  
B1.2 Did SPRING leverage additional resources?  B1.2 In what ways did SPRING represent good value for 
money?  
B1.3 To what extent and in what ways did SPRING achieve 
good value for money?     
B2. To what extent has SPRING adapted and with what 
effect?     
B2.1 To what extent has SPRING produced learning?     ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -5 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Evaluation Questions (2017)  Component  
Revised Evaluation Questions (2018)  Component  
PP
E BP
E IE PP
E BP
E IE 
B2.2 In what ways has SPRING made adaptations and key 
changes to programme design and delivery?     
B2.3 To what extent have adaptations affected SPRING's 
performance?     
Effectiveness                  
C1. How effectively were the different SPRING accelerator 
inputs designed and delivered?  C1. How effectively were the different SPRING accelerator 
experience inputs designed and delivered, to help 
businesses refine their business model, product, or 
service?  
C1.1 How effective was SPRING boot camp to help 
businesses develop prototypes to meet girls' needs?  C1.1 How effective was HCD at helping businesses refine 
their SPRING product, service or business model?  
C1.2 How effective was SPRING grant funding to help 
businesses develop prototypes to meet girls' needs?  C1.2 How effective was SPRING technical assistance to 
help businesses better understand girls' needs?  
C1.3 To what extent did girl research help businesses 
improve their understanding of girls' needs?  C1.3 How effective was SPRING technical assistance to 
help launch prototypes designed to benefit girls?  
C1.4 How effective was the SPRING local and global 
mentoring support?  C1.4 How effective was SPRING technical assistance to 
improve businesses' investment readiness?  
C1.5 To what extent did SPRING help businesses improve 
their investment readiness?    
C1.6 How effective was the in -country technical support (eg 
technical assistance provided by country managers & 
accelerator partners)?    
C1.7 Which (combination of) accelerator inputs were most 
effective in improving the performance of businesses?    
C2. How effective was HCD at helping businesses refine 
their SPRING product, service or business model?  C2. To what extent has SPRING adapted and with what 
effect?  ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -6 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Evaluation Questions (2017)  Component  
Revised Evaluation Questions (2018)  Component  
PP
E BP
E IE PP
E BP
E IE 
C2.1 To what extent and how did businesses absorb and 
apply HCD training?  C2.1 In what ways has SPRING made adaptations and key 
changes to programme design and delivery?  
C2.2 How could SPRING further improve the effectiveness 
of HCD?  C2.2 In what ways has SPRING made adaptations and key 
changes to programme design and delivery?  
 C2.3 Has SPRING implemented solutions as a result of 
ongoing programme learning?  
D1. To what extent have businesses achieved their 
SPRING development goals?  D1. How successful was the programme in enabling 
businesses to reach girls with market -based solutions (i.e. 
products or services) that can meet girls' needs?  
D1.1 To what extent did businesses achieve their SPRING 
goals and milestones?  D1.1 To what extent did participation in SPRING help 
businesses improve their performance with regards to girl 
reach?  
D1.2 To what extent did participation in SPRING help 
businesses improve their performance with regards to 
sales?  D1.2 To what extent did participation in SPRING help 
businesses improve their performance with regards to 
sales?  
D1.3 To what extent did participation in SPRING help 
businesses improve their performance with regards to girl 
reach?  D1.3 To what extent did SPRING help businesses attract 
new external investment?  
D1.4 To what extent do businesses the perceive benefits of 
participation in SPRING, to their businesses and for girls?  D1.4 Which (combination of) accelerator inputs were most 
effective in enabling businesses to reach girls with market -
based solutions (i.e. products or services) that can meet 
girls' needs?  
D2. Did SPRING enable businesses to develop prototypes 
that meet girls' needs?    
D2.1 What products, services, and business models 
worked to address the needs of girls?    ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -7 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Evaluation Questions (2017)  Component  
Revised Evaluation Questions (2018)  Component  
PP
E BP
E IE PP
E BP
E IE 
D2.2 What are the challenges that businesses faced in 
developing the 'right' products, services and business 
models to benefit girls and how where they overcome?    
D3. What works in reaching adolescent girls, with 
products, services, and business models?  D2. What works in reaching adolescent girls, with 
products, services, and business models?  
D3.1 What products, services, and business models 
worked in reaching adolescent girls, and which have the 
greatest potential for reaching girls at scale? D2.1 What products, services, and business models 
worked to reach adolescent girls, and which have the 
greatest potential for reaching girls at scale?  
D3.2 Which products, services, and business models did 
not work and why? D2.2 Which products, services, and business models did 
not work to reach adolescent girls and why?  
 D2.3 What are the challenges that businesses faced in 
developing the 'right' products, services and business 
models to reach adolescent girls and how where they 
overcome?  
 D2.4 What are the key contextual factors that have helped 
or hindered businesses from reaching adolescent girls?  
Impact                  
E1. To what extent have girls improved their earning 
potential (including employability skills) and savings as a 
result of accessing products, services, or business 
opportunities provided by SPRING businesses?  E1. To what extent has access to products, services, and 
business opportunities provided by SPRING businesses 
resulted in improved outcomes linked to economic 
empowerment for adolescent girls?  
E1.1 Did girl beneficiaries report having predictable income 
from safe sources and / or improved opportunities for 
income from safe sources?  E1.1 To what extent have girls improved their earnings 
(e.g. predictable income from safe sources) as a result of 
accessing products, services, or business opportunities 
provided by SPRING businesses?  
E1.2 How have the income generating activities of girls 
changed between baseline and endline?  E1.2 To what extent have girls improved their learning 
opportunities as a result of accessing products, services, or 
business opportunities provided by SPRING businesses?  ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -8 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Evaluation Questions (2017)  Component  
Revised Evaluation Questions (2018)  Component  
PP
E BP
E IE PP
E BP
E IE 
E1.3 To what extent and how did SPRING products, 
services, and business models contribute to this change, 
as opposed to other factors?  E1.3 To what extent have girls improved their savings as a 
result of accessing products, services, or business 
opportunities provided by SPRING busin esses?  
E1.4 To what extent have benefits been experienced by 
adolescent girls and their household, with regard to earning 
potential and savings, promoted girls' ability to learn, earn, 
and stay safe and healthy?  E1.4 To what extent have girls improved their health and 
safety as a result of accessing products, services or 
business opportunities provided by SPRING businesses?  
E2. To what extent have girls improved their safety and 
well-being as a result of accessing products, services, or 
business opportunities provided by SPRING businesses?  E1.5 To what extent have girls improved their well -being as 
a result of accessing products, services or business 
opportunities provided by SPRING businesses?  
E2.1 In what ways did SPRING products, services, and 
business models intend to improve girls' safety and 
wellbeing?  E1.6 How did SPRING contribute to this change, as 
opposed to other factors?  
E2.2 Did SPRING target girls show improved perceptions 
of their safety and wellbeing?     
E2.3 To what extent have key risk factors to girls' safety 
and wellbeing have decreased between baseline and 
endline?     
E2.4 To what extent and how did SPRING products, 
services or business models contribute to this change, as 
opposed to other factors?     
E2.5 To what extent have benefits experienced by 
adolescent girls and their household, with regard to safety 
and well -being, promoted girls' ability to learn, earn, and 
stay safe and healthy?     
E3. What have we learned about girls as end -consumers 
or beneficiaries in the value chain?  E2. What have we learned about adolescent girls as end -
users or beneficiaries in the value chain?  ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -9 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Evaluation Questions (2017)  Component  
Revised Evaluation Questions (2018)  Component  
PP
E BP
E IE PP
E BP
E IE 
E3.1 What factors helped or hindered girls from using 
SPRING products, services, or business opportunities?  E2.1 What factors helped or hindered adolescent girls from 
using SPRING products, services, or engaging with 
business models?  
 E2.2 What have been the unintended consequences of 
adolescent girls accessing products, services, or engaging 
with business models provided by SPRING businesses?  
Sustainability                  
F1. Do businesses continue to target adolescent girls 
beyond the accelerator's lifetime?  F1. Do businesses continue to target adolescent girls 
beyond the accelerator's lifetime?  
F1.1 To what extent are businesses still operating their 
SPRING -related products, services, or business models 
two years after graduating?  F1.1 To what extent are businesses still operating their 
SPRING -related products, services, or business models 
one year after graduating?  
F1.2 To what extent do businesses still target girls two 
years after graduating, and to what extent has their 
targeting changed?  F1.2 To what extent are businesses still using HCD 
principles one year after graduating?  
F1.3 What incentives do businesses have to continue 
reaching girls?  F1.3 To what extent do businesses still target girls one year 
after graduating?  
 F1.4 What incentives do businesses have to remain 
committed to girl -focused solutions?  
F2. To what extent has SPRING supported a growing 
market for products, services, or business models 
benefitting adolescent girls?  F2. Has SPRING supported a growing market for products, 
services, or business models benefitting adolescent girls?  
F2.1 To what extent have businesses entered new markets 
with products or services benefitting girls two years after 
the end of the cohort?  F2.1 Has SPRING (and SPRING businesses) initiated 
other businesses to copy through imitation (e.g. having 
similar products, services, or business models)?  
F2.2 To what extent is there a new or growing market for 
products, services, or business models benefitting 
adolescent girls?  F2.2 Has SPRING (and SPRING businesses) initiated 
other businesses to crowd -in through imitation (e.g. ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -10 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Evaluation Questions (2017)  Component  
Revised Evaluation Questions (2018)  Component  
PP
E BP
E IE PP
E BP
E IE 
replicate SPRING practices of recognising adolescent girls 
as a viable market)?  
F3. To what extent have communication outputs 
contributed to the impact and sustainability of the 
programme?     
F3.1 To what extent have communications outputs been 
produced and disseminated?     
  ANNEX C - EVALUATION FRAMEWORK REVISIONS  
ANNEX C -11 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
 
 
ANNEX D - SPRING BUSI NESSES AND HOW THEY TARGET GIRLS  
ANNEX D -1 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
 
Annex D. SPRING businesses and how they  targeted girls   
Cohort   Company   Country    Girl beneficiary 
description   PT 
target  group    Impact Area   Business 
Area   Prototype description    
1  Africaqua  Kenya  Value Chain  
End Users  N/A  Stay Healthy  Health  Sanitation hubs and water distribution centres  
1  Doctor Search  Kenya  End Users   Children and 
Youth  Stay Healthy  Health  Medical care service in schools.  
1 EarthEnable  Rwanda  End Users  Households  Stay Healthy  Health  Do-It-Yourself Floor Kit  
1 Ensibuuko  Uganda  End Users  Communities   Save  Financial 
Services  Girl-specific saving product  
1 Haute Baso  Rwanda  Value Chain  Girls 10 -24 Earn  Fashion / 
Retail   Girls working for the business as interns and 
employees and receiving training.  
1 KadAfrica  Uganda  Value Chain 
(Secondary)  Girls 10 -24 Earn  Agriculture  Trainings in business, life skills, sexual and 
reproductive health, integrating families into the 
process.  
1 Khenz  Rwanda  End Users  Communities  Earn  Tech  Integrated digital ticketing platform that enable quick 
and secure access to bus ticket for travellers via 
different sales channels.  
1 Kidogo  Kenya  End Users  Households  Learn  Childcare  Affordable early childhood care & education to 
families in Kenya.  
1 Sanitation  Kenya  End Users  Households  Stay Healthy  WASH  Toilets and hygiene products.  
1 Sare Millers  Kenya  End Users  Girls 10 -24 Earn  Agriculture  Girl trainings on livestock production and financial 
skills.  
1 Tiny Totos  Kenya  End Users  Households  Stay healthy  Childcare  Bootcamps and trainings for daycare providers.  
1 ` Banapads    Uganda   End Users  Females (all 
ages)   Stay Healthy   Health   Eco-friendly and re -usable pads.    ANNEX D - SPRING BUSI NESSES AND HOW THEY TARGET GIRLS  
ANNEX D -2 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
1  Shekina    Rwanda   Value Chain  Females (all 
ages)   Earn   Sales    Production and sales of cassava leaves products.    
1  Village Energy   Uganda    Value Chain  
(Primary)   Girls 10 -24  Earn   Energy    Phone -charging  micro -enterprise model.    
1  Totohealth   Kenya   End Users  Females (all 
ages)   Stay Healthy   Health   Health information and support during pregnancy.   
1  Green Credit    Kenya   End Beneficiaries    Females (all 
ages)   Learn   Financial 
services    Financial support to Mama  Mbgosas  towards 
children’s tuition fees.   
1  Jibu  Kenya   Value Chain  
(Primary)   
End users  Girls 10 -24  Earn/Stay 
Healthy   WASH   Micro -franchise system which sees girls involved as 
micro -franchise holders selling bottled water.     
1  FTB  Uganda    End Users  Value 
Chain (Secondary)   Girls 10 -24  Save   Financial 
services   Girl-specific saving accounts,  complemented by app 
with in -built trainings in financial education and 
reproductive health education.    
2 Ariia  Pakistan  Value Chain End 
Users  Females (all 
ages)  Earn  Retail  Online marketplace for female artisans  
2 Drinkwell  Bangladesh  End Users  Communities  Stay healthy  WASH  Water filtration solutions and water ATMs  
2 EasyPaisa  Pakistan  End Users  Females (all 
ages)  Save  Financial 
services  Personal savings account for married women and 
girls aged 18+.  
2 Engrofoods  Pakistan  End Users  Children and 
youth  Stay healthy   Sugared milk drink targeted at 5 -12 year olds  
2 Girl Connect  Nepal  Value Chain End 
Users  Girls 10 -24  Stay healthy  Health  girls-only community space that offers a suite of 
services including sports, academic support, 
computer and library access, mentoring, arts and 
dance classes, SRH information sessions and 
counselling.  
2 JBS  Nepal  End Users Value 
Chain (Secondary)  Girls 10 -24  Save  Education  Savings clubs for in -school girls (aged 11 -16), who 
also receive financial literacy training and a 
curriculum of life skills classes at their meetings.  ANNEX D - SPRING BUSI NESSES AND HOW THEY TARGET GIRLS  
ANNEX D -3 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
2 Shreenagar  Nepal  End Users Value 
Chain (Secondary)  Households  Stay healthy  Agriculture  Low-priced egg brand targeted at girls, mothers, and 
institutional customers who serve food to girls 
(schools).  
2 SmartPaani  Nepal  End Users  Children and 
youth 10 -16  Stay healthy  WASH  Clean water solution to schools, including a newly -
designed filter tank, routine servicing and monitoring, 
and WASH education  
2 Uptrade  Pakistan  End Users  Communities  Stay healthy  WASH  Communal water pumps in rural areas.  
2 Usehat  Pakistan  End Users Value 
Chain  Females (all 
ages)  Stay healthy  Health  Critical healthcare services to girl and families 
through rural telemedicine clinics and electronic 
diagnostics.  
2 Zoya  Pakistan  End Users  Girls 10 -24  Stay Healthy  Health  Customised healthcare information app called 'Zoya' 
(Zoya Mom and Zoya Teen), which includes period 
tracker, connectivity to doctors/clinic, articles, a chat 
feature, and symptom checker.  
2  ISocial   
  Bangladesh   Value Chain  
(Primary)  End users  Girls 10 -24  Earn   Sales    Avon -lady sales  model of female agents delivering 
services and products door -to-door in marginalised 
communities.    
2  Paritran   Pakistan   End Users  Value 
Chain (Secondary)   Girls 10 -24  Stay Safe   Personal 
security    Self-defence and personal security trainings in 
schools.   
2  Rooster Logic   Nepal   Value Chain  
(Primary)   Girls 10 -24  Earn   
  IT  Female enumerators and data -collectors.    
  
2  R&D    Nepal   End Beneficiaries  
Value Chain  Households    Earn   Agriculture   woman -owned agribusiness company based in Nepal 
that has multiple business streams with a focus on 
strengthening female agro -entrepreneurs.   
2  KGG   Nepal   End users  Value 
Chain  (Secondary)  Females (all 
ages)   
  Earn   Sales    Whole -sale distribution network run by women 
entrepreneurs and sales agents  (Avon -lady sales 
model).    
2  Sehat  Kahani   Pakistan   End users  Females (all 
ages)   
  Stay Healthy   Health   In-clinic and home -based visits, as well as 
awareness -raising activities to low -income 
communities through a network of female doctors.     ANNEX D - SPRING BUSI NESSES AND HOW THEY TARGET GIRLS  
ANNEX D -4 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
3 ACTT  Tanzania  End Users  Young adults 
17-24 Learn  Education  Career development counselling and training center 
for youth, offering training (including the Jiwezeshe 
package, which covers career and professional 
development skills, financial literacy and basic ICT 
skills), and linkages to other opportunities (such as 
further education, internships, jobs, or 
apprenticeships)  
3 Babyl  Rwanda  End Users  Children and 
Youth  Stay Healthy  Health  Free online healthcare consultation service   
3 Barefoot 
Powerhouse  Uganda  End Users  Children and 
Youth  Stay Healthy  Health  Solar lanterns paid via school fee top -ups or monthly 
installments.  
3 Deciwatt  Kenya  End Users  Households  Stay Healthy  Energy  Clean, safe, and affordable lighting to communities in 
Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda  
3 Ecofuels  Kenya  End users  Value 
Chain  (Secondary)   Households  Earn  Agriculture  A year -round centre and one stop shop for croton 
aggregation, farm and business training, tree 
nurseries and retail of croton -based and other farm 
inputs.  
3 HoneyCare  Kenya  Value Chain 
(Secondary)  Children and 
Youth  Stay Healthy  Food & 
Beverage  Nutritional campaign in girls' schools educating 
students and their mothers about healthy snacking.  
3 Illuminium  Kenya  End users  Value 
Chain  (Secondary)   Young adults 
17-24 Earn  Agriculture  Greenhouses bundled with financing, inputs, market 
linkages, training and crop insurance marketed to 
youth self -help and collective ownership groups.  
3 Kasha  Rwanda  End Users  Females (all 
ages)  Stay Healthy  Health  An affordable health insurance product for girls, with 
value -added features and benefits, including sms -
based health education, and linkages to youth -
friendly healthcare providers.  
3 Mode  Kenya  End Users  Households  Learn  Energy  Providing a mobile platform for salaried employees to 
access low interest school loans, linked to schools for 
direct payment and to payroll via employer 
partnerships for convenient repayment.  
3 Paygo  Kenya  End Users (Indirect)  Females (all 
ages)  Stay Healthy  Education  Offering PayGo service (meter, gas stove and fire 
prevention tools) to informal settlement households 
and mobilising informal distributors to provide in -ANNEX D - SPRING BUSI NESSES AND HOW THEY TARGET GIRLS  
ANNEX D -5 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
home gas cylinder replacement according to PayGo 
meter data and company customer service protocols.  
3 Telemed  Uganda  End Users  Young adults 
17-24 Stay Healthy  Health  An app extending Hello Doctor telemedicine services, 
referrals and girl specific health content to 
smartphones.  
3  AccelerarED   Ethiopia   End Beneficiaries    Children and 
youth   
  Learn  Education   Personalised trainings to teachers in Ethiopia to 
sensitise them about gender issues.    
3  Cherehani    Kenya   End users  Value 
Chain (Secondary)   Females (all 
ages)   
  Earn  Financial 
services    Financial support to young female entrepreneurs.    
3  Micro Health   
Initiative   Tanzania   End users  Value 
Chain (Secondary)   Girls 10 -24  Stay Healthy   Health   Girl-specific health insurance package solution.    
3  SafeBoda    Uganda   End users   Young Adults 
17-24  Stay Safe   Transport   App-based motorcycle private transport service.    
3  Resonate   Rwanda   End Beneficiaries    Females (all 
ages)   Learn  Education    Personal development trainings to females.    
3  Ubongo   Tanzania   End Users   Children and 
Youth 10 -16  Learn  Entertainment 
Education   Behavioural change campaigns  integrated into 
entertainment content  tailored for children.    
4  360ed  Myanmar  End Users  Children and 
Youth 10 -16  Learn  Education  low-cost augmented reality product targeted at girls 
to support learning of the Life Skills Education 
component of the Myanmar national curriculum.  
4  Build Up Nepal  Nepal  End Users  Households  Stay Safe  Construction  Social franchise model to expand CSEB technology 
throughout Nepal  
4  Eden  Myanmar  Value Chain  End 
Users  Girls 10 -24 Earn  Retail  Iconic Eden range and marketing campaign for the 
Australian retail and large -scale merchant market, 
enabling the scale up of comprehensive 
programming and income -generation for rescued 
trafficked girls  
4  Edkasa  Pakistan  End Users Value 
Chain (Secondary)  Young adults 
17-24 Learn  Education  Online revision/test preparation for 11th and 12th 
grade science students, through a (free) Youtube ANNEX D - SPRING BUSI NESSES AND HOW THEY TARGET GIRLS  
ANNEX D -6 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
video channel and fee -based (live) virtual 
classrooms.  
4  Edjaad Tech  Pakistan  End Users  Children and 
Youth 10 -16 Learn  Education  Science demo kits for Grade 5 teachers, with online 
instructional videos and supplemental resources.  
4  Himalayan 
Rabbit Farm  Nepal  Value Chain End 
Users (Indirect)  Communities  Earn  Agriculture  Local market for rabbit meat in Dhulikhel.  
4  Jeeon  Bangladesh  End Users (Indirect)  Communities  Stay Healthy  Health  Platform linking rural pharmacies with pharmaceutical 
companies to facilitate the ordering process (as well 
as linking them to other new product/serving 
offerings, referral partners,  and an e -learning app to 
enable continuous upskilling of RMPs.  
4  Koe Koe Tech  Myanmar  Value Chain End 
Users  Girls 10 -24 Learn  Education  Leadership academy for university and high school 
students (with a madrassa immersion option, to build 
skills and increase visibilty of female madrassa 
students).  
4  Play Nepal  Nepal  End Users  Females (all 
ages)  Learn  Education  Inclusive, high -quality sports education for girls and 
boys in Kathmandu schools.  
4  Sabaq  Pakistan  End Users  Children and 
Youth 10 -16 Learn  Education  Affordable subscription licenses and tablet -rental 
model for MUSE digital lessons to improve student 
engagement and performance in private schools.  
4  Women in 
Digital  Bangladesh  Value Chain  Females (all 
ages)  Learn  Education  Model digital training center for women and girls in 
Bangladesh to access IT training and opportunities 
for income generation.  
4  Wonder Tree  Bangladesh  End Uses  Children and 
Youth 10 -16 Stay Healthy  Health  Research -backed digital health and learning solution 
for the developmental needs of children with special 
needs.  
4  Doh Eain   Myanmar  End users  Communities / 
General 
Population   Stay Safe   Education   Inclusive,  safe public spaces for communities.    
4  Khalil   Nepal  End users  Girls +16   Earn  
  Financial 
services   The Smart  Chhori  app offers the possibility to Nepali 
women to manage and pay bills and to receive 
tailored financial literacy training through the app.     ANNEX D - SPRING BUSI NESSES AND HOW THEY TARGET GIRLS  
ANNEX D -7 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
4  Maya  Apa  Bangladesh  End users  Females (all 
ages)   Stay Healthy   Health   The Maya  Apa app offers an anonymous space for 
users where to seek professional advice on health 
matters.      
4  Rizq   Pakistan  End users  Households   Stay Healthy   Food   Food bank network distributing meals in households 
and schools.    
4  LeanObots   Pakistan  End users  Children 
and Youth 10 -
16  Learn  Education   STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics) eLearning platform.    
4   Pan Ka Lay   Myanmar  End users  Females (all 
ages)    Stay Healthy  Health   Bespoke online content to break the taboo around 
menstruation in Myanmar.    
4  Leaping 
Boundaries   Bangladesh  End beneficiaries  Young adults 
17-24 Learn  Education   Training, tech & language classes to girls 
in Madrasas. Leadership Academy for young change -
makers.    ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
ANNEX E -1 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Annex E - Evolution of the SPRING Theory of 
Change  
Evolution of the SPRING Theory of Change  
This section presents a summarised overview of how SPRING’s Theory of Change (ToC), and programme 
rationale, evolved over the lifetime of the programme. It presents the primary changes across  the various versions 
of the ToC, thereby mapping documented changes against  programme rationale.  
Purpose and evolution of SPRING’s ToC  
While the overall logic of the original programme T oC remains largely intact , a number of significant changes were 
made  during the various iterations presented below. SPRING was an experimental accelerator testing new 
hypotheses , including that by creating sustainable markets for life -enhancing products and services, the lives of 
adolescent girls would be transformed. Thes e products and services would help girls keep safe, learn, earn, and 
save without harm. It was thought that successful businesses and the investment they stimulate would lead to a 
broader shift in markets that would enable girls and their communities to en d the cycle of poverty .  
SPRING’s ToC’s primary purpose was to serve  as a tool for iteration,  providing a tool for reflection  and learning, 
which it did . However, in practice, its use was more fluid, serving more than one purpose, with differences from 
cohort to cohort. This is in line with what are commonly thought the most effective ways of using a ToC is: when it 
combines both approaches, and when it is kept flexible, not prescribed.180 
The SPRING ToC was used as a tool to document changes in programme design and was adapted as 
programme thinking evolved. This makes mapping the evolution of the ToC a useful exercise for mapping 
documented changes in programme thinking. However, during the first two cohort’s  innovation in programme 
design was not always suff iciently translated to ToC revisions. This process did improve over the lifetime of the 
programme . Coffey  offered recommendations after Cohort 2, and  they are  presented in Box 1. 
Box 1: Recommendations after Cohort 2  
 
The SPRING ToC was also used to drive programme implementation, including innovation . Each year , the 
ToC was reviewed and refined through annual workshops to integrate programme learning related to T oC 
assumptions a nd causal links, and to reflect changes in programme design and implementation.  This was 
particularly the case between Cohorts 2 and 4, following the recommendations presented in Box 1. As the nature of 
the programme became less experimental and adaptive , due to the focus being  less on learning and innovating 
towards the end of the programme, innovations in programme implementation became more subtle and operational 
and, consequently, less reflective of the ToC.  
 
 
 
180 Vogel, Isabel. (2012). Review of the Use of ‘Theory of Change’ in International Development ,  
http://www.theoryofchange.org/pdf/DFID_ToC_Review_VogelV7.pdf   In its C2 PPE report, Coffey  recommended that SPRING should more regularly record changes and details 
relating to the implementation on the programme level ToC, to give SPRING opportunities to reflect on the 
planned route of implementation and the rationale for variations to this rou te, and to provide background for 
SPRING to test programme changes and iterations against the ToC assumptions. This recommendation was 
implemented after the Cohort 2 PPE emerging findings workshop in July 2017.  
Coffey  also recommended that the programme To C be used as a guiding tool for programme implementation and 
as a reflective tool for charting progress against the planned path of action, playing a more central role in the 
decision -making process, even if this role is only the recording of changes made.   ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
ANNEX E -2 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
ToC evolution – timeline  
Prior to Cohort 1, the DFID ToC from the SPING Business Case was adopted (version 1) and used for Inception 
and early programme planning and design discussions. Following the addition of the SPRING M&E team, e ach 
year the T oC was reviewed and refined throu gh annual workshops with the IP, SPRING M&E team,  and donors . 
The intent was  to integrate programme learning related to T oC assumptions and causal links, and to reflect 
changes in programme design and implementation.   
Following Cohort 1, the Independent M&E Team (Tetra Tech)  hosted a workshop with the IP, DFID, USAID and 
Nike Foundation to kick off a collaborative process to revise the programme T oC and Logical Framework. The ToC 
was redesigned and finalised in May 2015  (version 2) to guide selection of the first cohort of SPRING businesses.   
Following a ToC workshop in December 2016, the ToC was revised for a second time (version 3). The primary aim 
of the workshop was to review lessons from Cohort 1 in relation to und erlying assumptions in the T oC, and 
considerations for future cohorts. It was found that the overall logic behind the ToC largely held true, with some 
minor modifications made. Version 3 of the ToC was finalised in February 2017 and t he changes applied to it 
reflected  programmatic changes more accurately than the earlier version s. They also reflected learning resulting 
from differences  between  the planned and actual implemented processes.  
Following a third workshop, in December 2017, the ToC was revised aga in (version 4). The main focus of the 
workshop was on lessons learned from Cohort 2 and early feedback from Cohort 3. It was agreed that while the 
overall ToC logic would remain intact, the visual presentation would need to be modified to better emphasise the 
multiple levels of change embedded within it.  
Finally, following a review in December 2018, the ToC’s  visual presentation was modified  again to reflect 
refinements to programme inputs and to reflect learnings of causal pathways to change . This resulte d in Version 5 
and it was finalised in February 2019. The revision ensured that changes in programme thinking were documented 
in the ToC.   
ToC evolution – programme design evolution  
As indicated above, mapping of changes in the ToC provides a useful lens  into how programme thinking evolved 
as many ToC changes were reflective of changes in programme design. Across the five iterations of the SPRING 
ToC, the most significant developments in programme design and implementation that were reflected in SPRING’s 
ToC evolution include:  
• The positioning  of the programme in a wider ecosystem and unpacking of three impact areas or domains;  
• A shift away from girls towards businesses as main recipients of programme input and pathways to change;  
• A shift from HCD as programme  input to primary change agent and objective.  
These are unpacked and elaborated on  in the following pages .  
 
 
 
ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
ANNEX E -3 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Positioning of the programme  in a wider ecosystem  
Desired changes in the broader ecosystem were documented for the first time in version 2, when a separate 
market -level outcome strand was added to reflect the importance of changes in the ecosystem resulting from 
programme communicati ons and demonstration effects. Version 3 of the T oC shows a further shift in this direction, 
with the various stakeholders that affect and are affected by the programme’s communications and demonstration 
effects being further unpacked. This ToC reflects tw o streams of programme activity: the first working with 
businesses and the second working with a wider “ecosystem”. The broader ecosystem replaced the earlier ‘market 
level’ category, which proved insufficient to : 
 “reflect the various stakeholders that af fect and are affected by the programme’s 
communications and demonstration effects”.181  
Version 4 further built on this rationale, reflecting and unpacking SPRING’s approach into three levels: enterprise, 
programme and ecosystem level. The inner level (enter prise) was understood to represents changes within cohort 
businesses as they participate in SPRING and transform programme inputs into outputs, outcomes and, ultimately, 
girl impact. The programme level sits in between enterprise and ecosystem levels, serv ing as a channel for 
learning and resources. The ecosystem level represents the work SPRING does to effect change outside of the 
programme and cohort businesses, including among investors, donors, market actors and other key stakeholders.  
The iterations p resented above speak to the programme’s desire to affect or influence a much broader group of 
actors, particularly externally facing actors, to help improve and stimulate the entrepreneurial, but also broader 
development markets SPRING operated in. The dif ferences between earlier version and later iterations suggest 
that initially this was with the aim  - to stimulat e the wider ecosystem to facilitate better programme implementation 
and adaptation. Towards the later stages of the programme ; However, the focus shifted more towards generating 
learning and evidence for the ecosystem.  
Shift away from girls towards businesses as main recipients of programme input and pathways to change  
This programme thinking is clearly evident in more recent vers ions of the ToC, but can be traced back to version 2, 
when some revisions were made to reflect the limited direct programme input on and contact with girls. It also 
reflected  on girls’ ability to benefit from commercially -based products and services given cultural, behavioural and 
purchasing power constraints . Girls benefitting as a result of accessing products, services and business models 
was also moved from outcome to impact level.   
‘Girls didn’t necessarily have to be the direct purchasers , because girl s don’t actually have 
much purchasing or decision -making power.”182 
The programme’s original hypothesis that having businesses provide direct assets to girls as an effective way to 
impact girls was largely disproven in the first cohort:  
“We saw a lot of exa mples in Cohort 1 where the businesses tried that, but there really wasn’t a 
strong business case for that and as a result, a lot of the businesses from Cohort 1 stopped 
running these girl pilot programmes after SPRING ended, and I think the thinking from direct 
assets changed to the thinking of girls as stakeholders in general, in a business ecosystem”.183 
The first cohort also demonstrated that many of the markets , where SPRING businesses were operating in , were 
underdeveloped. As a result of those learning s, programme thinking around girls as main recipients and pathway to 
change became more flexible, which translated into a shift away from girls in the value chain towards girls as end 
users (indirect and direct) . It also articulated  the rationale that targ eting a broader group of people, not just girls, 
would allow for harnessing various pathways to impact girls.  
Version 3 saw further changes to reflect a shift away from girls as main recipients of input and pathways to change, 
with girl impact level resul ts (girls’ economic empowerment) taken out and replaced by outcome level results 
(safety, wellbeing, learning, earning and saving). Direct girl inputs were taken out entirely (girl engagement and 
consultations).  
 
181 SPRING IP overview of SPRING TOC Evolution  
182 PPE Interview 2019 – AIP20 13052019  
183 PPE Interview 2019 – AFP35 30042019  ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
ANNEX E -4 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
Further, several initial assumptions around business maturity and needs were gradually disproven. For instance, 
businesses  were found to be less advanced in developing and formulating their offer than initially assumed. 
Businesses were also found less able  to identify and articulate their challenges and needs in the market. One IP 
stated:  
 “I think that their hypothesis would therefore be a little more validated and I think we discovered 
they were at an earlier stage than we thought and that they didn’t kno w their users or their 
markets as well as they thought. Their products were less developed. They may not already 
have product market fit. ”184 
This programme learning prompted a greater focus on business growth and sustainability, including prototype 
developm ent, launch, marketing and investment readiness, sometimes at the cost of the girl focus.  
“You could reach large numbers of people which is always going to be good for the business but it dilutes a 
focus,  it does dilute a focus on adolescent girls for sure.”185 
 
Resources and other programme inputs were redirected towards providing businesses a greater level of support – 
initially only provided as part of the bootcamp process – to help overcome those challenges.  
“[The other assumption that proved to be fa lse was] that we could, in that week with the 
collective resources of Spring, create a plan and a strategy and be assets that they could use to 
go to market and solve the problem  (..) Like we are experts in that, we as a consortium were 
experts in that pro cess and we needed to hold their hand through that process longer, 
basically”186 
As SPRING’s understanding of businesses and their ability to impact girls gradually changed, so did the rationale 
around where the greatest potential for change lies and how the  programme could best achieve this with the 
available resources. For instance, the selection of quality businesses became a necessary part of the programme 
logic, rather than the receipt of quality applications for each cohort. In version 3, revisions were  made to reflect this 
shift in programme thinking.  
“So I think we got much clearer on the types of challenges that we, as a consortium, were well 
positioned to help solve. And so what we went to was looking for businesses that really, and by 
cohort four w e actually had, as part of our assessment criteria, it was not just like what is the 
business, what are they solving, what is their traction? ”187 
Version 4 was an overhaul of earlier versions and reflected a strong focus on the business accelerator function of 
SPRING, with businesses becoming the main recipients of programme input and pathways to change. Girls impact 
pathways were now considered as inherent to the business. For instance, prototype launch was considered to be a 
pre-requisite for girl access to  products, reflecting the main focus of programme activities on enabling businesses 
to launch in market. Inputs were refined to reflect the “customised accelerator experience” offered to businesses 
and the possible inputs carefully tailored to the needs of  each SPRING business.  At the output level , the text 
“SPRING participants reach adolescent girls” was changed to “SPRING participants launch prototypes designed to 
reach and benefit adolescent girls”.  
Version 5 saw final changes that reflected further ref inement to SPRING’s offering of programme inputs to 
businesses, as a  “customised accelerator experience”  and other possible inputs carefully tailored to the needs of 
each SPRING business. These offerings included  the BAF, conducting further HCD research, a nd the provision of 
more comprehensive capital raising support  were added as additional programme inputs. The attraction of external 
investment, and businesses ’ continued use of HCD were added as  important SPRING outcome s.  
The iterations outlined above sp eak to the programme’s tensions between being a  business accelerator  promoting 
businesses to focus on girls as a potential market , and a girl-focused programme  using businesses as vehicles to 
impact on their economic lives . The ToC’s evolution demonstrates that SPRING gradually learned where the 
biggest challenges and opportunities lie, and where the programme was best able to achieve impact, with a greater 
 
184 PPE Interview 2019 – AFP35 30042019  
185 PPE Interview 2019 – AIP 33 26042019  
186 PPE Interview 2019 – AFP35 30042019  
187 PPE Interview 2019 – AFP35 30042019  ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
ANNEX E -5 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
emph asis on supporting businesses to focus on girls as a potential market. This translated into the prioritisation of 
enabling business viability and growth.  
Shift from HCD as programme input to primary change agent and outcome  
While the original SPRING assu mption was that HCD would lead to businesses developing sustainable solutions 
for girls . Through the use of HCD  in implementation , experiences of programme delivery demonstrated this 
assumption to be false. However, it was found that many businesses  valued  HCD and  continued using it, even 
when it was not directly targeted at solutions for girls, suggesting sustainability of HCD as a tool for business 
improvement rather than as a tool for reaching girls.  
“So I think what’s really  interesting is that some of  the businesses that did so well from Human 
Centre Design, were not those that did so well from a girl impact perspective. ”188 
Version 2 of the ToC saw HCD appearing as a primary change agent, assuming that the boot camp modules would 
enable businesses to be tter understand the needs of adolescent girls at the BoP . The assumption was that 
businesses  absorb the principles of HCD and apply them in their own business to develop a product, service, or 
business model that meets the needs of adolescent girls as end users; and establish effective strategies for 
reaching girls. However, after the first cohort many prototypes had failed, prompting SPRING to reassess the level 
of support provided to businesses, including the bootcamp process. It also caused the recogniti on that HCD was 
not the change agent it was assumed to be.  
“We were kind of preaching this HCD methodology and we had taken that methodology in 
developing the program me, we were asking businesses to do it but then we weren’t giving them 
the chance to go t hrough the full process with us. ”189 
A second bootcamp was introduced to allow for more research, testing and iteration prior to prototype launch. This 
includes a two -month period in between bootcamps in which businesses went out to apply the principles of H CD in 
their girl research and test their prototypes. Version 3 of the ToC reflects this change in rationale . The  application of 
HCD, not just the absorption, would result in an improved understanding of girls’ needs and improved girl reach.  
“So, having th ose two cycles rather than just one, where they came to Boot Camp, thought of a 
great idea and then went to market with it, I feel like we had much more potentially viable 
prototypes going into the market after that second Boot Camp, starting with Cohort 2 . And then 
of course, I feel that that sort of viability got even stronger as we improved the HCD research 
process in between Cohorts 2 and 3. So I would say that that was absolutely critical. ”190 
Version 5 identifies the  continued use of HCD as an important  SPRING outcome , particularly with regards to 
sustainability. Specific changes were made to reflect the continued use of HCD by businesses, even when not 
committed to girl -focused solutions, as an important outcome. While in earlier versions, it was assume d that, when 
businesses apply HCD and other SPRING -provided assistance , they would  provide market -based solutions 
benefitting girls . In turn,  girls would access these and business would as a result  increase revenue, attract external 
investment and ultimately remain focused on girls. However, this was found to be less sustainable than anticipated, 
with many businesses losing their girl focus. In the absence of girls focus sustainability ; However, man y businesses 
remained committed to the use of HCD.191 HCD was therefore considered an important outcome of programme 
inputs.  
 “What that meant is that the quality of insights that came back, both qualitative and quantitative 
were of high enough fidelity tha t we, as S PRING , could determine a kind of plan for them. I 
think the other thing that changed was that we, and this is all kind of part and parcel of the 
change in approach, but we were then able to apply more bespoke, tailored, focused , 
responsive resour ces to each business. ”192 
 
188 PPE Interview 2019 – AIP 33 26042019  
189 PPE Interview 2019 – AFP35 30042019  
190 PPE Interview 2019 – AIP23 23052019  
191 SPRING overview of SPRING TOC Evolution  
192 PPE Interview 2019 – AFP35 30042019  ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
ANNEX E -6 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
In light of the broader shift in programme rationale towards businesses as a primary recipient of programme inputs, 
the shift towards HCD as a primary agent of change is not  surprising. HCD proved an effective tool for business 
deve lopment, allowing SPRING to tailor its offer to businesses and allocate its resources based on business 
needs. The aim of placing a greater emphasis on supporting businesses to understand, adopt and apply HCD was 
to promote HCD as a primary agent of change . SPRING learned that in the absence of the anticipated change , its 
HCD approach was nevertheless successful and sustainable in helping businesses overcome some of the 
challenges pertaining to starting and growing a business, prompting a shift in rationale  towards the use HCD as an 
end in itself.  
Conclusions  
Mapping of the ToC can be a useful exercise  in exploring the evolution of programme rationale, but it also can be 
useful in supporting learning and answering questions that may help answering some of t he broader evaluation 
questions. For instance, a number of learning points can be drawn  from this exercise:  
• SPRING was indeed an iterative programme  and its ToC revisions are reflective of this. The iterations 
documented in the ToC demonstrate various adaptations to programme rationale and implementation. 
Elements of the  content of the programme , inputs,  outcomes , and the methodology were  all adapted over the 
course of the programme. Learning from evaluation and programme implementation, although primarily the 
latter, were used to adapt and influence the inputs and those elements of the content, methodology and 
outcomes that were deemed insufficient or  ineffective.  
• SPRING was a business accelerator  promoting businesses to focus on girls as a potential market . The 
question around the programme’s tensions between being a  business accelerator  promoting businesses to 
focus on girls as a potential market  and a girl-focused programme,  using businesses as vehicles to impact on 
their economic lives  was repeatedly raised by the Tetra Tech M&E Team .193 The iterations documented in the 
various versions of the ToC demonstrate that the programme moved away from girls to businesses as the 
main focus of the programme. As businesses became the main pathways to change, they also became the 
main recipients of programme inputs and any programme inputs were caref ully tailored to meet the needs of 
businesses. Girl impact was now considered inherent to business impact.  
• SPRING did not fully utilise the ToC review process . Better utilising the ToC process may have helped 
steer the programme focus back to its anticipa ted outcomes. Things that could have enabled SPRING to 
better utilise the ToC workshops and review processes and steer back the programme to a greater focus on 
girl impact include:  
o Timing of ToC workshops and cohorts . Allowing more time for learning betwe en cohorts and 
workshops, but also between cohorts, may have allowed for better programme iteration. SPRING 
shortened its implementation cycle from twelve to nine months, which limited the opportunity to 
reflect and iterate. More time between cohorts and T oC workshops would have allowed more time 
for reflection, learning and iteration. For instance, findings from the Tetra Tech  evaluation could 
have better supported  SPRING to the potential risk of moving away from girls focus  in light of the 
nature of the programme or  allowed for more early discussions around potential trade -offs between 
breadth of reach and depth of impact.  
o Early and continued donor engagement on programme learning . Engaging donors early on in 
more and continued discussions around programm e learning and iteration could have steered the 
programme back to its original aims and allowed for the focus to remain on achieving depth of 
impact rather than breadth of reach. SPRING was required to perform against girl reach numbers, 
which it successfu lly did, but arguably at the cost of maximising impact  and sustainability.  Early 
discussion with donors on programme learning may have alerted to the risk of focusing primarily on 
achieving girl reach targets and highlighted the need of adjusting targets t o allow for more focus on 
girl impact and innovation early on. For instance, revision of targets could have allowed SPRING 
more flexibility to work with businesses less likely to reach scale, but more likely to achieve greater 
impact.  
o Flexibility for SPRI NG’s experimental feature. Building in enough flexibility to facilitate a greater 
focus on the experimental nature of the programme could have steered the programme away from 
primarily pursuing girl reach numbers through working with businesses that were m ore likely to 
 
193 Coffey, Cohort 2 Programme Performance Evaluation Report , March 2018  ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
ANNEX E -7 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  OFFICIAL  
reach scale. At the same time, it could have allowed SPRING to work more with innovative 
businesses that were more likely to achieve greater and sustainable impact. This includes the 
flexibility for failure to achieve pre -defined targets in l ight of experimental outcomes. The ToC 
workshops and review processes , in particular , could have been an opportunity to re -emphasise 
the experimental nature of the programme, to ensure donors and the SPRING programme team 
maintained an appetite in the prog ramme being experimental, and to agree on the value of 
experimental outcomes.  
  
ANNEX E -8 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  Version 1  
 
  
Key
SPRING activities/processes
Expected resultsIMPACTEntrepreneurs develop, market and distribute 
products to benefit girlsImproved business practices/ performance
Girls access products that enable learning, 
earning, saving, and saving labour time
Evidence  of success captured and communicated 
widely and provokes interest through demonstration 
effectsChallenge competition and support to 
entrepreneurs (direct funding, tech assistance,  
mentorship, linkages to investors, etc.)
Increased 
salesIncreased 
revenueIncreased 
external 
investment
Business growth and scalabilityExpansion 
to new 
marketsOUTPUTS
Girls' economic and broader empowerment -
brief definition (e.g. greater ownership and control of assets, voice, agency, etc.)OUTCOMESIncreased #  and scale of businesses 
focusing on products for girlsIncreased investment in 
products for girls
Market changes due to demonstration effectsInfluence of enabling environmentOutreach, M&E, and Communications
Increased 
regular 
earningsIncreased 
school 
attendance/ Reduced 
unpaid work 
timeIncreased 
savings  and 
asset base
Increased resources and economic opportunities for girls
Reduced poverty of women and girlsImproved perceptions of girls' worth, and g reater agency, voice, 
and decision making power of girlsCollaboration with other girls' 
empowerment initiatives to 
address enabling environment 
ANNEX E -9 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  Version 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10 Version 3  
ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
 
ANNEX E -1 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  
 Version 4  
ANNEX E - EVOLUTION O F THE SPRING THEORY OF CHANGE  
 
ANNEX E -2 
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2 020  
 Version 5  
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -1 Annex F: Value for Money Analysis  
High-Level Findings  
Economy:  How well did SPRING minimise the cost of resources used or required (inputs), without 
compromising on quality?  
SPRING made conscious decisions about how to maximise value for the programme. However, the cost and 
financial implications of these decisions was not always transparent or shown to be competitively sourced. 
Decision -making around resource allocations and budgeting wa s also fragmented and unclear. To bypass these 
challenges, SPRING innovated by saving. SPRING was able to save 0.7% of its total cost, which it reinvested into 
businesses as an additional round of challenge funding.  
Efficiency:  How well did SPRING convert inputs into outputs?  
SPRING delivered all of its activities on time. Overall, SPRING was efficient and lean in its implementation, given 
the resources it had. The programme was also able to adapt quickly to improve for future cohorts. Strategic 
partnership s were seen as a cost -effective method for leveraging additional resources.  
Effectiveness:  How well have outputs had their intended effect?  
SPRING has mostly achieved its outcome -level targets of attracting external investment, increasing prototype sales 
and reaching girls. SPRING improved businesses’ ability to develop a girl -focused product but over time moved 
away from specifically girl -focused businesses. In terms of external investment, SPRING businesses were able to 
attract over £38m in funding. Most investment was focused on East African businesses. Sales growth was mixed, 
with prototype revenue showing a decreasing trend over time. Regarding girls reached, SPRING exceeded its 
target, even without Ubongo. However, there is emerging evidence from the i mpact evaluations that the sample of 
IE prototypes have not fully achieved their objective of contributing to girls’ economic empowerment.  
Equity:  How well did SPRING target the disadvantaged?  
SPRING was equitable in terms of gender, local representation, socioeconomic status and disability.  
Cost -effectiveness:  What were the costs of the outcomes of interest?  
Return on direct SPRING investment was greater than 1 in terms of external investment leveraged, meaning that 
businesses generally lev eraged more monetarily than the funds SPRING invested. However, in terms of prototype 
revenue, the ROI of SPRING financial support was on average less than 1. Cost per girl reached was £6.82 
(£45.81 excluding Ubongo). This decreased over time. Stay Healthy  interventions were the most cost -effective per 
girl reached. Earn and Save prototypes were the least cost -effective.  
Conclusion  
Based on the  evidence gathered, there is mixed evidence that SPRING provided good value for money. The 
programme made conscious  decisions to seek the best resources for technical assistance (value). However, 
procurement decisions and resource allocation were not always optimal or competitively sourced. Nevertheless, 
SPRING was efficient in its implementation and learned and iterat ed a great deal during its lifetime. The 
programme delivered within its timeframe, met its outcome -level indicators and demonstrated equity in its targeting. 
However, there is emerging evidence that the impact of SPRING prototypes on girls may be limited. It is yet to be 
seen how sustainable SPRING’s outcomes are in the medium - to long -term. In terms of cost -effectiveness, 
SPRING was able to leverage a proportionately greater return in external investment on direct financial support to 
businesses. Yet, SPRI NG’s investment has not generated a proportionate increase in prototype sales. Regarding 
cost per girl reached, it is difficult to judge how relatively cost -effective the programme has been without being able 
to compare it with similar interventions elsewh ere. 
  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -2 1. Introduction and Framework  
1.1. Purpose  
Value for Money (VfM) is defined as the optimal use of resources to achieve intended outcomes194. Within the 
context of SPRING, this means determining whether the best combination of resources was used and whether th ey 
were justified on the basis of programme outputs and outcomes. Given the evidence, this VfM assessment is 
intended to provide a better understanding of the programme’s inputs (financial, non -financial), decision -making 
processes and results to determine  whether SPRING has made the best possible choice and use of resources to 
maximise its impact. This assessment is also intended to provide evidence -based learning to inform similar 
interventions and/ or future development programming.  
1.2. Approach to assessing  value for money  
Judgment criteria  
This VfM analysis utilises a ‘value first’ approach, in which the VfM of SPRING is framed around the programme’s 
achievement of its intended outcomes (value derived).  
We will look at ‘value’ as what is defined in the prog ramme’s Theory of Change (TOC), first identifying the 
programme’s aims and then determining to what extent SPRING achieved its intended results. Given the data 
available, and using proxies where necessary, we will assign costs to different programme outcom es. The 
programme’s VfM will be a judgment of whether the inputs required were justified given the value the programme 
achieved.  
We will examine value for money at the business and girl impact levels, testing SPRING’s nested TOC and 
examining the programme ’s costs per different outcomes (e.g. return on direct financial investment, girls reached). 
A VfM analysis of the business ecosystem is not feasible given a scarcity of historical data, the complexity of the 
ecosystem and lack of attributable pathways, an d lagged market effects which will likely only materialise in the 
future.  
Framework  
We use DFID’s ‘4 E’s’ (economy, efficiency, effectiveness, equity) as a framework to assess value for money 
(Table 1 ). Based on an analysis of costs and impact achieved, we  will compute the programme’s cost -effectiveness 
for different outcomes of interest.  
Table 1. SPRING Value for Money framework  
‘E’ In the context of SPRING  Rationale and example  
Economy  How well did SPRING minimise the cost of resources used 
or required (inputs), without compromising on quality?  Spending less  
E.g. Competitive procurement 
process  
Efficiency  How well did SPRING convert inputs into outputs?  Spending well  
E.g. Lean implementation; low 
management costs  
Effectiveness  How well have outputs had their intended effect?  Spending wisely  
E.g. Number of girls reached  
Equity  How well did SPRING target the disadvantaged?  Spending fairly  
E.g. Gender, socioeconomic 
targeting, local representation, 
geography  
 
Cost -effectiveness analysis  
Where possible, we will use cost -effectiveness analysis to assess the VfM of different layers of SPRING’s Theory 
of Change. We will look at the ratio of inputs (monetised) to certain outcomes of interest, namely return on direct 
 
194 National Audit Office, Assessing value for money. https://www.nao.org.uk/successful -commissioning/genera l-principles/value -for-money/assessing -value -for-
money/#  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -3 SPRING investment for busin esses 195 and girl reach. We could not use cost -benefit analysis because of a lack of 
relevant and accurate data to measure the lifetime social and economic returns on different types of investments 
across diverse contexts. The diversity of programme outcomes  and impacts, some of which are intangible, also 
makes standardisation challenging. All cost -effectiveness calculations of girl reach have been done both with and 
without Ubongo, as Ubongo reached a total of 2,156,880 girls and is thus an outlier 196. This is  consistent with how 
SPRING reported on its own performance following Cohort 3.  
1.3 Data sources  
This analysis draws upon a combination of quantitative and qualitative data gathered by Coffey and SPRING:  
Primary data  
• Programme Performance Evaluation (PPE) key informant interviews (KIIs): conducted by Coffey at the end of 
Cohort 1, Cohort 2, and summative interviews conducted after Cohort 4. The interviews were conducted with 
businesses and key decision -makers from the Implementing Partner (IP), Fuse and donors.  
• PPE End of Cohort (EOC) surveys: conducted with businesses at all end of cohort events, asking businesses 
to rate their experience with technical assistance received.  
• Business Performance Evaluation (BPE) thematic reports: on girl targeting.  
• BPE sustainab ility interviews: conducted with businesses during Cohorts 1, 2 and 3.  
• Impact Evaluation (IE) data: collected with two businesses across each cohort 197. Of the eight planned 
impact evaluations, at the time of writing, five have been completed through endline  reporting: Shekina (C1, 
Rwanda), Totohealth (C1, Kenya), Paritran (C2, Nepal), iSocial (C2, Bangladesh), Ubongo (C3, Tanzania).  
Secondary data  
• M&E data from the Implementing Partner (IP): The SPRING M&E team has been collecting data from the start 
of the programme on business financial performance (revenue, profit, investment leveraged, etc.) and 
beneficiary data (girls reached). Given their proximity to businesses, the M&E team was able to gather 
detailed historical data covering the lifetime of the progr amme.  
• KPI data from businesses: All businesses were required to report on key performance indicators during the 
programme.  
• SPRING process data: SPRING’s documentation of decision -making processes (e.g. selection, funding) and 
other structural / programmati c changes.  
• SPRING financial data: SPRING spend data, including overhead, direct financial support to businesses in the 
form of PDF and BAF funding, and funds leveraged in -kind198 (pro bono / low bono), which were verified by 
Coffey until July 2017.  
• Donor rep orts: on SPRING’s performance, namely DFID Annual Reviews and Reports up to 2019.  
1.4 Limitations  
The key methodological limitations are as follows:  
• Standardising and aggregating impact : SPRING is a richly complex programme that operates in varied 
contexts, through different interventions, actors and beneficiaries. It is thus extremely difficult to systematically 
standardise and aggregate the programme’s value, as with aggregation much of the meaning and detail is 
lost. This analysis attempts to tri angulate quantitative data with qualitative findings to create a more holistic 
narrative around value for money at the programme level.  
• Capturing intangible benefits : In addition to improved quantitative indicators (e.g. girls reached, investment 
leveraged ), many of SPRING’s benefits  are intangible (e.g. businesses’ capacity to apply HCD and girls’ 
 
195 Investment leveraged is defined as the return on direct financial investment to businesses (in the form of PDF and BAF fundin g). Outputs as a result of SPRING 
direct financial investment are  extern al investment attracted  and increased sales . 
196 The average number of girls reached per business, excluding Ubongo, is 5,632.  
197 Due to selection difficulties, one of the Cohort 3 Impact Evaluation businesses, AcceleratED, was replaced with a Cohort 2 bu siness, JBS.  
198 SPRING defin es in -kind contributions as any negotiated savings on time, services and resources, or any non -cash contribution provided by an agency or 
organisation or an individual other than DFID, USAID, the Nike Foundation or DFAT. In -kind cont ributions can either be low -bono or pro -bono. Low -bono is defined 
as money saved through provision of under -market rate time, resources or location costs (venue or accommodation), or other service. It is calculated by subtracting 
the actual cost negotiated  by SPRING from the market -rate cost of the service. Pro -bono is any in -kind contribution that is provided at no cost, resulting in money 
saved. (Source: PIRS Output Indicator 4.2, January 2018)  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -4 increase in confidence, agency and quality of life). It is immensely difficult to quantify these changes. We have 
endeavoured to the extent possible to capture t hese changes, given the data available.  
• Capturing the benefits of adaptive programming: SPRING is an experimental programme, and much of its 
change has been non -linear. As such, part of SPRING’s value is the knowledge that it has gained through 
learning ov er time. However, given the difficulty in capturing value derived from adaptive programming, this 
analysis assumes that SPRING’s outcomes (i.e. improved business capacity and girl reach) are a 
manifestation of all developments throughout the programme’s li fetime. The specific processes that led to 
these changes are detailed in the Effectiveness section of the many body of this report.  
• Data limitations: Where possible, we use proxies and triangulate findings from multiple sources to produce 
well-informed con clusions. Nevertheless, numerous data limitations restrict the scope of our analysis. These 
include:  
o Heavy reliance on SPRING -reported M&E data.  
o Heavy reliance on businesses’ self -reporting (ability to collect, store and analyse data) and limited 
spot checks for verification.  
o Lack of proper disaggregations of girl reach and cost data, and resultant difficulty in averaging 
across heterogeneous parts.  
o Loss of institutional memory due to staff turnover. This is particularly relevant for Key Informant 
Interviews (KIIs) with programme staff. We tried to mitigate this by maintaining contact with past 
staff and asking them for interviews, though we were not always successful.  
o Difficulties in estimating, monetising and verifying in -kind support.  
o Lack of impact d ata across all businesses.  
• Wider ‘value’ (effects and benefits) are not captured : Value is defined in this assessment as improved 
business capacity to attract investment, improve sales and reach and benefit adolescent girls. Where 
possible, we also present  emerging findings of girl impact. Due to insufficient data (historical and future), this 
analysis does not capture  indirect benefits, or spillover, multiplier or displacement effects from programme 
activities. This analysis does not assess effects on the market ecosystem due to a lack of data and difficulty in 
defining attributable impact pathways.  
• Difficulty in capturing ‘value’ and the persistence of benefits beyond the lifetime of the programme : 
The extent to which businesses, girls and other stakeholde rs will continue to benefit after the initial 
intervention is unknown. To some extent, this may be affected by whether activities are likely to continue after 
programme end. However, persistence may also be affected by the type of capacity programme benefi ciaries 
have developed  as a result of an intervention and the extent to which this enables them to progress at the 
same trajectory through life. However, there are already emerging trends which we can extrapolate from 
earlier cohorts on how impact has or h as not been sustained. Sustainability of businesses and girl impact will 
be explored further in the Summative BPE Report.  
• SPRING is not comparable like for like to other programmes : It is not possible to compare SPRING’s 
value for money relative to other p rogrammes, as SPRING is unique in its structure, technical assistance and 
impact pathways. SPRING’s Theory of Change indicates that the programme has three pathways: it is 
simultaneously i) a business accelerator , ii) a girl -focused programme and iii) an H CD initiative. 199 The VfM 
judgment of the programme is thus based on the programme’s own performance relative to its Theory of 
Change.  
1.4. Structure of this report  
Section 1  outlines the theoretical framework and data sources used in the analysis, as well as lim itations. Section 
2 presents the evidence of SPRING’s value for money, vis -à-vis its Economy, Efficiency, Effectiveness, Equity and 
Cost-Effectiveness. Section 3  concludes to what extent SPRING offered good value for money, based on the 
given evidence.  
 
199 Cohort 2 Programme Performance Evaluation (PPE) Report Marc h 2018.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -5 2. Reporting on the 4 E’s  
2.1. Economy  
How did SPRING spend its money?  
According to the Implementing Partner (IP), the total cost of SPRING from August 2014 – September 2019 was 
£17,286,687 . This was comprised of three categories:  
• Milestone fees (£1,371,779):  The IP did not detail what this category entails.  
• Personnel fees (£ 5,482,787):  Comprised  of long -term and short -term input.  
• Expenses (£10,437,006):  Comprised  of travel, equipment, operating, grants, and programme activities.  
A breakdown of total costs is presented in Figure 1 . These are the most detailed disaggregations w e could 
calculate, given the data the IP provided in terms of programme spend. We were not given specific costs by year or 
cohort, nor by more detailed programme activity (i.e. bootcamps). However, using SPRING M&E data, we were 
able to determine the cost of direct financial support to businesses, in the form of a Prototype Development Fund 
(PDF) and Business Assistance Fund (BAF), as well as the cost of HCD research.  
SPRING shared that their management costs totalled to £1,145,765, or 7% of total programme  spend.  
Figure 1. Financial spending on SPRING  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Direct support to businesses accounted for less than one -fifth of all spending  
Although the IP classified 25% of programme spending as ‘Grants’, they did not specify what this entails. Utilising 
SPRING M&E data, we were able to compute the total value of direct  financial support to businesses, which is the 
sum of all PDF and BAF fund ing. 
Direct financial support to businesses in the form of the Prototype Development Fund (PDF) and Business 
Assistance Fund (BAF) was £3,074,717 , or 17.8% of all programme spend.  
• Prototype Development Fund (PDF):  The total amount of PDF disbursed to busin esses was £2,865,406.37. 
All businesses in Cohort 1 received the same amount of PDF. Once funding  became differentiated in Cohort 
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -6 2, six businesses in total did not receive any funding: three business in Cohort 2, two business in Cohort 3, 
and one business  in Cohort 4. The average amount of funding received across all businesses was £38,205.42 
(see Figure 2). The highest level of PDF funding was distributed in Cohort 1. Following the restructuring of 
PDF funding, the total amount of PDF received per busines s dropped. However, from Cohort 2 to Cohort 4, 
the average level of PDF received per business increased over time.  
• Business Assistance Fund (BAF)200: The BAF was a sum of unallocated spending that was disbursed as 
a second round of challenge funding for all businesses in Q2 2019. Businesses were selected on a needs -
basis by SPRING. Select businesses were invited to apply and specify where and how the f unds would be 
directed towards supporting their prototype. In sum, £209,310 was allocated to 36 businesses through the 
BAF.  
Figure 2. Total amount of direct SPRING financial investment (PDF, BAF)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What were the main cost drivers of SPRING?  
According to interviews with SPRING staff members, the main cost drivers for SPRING were the bootcamps, HCD 
technical assistance and HCD research. However, SPRING was unable to provide disaggregated financial data on 
programme spend, meaning we hav e been unable to triangulate these findings to validate actual programme costs.  
Bootcamps:   
There were conflicting opinions as to whether the costs related to bootcamps constituted good value for money.  
Some businesses felt that the programme was not good value for money because a disproportionate amount of 
funds was spent on bootcamps. Nepalese p articipants felt that bootcamps were unnecessarily expensive and that 
the learning achieved could have been attained in another context that cost much less. In the se business’ opinions, 
reallocating money to businesses to invest in their prototypes, or to Country Managers to allocate as appropriate, 
would have had a greater impact on entrepreneurs and by extension, beneficiaries and the marketplace.  However, 
this wo uld not have reduced the overall cost of the programme.   
A similar view is expressed by some of the country managers.  
 “I think the country managers in Nepal provide massive value for money, above and beyond. 
We had zero budget, so it was just our time, s o we didn't spend any money. We managed to 
get a tiny amount for these two events, but it was a few hundred dollars, that was it. We did a 
 
200 Adjusted at SPRING -documented exchange rates into GBP where necessary.  
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -7 lot with very limited resources, which I think was in vast contrast to the amount of resources that 
were spent on the  bootcamps, which did not provide value for money, in my opinion.”201 
However, this local perspective contrasts to Fuse’s belief that a certain dynamic and face -to-face interaction for 
HCD exposure and development at bootcamps could not have been replicated using other methodologies. We 
explore other views relating to the costs and importance of bootcamps later in this section. Without specific 
breakdowns of implementation costs, including of bootcamp, we are unable to disprove what has been sugges ted 
above that bootcamps were poor economy.  
Fuseproject : According to a senior SPRING staff member , Fuse was the main cost driver of programme 
implementation. Nevertheless, during the proposal stage, SPRING consciously opted to go with Fuse because they 
provided the best value for the programme. Aware of their high cost, SPRING did not mark -up Fuse in the budget 
proposal, indicating that the programme sought to provide the best option for the lowest cost.  
“[Fuse was] the most expensive element of the progra mme, of the budget…also in terms of 
delivery and technical assistance…Palladium decided to go with the best, wanting to partner 
with Fuse at the time who were the best, who had the most innovative approach for executing 
this programme…[When we] were pullin g the budget together for SPRING at the time of 
proposal, [we realised] that it just wasn't feasible to put a margin on Fuse because they were 
already so high. Their fee rate already exceeded the highest fee rate…The only way around it 
was to just make it a direct pass through and know that Palladium wouldn't make any money on 
them. But I think we also saw the benefit of SPRING as a really innovative pilot, a really 
innovative programme and a unique aspect of that was the partnership and Palladium was 
willing to take that.” 202 
Extrapolating from the cost data provided, non -management personnel accounted for 27% of all programme spend 
(£4,594,060). Although we do not know comprehensively what proportion of non -management personnel costs are 
attributed to Fuse,  these figures suggest that the cost of Fuse was relatively high.  
Research : Research was identified as the third main cost driver of SPRING. Research for the programme took on 
two forms: i) the girl landscaping research that was conducted by SPRING’s Girl Technical Expert ahead of 
bootcamps, and ii) the HCD research that was cond ucted for businesses between bootcamps. Qualitative evidence 
indicates that both types of research were deemed quite cumbersome, particularly for a programme of limited 
resources like SPRING.  
For girl landscaping, SPRING’s Girl Technical Expert who was in charge of the research remarked that the 
research was too expensive and lengthy to fit within SPRING’s tight timelines.  
“We learned a lot from C1, that the type of landscaping we did in C1 was too much like 
academic research, or research for the design of a development programme…I'd never worked 
with the private sector before, so I wasn't quite sure what people needed to know...So we 
gathered a lot of really interesting stuff that didn't translate into 'so what' and 'now what' for 
businesses in C1. It was i nteresting, but it wasn't as relevant as it needed to be. That's fine, we 
learned, we iterated. [For C3] I did secondary scoping to plug the gaps because the research 
wasn't relevant enough…So we did specific, really surgical research into sectors in the 
countries where we were not familiar, as well as sectors where we didn't feel like we had 
enough information in countries where we'd previously done landscaping...It was mainly to 
inform me so that I could work with the businesses better...So we did that in  all five countries 
and we picked specific issues that we wanted to dive in a little deeper to fill gaps in our own 
knowledge and in the secondary data. And we will do it differently in C4. The C2 landscaping 
research was extraordinary, but it was way, way , way too heavy for us to continue to do again. 
It cost too much, and it took too long. It's such amazing research, but it was too much and too 
heavy for a programme like SPRING to carry and I can't get it done in the time.”203 
On HCD research, country manag ers noted the top -heavy nature of the HCD research, particularly at the beginning 
of the programme, which was believed to be bulky and bureaucratic. Country managers thought that by 
 
201 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – ACM09  
202 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
203 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP33.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -8 streamlining the process and involving entrepreneurs more, research would be more relevant, cost -effective and 
have local ownership.  
“The research could have been done in a much more streamlined and affordable, cost -effective 
way. I think the prototyping research was done in a very heavy, expensive way that had limited 
impact. I t feels like a really heavy programme and therefore expensive, and I think it needs a 
complete rethink in terms of the value for money question: what actually has impact? How best 
to work with entrepreneurs in developing countries? ... [Businesses need to be] more engaged 
with the research, to see the value of it… [This would also] reduce all the delay because it 
would be much more of a distributed research process rather than a heavy, top -down [one].” 204 
We were not given any cost data on the girl landscapi ng research. However, SPRING M&E data provided 
information on the cost of HCD research per business in Cohorts 2 -4. The cost of HCD research decreased over 
time, from £322,216 (Cohort 2), £294,100 (Cohort 3) to £206,583 (Cohort 4), as did the variance in h ow much 
businesses received for research (Figure 3). The provider of the research also changed, from Kantar in Cohorts 2 
and 3 to Proportion in Cohort 4. This reflected a shift in SPRING’s move to a competitive procurement process. 
HCD research was not sys tematically conducted with all Cohort 1 businesses. No data on research costs was 
available for Cohort 1 businesses.  
Figure 3. Cost of HCD research per business (Cohorts 2 -4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Minimum refers to the smallest sum of HCD research received by any business in a given cohort. Maximum refers to the largest amount.  
 
How did SPRING decide on how to spend its money?  
There was an initial lack of clarity in the consortium over resource allocation  
Many SPRING staff members remarked on a lack of transparency in budget or spending authority within the 
consortium: “There were blurred lines about whose responsibility it was [to own the budget and budget decision -
making ]…As we moved into C3, we tried to refine that and give the team leader that autonomy…But I think 
because of the kind of track record to date, that’s what it was all the way through.”205 
However, over time, the consortium became more aligned in terms of articulating a singular vision, particu larly 
around structural and procurement decision -making.  
SPRING made conscious decisions around how to maximise the value of technical assistance  
 
204 C2, PPE KII respondent 2.  
205 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -9 SPRING staff felt the selection of Fuse, the splitting of bootcamps and HCD research were central to SPRING’s 
value -add. According to one SPRING staff member, every component of SPRING is essential, and in fact 
additional resources would have helped the programme extract more value in the process: “the bootcamps, all of 
the modules  and all the content, all the wor k that Fuse deliver is core. It's the core nucleus of SPRING. It's the 
differentiating factor. We're not an accelerator programme in the traditional sense…I don't think there's an aspect 
that I'll say is not essential because all of it is, and if anything,  I would say more resources would enable us to 
deliver on more.” 206 
 
On bootcamp, another staff member shared that the decision to hold two bootcamps per cohort, although more 
expensive, generated more value relative to the cost.  
“The fact that we now have two bootcamps instead of one…although they're very different and 
have different needs, essentially, it's double the cost. There's value in that because we know 
that, actually, by doing some of the upfront work around breaking the business apart, breaking 
the prototype apart, really understanding it better, and then helping them build it back up to then 
identify all these questions, move into research, get the answers, some of which they may be 
surprised by, some they may expect, and then saying, what does t his now mean for my 
prototype? I think having that trajectory rather than cramming it all together and having research 
and then saying that didn't match with what I expected and I don't quite know now how to apply 
it to my business or my business prototype ...So although it's a big cost driver, I think it's 
bringing a lot more value because it's a much more bookended process.” 207 
On HCD research, SPRING acknowledged the importance of research for the programme:  
“Another big cost driver is the research. For C1 , my understanding is that not everyone got 
research, and some of the wider research needs were mocked up by prototyping in context 
which was conducted by Fuse and which isn't really how it should be when you're looking at an 
HCD -driven programme. But obvi ously, developing, designing and implementing the research is 
expensive...But again, there's value there. As much as C2 was really challenging and had lot of 
issues, we still got some really useful learning and so, being able to improve the process for C3,  
it's exciting...the value there is not pricelist, but it's really important and the only way to do that 
is to spend around this additional support.”208 
However, a senior SPRING staff member commented that relative to other components, the amount of money 
allocated to HCD and its associated research, was disproportionate, referencing again the lack of flexibility in 
budget reallocation.  
“At a broader level, I just think that, given the multiplicity of SPRING's goals, I would have 
challenged and said are we re ally spending this much on HCD activities when all these other 
things are completely underfunded? There's a complete mismatch here. Now you could say, 
actually, the programme should just have had fewer objectives, which I might argue, but if we're 
going to  have this many objectives, there should be some way of achieving value for money by 
combining, and I've had a limited ability to do that because the design and the budget were 
specified before I ever came on board and they're locked in. There's no room fo r 
manoeuvre.”209 
SPRING was operationally constrained in its geographies  
A senior SPRING staff member noted that programme design limited the flexibility and cost -efficiency that the 
implementing team had in its operations. Country selection and short timefr ames meant that the programme was 
operationally and logistically constrained relative to its objectives.  
“When you're looking at all these different geographies, from a budget perspective, from a 
travel budget perspective, we were very constrained. And tha t wasn't just for staff, but for the 
 
206 C2, PPE KII respondent 18.  
207 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
208 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
209 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP12.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -10 businesses themselves. When you're looking at South Asia, we ended up having to do all of our 
essential bootcamps in Nepal because we couldn't do them in Pakistan, because it just wasn't 
going to be feasible from a secu rity perspective. The same is true of Bangladesh. Myanmar was 
far too expensive. But in order for people to get to Nepal, often we had to fly people to Dubai, 
and then back into Nepal, which was hugely expensive. Flight caps, we could not stick to those. 
We had a flight cap of £250 for a regional flight for both Africa and Asia. It's never going to 
happen. I mean, flying from Addis to Nairobi costs up to $400. And from a logistical perspective, 
it's great if we're looking at those geographies, but then we n eed the resources from an 
operational perspective to back that up. Otherwise, you're going to have to cut corners 
operationally, and you're going to have to make compromises in order to deliver.” 210 
Similarly, a regional staff member for SPRING expressed that SPRING had achieved cost -savings through holding 
Cohort 2 and 4 bootcamps in Nepal. However, this was framed as an informed cost -benefit decision rather than a 
decision due to operational restrictions.  
“We delivered four successful bootcamps  and everybody tried to save money where we could, 
our negotiated savings were quite good. I think the logistics side worked quite well. I think using 
Nepal as the country was the best choice...I think Nepal worked because it's easy to get to. 
There were l ess businesses in Bangladesh and Pakistan is impossible to get to in terms of 
everyone's visas…with Nepal, everyone can just rock up and get a visa on arrival. They're free 
for other countries in the SAARC regions. So all of that side went smoothly, and so  I think 
having Nepal as the bootcamp hub was the right decision.”211 
Selection was largely donor -driven. At times, donor preference created an operational constraint in implementation.  
“From a logistical, practical perspective, this would be a recommendatio n for design, I think that 
we need to be a lot more careful about how these countries are picked…For example, if you're 
looking at Myanmar, it is still quite nascent in terms of its openness towards businesses and 
entrepreneurship, and with the Rohingya cr isis, we had to tread really, really carefully. And I 
know we ended up choosing Myanmar because obviously we had DFID, we had DFAT, and 
that was really the other geography that fit well for both of those donors. And obviously donor 
agenda is what drives a lot of this, but I think that there needs to be a little bit more 
consideration about some of the practicalities of this in practice, because managing the 
Rohingya crisis was challenging from an operational perspective.” 212 
Procurement for HCD research impr oved over time  
Not all businesses in Cohort 1 received HCD research. This changed from Cohort 2 onwards. However, the shift in 
the structure of technical assistance was not adequately planned, as what was initially meant to be in -house was 
outsourced at th e last minute to Kantar. The last -minute decision -making revealed fragmentation in the consortium, 
not only in the selection of Kantar but in the management of Kantar’s output. There was a lack of understanding 
between SPRING and Fuse on the scope, nature or requirements of HCD research, which meant that there was 
also insufficient oversight in the research process.  
“For a programme as complicated as SPRING where you're doing things for the first time, you 
cannot make large, significant changes at the last moment like suddenly choose to use an 
agency like Kantar rather than manage [research] internally, which was the original idea…You 
really need to have a clear management and reporting structure and a training session. People 
need to understand what they're  delivering, and Kantar did not know what they were 
delivering.”213 
SPRING recognised the procurement shortcomings made in Cohort 2 and collectively sought to remedy them for 
the remaining cohorts. This required the various players in the consortium to reach  a mutual understanding of what 
it is that research required and what it should look like.  
 
210 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
211 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – ACM21.  
212 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
213 C2, PPE KII respondent 9.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -11 SPRING held a competitive tender for Cohort 3, in which Kantar was successful. Although research procurement 
was competitive, both SPRING and Fuse commented that Kan tar, being the incumbent, had a distinct advantage in 
that they understood the requirements of HCD research.  
“[For C3] we went through a procurement process, we looked at lots of different companies, 
and Kantar won again…I think Kantar at least knows how c omplicated it is and knows how to 
correct the mistakes, and we know how to brief them properly and correct for those 
mistakes...The other companies put bids in for very little money, that showed they didn't really 
understand how complex it was.”214 
“In the e nd, going with Kantar was definitely the best bet because they understood. Getting 
them up to speed...and how to make it all work is just an invaluable advantage they have...We 
don't have time to get someone else up to speed and start from scratch.”215 
“On t he cost side, I actually think we've done a good job. For example, for research, we 
procured among seven companies, we really interrogated value for money. We didn't choose 
the cheapest option, but we chose an option where we felt the result was going to b e that much 
better because of the extras. So I think that's entirely defensible.”216 
In retrospect, SPRING should have budgeted for an alumni programme  
SPRING felt that it was a mistake not to have budgeted for an alumni programme after programme end. While this 
was something initially included, it was cut out during implementation. Follow -up technical assistance was 
something identified by many businesses and the donors as something that would have helped in programme 
sustainability. However, this was always  a secondary priority and did not materialise in the end.  
“The fact that we didn't budget for an alumni programme I think was a real miss. I know 
originally, we had talked about it, and things had to get cut out of the budget as we were 
sharpening our penc il, so to speak, but I think about other programmes that are out there that 
have much better alumni programmes and I wish we had budgeted for that.” 217 
Was SPRING able to save?  
SPRING was able to save money, which was reinvested into businesses in the form of BAF. SPRING reported in 
its Project Completion Report that the programme’s cumulative cost savings were £119,566 (0.7% of its total 
spend). SPRING reported that just over 12% (£15,051.96) of these savings came from Bootcamp 2 of the final 
cohort, which it claims indicates efficiency gains over time. However, given the absence of all relevant data, it is not 
possible to determine the source of these savings.  
SPRING was strict in spending, but was able to produce a cost -saving balance overall  
A senior SPRI NG staff member noted that the IP was very strict in spending, which at times caused friction with 
fuseproject. However, she maintained that overall SPRING was “really practical in terms of how [they] were 
spending money and keeping a tight leash on the pu rse strings.”  
“Palladium became an example of how you can cut costs and how you can really get to cost 
saving. And that was great, because often, as a development consultancy, you're competing 
between cost saving and just spending on budget to make sure th at you're also meeting your 
profitability index and those elements. But I think SPRING was able to balance both well.” 218 
A senior SPRING staff members also noted that the team was extremely cost -effective in saving, closely 
documenting the savings received  in-kind and keeping tight spending caps on various activities. These savings led 
to a contract amendment in November 2017 for SPRING to reallocate what had been underspent in a Go -To-
 
214 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
215 C2, PPE KII respondent 14.  
216 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP12.  
217 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP30.  
218 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -12 Market Business Assistance Fund (BAF). “From my perspective, it’s been p retty impressive to have consistently 
come in under -budget on things and then figuring out how to more effectively spend that in a different way.”219 
Donors also felt that SPRING had achieved a sufficient level of cost -saving, noting that any further reducti ons may 
have had negative implications on the programme’s effectiveness.  
“There is probably always scope to do more [to reduce costs], but then there is a cost -benefit 
analysis to be had about whether that is the right way to deploy your staff. So yes, I t hink there 
is always space to do more but at the cost of what I think is the question. And I'm not sure that 
they could have done more without sort of negatively impacting the programme in terms of 
someone spending their time focusing on it or reducing the  quality of the TA itself, for 
example .”220 
Decision -making around spend was pre -determined and opaque, so SPRING innovated by saving  
Key senior SPRING staff  who joined from Cohort 2 onwards noted that there was limited freedom in resource 
allocation. This meant that one of the only ways to achieve efficiency was by saving.  
“Most of these decisions were made before I ever came on board. So I haven't had any leeway 
to change it. The only leeway we've had has been on the savings front, where w e've done, I 
think, a very credible job of maintaining very, very tight cost discipline on everything. My view 
would be this need s to be clear in a consortium, who has that ability to specify the allocation of 
resources, because actually what I was handed was a fait accompli. Here's the amount we're 
spending on this. So the only thing I could do is save bootcamp to bootcamp. One of our VfM 
metrics is effectively compare like for like, have we saved? And we will and we do and we 
should, but that's not the sa me as an effective allocation of resources.” 221 
Even Country Managers, an important component of overall technical assistance and the programme’s ‘eyes on 
the ground’, could not input into how resources were allocated. They thus had to go “above and beyond in terms of 
trying to help find the most cost -effective ways of doing things, pulling in their networks and resources”  222 
A senior SPRING staffer  also noted that the budget was particularly challenging: “I think part of the inefficiency 
came because there w as so much confusion around who does what, how do we spend what and what has 
changed . In hindsight, this would have been something that we could have better managed.”223  
2.2. Efficiency  
Did SPRING deliver its activities on time?  
Programme activities were delivered on time, yet there were operational delays in HCD research 
and the release of PDF  
The programme delivered or exceeded all of its logframe milestones on time. While there were no substantial 
delays in implementation activities, there were some del ays in the administration of key business -facing services, 
namely HCD research and the disbursement of PDF funding. A senior SPRING staff member noted that these 
delays “ didn’t affect [SPRING’s] overall ability to implement ”224 programme activities (i.e. boo tcamps). However, 
country managers, particularly in South Asia, felt that these delays caused a loss of momentum and time for 
businesses.  
“For operational reasons, there was a big delay in delivering [the PDF funds], and that has had 
a negative impact [on businesses]. There were issues with donors releasing funds and I also 
think that there were issues with physically getting money into the countries. Countries like 
Myanmar are very, very difficult to get money into, as is Nepal, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Th ey 
are all quite difficult countries to work in operationally. Just getting money in an out, and I think 
 
219 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP12.  
220 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – ADN02  
221 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP12.  
222 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
223 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
224 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -13 there were a combination of contractual things taking a lot of time…They were delayed by 
weeks and weeks and weeks, probably about two months overall.”225 
SPRING was able to deliver many moving parts through structural changes within the set timeframes  
Members of the IP felt that from Cohort 2 onwards, the team was able to deliver very efficiently, particularly given 
limited resources (time, staff), progra mmatic changes and overlapping cohorts. One team member reflected:  
“I think it’s a really important thing to note because we had this whole shift in the design of the 
programme, a whole new team, and the shift from Nairobi to London, there were loads of 
moving parts. Bearing all of that in mind, we did things amazingly well and very efficiently.”226 
The processes defined in Cohort 2 set the architecture for future cohorts, particularly around selection, monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) and data management. Th is heightened efficiency was attributed to a change in internal 
resourcing towards more specialists in clearly defined roles. Previously, “fewer people were doing more work, and 
perhaps not with the right skillset” 227  Having a broader team with differentia ted responsibilities has allowed 
individuals to focus on particular tasks, such as setting up the M&E plan, having a centralised information 
management system (Google Drive) and streamlined communication across the consortium. The centralisation of 
informa tion was particularly noted as a source of value for money:  
“I’m really proud of the Google Drive...I look at it now and it has structure…The whole team 
have really committed to it and they input into it and it's actually filled out and it's a living, 
breathing repository that everyone inputs to and everyone relies on. Also if you [Coffey] or the 
donors need information, we can very quickly go and extract it and pull something together, and 
that makes me feel really pleased because I feel like that's also value for money, that's also 
being able to provide that audit to those who request it, and I'm open to sharing that and it 
should be completely transparent. I take pride in that particular piece because I think that's 
helped and I know that, when I first j oined, the information management was atrocious.”228 
Short timelines and a stretched team were seen as a risk to programme impact and business sustainability  
Donors saw the programme’s timelines as a potential risk to business impact and programme sustainabi lity. In 
particular, short timelines and businesses’ limited interactions with the technical team raised concerns that 
businesses may not be able to sustain the changes made during the programme, due to lack of capacity or 
commercial opportunity. Donors al so raised concern over the small implementation team working on simultaneous 
priorities across cohorts.  
“The grant period is so short, and the interaction with the grantees is also limited. There are two 
bootcamps, a little bit of technical assistance, HCD  assistance. Then you're on to the next 
cohort...I think that very rapid transition is a risk for SPRING. For a small implementation team 
to handle all these transitions, the recruitment, orientation, and transition, it must be very 
challenging. It's all g ot to do with timing. The timing creates risks and I think affects the 
sustainability. If SPRING happened over a longer period of time for each cohort, I think you 
would get more traction.” 229 
“When I talk about risks to businesses [due to short timeframes] , they may start developing a 
new product or a service, or they may increase the girl market, they may expand it and diversify 
it, and all this takes time. And then, when they've started to do it, they may lose SPRING's 
support because SPRING has now moved  on to the next cohort. It would've been much better if 
there was a budget to support the grantee for the longer period of time but to provide a different 
kind of support…you start them walking down a certain path but then you're not there to hold 
their ha nd, you're there only for a very short time because now you've moved on...”230 
 
225 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – ACM21.  
226 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
227 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
228 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP10.  
229 C2, PPE KII respondent 14.  
230 C2, PPE KII respondent 14.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -14 There was also concern over the role of the country managers, particularly their effectiveness given that they are 
part-time and seemingly unsupervised.  
“The IP team is strong…but they also seem very rushed because there is so much that they 
have to do and you always wonder whether they have the budget and the resources, and I also 
wonder whether the country programme managers who are part -time, whether they are doing 
their job...I would say that the country programme manager is like a lynchpin. That person is 
very important, it's a pivotal role, and I think if the country programme manager is very 
engaged, very interested, very knowledgeable, has good partnering skills, t hen that would be a 
huge difference in the programme on the ground. But I never know how it's panning out. I only 
know what is possible and what the risks are.”231 
Was SPRING lean in its implementation costs?  
Programme management costs were £1,145,765 (6.63%  of total spend). This decreased over the implementation 
period, following a downward trend over time ( Figure 4 ). SPRING achieved this through active negotiation on rates 
(e.g. through a reduction in rental costs and negotiating market rates for all reimbu rsable procurements and 
economies of scale).  
Figure 4. Programme management costs as a percentage of all spending by year  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Did SPRING make informed decisions on how to deliver the programme most efficiently?  
Overall, SPRING was efficient in its implementation, given the resources it had available  
SPRING staff felt that overall, they were extremely quick and efficient in implementation, especially considering 
their limited resources and constant programme iterations232. According to  senior SPRING staff member   
“In terms of delivery of the business -facing activities, I think we did a really good job…I think 
from an efficiency standpoint, we were able to get all of the different inputs from people in 
different locations around the worl d together to really get an output and deliver a bootcamp that 
was quite cohesive and that was relatively new in its design, too, compared to C1. So again, I 
think that was quite efficient.” 233 
 
 
231 C2, PPE KII respondent 14.  
232 These include the addition of a second cohort, the restructuring of the HCD process, differentiated grant funding and investm ent in M&E, among others.  
233 C2, PPE KII responde nt 1. 
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -15 Learning was an important part of improvement  
SPRING prided it self on its ability to identify problems and quickly adapt in its design and processes to apply 
learnings to future cohorts. For example, SPRING drastically revised the structure of bootcamp, grant funding and 
HCD research following Cohort 1. However, Coho rt 2 was still a learning period, particularly for elements like HCD 
research. A senior SPRING staff member  described Cohort 2’s HCD research as “not efficient at all”  due to the 
absence of a procurement process. This was identified and remedied, however, for Cohort 3.  
“I think we've redeemed ourselves a bit on that because of the process that we've put in place 
for C3…I think, because there was no procurement process clearly mapped out and followed 
[for C2], there were lots of elements that weren't present  and, if we had had a clear process, we 
would have had them.”234 
However, efficiency in delivery and adaptation does not necessarily mean that all changes were effective. At times, 
more reflection was needed. For example, although SPRING changed the structur e of PDF funding, there were 
consistent delays in disbursing these funds across all cohorts. Additionally, as explored above, SPRING’s decision 
to provide HCD research to all businesses after Cohort 1 led to a rash decision to use Kantar as the provider fo r 
Cohort 2.  
Did SPRING leverage additional resources?  
Leveraging strategic partnerships  
SPRING’s approach to corporate partnerships is an example of how the programme was able to innovate to not 
only reduce costs but generate value. SPRING recognised that the programme had limited capacity, both in terms 
of staff time and skills to meet certain business needs (e.g. marketing, legal). The programme thus reframed 
corporate partnerships as an effective means to fill these gaps – focusing instead on ‘strategic’  partnerships.  
SPRING identified early on that the most cost -effective approach to leveraging additional resources was to 
focus on leveraging skills and time rather than money.  During Cohort 1, the programme defined corporate 
partnerships as a means to rea ch a set matched funding target of £750,000. Raising cash was a contractual 
obligation. It became apparent, however, during Cohort 1 that the fundraising target and mechanisms for achieving 
it were unrealistic. SPRING thus proposed a new approach, centred on a new value proposition to potential 
funders. Rather than asking corporations to fund unspecified resourcing gaps at the programme level, SPRING 
appealed to the private sector’s market interests, specifically around market intelligence -gathering, exposu re and 
therefore competitive advantage. As senior SPRING staff member  observed after the first cohort: “We came to the 
conclusion that we have understood what it is that the market wanted to support: not SPRING as a programme, but 
the individual businesses .” 235At the Theory of Change workshop in December 2016, SPRING thus formally shifted 
away from raising cash donations to seeking private sector contributions in -kind.236 
“At C1, [corporate partnerships were] seen as something that had to be money. How do you get 
businesses or people to donate to SPRING? And it became very clear very quickly that that just 
wasn't an appropriate way of thinking about it. I think [our CEO’s] approach where it’s not about 
money, it’s about time, it’s about using corporate part ners so that you’re using their skillsets to 
improve the project in a way that the project couldn’t afford unless it was pro bono was a really 
interesting way of seeing it.”237 
The shift in thinking of support as non -financial was greatly beneficial to SPRIN G. By creating a value proposition 
that was mutually beneficial for the programme and potential partners, SPRING was able to extract value in a way 
that generated more inputs than the money the programme spent. The programme was able to direct the pro and 
low bono support towards addressing specific business needs, “looking at what it is that businesses need and 
[ensuring] that we bring in that support so that they are able to go to market, able to stay in market and grow and 
scale”238Following this shift, SP RING created a position so that there was someone dedicated full time to sourcing 
these strategic partnerships.  
 
234 C2, PPE KII respondent 1.  
235 C2, PPE KII respondent 18.  
236 PIRS Output Indicator 4.2, January 2018.  
237 Coffey, SPRING PPE KII – AIP24.  
238 C2, PPE KII respondent 18.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -16 “Corporates in general are interested in market penetration as talking about revenue and 
access to new markets. But beyond having that access to emerging markets, which is very 
interesting to them, it is coupled with getting insights into those markets, ge tting insights into 
user-centric thinking, getting insights as to the types of innovations in those markets. It's access 
to innovative thinking.” 239 
“[SPRING’s] value proposition to companies or to potential sponsors is you get to be part of 
helping a parti cular business that might be quite interesting for you because it's in your sector 
or because it gives you exposure to a country that you're not involved in and it has social 
impact…[For example] with Hogan Lovells, their lawyers are getting experience of working on 
legal issues in countries where they have no presence, which is of value to their main business. 
So I think that's the value -add proposition on SPRING.” 240 
This in turn helped contribute to ecosystem stimulation.  
By programme end, SPRING reported  having raised £1,118,974 (6.5% of total spend) in in -kind contributions, 
including pro / low -bono support, negotiated savings and monetary contributions. Strategic partnerships played a 
crucial role in helping the programme leverage more than what it coul d have with what it was given.  
Leveraging internal investment  
Another aspect of leveraging was in the form of businesses’ own commitment to invest in their prototypes. 
However, quantitative data on internal investment was not systematically gathered over t he course of the 
programme. Qualitative evidence from our sustainability interviews indicate that some businesses have been 
reinvesting a proportion of their revenue towards developing their SPRING prototype.  
2.3. Effectiveness  
This section examines effectivene ss in terms of how well SPRING achieved its outcome -level targets. Specifically, 
how well SPRING improved businesses’ ability to develop market -based solutions that contribute to girls’ economic 
empowerment. First, we examine how the programme benefitted b usinesses in terms of helping them i) develop a 
girl-focused product or service, ii) attract external investment and iii) increase sales. We then examine how 
improved business capacity benefitted girls, particularly through increased access (girls reached)  and emerging 
signs of girl impact. The processes that led to these outputs and outcomes can be found in the Effectiveness 
section of the main report.  
How well did SPRING improve businesses’ capacity to target adolescent girls?  
Extent to which businesses d eveloped a girl -focused product or service  
SPRING collected data on the extent to which businesses’ prototypes were girl focused . This was defined as the 
degree to which the prototype was designed to meet the needs of girls specifically. As can be seen in Figure 5, 
SPRING technical assistance helped businesses improve their girl focus. Eighty percent of businesses had no 
specific girl design at baseline. However, by bootcamp 2, this had dropped to 31%. In the Project Completion 
Report, DFID note that from C ohort 2 onwards, business prototypes became generally less specifically girl 
focused .241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
239 C2, PPE KII respondent 18.  
240 C2, PPE KII respondent 14.  
241 DFID 2019 Project Completio n Report, Annex 3. Girl Focus of SPRING Prototypes  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -17 Figure 5. Girl -focused design of all prototypes, Baseline to Year 1 (Cohort 1 -4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extent to which businesses attracted external investment  
SPRING businesses attracted a total sum of £38,098,524  in external investment. Less than half of this (45%) was 
SPRING -attributable242. In total, East African businesses brought in over three times as much investment as South 
Asia businesses (£29. 7m versus £9.4m, respectively). Most notably, 92% of all non -SPRING investment was in 
East Africa, indicating that the investment climate may be more mature in East Africa than in South Asia ( Figure 6 ). 
This is consistent with the findings in DFID’s 2018 A nnual Review.  
Figure 6. SPRING external investment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note; ‘Other’ invested in Cohorts 1 and 3 were un -attributed sums that went to two businesses, KadAfrica (C1) and Kasha (C3).  
 
 
242 SPRING attribution was determined through businesses’ KPI form and an assessment by the SPRING team.  
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -18 Extent to which businesses increased their prototype sales  
SPRING businesses reported their prototype revenue from baseline through to at least Year 1. Cohorts 1 and 2 
have reported through to Year 3, and Cohort 3 to Year 2. To standardise across cohorts, Figure 7 illustrates the 
average prototype revenue per cohort from baseline to Year 1. There is downward trend over time, indicating that 
prototype sales have decreased across cohorts. This could be due to the fact that SPRING shifted its selection 
targeting from businesses whose prototype was cent ral to their business model (Cohort 1), to those with more 
diverse business models where the prototype was an add -on or new stream (Cohort 4). Alternatively, it could be 
that businesses in later cohorts were taking longer to get their product to the market . The increase in sales from all 
periods between Cohorts 1 to 2 also likely reflects the shift in selection from start -ups to more mature businesses.  
 
Figure 7. Prototype revenue  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How well did SPRING benefit adolescent girls?  
The sum of SPRING technical assistance and capacity building is represented by girls reached.  
It is difficult to determine the effectiveness of SPRING on girls at this point in time. However, emerging findings 
from our impact evaluations indicate that the programme h as not impacted girls in the way that it had initially 
envisioned. Depth of impact has been limited, and many prototypes have not been sustained, meaning that 
although the businesses did collectively reach a certain number of girls, there is limited eviden ce that this is 
sustainable. The wider effects of SPRING on businesses, girls and the market ecosystem will likely only materialise 
in the medium - to long -term.  
Girls reached  
SPRING met its girl reach target of 200,000 girls, as was set out in its logframe . A total of 2,534,214 girls  were 
reached. Even excluding Ubongo, SPRING surpassed its target by reaching 377,334 girls. SPRING thus effectively 
met its outcome -level target of reaching 200,000 adolescent girls.  
Emerging findings on girl impact  
While SPRIN G met its girl reach target, girls reached are not necessarily girls benefitting. There is emerging 
evidence that the programme has not fully achieved its impact -level target of contributing to girls’ economic 
empowerment.  
Impact evaluation data is availab le for five of the eight businesses. The findings in Table 2 indicate that in the 
cases of Shekina (C1), Totohealth (C1) and iSocial (C2), the depth of girl impact was much less than the 
businesses had set out in their Theory of Change. Shekina and iSocial  had also scaled back their operations 
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -19 substantially by endline. There is also limited evidence of systematic and sustained impact for Ubongo (C3). The 
only business which demonstrated high and sustained impact through to endline is Paritran (C2).  
Although  these impact evaluations are only a small sample of all SPRING businesses243, they indicate that the 
programme has had mixed success in achieving its impact of contributing to the economic empowerment of 
adolescent girls. In the context of SPRING’s effectiv eness, girl reach does not automatically mean girl impact. 
While the programme met its girl reach target, even without Ubongo’s figures, the findings from the impact 
evaluations have strong implications on the programme’s effectiveness in achieving sustain ed impact on the lives 
of adolescent girls.  
The impact evaluation results for JBS (C2), 360ed (C4) and RobotWala (C4) are still pending and will only be 
available in Q2/Q3 2020.  
Table 2. Findings of girl impact from Impact Evaluations  
Cohort  Business  Main findings  Girls 
reached244 
1 Shekina 245 
(Rwanda)  Prototype: improve supply chain operations by establishing cooperatives for 
girls to support in the production and sale of cassava leaves, thereby 
helping girls earn, save and protect their assets (via formal bank account 
payments) (Pillar: Earn)  
By endline, there was a significant reduction in the activity of the 
cooperatives. All cooperatives were inactive outside of the harvest season 
(July -October). Girls had not improved their earnings: 82% of girls felt that 
they had worked and earned more before they joined Shekina. Most girls 
were paid informally in cash rather than through secure banking channels. 
Girls’ savings doubled from baseline to endline, and there was a greater 
understanding o f, interest and participation in savings.  326 
1 Totohealth 246 
(Kenya)  Prototype: use SMS mobile technology to provide maternal and child health 
(MCH) advice to new and expectant mothers (Pillar: Stay Healthy)  
The business had a positive impact on health -seeking behaviour, though 
the magnitude was still low given prevailing contextual barriers. The 
greatest change was in improved MCH knowledge and awareness, though 
corresponding changes in attitudes and behaviour were more tenuous.  2,641  
2 Paritran 247 
(Nepal)  Prototype: provide girls with training in safety awareness and self -defence 
(Pillar: Stay Safe)  
Girls improved their knowledge of safety and self -defence techniques. Girls 
reported improved psychological and physical health and self -confidence in  
their ability to stay safe and defend themselves.  12,427  
2 iSocial 248 
(Bangladesh)  Prototype: offer a last -mile distribution micro -franchise to girls and women 
in rural communities; micro -franchisees (Kallyanis) in turn provide rural 
communities with acces s to information, products and services for nutrition, 
sexual, reproductive and mental health, and career training (Pillar: Stay 
Healthy)  
Decline at endline in the number of operating Kallyanis, leading to a 
decrease in their coverage and frequency of cust omer visits. This impacted 
how girls benefitted from access to information, products and mentorship. 
Only 4% of girls mentioned the Kallyani as a source of counsel. Overall, 
there is limited evidence of depth of girl impact.  11,353  
 
243 Impact evaluation businesses were systematically chosen based on a set of evaluability criteria such  as breadth and depth of girl impact, sustainability, viability 
and risk. In this regard, the businesses were affirmatively selected based on strong performance or potential. SPRING was inv olved in the selection process.  
244 Total number of girls reached by September 2019, as reported by the SPRING M&E team. This figure does not account for girls that have ceased using the 
prototype and is thus not reflective of the number of girls who are currently using the SPRING product or service.  
245 SPRING Impact Evaluation Endline Report: Shekina, March 2019.  
246 SPRING Impact Evaluation Endline Report: Totohealth, June 2019.  
247 SPRING Impact Evaluation Endline Report: Fightback Girls, July 2019.  
248 SPRING Impact Evaluation Endline Report: iSocial, Dece mber 2019.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -20 3 Ubongo 249 
(Tanzania)  Prototype: develop three financial literacy animation episodes on the 
themes of Earning, Saving and Budgeting (Pillar: Learn)  
Specific audience sub -groups (e.g. younger or urban girls) increased their 
knowledge and understanding of earning, sav ing and budgeting concepts 
and in some instances, changed their financial behaviour. However, these 
effects were often not sustained to endline given the short exposure to a 
singular, 20 -minute episode.  2,156,880  
2 JBS (Nepal)  Prototype: provide a saving club for in -school girls that includes financial 
literacy training and additional life skills curricula (Pillar: Save)  
Findings pending (November 2020)  787 
4 360ed 
(Myanmar)  Prototype: develop booklets on body literacy, sexual and reproductive 
health and safety with an accompanying app and augmented reality (AR) 
function (Pillar: Stay Healthy)  
Findings pending (March 2020)  1,349  
4 RobotWala 
(Pakistan)  Prototype: interactive combination of hardware (robot) and software (e -
learning platform) to t each students STEAM education (Pillar: Learn)  
Findings pending (August 2020)  20 
 
2.4. Equity  
This section examines how equitable SPRING was in terms of gender, local representation, socioeconomic status 
and disability.  
Gender  
Beneficiaries: SPRING is fundamentally a girl -focused programme. The programme’s business case is centred 
around the objective of leveraging businesses to improve girls’ lives. While this has remained the core tenet of 
SPRING, over time, business selection and girl targeting has e volved, shifting away from girls in the value chain to 
girls as direct beneficiaries, to girls as indirect beneficiaries as SPRING’s focused shifted to helping businesses 
reach scale.250 
Implementing team and technical assistance:  SPRING’s implementation tea m was gender -balanced251. From upper 
management, SPRING’s two directors (Technical, Investment) were both female. While at programme end the 
CEO was male, for the bulk of the operational time the programme the CEO was female. All Palladium and 
London -based S PRING staff were also female. As of C4, the programme’s COO was male. However, the previous 
two COOs were both women. SPRING’s regional teams (Country Managers, regional advisors) were roughly 50 -
50, as was fuseproject.  
Entrepreneurs:  Forty -one percent of entrepreneurs252 were female (31 out of 75 individuals).  
Overall, the programme had strong female representation amongst decision -makers, implementers and 
businesses.  
Local representation  
Country Managers:  All country managers (CMs) in East Africa were local . Conversely, two of the five CMs in South 
Asia were international staff: one of the two Nepal CMs and the Myanmar CM.  
Entrepreneurs:  Two-thirds of all main SPRING participants were local (50 individuals), and four entrepreneurs were 
classified as ‘diaspor a’. Over time, the programme expanded the proportion of international entrepreneurs admitted 
in each region. In East Africa, Cohort 1 had five international entrepreneurs. In Cohort 3, this number increased to 
nine, just about half of all businesses. In So uth Asia, the number of international entrepreneurs increased from one 
 
249 SPRING Impact Evaluation Endline Report: Ubongo, October 2019.  
250 See the BPE Thematic Report on Narrow or Broad Targeting, October 2019.  
251 SPRING organogram as of February 2019.  
252 ‘Entrepreneur’ refers to the main SPRING participant at bootcamps.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -21 in Cohort 2 to five in Cohort 4. Notably, almost all Myanmar businesses (four of five) were represented by 
international entrepreneurs.  
Socioeconomic  
Poverty:  There was an official shift away from the bottom of the pyramid (BoP) in August 2016. This agreement 
was formally documented in SPRING’s logframe in December 2016. It was agreed that the programme inherently 
targets vulnerable girls and that determining h ow BoP would be defined and counted would be prohibitively 
challenging for businesses .253 
Location:  Most SPRING businesses targeted beneficiaries across a mix of rural, urban and peri -urban locations. 
Eleven businesses explicitly targeted rural areas, and 11  targeted only urban areas. In comparing these 22 
businesses, we found no stark differences in terms of the funding these businesses received or in the number of 
beneficiaries reached ( Table 3 ). While it was not possible to disentangle the total number of programme 
beneficiaries from rural versus urban areas, this sample suggests that there was no systematic inequality by 
geography.  
Table 3. SPRING investment and girls reached by geography (rural -urban)  
Location  Ave. SPRING Investment*  Ave. # girl reached  
Rural  39,517  3,771  
Urban  45,551  3,421  
*Investment is the sum of PDF and BAF funding received  
 
Disability  
While the programme did not collect data on disability, data was collected by Coffey as part of the Impact 
Evaluations. The Washington Group Short Set254 questions were included in each of the quantitative tools 
administered per evaluation. Disability data is available from three of the evaluations to date ( Table 4 ). 255 
The findings indicate that girls who were included in the random sample do exp erience some degree of disability. 
This suggests that when extrapolating to the wider target population, SPRING’s interventions do include individuals 
with disability . 
Table 4. Washington Disability across SPRING Impact Evaluations (sum of girls responding  some, a lot of difficulty, or 
cannot do at all)  
 Shekina  iSocial  Fightback  
Difficulty seeing, even if wearing glasses?  8% 14% 13% 
Difficulty hearing, even if using a hearing aid?  7% 6% 3% 
Difficulty walking or climbing steps?  7% 29% 16% 
Difficulty remembering things or concentrating on activities?  22% 21% 49% 
Difficulty with self -care (e.g. dressing and being able to feed 
yourself?  15% 5% 20% 
In terms of prototypes, one of the businesses in Cohort 4, WonderTree (Pakistan), developed a prototype that 
provides AR -based educational games targeted at children with special needs.  
2.5. Cost-Effectiveness  
We calculate cost -effectiveness as the cost per unit of a given outcome of interest. I n line with SPRING’s Theory of 
Change, and based on the data available, our outcomes of interest are i) return on investment (ROI), and ii) girls 
reached. We also explore these outcomes for different sub -groups, such as by cohort, region  and impact pillar.  
 
253 PIRS Outcome Indicator 2, January 2018.  
254 The Washington Group Short Set is a set of questions administered in a census or survey to identify people with a disability.  
255 Data on disabili ty was not collected as part of the Totohealth or Ubongo evaluations.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -22 These calculations are limited in that cost can only be determined for a singular outcome of interest. The 
computations are thus crude as SPRING is a complex programme in which outcomes overlap, and in which inputs 
cannot and have not been neatly disaggre gated into discrete sums.  
Box 1. Cost -effectiveness calculations  
 
 
Return on SPRING direct financial investment  
The return on SPRING investment, in the form of PDF and BAF, has been computed in terms of external 
investment leveraged, and prototype sales.  
Across all cohorts, the average rate of return on investment (external investment leveraged)  was greater than 1, 
indicating that businesses generally leveraged more monetarily than the funds SPRING invested. As can be seen 
in Figure 8 , Cohort 3 businesses had the highest average return on direct SPRING investment, with an ROI ratio of 
21.5. South  Asia businesses had the lowest average ROI ratio at 5.6 (Cohort 2) and 5.5 (Cohort 4).  
Figure 8. External investment leveraged as a result of SPRING direct investment (PDF, BAF)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Stay Safe’ businesses had the highest return on direct SPRING investment, with an average return of 24.6 times 
the amount of funding received ( Figure 9). In contrast, ‘Learn’ businesses leveraged the lowest levels of external 
investment, with on average a 7.6 -fold return. All Stay Safe businesses had a positive return on investment, with 
Safeboda (C3) having the highest ratio at 84.57. Safeboda attracted £3.35m in external investment and received a 
total of £39,612 in direct SPRING funding.  
 
 
 
 ROI* on attracting external investment = (Total value of PDF and BAF  funding ) / (Total value of external investment)  
ROI on  sales growth  = (Total value of PDF and BAF funding) / (Total value of prototype revenue)  
Cost per girl reached  = (Total programme spend) / (# of girls reached)  
 
*ROI = Return on SPRING direct financial investment (PDF + BAF)  
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -23 Figure 9. External investment leveraged as a result of SPRIN G direct investment, by impact pillar  
 
  
 
In terms of prototype revenue generated, most SPRING businesses leveraged proportionately less (monetarily) 
than the sum that SPRING invested ( Figure 10). Only Cohort 2 businesses, on average, had an ROI greater than 
1. It should be noted, however, that the prototype revenue figures are summative, meaning that Cohort 1 and 2 
businesses have reported revenue growth from baseline to Year 3, Cohort 3 have reported up to Year 2, and 
Cohort through to Year 1. G iven this, we can expect an increased in leveraged revenue for businesses in Cohorts 3 
and 4 to increase in the coming years. However, in the same light, the sales performance of Cohort 1 businesses is 
extremely low given how much time has elapsed.  
 
Figure  10. Return on direct SPRING investment as sales (total)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost per girl reached  
Overall, the cost per girl reached was £6.82 . Excluding Ubongo, the cost per girl comes to £45.81 . As can be seen 
in Table 5 , there is evidence that SPRING has been more cost -effective in reaching girls over time, as the 
programme has changed its targeting to support businesses with greater scale. The average cost per girl in East 
Africa is £210.26  (with Ubongo, £7.72 ), compare d to £58.58  in South Asia. However, it should be noted that these 
calculations are crude as we were not provided cost data by cohort or region, and as such calculations as done by 
dividing total costs by girls reached per cohort of region.  
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -24 Table 5. Cost pe r girl reached by cohort and region  
Cohort  
C1 £606.08  
C2 £253.75  
C3 £7.82 (without Ubongo: £321.95)  
C4 £76.15  
Region  
East Africa  £7.72 (without Ubongo: £210.26)  
South Asia  £58.58  
 
Girls reach by impact pillar  
Stay Healthy businesses reached the highest number of girls, followed by Learn and Stay Safe businesses ( Figure 
11). Earn and Save businesses had the lowest -scale interventions, and were also the most expensive per girl 
reached, costing £1,673 and £1,409 per girl, respectively. By contrast, Stay Healthy businesses were the most 
cost-effective businesses, costing £72 per girl reached.  
 
Figure 11. Girls reached and cost per girl reached by Impact Pillar  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Conclusion  
3.1. Economy  
 How well did SPRING minimise the cost of resources used or required (inputs), without 
compromising on quality?  
SPRING made conscious decisions about how to maximise value for the programme. However, the cost of 
these decisions was not always transparent or shown to be competitively sourced. Decis ion-making around 
resource allocations and budgeting was also fragmented and unclear. Working within budget constraints, 
SPRING innovated by saving 0.7% of its total cost, which it reinvested into businesses as an additional round of 
challenge funding.  
ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -25 • The main cost drivers  of SPRING were bootcamps, HCD technical assistance (Fuse) and HCD research. 
Direct financial  assistance  to businesses, in the form of PDF and BAF funding, accounted for only 17.8% of 
programme spend.  
• Overall, SPRING made conscious decisions around how to maximise the value of technical 
assistance: SPRING staff felt the selection of Fuse, the splitting of bootcamps and HCD research were 
central to SPRING’s value -add. These decisions were made with a value -first lens.  
• Minimising costs : There were mixed opinions on the value for money of bootcamps, with some local 
opinions (businesses, country managers) differing from those of Fuse. HCD research was also deemed quite 
cumbersome and top -heavy, particularly in the ea rly part of the programme. However, the cost of HCD 
research decreased over time, reflecting a shift to a  competitive procurement process . 
• Decision -making  in resource allocation : There was an initial lack of clarity in the consortium over resource 
allocati on. However, over time, the consortium became more aligned in terms of articulating a singular vision, 
particularly around structural and procurement decision -making . 
• External constraints at times inhibited operational:  Programme design limited the flexibi lity and cost -
efficiency that the implementing team had in its operations. Country selection and short timeframes meant 
that the programme was operationally and logistically constrained relative to its objectiv es. 
• SPRING was strict in spending  but was able to produce a cost -saving balance overall . 
3.2. Efficiency  
 
• Programme activities were delivered on time , yet there were operational delays in HCD research  and the 
release of PDF. 
• SPRING was able to deliver many moving parts  within the set timeframes:  SPRING  was able to deliver  
efficiently, particularly given limited resources (time, staff), programmatic changes and overlapping cohorts . 
SPRING  staff felt tha t overall, they were extremely quick and efficient in implementation, especially 
considering their limited resources and constant programme iterations . 
• SPRING  was lean in its implementation costs: Programme management costs  decreased over the 
implementation period, following a downward trend over time. SPRING achieved this through active 
negotiation on rates (e.g. through a reduction in rental costs and negotiating market rates for all reimbursable  
procurements and economies of scale).  
• Learning was an important part of improvement . However, adapting quickly did not always mean that the 
changes were  effective.  
• Leveraging additional resources: SPRING identified early on that the most cost -effective approach to 
leveraging additio nal resources was to focus on leveraging skills and time rather than money . Strategic 
partnerships played a crucial role in helping the programme leverage more than what it could have with what 
it was given.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How well did SPRING  convert inputs into outputs?  
SPRING delivered all of its activities on time. Overall, SPRING was efficient and lean in its implementation, 
given the resources it had. The programm e was also able to adapt quickly to improve for future cohorts. 
Strategic partnerships were seen as a cost -effective method for leveraging additional resources.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -26 3.3. Effectiveness  
 
Improved business capacity to target adolescent girls  
• Develop a girl -focused prototype:  SPRING technical assistance helped businesses improve their girl focus . 
However, over time, prototypes became less spe cifically girl -focused.  
• Extent to which businesses attracted external investment:  SPRING businesses attracted a total sum of 
£38,098,524 in external  investment. Less than half of this (45%) was SPRING -attributable. In total, East 
African businesses brought  in over three times as much investment as South Asia businesses. Ninety -two 
percent of all non -SPRING investment was in East Africa, indicating that the investment climate may be more 
mature in East Africa than in South Asia . 
• Extent to which businesses in creased their prototype sales:  There is downward trend over time, 
indicating that prototype sales  have decreased across cohorts.  
Reaching and benefitting adolescent girls  
• Girls reached:  SPRING exceeded its girl reach target of 200,000. A total of 2,534,214 girls  were reached. 
Even excluding Ubongo, SPRING  surpassed its target by reaching 377,334 girls. SPRING thus effectively met 
its outcome -level target of reaching 200,000 adolescent gi rls. 
• Emerging findings on girl impact:  While SPRING met its girl reach target, girls reached are not necessarily 
girls benefitting. There is emerging  evidence that the programme has not fully achieved its impact -level target 
of contributing to girls’ econo mic empowerment.  
3.4. Equity  
 
• Gender : The programme had strong female representation amongst decision -makers, implementers and 
businesses . 
• Local representation : Most country managers were local. Two-thirds of all main SPRING participants were 
local. 
• Socioeconomic status : Although the programme shifted away from the terminology ‘bottom of the pyram id’, 
it was agreed by donors and the implementing team that SPRING inherently targets vulnerable girl s. We 
found no systematic inequality in SPRING targeting or funding of businesses by geography  (i.e. rural, urban).  
• Disability : Impact evaluation data indi cates that SPRING prototypes are reaching girls with various extents of 
disability.  
 
 
 
 
 How well have outputs had their intended effect?  
SPRING has mostly achieved its outcome -level targets of attracting external investment, increasing prototype 
sales and reaching girls. SPRING improved businesses’ ability to develop a girl -focused product. However, over 
time, SPRING moved away from specifically girl -focused businesses. In terms of external investment, SPRING 
businesses were able to attract over £38m in funding. Most investment was focused on East African 
businesses. Sales growth was mixed, with prototype r evenue showing a decreasing trend over time. Regarding 
girls reached, SPRING exceeded its target, even without Ubongo. However, there is emerging evidence from 
the impact evaluations that the sample of IE prototypes have not fully achieved their objective of contributing to 
girls’ economic empowerment.  
How well did SPRING target the disadvantaged?  
SPRING was equitable in terms of gender, local representation, socioeconomic status and disability.  ANNEX F: VALUE FOR M ONEY ANALYSIS  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX F -27 3.5. Cost-Effectiveness  
 
• Return on investment as external investment leveraged:  Across all cohorts, the average ra te of return on 
investment (external investment leveraged) was greater than 1, indicating that businesses generally  
leveraged more monetarily than the funds SPRING invested.  Cohort 3 businesses had the highest average 
return on direct SPRING investment, wi th an ROI ratio of 21.5. South Asia businesses had the lowest average 
ROI ratio at 5.6 (Cohort 2) and 5.5 (Cohort 4). Examining by impact pillar, Stay Safe businesses had the 
highest ROI, with an average return of 24.6 times the amount of funding received.  In contrast, Learn 
businesses leveraged the lowest levels of external investment, with on average a 7.6 -fold return . 
• Return on investment as prototype sales:  In terms of prototype revenue generated, most SPRING 
businesses leveraged proportionately less (m onetarily) than the sum that SPRING invested. Only Cohort 2 
businesses, on average, had an ROI greater than 1 . 
• Cost per girl reached:  was £6.82 considering  all programme costs. Excluding Ubongo’s, this was £ 45.81 . 
There is evidence that SPRING has been mor e cost -effective in reaching girls over time , as the cost per girl 
reached decreased per cohort. Excluding Ubongo, cost per girl reached was lower for businesses in South 
Asia than in East Africa.  
• Most cost -effective prototypes by impact pillar:  Stay Healt hy interventions were the most cost -effective, at 
£72 per girl reached . Earn and Save interventions were the least cost -effective, at £1,673 and £1,409 per girl, 
respectively.  
Did SPRING represent good value for money?  
Based on the  evidence gathered, there is mixed evidence that SPRING provided good value for money. The 
programme made conscious decisions to seek the best resources for technical assistance (value). However, 
procurement decisions and resource allocation were not alway s optimal or competitively sourced. Nevertheless, 
SPRING was efficient in its implementation and learned and iterated a great deal during its lifetime. The 
programme delivered within its timeframe, met its outcome -level indicators and demonstrated equity i n its targeting. 
However, there is emerging evidence that the impact of SPRING prototypes on girls may be limited. It is yet to be 
seen how sustainable SPRING’s outcomes are in the medium - to long -term. In terms of cost -effectiveness, 
SPRING was able to le verage a proportionately greater return in external investment on direct financial support to 
businesses. Yet, SPRING’s investment has not generated a proportionate increase in prototype sales. Regarding 
cost per girl reached, it is difficult to judge how relatively cost -effective the programme has been without being able 
to compare it with similar interventions elsewhere.  
 What were the costs of the outcomes of interest?  
Return on direct SPRING investment was greater than 1 in terms of external investment leveraged, meaning 
that businesses generally leveraged more monetarily than the funds SPRING invested. However, in terms of 
prototype revenue, the ROI of SPRING financial support was on average less than 1. Cost per girl reached was 
£6.82 (£45.81 excluding  Ubongo). This decreased over time. Stay Healthy interventions were the most cost -
effective per girl reached. Earn and Save prototypes were the least cost -effective.  ANNEX G: COMPARISON OF SPRING WITH OTHER  PROGRAMMES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX G -1 Annex G – Comparison of SPRING with other 
Programmes  
1.1. Introduction  
Comparing SPRING  with other businesses development and girl programmes was not part of the original 
Evaluation Framework, and as a result, no specific data was collected over the course of t he evaluation to address 
this issue. However, at the request of the donors, we have conducted a high -level comparison with other 
programmes which had readily accessible data.  
Comparing SPRING with other programmes comes with one key caveat: SPRING was uniq ue. Its uniqueness was 
determined by the fact that it was a business  accelerator and a HCD initiative , and a programme with a very 
specific focus on girls. These three focal areas and the resultant tension between them256 made it unique and all 
the more chal lenging to compare.  
Given this unique nature, and its unusual set of outcomes, the comparison presented below is not holistic. Rather, 
we compare SPRING, where we can, to other business accelerators and other girl programmes, with the aim to 
determine wha t differentiated  SPRING  from these. Specifically, our analysis focuses on SPRING’s offer of 
business support (HCD, investment readiness, the programme curriculum, etc .) compared with other business 
accelerators, and SPRING’s approach to empowering adolesce nt girls compared with other girl programmes. 
Aspects such as girl reach, impact and VfM cannot be compared due to limited or no data, and our reliance on 
secondary sources regarding other businesses and girl programmes that are referenced.  
1.2. Comparison wit h other business accelerators  
SPRING’s approach to improving the economic lives of adolescent girls through supporting businesses in 
developing girl -focused  prototypes cannot be compared to the strategies of other business accelerators, which 
often seek si mply to improve the efficiencies of the business. Therefore, we focus this section on what SPRING 
offered the businesses, comparing SPRING’s curriculum, investment readiness and alumni support with offerings 
from other business accelerators .  
We identified  a list of businesses accelerators and girl programmes against which to compare SPRING, (Table 1).  
This list is not comprehensive, but we started with the names of some of the accelerators that SPRING businesses 
mentioned they had also been part of. When these businesses were asked to compare their levels of satisfaction 
with SPRING deliverables, it  was often against some of the programmes mentioned below. We also identified 
some other programmes that made their data readily available, allowing us to try and identify comparable data 
points.  
Table 1: Business Accelerators  
Business accelerators  
i2i 
Rockstart  
Ashoka  
Acumen Fund  
HCD programmes  
Amplify  
Girl programmes  
Adolescent Girls’ Empowerment Programme (AGEP)  
 
256 Coffey, Cohort 2 Programme Performance Evaluation Report , March 2018  ANNEX G: COMPARISON OF SPRING WITH OTHER  PROGRAMMES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX G -2 Empowerment and Livelihood for Adolescents (ELA)  
World Bank’s Adolescent Girls Initiative Multi -Donor Trust Fund (AGI MDTF)  
Girl Effect  
 
1.2.1 A tailored programme curriculum  
SPRING offered a curriculum  that was more tailored to the individual businesses that participated in the 
programme than offered by other business accelerators. SPRING achieved this by initially completing  its 
landscaping study, guiding businesses in their prototype development, by providing mentoring and in -country 
support via CM throughout  every business’ participation, and by offering a highly interactive HCD curriculum, which 
was a new concept for many businesses in the earlier cohorts. SPRING also offered the more traditional aspects of 
many business accelerators with support offered in areas such as branding and financial modelling. Moreover, 
SPRING mapped out each individual business journey with the business.  
The offering of a comparable  accelerator is presented in text box 1, below.  
Invest2Innovate (i2i) is a four -month accelerator programme established in Pakistan in 2011 by 
Kalsoom Lakhani, an entrepreneur with international experience of working with social ventures257. 
The accelerator grants participants access to virtual support to grow their businesses, as well as six 
targeted se ssions led by mentors on topics relevant to business growth, such as branding, customer 
acquisition, financials and operations.  
Businesses that participated in SPRING as well as i2i reported that they found SPRING’s curriculum to 
have been more tailored, as i2i was found to focus more on a broad understanding of the business in 
general.258  
 
1.2.2 More than investment readiness support  
By contrast to other business accelerators, SPRING offered more than just investment readiness support in terms 
of matchmaking (investor introductions, deal structuring, investment coaching), but aimed to really understand the 
challenges of each business  and provide tailored support to arrive at solutions to these challenges. Consequently, 
SPRING was suitable for early stage businesses and succeeded at supporting medium stage business 
development. Other business accelerators tend to focus on investment read iness support, specifically for start -ups.  
This was particularly true for Rockstart, detailed below.  
Rockstart is an Amsterdam -based six -month start -up accelerator that works internationally in four 
domains : Energy, Health, AgriFood and Emerging Tech; it was privately funded by current CEO Rune 
Theill.  
It is aimed at connecting start -ups with partners, investors and mentors. In 2019, Rockstart transformed 
its way of funding start -ups so to ensure long -term support259, moving beyond the offer of start -up 
funding to what it called ‘follow -on” funding.   
In comparison , SPRING offered little in the form of capital and focused  more on the businesses 
themselves and their challenges regarding being ready for investment, as well as being able to attract 
investment. SPRING’s added value lay in the branding, product mix, making the businesses more 
“appealing” to potential investors, and then linking them with potential investors and connecting them 
with a network of international NGOs and development bodies.  
 
 
 
257 i2i partnered with a government funded incubator (Plan9) and the Karachi Institute of Technology; capital is rais ed through 
crowdfunding. i2i distinguishes itself for its ecosystem approach, working with all stakeholders and not just selected 
entrepreneurs. Invest2Innovate website: http://invest2innovate.com/what -we-do/ .  
258 see End of Cohort Reports 1 -4 
259 https://siliconcanals.com/news/startups/amsterdam -based -rockstart -reinvents -the-way-accelerators -fund-their-startups/   ANNEX G: COMPARISON OF SPRING WITH OTHER  PROGRAMMES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX G -3 1.2.3 Limited alumni support  
An absence of alumni support was an apparent lack in SPRING’s offering. IP respondents highlighted that alumni 
support was not well thought through for SPRING and was limited to enabling businesses to stay in touch with one 
another v ia social media.  
I personally don’t feel that the current  alumni  approach is the most innovative and exciting. 
… I think a lot of the cohorts have their own WhatsApp  groups, so they have one that we’re 
involved in and they have their own and I think those are quite active.   And so maybe there’s a 
more informal  alumni  network that will and is developing outside of what we create.260 
The main reason for limited alumni support was identified as a lack of budget and an absence as a strategic 
priority.  
The fact that we didn’t budget for an alumni programme I think was a real miss. And I know, 
originally, we had talked about it and things  had to get cut out of the budget as we were 
sharpening our pencil, so to speak, but I think about other programmes that are out there that 
have much better alumni programmes and I wish we had budgeted for that261. 
SPRING businesses reported that they would have preferred more access and support to an alumni network. 
There were  reported benefits of alumni associations through other accelerators, such as Ashoka and Acumen.  
Ashoka  is a non -profit international organisation funded in 1980 by Bill Drayton which p romotes social 
entrepreneurship and receives funding from charitable organisations and individuals. It operates a 
fellowship  programmes with selected social entrepreneurs in Sub -Saharan Africa, Asia and Latin 
America.  
It continues to support its alumni th roughout their career by providing assistance with pro bono support, 
access to Ashoka’s extended global network, and periodic extended training. They based their model 
on university alumni organisations.  
The Acumen Fund  is a non -profit impact investment f und serving BoP markets, established in 2001 by 
former investment  banker Jacqueline Novogratz. It has invested over $115 million in 113 companies 
across Sub -Saharan Africa, South Asia, Latin America, and the United States.  
Acumen  convenes alumni through r eunions, promoting informal alumni collaborations, involving alumni 
in ongoing recruitment processes to the programme.  
 
HCD as the framework for technical support and capacity building  
The Humanitarian Innovation Fund and the Global Poverty Action Fund are both accelerators that focus on 
innovation and capacity building, similar to SPRING. What set SPRING apart was its strong focus on HCD. This 
tool and methodology  provided a framework f or the tailored technical support and capacity building offered to 
businesses. It was also used by SPRING itself to adapt its own offering to businesses, ensuring that they, as the 
clients, experienced high levels of satisfaction with the programme. Most b usiness accelerators analysed for 
comparison do not focus on HCD in their offer. An exception that SPRING could be compared to is Amplify.  
Amplify is a DFID -funded £10 million fund for early stage ideas in emerging economies across Asia, 
the Middle East an d Africa which ran from 2013 to 2019.  
It ran in partnership with IDEO.org and aimed to improve the lives of poor and marginalised people 
through replicable, scalable solutions.  The programme offered solutions tailored to the needs within 
the emerging eco nomies by delivering outputs focused  on an open and flexible funding mechanism, 
engagement of small and diverse grassroots organisations, effective use of HCD and a marketplace for 
learning and networking.  
A key difference between  Amplify and SPRING was t hat Amplify focused  on grassroot organisations, 
while SPRING was designed to leverage private sector interest.  
 
260 Summative PPE Interview with SPRING IP, April 2019.    
261 C2 PPE KII – Interview SPRING IP, August 2017.    ANNEX G: COMPARISON OF SPRING WITH OTHER  PROGRAMMES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 2020   ANNEX G -4 1.3. Comparison with other girl programmes  
One key element that set SPRING apart from other business accelerators was its focus on girls. At the sam e time, 
the programme’s focus on businesses sets SPRING apart from other girl programmes. Other development 
programmes that focus on empowering adolescent girls, such as the Adolescent Girl’s Empowerment Programme 
(AGEP) in Zambia, which  aims to increase school  completion and improving sexual, reproductive health outcomes, 
or the Empowerment and Livelihood for Adolescents (ELA programme in Uganda, which focusses on mentorship 
and skills training, are based on interventions rather than supporting business ac celerators.  
Similarly, the World Bank’s Adolescent Girls Initiative Multi -Donor Trust Fund (AGI MDTF), which closed in 2015, 
aimed at understanding what  works in helping adolescent girls and young women transition into productive 
employment, was based  on offering skills training to young women (business development skills, technical and 
vocational training, life skills training).  
Girl Effect262 is perhaps the closest comparable model, working with girls to develop prototypes, similar to SPRING 
in design.263  The brand strategy is driven by formative research in each country, with prototypes tested in a “real -
life setting” to ensure both the concept and format work as designed, followed by iterations to the prototype if 
required. This process is very similar to  SPRING, where landscaping studies were conducted in each country to 
explore the experiences of girls and priority areas for social change. One could argue, however, that given the 
limited timeframe of each SPRING cohort, opportunities for prototype testin g and iterations were limited, which 
resulted in some less successful businesses in the programme.  
Both, Girl Effect and SPRING, aim to improve the lives of adolescent girls, however, the approach is vastly 
different. Girl Effect focusses on girls as creat ors and consumers of brands, while SPRING’s premise was to 
support businesses in developing  girl products, with an emphasis on girls as users, clients, consumers or placed 
within the value chain. Given that businesses require a market for their products, a nd consumers with the 
appropriate buying -power to purchase them, SPRING was limited in its ability to empower the most vulnerable – 
which also led to an adjustment of the definition of the target beneficiaries from “bottom of the pyramid” to 
“vulnerable gi rls” between Cohorts 1 and 2.  
Girl Effect was initially funded by the Nike Foundation in 2004. It is now an independent girl -specific 
initiative operating across 50 countries. It acts as a facilitator and partner for numerous initiatives that 
have an inter est in promoting similar girl empowerment goals.  
It aims to empower girls during adolescence in the areas of health, education and their economic 
empowerment by creating  branded media. Their youth brands are created by girls and with girls to 
benefit commu nities, enabling girls to tell their stories in their own words through the media and mobile 
tech.  
Girl Effect also delivers direct to girls as end users, while SPRING used businesses as intermediaries 
to reach girls, in an attempt to ensure the sustainab ility and ongoing application of the SPRING model.  
 
 
 
262 https://www.girleffect.org/  
263 GIRL Effect was the inspiration for the SPRING initiative.   ANNEX H: LIST OF STA KEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX H -1 Annex H: List of stakeholders interviewed  
The following table shows all the stakeholders that were interviewed as part of the Programme Performance 
Evaluation of SPRING , and  that informed the End -of-Cohort Report.  
Organisation  Function  Staff Name  Date  
SPRING Donors    
Girl Effect / Nike Foundation  Senior Director of 
Programmes  
 
Senior Manager  Matt Freeman  
 
 
Sara Posada  February 2016  
 
 
August 2017  
DFID  SPRING Project Officer  Sumana Hussain  
 
Kate Cooper  February 2016  
 
August 2016  
April 2019  
DFAT  Economic Advisor  Mary James  April 2019   
USAID  Senior Economic Growth 
Advisor  
 
 
Gender Advisor for 
Monitoring and Evaluation  Wade Channel  
 
 
 
Niloufer de Silva  February 2016  
August 2017  
April 2019  
 
August 2017  
April 2019  
DFAT  Assistant Director, Gender 
Equality Branch  
  
 
Policy Advisor  Angela Lenn  
 
Sharon McIvor  
 
Sean Singh  August 2017  
 
August 2017  
 
August 2017  
SPRING Implementing Team    
SPRING  CEO of SPRING  Robert Haynie  February 2016  
April 2019  
Independent Expert  Investment Director  Suzanne Biegel  February 2016  
August 2017   
Independent Expert  Technical Director  Rebecca Calder  February 2016  
August 2017  
April 2019  
fuseproject  Innovation Director  Rebecca Orloff  February 2016  
fuseproject  Chairman  Roo Rogers  February 2016  
August 2017  
April 2019    ANNEX H: LIST OF STA KEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX H -2 Hive Colab  Uganda Country Manager  Kenus Thi’ongo  February 2016  
GrowthAfrica  Kenya Country Manager  Denis Karema  February 2016  
African Entrepreneur 
Collective / Inkomoko  Tanzania & Rwanda Country 
Manager  Rizwan Khambata  February 2016  
April 2019  
SPRING  Nepal Country Manager  Luna Shrestha Thakur  August 2017  
SPRING  Pakistan Country Manager  Zia Imran  August 2017  
SPRING  Bangladesh Country 
Manager  Fahad Ifaz  August 2017  
SPRING  
Myanmar Country Manager  Andy Annett  August 2017  
April 2019  
Palladium  Palladium Director  David McGinty  February 2016  
Palladium  Results Director  Meghan Bishop  February 2016  
August 2017  
Palladium  Operations Manager  / COO  Charlotte Blundy  February 2016  
August 2017  
April 2019  
Palladium  Manager  Hanna Alder  February 2016  
SPRING  Senior Advisor   Rebecca Spohrer  August 2017  
April 2019  
SPRING  Senior Advisor  Ramona Liberoff  August 2017  
April 2019  
SPRING  M&E Adviser  Sabrina Snell  August 2017  
April 2019   
SPRING  M&E  Emily Waters  August 2017  
SPRING  Technical Supervisor, Nepal  Jo Hill  August 2017  
April 2019  
fuseproject  Strategist  Sam Sturm  August 2017  
April 2019  
fuseproject  Senior Account Manager  Martha Deery  August 2017  
SPRING  Accelerator Manager  Janet Southern  August 2017  
SPRING  Corporate Partnerships 
Manager  Alina Truhina  August 2017  
April 2019  
SPRING  COO  Kofo Sanusi  April 2019  
SPRING  Programme Manager  Aurelie Faugier  April 2019  
SPRING Businesses    
Village Energy Limited  Co-founder & CEO  Abubaker Musuuza  February 2016  ANNEX H: LIST OF STA KEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX H -3 AfricAqua Limited  CEO  David Kuria  February 2016  
Doctor Search  Founder & CEO  Charles Kamotho  February 2016  
EarthEnable  Co-founder & Managing 
Director  Gayatri Datar  February 2016  
Green Credit Group Limited  Managing Director  Geoffrey Kobia  February 2016  
Finance Trust Bank  Marketing  Leah Namugosa  February 2016  
Haute Baso  Co-founders  Linda Mukangoga  
Pierra Ntayombya  February 2016  
Shekina Enterprise  Managing Director  P. Damien 
Mbatezimana  February 2016  
KadAfrica Ltd  Co-founder & Managing 
Director  Rebecca Kaduru  February 2016  
Jeevan Bikas Samaj (JBS)  Programme Coordinator  Ranjita Neupane  February 2017  
August 2017  
R&D  Managing Director  Danber Khanal  August 2017  
Sehat Kahani  Co-founder and Chief Data 
Officer  Iffat Zahar  August 2017  
Shreenagar  Director of Business 
Development  Tyler McMahon  February 2017  
August 2017  
U-Sehat  Chairman  Nazir Vaid  February 2017  
Zoya  Founder and CEO  Danielle Sharaf  August 2017  
Smart Paani  International Advisor and 
Co-founder  Tyler McMahon  February 2017  
August 2017  
Rooster Logic  Co-Founder and COO  Brijendra Joshi  February 2017  
August 2017  
Paritran  Director of Business 
Development  Vikrant Pandey  August 2017  
Goats for Water  Founder  Fariel Salahuddin  August 2017  
iSocial  CEO  Ananya Raihan  February 2017  
August 2017  
KGG  CEO  Sita Adhikari  February 2017  
August 2017  
Easy Paisa  Director, Head of Insurance 
Department  Murtaza Hassan  February 2017  
August 2017  
Drinkwell  Co-Founder and CEO  Minhaj Chowdhury  February 2017  
August 2017  
Dot and Line  Co-Founder  Lina Ahmed  February 2017  
August 2017  
Ariia  Founder  Shehrbano Rizvi  August 2017  ANNEX H: LIST OF STA KEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX H -4 Uraan  N/A N/A August 2017  
Switch  N/A N/A August 2017  
NexSource  N/A N/A August 2017  
MSI  N/A N/A August 2017  
DoctorHERS  N/A N/A August 2017  
Academic Bridge  CEO  Mariam Muganga  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019  
Accelerated  Founder  Ravi Shankar  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019  
ACCT  CEO  Robert Mafie  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019  
Babyl  CEO  Tracey McNeill  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
Barefoot Power  Projects Manager  Sam Kisuki  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019  
Cherehani  Co-Founder and COO   
Robert Mboya  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
Ecofuels  Co-owner and Director of 
R&D  Larisa Warhol  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019  
Gravity Light  N/A  
N/A August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
Honey Care  Head of Sales and Marketing  Eric Gichinga  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
Illuminum Greenhouse  Co-founder and Head of 
Operations and Engineering  Taita Ngetich  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019    
Kasha  Co-founder and COO   
Amanda Arch  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   ANNEX H: LIST OF STA KEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX H -5 MHI  Founder and CEO  John Mugo  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
MODE  Group Director for Innovation  Kevin Omondi  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
PayGo Energy  CEO and Co -founder  Nick Quitong  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
Resonate  Co-founder and CEO  Ayla Schlosser  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
Safeboda  Co-founder and Co -CEO  Max Dieudonne   August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019  
Telemed  COO  Yordanos Berhanu  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019  
Totohealth  Country Manager  Giulia Besana  August 2017  
January 2018  
February 2019   
Ubongo  CEO and Product Lead  Nisha Ligon  August 2017  
January 2018 
February 2019  
Eden  Creative Director  Keight Davis  March 2018  
August 2018  
FZM  CEO and Head Trainer  Fatima Mallick  March 2018264  
Play Nepal  COO  Prakash Basnet  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019  
RIZQ  Co-founder and CSO  Musa Aamir  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019   
Wonder Tree  CEO  Waqas Mohammed  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019  
Build Up Nepal  Deputy MD and Sales 
Manager  Andreas Kolling  March 2018  
August 2018  
 
264 FZM dropped out of the programme after Bootcamp 1.  ANNEX H: LIST OF STA KEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX H -6 February 2019  
Doh Eain  Director  Emilie Roell  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019  
Edkasa  Co-founder and Chief 
Education Officer  Annum Sadiq  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019  
Ejaad Tech  Co-founder  Nasir Jumani  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019   
Jeeon  CEO  Rubayat Khan  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019  
Koe Koe Tech  Program Manager  Misja Ilcisin  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019  
Leaping Boundaries  Founder  Syeda Shagufe 
Hossain  March 2018  
August 2018  
February 2019   
Pomelo  N/A N/A March 2018  
Sparrow Pay  N/A N/A March 2018  
360ed  EduTech Program Manager  Theingi Oung  March 2018  
August 2018   
February 2019  
Maya Apa  CEO  Ivy Russell  March 2018  
Sabaq  CEO  Hassan Bin Rizwan  March 2018  
August 2018  
Women in Digital  CEO  Nila Achia  March 2018  
August 2018  
Himalayan Rabbit Farm  Managing Director  Ujjwal Chapageen  March 2018  
August 2018  
LearnOBots  CEO  Faisal Laghari  March 2018  
Khalti  Director  Amit Agrawal  August 2018  
February 2019  
Jeeon  CEO  Rubayat Khan  August 2018  
February 2019  
Pan Ka Lay  Founder  Henriette Ceyrac  August 2018  ANNEX I: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-1 Annex I: List of References  
DFID. Business Plan 2011 -2015, May 2011. Accessible at: 
Https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/67658/DFID -business -
plan.pdf   
DFID. A New Strategic Vision for Gi rls and Women: Stopping Poverty Before it Starts, 2011. 
Accessible at : 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/att achment_data/file/67582/strategic -vision -
girls-women.pdf   
DFID. Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative – Business Case, DFID Policy Division, July 2013.  
Impact Hub, Social Enterprise – Alive & Well in East Africa, 2012.  http://impacthubboulder.com/social -
enterprise -alive-well-east-africa   
Kessler, Adam. Results Measurement: Measuring Results in Challenge Funds - Practical Guidelines 
for Imp lementing the DCED Standard, October 2013.  
Palladium. SPRING Annual Report, September 2015.  
Palladium. SPRING Bi -annual Report, April 2016.  
Werner, Alan. A Guide to Implementation Research. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 2004.  
Amplify, Business Ca se and  Intervention  Summary, Open Innovation for 
Development  Programme  EDRM: 4048206, February 2016. Accessible at:  
https://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/projects/GB -1-203798/documents   
IPE Triple Line and A2B labs, Amplify Evaluation, Final Report, October 2018.   
Fivenson  Adam and  Roggemann  Kirsten. Lean HCD, A Case Study in Human -Centered Design in the 
Highlands of Guatemal a, DAI, November 2017.   
 UNICEF Policy and Strategy, Child Poverty Insights, November 2012.   
Bandiera, Oriana et al.: Empowering  Adolescent girls: evidence from a randomized control trial in 
Uganda, October 2012.   
Mott Macdonald, Adolescent Girls Empower ment  Programme, Zambia, End term Evaluation Report, 
Volume 1, Main Report, January 2017.  
Prezenieto, P., Rapid Review of  Programmes  for Women and Girls’ Economic Empowerment, 
Overseas Development Institute, September 2016.  
Worldbank, UFGE, AGI, WLSME, Pa rtnering for Gender Equality, World Bank Annual Gender Trust 
Fund Program Report, 2015.   
SPRING Business Case, Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative, Policy Division, DFID, June 2013.  
SPRING, Building Businesses for Girl Impact. Integrating Human -centred Design. Accessible at:  
http://www.springaccelerator.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/09/4.Building -businesses -for-girl-impa ct-
Integrating -HCD_web.pdf . 
SPRING IP Inception Report.  
SPRING Implementation Terms of Reference – Original Version, 2014.  
SPRING Implementation Terms of Reference – Revised Version, December 2015.  
SPRING Girl Landscaping Report, November 2014.  
SPRING M&E Terms of Reference – Original Version, 2014.  
SPRING M&E Terms of Reference – Revised Version, March 2016.  
Coffey, SPRING Inception Report, SPRING Monitoring & Evaluation, Version 2, September 2015.  ANNEX I: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-2 Coffey, Independent Evaluation of SPRING: Revised Ev aluation Plan, August 2018.  
Coffey, SPRING Evaluation Concept Note, April 2018.  
Coffey, Revisions to the Evaluation Framework, August 2018.  
SPRING, Proposed Theory of Change Changes, March 2019.  
Coffey, Cohort 1 Programme Performance Evaluation, SPRING  Monitoring & Evaluation, May 2016.  
Coffey, Cohort 2, Programme Performance Evaluation Report, SPRING Monitoring & Evaluation, 
March 2018.  
Coffey, BPE Thematic Report on Narrow or Broad Targeting, November 2019.  
Coffey, Reaching Girls in the Value Chain: Lessons Learned from SPRING, BPE Thematic Reports, 
November 2019.  
Coffey, Working With Girls in Different Age Groups: Lessons Learned from  SPRING, BPE Thematic 
Reports, November 2019.  
Coffey, Reaching Girls Through Technology: Lessons Learned from SPRING, BPE Thematic Report, 
November 2019.  
Other incubator data  
The Entrepreneurship Database Program at Emory University, 2018 Year -End Data summary, April 
2019.   
GALI, Benchmarking Partner Tool, January 2019.   
DOLMA, A Report on Market Data for Private Sector Investments in Nepal Agriculture Sector, 
September 2014.   
DOLMA, A Report on Market Data for Private Sector Investments in Nepal  Educati on Sector, 
September 2014.   
DOLMA, A Report on Market Data for Private Sector Investments in Nepal  Healthcare  Sector, 
September 2014.   
GALI Excel Tutorial and Benchmarking Guide, 2019.   
Bo2, Investing for Change, Nepal.  
Programme management  
SPRING Annual  Reports, 2015 – 2018  
SPRING Annual Reviews, 2015 – 2019  
SPRING Quarterly Reports, 2015 & 2016  
SPRING Master Dataset  
Application documents  
Successful applications  
Application Package  
Short -lister Manual  
Final Scores  
Business data and evidence  
KPI data  & business operations data  
Grant forms & business summaries  
HCD feedback & tracking forms  ANNEX I: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-3 Investment Readiness Checklist  
Grantee progress reports  
End of Cohort Surveys  
Online References  
http://www.girleffect.org/learn/faq   
http://nikeinc.com/pages/our -work  
http://www.progressoutofpoverty.o rg 
https://bo2.com.np   
https://www.springcurriculum.com  
National Audit Office, Assessing Value for Money. Accessible: https://www.nao.org.uk/successful -
commissioning/genera l-principles/value -for-money/assessing -value -for-money/#  
Conferences and p resentations  
SPRING Webinar, Beyond Good Intentions: Building Businesses to Benefit Girls. Ramona Liberoff, 
Senior Advisor, SPRING Accelerator, 16 -17 September, London.  Accessible at: 
https ://register.gotowebinar.com/recording/8340362346757437953  Presentation slides: 
http://www.springaccelerator.org/wp -content/uploads /2019/09/SPRING -Webinar_Sep2019_Beyond -
Good -Intentions.pdf  ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J - 1  Annex J  – Evaluation Methodology  
1. Evaluation Methodology  
This section contains a summary of the method ology.  The full methodology is provided in Annex I.  In addition, each 
contributing reports speaks in detail to the methodology followed in that specific report.  
This section briefly outlines the overall SPRING evaluation methodology and its revisions, be fore providing more 
detail regarding the PPE specific methodology.  We end the section by outlining the limitations, challenges and 
mitigation measures we implemented during this research.  
 Overview of evaluation design  
1.1.1.  Description of the overall SPRING evaluation methodology  
Our evaluation aimed to fill gaps in the international knowledge base around what works and why (and what does not 
work, and why) in transforming the lives of adolescent girls by creating sustainable markets for life -enhancing  
products and services. This was keeping with the vision expressed in the original Business Case supporting the 
design and implementation of SPRING, “DFID will also invest in research, monitoring and evaluation to build the 
evidence base and test the theor y of change around the role of assets in girls’ economic empowerment.”265   
The evaluation focused  on both learning and accountability, to capture and communicate to donors and the wider 
development community, evidence and lessons on the programme’s “success es” and “failures”. We sought to 
understand the value of and most effective approaches to both (i) developing products and services that benefit girls, 
and (ii) creating the most effective business models for companies which provide these products and serv ices. 
To meet this objective, the evaluation gathered and synthesised evidence using three components illustrated in 
Figure 2:  
• the Programme Performance Evaluation  (PPE) assessed the effectiveness of the programme design and 
delivery, tracked and recorded changes at the programme level, the reasons for these changes and, to the 
extent possible, their impact on programme implementation;  
 
• the Business Performance Evaluation (BPE) assessed the SPRING businesses as a mechanism for 
learning lessons and understan ding “what is happening and why”, how businesses have adapted as a result 
of SPRING, and how this has helped or hindered their success in reaching adolescent girls;  
 
• the Impact Evaluation (IE) contributed evidence to understand the effects of products and services 
introduced by SPRING -supported businesses on the socio -economic circumstances of adolescent girls, and 
to establish the extent to which SPRING has enabled girls to enhance their earning, learning, savings, and 
safety and well -being.  
Using these t hree components, the evaluation adopted a theory -based approach , meaning that the evaluation 
design and implementation were framed by the SPRING Theory of Change (ToC).266 We assessed whether SPRING 
delivered the types of changes set out in the ToC, whether the assumptions that were made held true and the extent 
to which the programme achieved its objectives. Taking a theory -based approach enabled us to explore which 
aspects of SPRING worked well, which were less successful, and the reasons for these “success es” and “failures”.  
This approach also allowed us to adapt the implementation of our own evaluation strategy in response to SPRING’s 
iterative, learning nature.   
To guide and focus our evaluation questions, we developed an Evaluation Framework during the  Inception Phase, 
which aligned to the OECD  DAC criteria. As the programme evolved and changed, our evaluation needed to adapt in 
response.  As a result, the Framework was regularly reviewed and refined to ensure that the evaluation focus 
remained relevant  to the intended users.  
 
 
265 DFID, Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative: Business Case, Policy Division, 2013.  
266 Coffey, SPRING Monitoring and Evaluation: Inception Re port, Version 2, September 2015, pp.14 -16 ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-2 Figure 2: The three components of the SPRING evaluation design  
 
The evaluation ran in parallel with programme implementation and continued beyond the programme closure in June 
2019. As we maintained contact with most businesses after SPRING ended, we also assessed the sustainability  of 
changes that businesses have made  due to their involvement in SPRING to capture longer -term impacts of the 
programme.  
1.1.2.  Revision of the evaluation strategy and framework  
After Cohort 2, we proposed a revised evaluation plan267 based on findings and lessons learned from the PPE and 
BPE activ ities for Cohorts 1 and 2 and the further development of the IE. Th is plan also included revisions to the 
Evaluation Framework, which set out the evaluation questions, sub -questions and sources of evidence used to 
answer each question268. The rationale for t his change was to ensure that the evaluation was reflective of the 
changing needs of the programme and the donors.  Given the overlap in implementation of Cohorts 2 and 3, the 
Cohort 2 PPE report provided input into the design of Cohort 4  implementation .  It was argued that a Cohort 3 PPE 
report, as originally envisaged, would be superfluous. As a result, we suggested to collect data from Cohorts 3 and 4 
but present it together with findings from Cohorts 1 and 2 reports in a summative PPE report outlining a  shift in the 
emphasis away from programmatic learning for implementation towards generating more widespread learning about 
programme design. During this revision we took the opportunity to also refocus the BPE related questions. As with the 
PPE, we sugges ted replacing the end -of-cohort reports for Cohorts 3 and 4 with a summative BPE report. We 
broadened the scope of the BPE to look across cohorts and examine similarities and differences between businesses, 
to move beyond comparing businesses within a sing ular cohort and look for other thematic commonalities. Finally, we 
proposed to look at sustainability of business changes within the summative BPE report exploring their adoption of 
SPRING related lessons and examining the impact of SPRING inputs within th e businesses. The revised evaluation 
strategy  reviewed the evaluation timeframes and proposed some changes to the  IE evaluation framework questions, 
detailed in Section 3.1.4,  below . After inclusive consultation and consideration by all the stakeholders we  revised the 
deliverables and timelines originally agreed during inception. The revised list, accepted by the donors in December 
2018, includes:  
• A summative PPE report ; 
• A summative BPE report ; 
• Five thematic reports focusing  on cross cutting themes across a ll cohorts and all businesses; and  
• A final synthesis report.  
1.1.3.  Relationship between the evaluation and other programme stakeholders  
Throughout the programme, we maintained a strong working relationship with key SPRING stakeholders including the 
donors and t he IP. We communicated with DFID, USAID and the Nike Foundation , and later DFAT , on any changes 
or concerns related to the M&E  of SPRING, and donors had an opportunity to comment on all deliverables. We also 
 
267 Coffey, Independent Evaluation of SPRING: Revised Evaluation Plan, August 2018  
268 The revised evaluation framework is in Annex C.   
ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-3 engaged with the IP  in regular meetings, observa tions of IP activities in country, and consultations on updates to the 
SPRING ToC and refinements of the SPRING logframe. While ensuring that the independence of the evaluation was 
kept at all times, we presented the IP with feedback on early findings, com mented on annual and bi -annual reports 
and reviewed their interim findings to on a regular basis. This allowed them to draw on these learnings and data, to 
improve their implementation process. These meetings also allowed us the opportunity to better under stand the 
context of SPRING and gather more nuanced information and data as to programme and business performance.  
1.1.4.  An adaptive evaluation approach  
Evaluating an adaptive and iterative programme like SPRING required a similarly dynamic and flexible evaluation 
approach. As a result, there have been several changes to the evaluation process and Framework as envisaged in 
the Terms of Reference.269 All of t hese changes were agreed to with the inclusion and consent of the donors, and with 
occasional contribution from the IP.   
Revisions to the evaluation design and Framework concerned mainly adaptations at the evaluation component level, 
and then subsequently  to the ways in which the components were integrated. With regards to the PPE, this was done 
to ensure maximum utility of the evaluation and relevance to the client by adapting the evaluation approach alongside 
the programme. Updates to the Evaluation Framework were based on findings and lessons learned from the PPE and 
BPE processes of Cohorts 1 and 2. Suggested changes to the evaluation proposed in the Revised Evaluation Plan 
resulted from notable changes regarding  SPRING implementation . For example, a fter Cohort 1270 the PPE was 
elevated from documenting and assessing implementation processes to looking more in -depth to understand these 
processes and the effectiveness of the SPRING programme design and model. T his revised approach included 
additional resear ch activities271 to more closely capture  these effectiveness elements from the perspective of 
programme changes, which complemented the BPE approach of documenting the performance elements of 
programme effectiveness . Updates to the most recent Evaluation Framework ( see Annex C ) reflected modifications to 
the ToC272 by the IP, which were conducted in cooperation with and with commentary from the evaluation team. 
Revisions to Evaluation Framework centred on273: 
• Streamlining, adjusting and re focusing  sub-questions t hat addressed the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and 
sustainability evaluation criteria; (for example, adjusting these to track SPRING’s revised outputs rather than 
focusing  on delivery of inputs in Effectiveness.  
• Streamlining impact  evaluation sub -questions to contain an overarching question examining SPRING’s impact 
on businesses’ products, services, or opportunities, with additional sub -questions examining impact by pillar 
(earn, learn, save, and stay safe and healthy).  
• Removing the evaluation que stion which examined the effects of SPRING communications outputs as 
contributing to wider ecosystem -level changes, as this was not something against which the evaluation could 
collect data.  
1.1.5.  Summative PPE Evaluation Process and Methodology  
In July and August 2019, the M&E  team held two workshops dedicated to the planning of this summative report.  To 
avoid extensive duplication between the summative PPE and BPE reports,  the M&E  team decided which questions 
should be answered in more depth in  which of the reports. As a result of this discussion, the following changes were 
introduced (see Table 3):  
Table 3: Re -allocation of evaluation questions and sub -questions in the planning of the PPE and BPE summative reports  
OECD -DAC 
Criteria   Evaluation Questions and 
Sub-Questions  Evaluation 
Strand  Comments  
Relevance  A 2.1  How have SPRING 
businesses targeted 
adolescent girls?  BPE  Compared with the PPE, the evidence 
is more significant and pertinent in the 
BPE 
 A 2.2  How has SPRING helped 
businesses strengthen their 
targeting of adolescent girls?  PPE and 
BPE To be addressed in the PPE from a top -
down perspective (in terms of viability 
of the programme) and in the BPE from 
a bottom -up perspective (in terms of 
 
269 See Annex A  
270 Coffey, SPRING  Evaluation Concept Note, April 2018  
271 Coffey, SPRING Monitoring and Evaluation: Cohort 2 Programme Performance Evaluation, March 2018, Annex 2:  These included: increased number of key 
informant interviews (from 9 to 16 businesses, from 13 to 21 IP respond ents); ’10 minute chats’ with businesses, VfM assessment (see section 3.1.4 for PPE specific 
methodology)  
272 Coffey, Revisions to the SPRING M&E Evaluation Framework, August 2018  
273 Coffey, Revisions to the SPRING M&E Evaluation Framework, August 2018, pp. 4 -7 ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-4 businesses’ potential changes in  
perceptions)  
Effectiveness  C 1 How effectively were the 
different SPRING accelerator 
experience inputs designed 
and delivered to help 
businesses refine their 
business model, product or 
service?  Mainly BPE, 
“lighter” 
touch 
answers by 
PPE  
 C 1.3  How effe ctive was SPRING 
technical assistance to help 
launch prototypes designed to 
benefit girls?  PPE To centre on PPE changes made to the 
programme that increased or hindered 
the effectiveness of SPRING technical 
assistance.  
  C 1.4  How effective was SPRING 
technical assistance to 
improve businesses’ 
investment readiness?  PPE 
 D 1.4  Which (combination of) 
accelerator inputs were most 
effective in enabling 
businesses to reach girls with 
market -based solutions (i.e. 
products or services) that can 
meet girls’ needs?  BPE  To be moved to C 1.5 and addressed 
by the BPE.  
 
The summative PPE triangulates data and evidence from several different sources. Data collection methods and tools 
are detailed in Table 4 and a full list of respondents is attached in Annex H.   
Table 4: PPE  data collection activities and their purpose  
Data collection activities  Purpose of data collection activities  
Key Informant Interviews (KIIs)  
IP Team Members (27 respondents)  to clarify the processes used to deliver the programme and 
identify procedural strengths and weaknesses, aspects that 
could be improved, and lessons learned.  
to determine the extent of VfM.  
Donors (10 respondents)  to clarify the rationale and expectations around the initial 
design of SPRING, gather feedback on the processes and 
performance of SPRING, document key decisions -making 
processes and points and assess the alignment of priorities 
between different donors.  
‘10 Minute  Chats’  (Cohorts 3 and 4)  (with 
businesses) (73 respondents)  to gather  ‘change  stories’  from each  business  to document  
businesses’ perceptions of the technical assistance provided 
by SPRING and of their participation in SPRING as a 
programme overall.  
Documentation review and analysis  
Programme documents supplied  by the IP (full list 
in Bibliography)  
Programme documents drafted by the M&E Team 
for earlier learning and reflection.  to assess SPRING processes and activities and their 
contributions to reaching SPRING objectives; including 
selection processes, targeting, provision of technical 
assistance, the programme’s adaptability.  
Other, similar programmes that support the 
empowerment of adolescent girls  to compare SPRING in its design and delivery to other 
programmes.  ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-5 Observation of Boot Camp  activities (Cohorts 3 
and 4)  to assess relevance and effectiveness of programme 
activities in terms of identifying and addressing the grantees’ 
needs  
Findings from event -based  surveys  (all businesses)  
during  Boot Camp  1 and 2,  and End of Cohort  
events, published in previous reports  to capture  feedback and perspectives  of businesses 
throughout  the duration  of the Cohort,  on satisfaction  with the 
programme  performance  
Meta -analysis  
Review of all data from the PPE, BPE and IE 
reports  to assess the overall effectiveness and delivery of SPRING 
programme design, delivery and technical assistance  
Value for Money (VfM) assessment – review of programme financial data  
Mapping of existing secondary data and reporting  to examine whether SPRING delivered value for money, 
addressing evaluation questions around efficiency and cost -
effectiveness to provide recommendations on how to best 
generate value on a programme such as SPRING  Identification of possible cost drivers  
Collection of necessary primary and secondary 
data via KIIs with IPs and donors  
 
 Ethical  considerations and independence, conflicts of interest within and 
disputes between the M&E team members  
Coffey adheres to industry’s ethical research standards and has thorough research ethics, and child protection and 
safeguarding policies in place. Conc ept notes on each of our impact evaluations speak specifically to relevant ethical 
protocols followed by both our own field teams as well as those of our research partners. Our safeguarding policies 
are regularly reviewed274. In summary, our ethics protocols covered the following principles and procedures:  
• Do no harm principles, which require the protection of respondents from any risks that may arise from their 
participation in research activities and postulate that no undue burden or stress is plac ed on them;  
• Child protection procedures during field work, which require that children are only interviewed with written 
authorisation of their caregiver, and never photographed without the caregiver’s explicit consent. In addition, we 
developed Girl Safet y Protocols which is fully compliant with the guiding concepts and principles set out in 
DFID’s ethics principles for research and evaluation, ESOMAR’s International Code on social research and data 
analytics, as well as ESMOAR’s guidelines for working wit h Children and Young People;  
• Safeguarding procedures for engaging with vulnerable individuals;  
• Protocols to obtaining informed consent from any respondents participating in data collection activities, 
including caregivers as well as children;  
• Guidelines fo r creating a safe and encouraging atmosphere in which young persons in particular feel 
comfortable and at ease in participating in the study;  
• Conventions for anonymising sensitive data, applying additional disclosure controls, and storing data safely 
and securely.  
We took a gender -sensitive approach to our fieldwork by liaising with gender experts within our pool of thematic 
experts, and in consultation with our local research partners to ensure that research instruments and fieldwork 
protocols were gender  sensitive.  
• Our gender experts reviewed research tools to ensure that questions were appropriate and well -worded to 
encourage adolescent girls to provide honest and insightful responses.  
• Our local partners had first -hand experience conducting qualitative a nd quantitative research with girls across a 
range of contexts and were familiar with local cultural norms.  
• Gender -sensitive research was also a key component of our training of enumerators and we worked closely 
with our local research partners to recruit  a maximum number of female enumerators who were best placed 
to conduct interviews with adolescent girls.  
 
274 Our last review of safeguarding protocols and procedures was carried out in January 2020.  ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-6 Our local research partners adhered to the ESOMAR code of conduct.275  
In spite of a close working relationship with the IP, the M&E team was able main tain its independence throughout the 
evaluation and to work freely, without interference. The M&E team, the IP and the donors took this independence and 
impartiality seriously at all stages of the evaluation process, including the formulation of scope, pla nning, budgeting 
and managing the evaluation, formulating findings and recommendations, and reviewing and finalising reports. The 
IP, while consulted and informed of all aspects of the evaluation process did not have any undue influence on the 
scope or on the design of the evaluation. The M&E team collected its own primary data and where the IP provided 
information and support to data collection, this is acknowledged. Members of the M&E team were free to express their 
own views throughout the evaluation pro cess and this report reflects their views; while there was robust discussion 
regarding data and its interpretation, between M&E team members, there were no major differences of opinion within 
the team.  
1.3 Challenges and limitations  
Table 5 overleaf presents c hallenges and limitations to the PPE as identified during inception, as well as the originally 
proposed mitigation strategies, and a reflection on these, in terms of their adequacy and effectiveness.  
  
 
275 ESOMAR is a worldwide association for market, social and opinion researchers. Founded in 1948 ESOMAR began as a regional asso ciation 
within Europe. The a ssociation currently includes over 5,000 members from over 130 countries. The following are key fundamentals of the code:  
(1) Researchers shall conform to all relevant national and international laws; (2) Researchers shall behave ethically and sha ll not d o anything which might damage the 
reputation of social / market research; (3) Researchers shall take special care when carrying out research among children and  young people; (4) Respondents’ 
cooperation is voluntary and must be based on adequate, and not m isleading, information about the general purpose and nature of the project when their agreement to 
participate is being obtained and all such statements shall be honoured; (5) The rights of respondents as private individuals  shall be respected by researche rs and they 
shall not be harmed or adversely affected as the direct result of cooperating in a research project; (6) Researchers shall ne ver allow personal data they collect in a social 
research project to be used for any purpose other than social research ; (7); Researchers shall ensure that projects and activities are designed, carried out, reported and 
documented accurately, transparently and objectively; and (8) Researchers shall conform to the accepted principles of fair co mpetition.    ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-7 Table  5: Reflection on risks and mitigating  actions e stablished during inception  
Challenges and limitations 
identified during inception  Our Original Response  Reflection  
Collaboration with the IP  
A high level of 
collaboration is required to 
ensure the required flow of 
information and increase 
the chances of useful 
adaptive learning 
throughout the SPRING 
implementation. This level 
of collaboration may pose 
difficulties for the IP whose 
main priority  will be the 
implementation of SPRING 
activities and may find it 
uncomfortable or 
burdensome to have 
ongoing M&E partner 
presence during 
programme design and roll 
out.  By providing valuable 
insights and timely 
feedback to the IP and 
grantees, the M&E part ner 
will ensure they are able to 
add value to the IP rather 
than creating additional 
burden. To facilitate a 
smooth relationship, we 
are developing an 
engagement strategy 
which outlines the 
keyways of sharing 
information and 
recommendations. This 
will be d eveloped further in 
consultation with the IP 
and agreed with them.  Despite initial challenges, we developed a sound 
working relationship with the IP while maintaining the 
integrity and independence of the evaluation. We 
participated as observers in all pro gramme events, 
provided critical independent reviews of proposed 
processes and acted as a “critical friend” taking into 
account the IP’s learning needs given the iterative 
nature of SPRING. This approach allowed for revisions 
and iterations of our own stra tegy to arrive at the most 
effective and applicable solutions.  
We maintained a separate line of communication with 
the donors, providing them with impartial feedback.  
As the programme was ending, we identified the risk of 
institutional memory loss. This was mitigated against by 
conducting KIIs with key staff members before or 
shortly after they left the programme.  
Reliance on the IP for 
Data Collection  
The IP are responsible for 
collecting grantee KPIs, 
operations data and 
qualitative information 
which will be analysed by 
the M&E Partner. Delays 
in data collection or 
departure from the plan 
may hinder the M&E 
Partner’s ability to provide 
timely lessons to grantees 
to enable them to pivot 
their ventures accordingly.  The M&E partner will 
coordinate with t he IP to 
support in the 
development of tools and 
templates for business 
data collection. We will 
follow up with them to get 
regular updates on 
progress with this, and 
where delays are likely to 
occur, we will work with 
the IP and Donors to agree 
a revised plan.  In the initial stage of the evaluation we assisted the IP 
in the development of appropriate indicators and 
reporting tools. In later stages, as the monitoring 
capacity of the IP improved, we provided critical 
feedback on changes to these tools and su pported the 
IP via a spot check process to ensure the most 
accurate data collection given reliance on business’ 
self-reporting.  
Dependency upon 
grantee provided data  
The evaluation relies on 
self-reported grantee KPI 
data. The quality of 
findings will dep end on the 
accuracy and timeliness of 
this data. While the IP is 
developing a template for 
KPI data collection and 
making refinements in 
consultation with the M&E 
Partner, monitoring 
limitations could arise if 
that data did not capture 
all the key variable s.   The M&E partner will 
identify issues with 
unreliable data when 
conducting spot checks. If 
there are common areas of 
inconsistency it may 
require working with the IP 
to consider different ways 
of collecting the relevant 
data. We will work with the 
IP to address issues of 
data reliability and discuss 
ways of building grantee 
capacity to collect reliable 
and valid data.  This risk materialised, and the mitigation strategy was 
implemented seamlessly. A number of businesses 
struggled with collecting accurate, disaggregated data 
required by SPRING. Following recommendations, as a 
result of our spot checks, the IP instituted supportive 
measures to these businesses.  
For the VfM assessment, we did not conduct an 
independent audit, but relied so lely on programme data; 
this is an important limitation to our approach, as this 
data could not be verified; other limitations to the VfM 
assessment included the measurement of intangible 
benefits (such as agency, confidence, quality of life), an 
absence o f impact data / institutional memory across all 
businesses, and long / variable time lags between 
interventions and the delivery of intermediate and 
ultimate impacts.  
Grantees may not keep 
customer records, i.e. 
sex and age of 
customers  As part of our selection 
criteria for the IEs we will 
choose grantees that are 
able to trac k girl customers 
or beneficiaries. As part of Similar to the risk above, this risk was realised in some 
businesses, partially as a result of these businesses 
providing anonymity to girl clients. This was one of the ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-8 Most businesses, with the 
exception of financial 
services, utilities and 
mobile network operators, 
do not keep good 
customer records 
especially early stage 
ventures and those serving 
the Bottom of the Pyramid 
(BoP). It is costly and not 
convenient to track 
customer data un less 
there are product 
warrantees, or it is a 
service or regulated 
business. Many SPRING 
ventures employing 
innovative business 
models will not sell directly 
to girls and many may use 
girls in the supply chain for 
providing product inputs or 
selling produc ts through a 
distribution network. Many 
BoP businesses do not 
have contact with the 
customer at the point of 
sale, especially if they are 
attempting to reach scale.  the business performance 
evaluation (i.e. quantitative 
or qualitative research on 
behalf of grantees), we 
may be able to supplement 
existing customer data, 
take a market sample from 
which to extrapolate the 
“percent of girl customers” 
or to help enterprises build 
capacity for collecting this 
data. The IP is also 
investigating possible 
solutions such as cost -
effective applications for 
customer data tracking or 
requiring that a portion of 
the grant be used for 
purchasing a customer 
tracking application or 
service.  reasons these businesses were not selected for impact 
evaluation.  
In other businesses, as a result of performing our 
business spot checks we made suggestions to the IP, 
(for implementation of business level), for ways in which 
specific businesses might change the data capturing 
processes t o allow for this level of disaggregation.  
Insufficient data for 
Business Performance 
Evaluation based on 
data collected during the 
cohort  
For the BPE, PPE and IE 
to provide meaningful 
insights and to stay 
aligned with the logframe it 
is necessary to colle ct 
business performance 
data for more than the 
duration of the cohort. For 
insights to be of useful to 
grantees and external 
audiences, grantee KPI 
and operations data needs 
to be collected for longer 
than the 9 months of the 
cohort. Early stage 
businesses  often iterate as 
they adapt to market 
conditions through 
product, distribution and 
business model 
innovation.  We recommended to the 
donors and the IP that 
grantee KPI data be 
collected on an annual 
basis for up to three years 
after the end of each 
cohort . Three years of data 
after the cohort allows 
sufficient time to validate 
whether or not SPRING’s 
accelerator model is an 
effective way to drive 
enterprise growth and to 
reveal which components 
of SPRING led to 
development at scale of 
products and services  
benefitting girls.  Cohorts 1 and 2 reported business performance data 
for three years after the cohorts ended, with the noted 
limitation of some businesses which did not provide this 
data. Cohorts 3 and 4 reported for two years and one 
year, respectively.   This means that data on Cohort 4, 
especially, is limited. Data limitations in Cohorts 3 and 4 
were mitigated against by carrying out sustainability 
interviews with all businesses one year after the end of 
cohort. However, despite the independent evaluati on 
team providing feedback to the IP as a result of spot 
check, and the internal IP monitoring team using this 
feedback and contributing to data quality in a 
“mentoring capacity” to businesses, data quality and 
gaps remained a pertinent risk to this evalua tion.   
Selecting the grantees 
for the Impact Evaluation  
For findings from the IE to 
be meaningful for 
revealing ways that girls 
have or have not The selection of grantees 
will be made 
collaboratively with the IP 
and will take place 
following the analysis of 
KPI data. This will ensure This mitigation strategy was implemented; taking IP 
suggestions into consideration during the IE selection 
process and delaying IE data collection until prototypes 
were sufficiently operational. Further refinements were 
made to the IE se lection process based on evaluability ANNEX J: LIST OF REF ERENCES  
SPRING M&E – MARCH 20 20 ANNEX J-9 benefitted from grantee 
products and services it is 
important to ‘pick the 
winners’ (i.e. grantees 
assured of  being in 
business three years after 
the cohort ends) when 
conducting the baseline. 
Timing for the baseline has 
cost implications if the 
wrong grantees are 
selected. The sample of 
six enterprises from which 
to draw conclusions is 
small given the many 
featu res which could be 
assessed, including 
outcome areas on girls, 
geography, demography, 
sector as well as business 
stage or innovative 
approaches or reaching 
scale.  we can draw on the IP 
insights into the 
businesses that are most 
likely to succeed, in 
addition to data on the 
businesses themselves. 
To improve the chances of 
‘picking the winners’, the 
baseline data will be  
collected towards the end 
of the cohort rather than 
before the start of the 
cohort. Selecting toward 
the end of the cohort also 
reduces the risk that the 
business model or product 
will change during the 
cohort implementation, 
following prototyping and 
technical assistance.  assessments conducted after tracking business 
developments.  
In the case of one IE, in spite of the mitigation strategy, 
this risk materialised.  Together with the IP and the 
donors, we conducted a second round of evaluability 
assessments amongst potential businesses across all 
cohorts.  We then identified potential  candidates and in 
discussion with the IP selected a second candidate.  
Capturing the voices of 
girls  
It is important to be 
respectful of cultural norms 
and to stay aligned with 
legal restrictions for 
interviewing under -age 
girls. Adolescent girls may 
also feel inhibited in freely 
expressing their views in 
front of a parent, guardian 
or authority figure.  We will work with our local 
research partners to select 
the appropriate 
enumerators for the task. 
Where appropriate 
enumerators will only 
interview membe rs of the 
same sex. We will be 
sensitive to local customs 
and account for inhibitions 
of girls during interviews 
and through focus groups 
or other means attempt to 
get honest feedback.  This mitigation strategy was implemented, and we only 
employed women e numerators, although at times, 
teams had male field supervisors.  
Further, to ensure that we adequately captured the 
voices of girls, we expanded the scope of BPE research 
in Cohorts 3 and 4 to reflect more on girl insights within 
the BPE case study report s, as well as capture more 
data which would be relevant for our thematic reports 
on girl reach.  
We also broadened data collection to include other 
stakeholders capturing their views on the prototype. 
This included caregivers, teachers, institutional 
partne rs, and also girls (and boys) wherever possible.  
 
 
 
 