In addition to its immediate adverse impact on women’s and girls’ health and 
education, the COVID-19 pandemic has the potential to further exacerbate existing 
gender inequalities in economic opportunities across Sub-Saharan Africa:
•	Women-owned	 firms,	for	example,	 which	are	primarily	 concentrated	 in	
informal	 or	low-paying	 sectors,	 lack	basic	formal	social	protection	 that	
would	provide	a	buffer	against	economic	distress.
•	Women farmers often have lower access to productive inputs, information, 
and	liquidity	 than	men—so	 in	times	of	crisis,	their	farm	productivity	 and	
food	security	will	likely	be	hit	hard.
•	School closures and a reduction in health services can interrupt the 
trajectories	of	adolescent	girls	at	a	critical	life	juncture.
•	Risks	of	gender-based	 violence	 (GBV)	can	also	be	heightened	 during	times	
of	crisis,	isolation,	and	confinement. 	
The	below	studies	 highlight	 evidence	 from	the	Africa	Gender	 Innovation	 Lab	
and other promising research on mechanisms that can help protect the lives 
and	livelihoods	 of	women	and	girls—at	 the	household	 level,	in	firms	and	farms,	
and	during	adolescence—in	 the	context	 of	the	COVID-19	 pandemic.	 While	
these interventions focus on improving economic and social outcomes for 
women,	 many	of	them	also	have	positive	 impacts	 for	men.	In	addition	 to	the	
below strategies, all operations should consider measures to reduce potential 
violence	against	 women.	 For	project	design	support	 and/or	more	information 	
on	any	of	these	studies,	please	contact	 afrgenderlab@worldbank.org .	SUPPORTING WOMEN THROUGHOUT THE 
CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19) EMERGENCY 
RESPONSE AND ECONOMIC RECOVERY
April 2020
http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/africa-gender-innovation-labGENDER 
INNOVATION LAB
The Gender Innovation Lab (GIL) 
conducts impact evaluations of 
development interventions in 
Sub-Saharan Africa, seeking 
to generate evidence on 
how to close gender gaps in 
earnings, productivity, assets, 
and agency. The GIL team is 
currently working on over 70 
impact evaluations in more than 
25 countries with the aim of 
building an evidence base with 
lessons for the region.
The impact objective of GIL is 
increasing take-up of effective 
policies by governments, 
development organizations, 
and the private sector 
to address the underlying 
causes of gender inequality 
in Africa, particularly in terms 
of women’s economic and 
social empowerment. The Lab 
aims to do this by producing 
and delivering a new body 
of evidence and developing a 
compelling narrative, geared 
towards policymakers, on what 
works and what does not work 
in promoting gender equality.
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedPROTECTING HOUSEHOLDS
The	positive	 impacts	 of	cash	transfer	 programs	 are	myriad;	safeguarding	 these	benefits	 for	women	and	men	in	the	
household	 during	times	of	crisis	is	critical.	Implementation	 details	on	timing,	targeting,	 and	modality—as	 well	as	
potential	 tweaks	to	packages—can	 ensure	that	women	and	girls	are	not	left	behind	and	provide	design	ideas	for	
navigating	the	logistics	of	cash	transfer	programs	under	the	uncertainty	of	COVID-19.
For women, the positive impacts from cash transfers are just as strong when they are delivered on 
a quarterly basis as when they are delivered more frequently—yielding the same impact at a lower 
implementation cost, with fewer person-to-person interactions.  In an impact evaluation in Nigeria , women 
who received cash transfers were more likely to work and their households ate better (more food, more regularly, 
with a more diverse diet) and invested more in assets, and these positive effects did not vary by frequency of the 
transfer.
Cash transfers to women can also be used as a tool for economic recovery: women who receive them 
are more likely to start businesses, which can fuel economic growth.  After receiving the cash transfer and 
a community livelihoods program, women in Northern Nigeria , a part of the country with low levels of education 
and many vulnerable households, became more engaged in home-based activities, like petty trading and rice 
processing. GIL work from the Central African Republic  also shows how recovery could be supported through 
public works programs. The intervention increased the number of days worked, monthly earnings (by roughly 
10%), and ownership of durable goods for both male and female participants in a lasting way.
In	addition	 to	these	tested	interventions,	 the	Gender	Innovation	 Lab	highlights	 the	following	 promising	 strategies 	
from	a	review	of	the	literature.
Cash transfers can be bundled with the provision of mobile phones. Delivering mobile phones directly to 
women can potentially address multiple issues that women might face in a COVID-19 context—like access to 
mobile money transfers, other banking services, and information. Research has shown that access to mobile 
money accounts for women can lead to increased financial resilience, especially for female-headed households 
(Suri and Jack, 2016). Aker et al. (2011 and 2014) found that mobile payments led to an improvement in dietary 
diversity, as well as boosted intra-household bargaining power for women. Mobile phones can also potentially act 
as a mechanism to enable reporting of gender-based violence, as women are confined to an environment with 
heightened tensions and exacerbated economic stress.
Carefully designed cash transfer programs have been shown to reduce levels of intimate partner 
violence.  In a recent review , 11 out of 14 impact assessments found decreases in intimate partner violence 
attributable to a cash transfer program. Authors note that cash could decrease violence by decreasing household 
poverty and poverty-related stress and reducing intra-household conflict.
When paired with cash transfers, SMS messages or radio programming as light-touch behavioral 
nudges for couples could promote more equitable sharing of household resources or intra-household 
allocation of labor without requiring physical gatherings.  Couples’ interventions designed to increase 
household cooperation and change gender norms have shown promising results—and could be adapted to reach 
couples virtually in this crisis context. In Cote d’Ivoire , for example, export crop farmers who filled out a two-year 
action plan with their wives shared more agricultural decisions, and women managed more cash-crop tasks. GIL-
IFPRI research from Uganda  showed that small incentives paired with a couples’ workshop helped to encourage 
cash crop farmers to transfer contracts into their wives’ names—which led to more women interacting with the 
purchasing company, and holding contracts.EMERGENCY 
RESPONSEEMERGENCY RESPONSEECONOMIC 
RECOVERYSUPPORTING WOMEN-OWNED FIRMS
Women	in	Africa	are	more	likely	than	men	to	be	entrepreneurs,	 and	they	make	up	58%	of	the	continent’s	 self-employed 	
population.	 However,	 women-owned	 businesses	 are	particularly	 vulnerable	 to	shocks,	as	they	are	disproportionately 	
informal	 and	operate	 in	less-profitable	 sectors.	 Providing	 critical	liquidity	 and	other	buffers	against	shocks	can	help	
to	protect	women-owned	firms	from	the	effects	of	COVID-19. 	
Lines of credit and meso-financing can provide much-needed liquidity to women-owned firms in 
times of crisis.  The Women Entrepreneurship Development Project (WEDP) issued 23.3 million USD to women 
entrepreneurs in just its first calendar year, with 66% of recipients being first-time borrowers. Three years later, 
women who received the credit line increased their profits by an average of 40%, and repayment rates stand at 
99.1%. Psychometric tests may also help bolster women’s access to loans by providing alternative data for credit 
decisions. In  Ethiopia , one study showed that customers who scored at a high threshold on the test were seven 
times more likely to repay their loans compared to lower-scoring customers.
Helping urban firms to formalize through small incentives and a banking information session can 
also boost their access to financial services.  In Malawi , a GIL study showed that encouraging women 
entrepreneurs to register their firms, coupled with an information session at a bank, increased their use of formal 
financial services, which helped boost their profits by an average of 20%. A similar effect was observed for men. 
This model could be adapted to the current crisis by offering the bank information via mobile phones. 
Business plan competitions could be another tool to address capital constraints and encourage 
investment and risk-taking during the post-crisis recovery. In Nigeria , a business plan competition 
providing cash grants averaging $50,000 increased the likelihood that women would operate a firm, boosted 
employment, and led to increases in sales and profits. These competitions could also foster innovations around 
the Coronavirus response. 
Personal initiative training—which teaches women entrepreneurs to be proactive and demonstrate 
perseverance—may help them to bounce back from the economic ramifications of COVID-19.  In 
Togo , the training resulted in a 40% increase in profits for female entrepreneurs compared to those who took 
a traditional business training, and it was successfully scaled up in over ten countries. It could be a key tool to 
promote investments, decrease risk aversion, and increase worker productivity during crisis recovery. Depending 
on mobility restrictions, the training could take place virtually. This training also boosted the profits of male 
entrepreneurs who were trained.
Coaching as well as providing information and training on sector choice can be crucial to guide 
women who are starting new self-employment livelihoods during the recovery phase.  Evidence from 
Ethiopia  and Uganda  highlights that women entrepreneurs’ profits are significantly higher in sectors in which 
women are typically less likely to operate, compared to those they earn in female-dominated sectors. Counseling 
women on the implications of sector choice during the very initial startup phase may support improving women’s 
business outcomes in the medium-term.
SECURING FARMERS’ LIVELIHOODS
Over	90%	of	Sub-Saharan	 Africa’s	extreme	 poor,	who	are	some	of	the	most	vulnerable	 to	shocks,	 are	engaged	 in	
agriculture.	 Women	 contribute	 a	large	share—roughly	 40%—of	 agricultural	 labor	across	the	African	continent.	 Yet	
designing	 an	agricultural	 intervention	 that	meets	the	needs	of	women	farmers	 can	be	challenging,	 especially	 in	
times	of	crisis	and	food	insecurity.
EMERGENCY 
RESPONSEECONOMIC RECOVERYProviding productive inputs directly to women farmers can have positive impacts for women—including 
increasing their use of that input, shifting time-use patterns, and encouraging dietary diversity—and 
can spur economic recovery following the crisis. In Côte d’Ivoire, an impact evaluation of the World Bank’s 
Agriculture Sector Support Project tested the effectiveness of providing oxen to household heads via matching 
grants of 50% of the cost of animals and equipment. Preliminary results show that households were able to 
expand their cultivated land, and women in the households were able to shift their time use patterns towards 
self-employment. In Mali, an impact evaluation found that when women received free fertilizer, they increased 
their use of fertilizer as well as other complementary inputs, including herbicides and hired labor. A GIL study 
in Uganda  tested the introduction of a nutrient-dense crop, the orange-fleshed sweet potato, and found that 
providing subsidized crop vines and trainings helped boost the number of households cultivating and consuming 
sweet potatoes by 68% and 50%, respectively.
Encouraging couples to create joint action plans can help include women in higher-value agricultural 
activities, offering an opportunity to promote market inclusion in the aftermath of the crisis.  In a 
separate intervention in Cote d’Ivoire’s  Agriculture Sector Support Project, male export crop farmers in an 
agricultural extension training were asked to fill out a two-year action plan together with their wives to manage 
their farms. Compared to those who did not fill out a plan, couples who did shared more agricultural decisions 
and women managed more cash-crop tasks. Such joint planning may also help households navigate the effects 
of the crisis in a more gender-equitable way. In Uganda , small incentives paired with a couples’ workshop 
encouraged sugarcane farmers to transfer outgrower contracts into their wives’ names. The contract intervention 
led to marked increases in women’s agency and control over productive resources.
In	addition	 to	the	tested	interventions,	 the	Gender	Innovation	 Lab	highlights	 the	promising	 below	strategies	 from	a	
review	of	existing	literature.
Digital extension services can be used when traditional agricultural extension programs are curtailed 
to limit person-to-person contact.  Research has noted that mobile phones can connect farmers to information 
about agricultural technologies, and increase farmers’ contact with other technology adopters in their social 
network. There are limits, however, to the types of information that is easily disseminated via mobile phone. 
Digital services might include a call center or helpline: in Kenya, a service called M-Kilimo is a farmer helpline, 
where farmers can call in and speak to a real person for agricultural advice. An estimated 43% of the callers to 
the service are women (USAID, 2013). Research has shown that video-enabled extension messaging helped to 
increase women’s participation in agricultural-decision-making, adoption of agricultural practices and inputs, and 
production outcomes for plots that women manage ( Lecoutere  et al, 2019).
BOOSTING YOUTH EMPLOYMENT
Young	people	make	up	a	majority	 of	the	population	 in	African	countries,	 but	youth	unemployment	 rates	are	double	
those	of	adults.	Due	to	gender-specific	 constraints,	 like	differential	 access	to	key	resources	 as	well	as	underlying	 social	
norms,	young	women	in	particular	 face	higher	unemployment	 rates	than	men,	making	them	even	more	vulnerable	
to	economic	 shocks.	 Programs	 that	can	help	young	people	regain	their	livelihoods	 during	and	in	the	aftermath	 of	
COVID-19	will	be	critical	to	their	wellbeing—as	well	as	economic	growth	and	productivity	more	broadly.
Adding in an element of “action planning” can help youth better navigate the job search.  In a study 
in South Africa , unemployed youth who completed a detailed job search plan as part of the project increased 
the number of job applications submitted, but not the time spent searching, and this translated to sizeable 
improvements in employment outcomes.EMERGENCY RESPONSE EMERGENCY RESPONSE ECONOMIC RECOVERYECONOMIC 
RECOVERYSoft skills training can increase employment of the most vulnerable to help them bounce back from 
the crisis.  Preliminary results from a GIL study in Togo showed that a soft skills training had large and positive 
impacts on number of hours worked (10%), reservation wage (7%), and income (15%) for only the poorest 
participants, indicating the effectiveness of the intervention for low-income, more vulnerable groups.
Complementing training with cash grants can enhance entrepreneurship and employment 
outcomes as part of the crisis recovery.  In Benin, a World Bank project which offered business and life-
skills training as well as cash grants (approximately $400) to vulnerable youth yielded positive short-term 
impacts on employment outcomes.
Both training young women to operate as franchisees of large firms and cash grants can increase 
entrepreneurship and short-term incomes.  In urban Kenya , a bundled project that offered business and 
life skills training, a capital grant, and links with firms to start small-scale franchises, yielded similarly persistent 
increases in entrepreneurship rates and short-term increases in income as cash grants of comparable value 
(approximately $220).
FOSTERING RESILIENCE OF ADOLESCENT GIRLS
In	times	of	crisis,	when	schools	 close	and	economic	 opportunities	 diminish,	 adolescent	 girls’	vulnerability	 can	
heighten.	 Evidence	 from	 Sierra Leone 	during	the	Ebola	epidemic	 indicates	 that	girls	spent	an	additional	 1.3	hours	per	
week	with	men	than	they	did	prior	to	the	crisis.	In	areas	severely	 affected	 by	Ebola,	girls	were	also	twice	as	likely	to	
become	 pregnant	 compared	 to	girls	in	less-affected	 communities.	 This	increased	 their	likelihood	 of	leaving	school,	
adversely	affecting	their	life	trajectories.
Adapting adolescent girls programs —focused on mentoring, support networks, and providing 
vocational and life skills training—to a virtual format could help reach girls in the context of 
confinement due to COVID.  In Uganda , an adolescent girls program implemented by the NGO BRAC 
increased the likelihood of girls engaging in income-generating activities by nearly 50%, trebled their earnings, 
decreased teen pregnancy by a third, and led to a drop in girls reporting sex against their will by close to 
a third. During the Ebola epidemic, an adolescent girls program implemented by the International Rescue 
Committee in Liberia  increased adolescent girls’ transition from primary to secondary school and led to 
sustained impacts on educational achievement. The program adapted to the crisis by ensuring that mentors 
leading the programming could disseminate public health information, and discuss the Ebola epidemic in 
group sessions. In the COVID-19 context, mobile delivery modes (text messaging, chatlines, and apps) and 
virtual mentoring/meeting groups—while untested—could help to diffuse information on a range of topics and 
connect girls to important vocational and life skills training.
Offering adolescent girls programs could help expand girls’ economic opportunities and mitigate the 
effects of future crises.  Adolescent girls programs implemented in Sierra Leone  (preceding the Ebola epidemic) 
and South Sudan (in conflict-affected areas, before conflict intensified) helped young women remain in school and 
avoid unintended pregnancies following the crises, suggesting that these programs could be implemented in the 
recovery phase to help buffer girls against future shocks. Notably, in Sierra Leone, unwanted and transactional 
sex increased among older girls during the crisis—likely due to the fact that younger women involved in the 
program spent less time with men. However, older girls were more likely to use modern contraceptives and there 
were no resulting increases in pregnancy rates, suggesting that the program helped mitigate some of the risks 
around transactional sex.EMERGENCY RESPONSE ECONOMIC RECOVERY ECONOMIC RECOVERYCROSS-CUTTING GENDER CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
RESPONSE AND RECOVERY OPERATIONS
Distributing mobile phones directly to women can facilitate 
operations, given existing gender gaps in mobile phone ownership.  
World Bank data show that across Africa, on average, 71% of men have 
a mobile phone compared with 58% of women, revealing a gender gap 
of 13%. Mobile phone access will be critical for many operations—giving 
women access to one will enable her to benefit from mobile cash transfer 
programs, agricultural extension advice, mobile banking, and even 
potentially reporting services for gender-based violence. 
The social distancing and quarantine recommendations in a 
COVID-19 context can heighten the risk of gender-based violence 
(GBV). Reports of domestic violence have increased in contexts where 
COVID-19 has spread widely, including China and the United States. 
Economic stress and times of crisis can exacerbate risks of GBV, and 
COVID-19 is likely to spark both of these conditions. Crisis response 
programs should consult available global guidance  on how to prepare 
health systems to respond to GBV in emergency situations and should 
consider allocating funding for GBV-response service providers.
Providing access to caregiving resources can facilitate women’s 
engagement in economic activity. Women bear the brunt of 
responsibility for care in societies across the world. COVID-19 related 
increases in mortality and morbidity could further increase households’ 
caregiving needs during the recovery period, which could inhibit women 
from engaging in paid work to ensure their economic wellbeing. Studies 
from Kenya  and Mozambique  have found that supporting women’s access 
to childcare increases their employment rates and raises the likelihood that 
older siblings enroll in school.
This	work	has	been	funded	in	part	by	the	Umbrella	 Facility	for	Gender	Equality	 (UFGE),	 which	is	a	multi-donor	 trust	fund	
administered	 by	the	World	Bank	to	advance	 gender	equality	 and	women’s	 empowerment	 through	 experimentation	 and	
knowledge	 creation	 to	help	governments	 and	the	private	sector	focus	policy	and	programs	 on	scalable	 solutions	 with	
sustainable	 outcomes.	 The	UFGE	is	supported	 with	generous	 contributions	 from	Australia,	 Canada,	 Denmark,	 Germany,	
Iceland,	 Latvia,	the	Netherlands,	 Norway,	 Spain,	Sweden,	 Switzerland,	 United	Kingdom,	 United	States,	and	the	Bill	and	
Melinda	Gates	Foundation.FOR MORE INFORMATION, 
PLEASE CONTACT
afrgenderlab@worldbank.org
1818 H St NW  
Washington, DC 20433 USA  
www.worldbank.org/africa/gilPhoto	credit:	Lindsay	Mgbor,	World	Bank	/	Lewis,	World	Bank	/	Arne	Hoel,	World	Bank	
EMERGENCY RESPONSE ECONOMIC RECOVERY