  1  
 
 
Case Study  
The Future of G2P Payments : 
Toward s an integrated infrastructure in Bangladesh  
Silvia Baur -Yazbeck and Joep Roest  
March 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2  
 
 
This work was funded in whole or in part by CGAP.  Unlike CGAP's official 
publications, it has not been peer reviewed or edited by CGAP, and any 
conclusions or viewpoints expressed are those of the authors, and they may 
or may not reflect the views of CGAP staff.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DISCLAIMER  
 
   3  
Summary  
By 2015 , Bangladesh already had begun to experiment with digitizing government -to-person payments. Several  
social safety net programs, among the more than 100 in place , were experimenting with various digital payment 
approaches —often through a customized arrangement with a single ven dor or  provider.  
Access to Information ( A2i) is a cross -government agency that seeks to  improve  government service s to citizens . 
Along with the digitization efforts that were already taking shape, A2i saw that more benefits  could be gained if 
government programs  shared and used a  unified government payments platform that would consolidate and 
simplify delivery  for both government programs and their citizens . In early 2016 , A2i partnered  with CGAP, the Bill 
& Melinda Gates Foundation,  the Better Than Cash Alliance, and Price Waterhouse Coopers  to conduct a deep as-
is context assessment . Based on this assessment, the partners  set out  to create a  detailed systems design process 
that leveraged the existing payments infrastructure, identified trade -offs and reaffirmed  the core goals  of A2i’s 
vision of building a more inclusive digital payments system . As implementation  progressed, A2i revisit ed the 
design , made  adjustments , and brought in other government  departments , while  remain ing focused on  its 
ambit ious long -term vision . By February 2019, A2i had connected key elements of the system and was well into 
piloting different aspects of the overall architecture.      4 Introduction to the case  
Bangladesh has around 11 0 government social safety net payment programs. In recent years, t he government  has 
shown  an increased interest in modernizing payments b ecause , at nearly 13 percent of the annual budget, these 
payments account for a significant part of the budget . This gr owing interest aligned with the efforts of “Digital 
Bangladesh, ” a government -wide initiative championed by the Prime Minister’s son. By 2016 , many government 
programs had begun to move their payments through digital channels  by seeking customized solution s, which 
presented both a problem and an opportunity.  
Access to Information (A2i) is a cross -government agency that seeks to improve government service. A2i is housed 
at the Prime Minister’s Office  and focuses on advancing technology -led solutions for gove rnment services. Since 
its creation in 2007, A2i has promoted digitizing and overhauling government services. It developed a 
methodology for measuring, understanding, and communicating government service improvement , called TCV 
(time, costs, and visits).  Despite considerable success in digitizing public services, the associated payments to and 
from government were still processed manually and often incurred significant costs on citizens.  
A2i saw an opportunity to establish a system -wide approach to channel ing multiple, if not all, government 
payment flows. A2i believed that  a unified approach  could offer a range of benefits beyond what an individual 
financial institution  could offer.  A2i began to articulate this vision by emphasizing that citizens could mak e choices  
on how and where to receive and make payments to government . The vision promoted the idea that choice should 
not be dictated to citizens by either government or providers and simultaneously  linked to a wider aspiration for 
digital finance ; that government payments ought to reinforce wider goals of interoperability, competition among 
providers, and more inclusive open systems. Their goal was to reinvent  both government -to-person ( G2P) and 
person -to-government ( P2G) payments  though in the learn ing process they realized the need to tackle these 
distinct payment types under separate initiatives . Their focus early on in 2017 was to begin with G2P payments.  
Enabling environment  
There was considerable room for improv ing the existing G2P payments syst em in Bangladesh . A 2016 review of  
the volumes, management systems, and disbursement practices of Bangladesh’s highest volume government 
schemes , includ ing social welfare schemes and government salary payments , revealed that payments were 
predominantly mad e in cash . The m anual systems were vulnerable to  leakage and inefficien cy. Where some 
digitization had occurred , government programs were procuring single vendor closed -loop solutions  that offered 
little to no choice to citizen s.  
For c itizens , the experiences with receiving G2P payments ranged from bad to terrible. The typical customer 
journey was riddled with pain points, including unpredictable payments, high levels of fraud and financial loss, 
and overall inconvenience and cost. Those few (less t han 1 percent) who were already receiving payments into an 
account , frequently complained about account opening fees and cumbersome cash -out processes.  The 2016 study 
also showed that c itizens were not well  equipped to take advantage of digitization.  With most G2P recipients 
represent ing the poorest and most vulnerable , they  typically have low literacy levels and limited access to, and 
familiarity with, digital devices and services. Despite the rapid uptake of mobile phones, including smartphones , 
in Bangla desh over 80 percent of the G2P population did not own a mobile phone  in 2016 . Citizen s had diverse 
realities and needs: An old person receiving an old age allowance would conceivably want disbursements 
delivered directly to her home or as close as possibl e, whereas a citizen sending school fees to government, might 
prefer to travel to the school and pay there for various reasons.    5 Key payments infrastructure was already in place . Bangladesh Bank’s National Payments Switch (NPSB) 
connected with the four big  public banks and most of the roughly 50 commercial banks. However, NPSB did not 
connect with a  majority of the mobile financial services  (MFS)  accounts , including  those of bKash —by far the 
largest provider of mobile accounts and agent points of service. NPSB was also in  need of a technology  upgrade 
that would, among other things, enable it to handle biometric authentication.  
Existing distribution networks were reasonably well spread across the densely populated country.  The banks 
that were delivering G2P payments at that time, and those connected to the existing switch, did not reach far 
beyond urban and suburban areas. MFS providers had a much greater reach than these banks, with over 200,000 
access points , but they  were not interoperable. Over 5,000 publ icly run Union Digital Centers (UDC) and over 8,500 
e-centers of Bangladesh Post offered an additional network. While a  few UDCs had begun to also offer basic 
banking and payments services , large portions of these nonbank delivery networks remained outside  the 
payments system.  
Bangladesh’s N ational ID  (NID)  system was in transition. The national biometric ID covered over 95 percent of 
the adult population, including over 85 percent of G2P recipients. This meant that the NID database could be 
leveraged for biometric customer verification  during enrollment and account opening, and for authenticati ng 
customers performing transactions. NID offered customer verification services to a few banks on a single contract 
basis. Only recently, mobile network operators had been given access to the NID database to biometrically verify 
customers for SIM card  registration .  
While the ID  infrastructure was in place , its full use for government or private  sector  services had not been well 
developed yet. Since the NID had been designed for election purposes , it was within the domain of the Bangladesh 
electoral commission. The commission was  not oriented towards offering the NID for regular use by multiple 
institutions. The use  agreements  they did establish  were based on ad hoc technical and pricing arrangements 
rather than well -established A pplication Programming Interface s (API) or terms.  
There was a parallel effort to issue a large number of IDs via smartcards that would allow offline  customer  
verification . While this held some potential , the card’s  deployment was running into significant delays  and its long -
term  availability was in doubt.   
The regulatory framework for digital financial services was conducive to digital government payments and a 
wider outreach of access points  with some minor gaps.  Bangladesh Bank had allowed both agents for MFS and 
agents for banking under two different regulations. However, the agent regulations were not specific about 
whether interoperable off -us transactions1 would be possible. These types of transactions were n ot barred in the 
regulation, but neither were they specifically permitted. Also, the  regulatory regime provided little clarity as to 
whether Bangladesh Bank would allow electronic Know -Your -Customer (eKYC) processes for account opening.  
A2i was uniquely p ositioned to take on the challenge of driving this kind of payments reform . It was housed in 
the influential Prime Ministers’ Office and had access  into the senior echelons of the civil bureaucracy. A2i also 
recognized its limitations: It was not a governm ent ministry that had direct control over government programs. 
A2i would need to “sell” its ideas within government. On the other hand, because it did not run any programs, A2i 
could take the role of a neutral party and work to establish cross -cutting gove rnment payments systems , with 
fewer inter -ministerial “turf” constraints. Political considerations were a final and compelling reason to push 
ahead . The government had set a priority of going digital by 2021 , in time for the country’s 50th anniversary.  
                                                           
1 In an off -us transaction, the bank or agent processing a cash -out is not the customer ’s financial service provider .   6 Design: Key choices  
Confident and backed by  several partners, A2i took further steps in early 2016. With support from the Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation, CGAP, and the Better than Cash Alliance ( BTCA ), A2i engaged a team from Price 
Waterhouse Coopers ( PWC )2 to assist in an intensive design effort.   
This began with  an As -Is context assessment to identify existing resources and gaps, followed by a design phase 
that sought to optimize key choices to best meet A2i’s goals , and lastly involved the development of a  detailed 
implementation roadmap .   
Box 1. A crucial intervention by Nandan Nilekani . 
A key event in the design stage was a security crackdown that followed a terrorist attack in July 2016 in Dhaka. 
Enhanced security measures made it difficult for A2i and its partners to meet at a critical stage in the design 
planning phase. This important two-day design meeting was moved to Bangalore from its original venue in Dhaka.  
The meeting’s new location presented an opportunity for A2i to invite Nandan Nilekani, the former Minister of 
the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) and a founde r of the software giant Infosys. Nilekani was a 
key person behind the development of India’s identification and G2P architecture. He spent nearly a full day with 
A2i and its partners learning about Bangladesh’s current landscape and its growing digitizatio n efforts.  
He observed that several key elements in payments, national ID, and other systems were already present in 
Bangladesh, and he advocated for a design that would best leverage the existing assets. In the weeks that 
followed, A2i and PWC pressure -tested the design, vetted assumptions, and reviewed the design. Nilekani’s input 
persuaded A2i to push for a design that best leveraged existing systems and to adopt a longer term and more 
aspirational  vision. Critically , Nilekani’s credibility and backing gave A2i even greater reassurance that their vision 
could be delivered.  
A2i and its partners used the knowledge gleaned from the multi -pronged As-Is assessment to consolidate the 
design  choices . The design process took s everal weeks and required verification of key factors and system 
capabilities. The design was guided by a clearly articulated set of overarching principles, as shown in Figure 1.  
Figure 1. Key design principles for Bangladesh's G2P payments architecture . 
 
 
KEY CHOICE #1: A2I WOULD FOCUS ONLY ON SERVICING PAYMENTS, NOT G2P PROGRAM MANAGEMENT  
A2i decided to focus solely on making payments easier  and leave program management to government 
departments. This decision helped A2i to avoid conflict with government programs. A2i’s focus would be on 
                                                           
2 PWC is a global consulting firm that proposed a team of various expertise from government process re -engineering, national IDs, payment 
systems, and strategy. The team, from PWC Asia, had worked on IDs and G2P in India.   
  7 making payment s easier for the government programs . The design meant  government program s wou ld collect 
citizens’ verified NIDs  and offer  these  basic  details at the time of payment.  
This approach was not without risks. Without its own programs, A2i would need to persuade programs to deploy 
the new payments approach. Some government programs had already created  their own customized solutions  
and A2i would need to offer them a compelling reason to join.  
KEY CHOICE #2: LONG -TERM VIEW TO PROMOTE INTEROPERABILITY  
A2i chose to leverage the existing  payments switch , the NPSB , since it had many of the necessary capab ilities and 
was the most widely available . This mean t, however , that payments could only be made to accounts at providers 
who were  linked to NPSB. This decision left out bKash, which had the largest reach of accounts and access points. 
By sacrificing its reach in the short run, A2i hoped that its patience would prove to be a strong incentive for bKash 
and other providers outside the national payments system to come in later. This decision exhibits how A2i opt ed 
for a large r, long -term pay -off over short -term smaller gains . 
One key piece of infrastructure that did not exist and need ed to be built  was a “mapper ” that connect ed 
individuals’ IDs to their bank account of choice. This function would allow government programs to c apture only 
IDs (not account  information) and provide this information to the mapper in order to initiate a payment .  
KEY CHOICE #3: SOUGHT TO LEVERAGE EXISTING NID  DATABASE  AND EASE AUTHENTICATION  
Another key design choice was to focus on biometric account opening and payment authentication. This decision 
was based on findings from  the As -Is assessment: Many citizen s did not have phones or the skills to navigate 
complex registration processes. A  card-based system  was considered but de-emphasized due to high er costs and 
complications inherent in card system management. An important related objective is that A2i also saw this as an 
opportunity to promote government use of NIDs  and provide  further reaso ns for the Election Commission to 
expand the utility of the ID system . 
KEY CHOICE #4: PAY HEFTY FEES FOR PAYMENTS DELIVERY TO INCENTIVIZE PROVIDERS  
One of the concerns with this new G2P payments approach was how to create incentives that would draw 
provid ers into the system. The expectation , based on experience elsewhere, was that the target population would 
immediately cash out the entirety of their payments. Payments directly to customer accounts meant less float for 
the banks and so other incentives wou ld need to be developed.  
The new approach also challenged perceptions citizen s had developed over time. For example, it was perceived 
to be difficult to shift from cash delivery, which is perceived as “free” to citizen s, to making citizens pay a fee  to 
cash out. Therefore, A2i determined that a fee would be needed to be paid to providers —one that is s ubstantial 
enough  to give an incentive to pursue these customers . The acquiring networks (points of service where people 
could cash out) would be compen sated by an interchange fee based on the interoperable payments system in 
place.  
A2i’s design encompassed a range of long -term goals. One was to bring providers into the interoperable system, 
where the cash -out fees would give them the incentive to pursue  these accounts and increase the number of 
access points. Rather than paying one firm in a single -vendor contract, A2i opted to stimulate a wider digital 
financial  ecosystem. The keys to success, therefore, were whether the volumes, fees, interoperability,  and other 
considerations would be sufficient to stimulate a positive and dynamic provider response.    8 KEY CHOICE #5: ASKING AS LITTLE AS POSSIBLE FROM OTHER ARMS OF GOVERNMENT  
To limit interdependence and to avoid creating unnecessary complications, the design sought to rely as little as 
possible on help from other parts of government. However, A2i needed to work with a few other arms of 
government , including Bangladesh Bank , the Election Commission and the government schemes, as well as the 
banks and the MFS providers  to make the design feasible. (See Table 2 in Annex .) 
 
These five key choices significantly shaped the design of the payments model and defined the processes required 
for making direct payments to citizens. (See Figure 2.)   9 Figure 2. Process flows for key steps in the  new G2P payments system . 
 
  
  10 Implementation thu s far 
Following the design effort A2i created a Project Management Unit dedicated to  pursuing the goal of 
implementing the new system .3 It was clear that implementation would not happen quickly and take  some  
significant effort, including management expertise, resources, partnerships, and political navigation . It would need 
to follow a phased strategy in which earlier steps create momentum for subsequent steps. This staged appro ach 
comprised three broad phases, as illustrated in Figure 3.  
Figure 3. Phased roadmap for Bangladesh's new payments architecture . 
 
The first step was to identify a few government programs and banks  to kick off a pilot . By early 2018, two G2P 
programs from the Ministry of Social Services and one program from the Ministry of Women’s Affairs agreed to 
participate in the pilot. As the pilot efforts were launched in 2018 , some  significant shifts were needed in the 
original design  in order to  get things moving  (see Figure 4 ). By early 2019 , the pilots had made payments to over 
100,000 individuals across three programs. Of these at least a quarter had been done testing the mapper function.  
The Ministry of Finance takes center stage . As implemen tation of the roadmap proceeded , A2i brought on board 
the Finance Division of the Ministry of Finance, which is the Government’s key payments and treasury arm. The 
Finance Division determined that it would disburse funds directly from Treasury instead of t hrough public banks 
as was assumed in the original design. In addition, the Finance Division —as opposed to A2i —procured and 
oversaw  the development of a shared scheme and payments management portal. Since the Finance Division will 
own the portal, it will b e able to regularly monitor payments and schemes; such as identifying duplicate  G2P 
recipients. This reflects both greater buy -in by government but also added effort to integrate with the Ministry’s 
systems.  
Interoperability through the electronic fund transfer network instead of the switch . NPSB, managed by 
Bangladesh Bank, was going to take many months to  upgrad e the switch  to support biometric transactions. 
Instead , A2i began to work with an alternative payment scheme called the Electronic Fund Transf er Network 
(BEFTN), which connects 40 of the 58 banks in Bangladesh. Crucially, as with the NPSB, citizen s would be able to 
choose from among several providers on where to keep an account . However, going with the BEFTN entailed 
some  significant tradeoff s. For cash -outs, BEFTN is unable to allow off -us transactions and customers are limited 
                                                           
3 Roadmap implementation was funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and technical assistance was provided by BTCA.  
  11 in their options of cash -out points . Large providers that are not banks, such as bKash , do not participate directly 
in BEFTN. Instead, bKash payments are routed to a bank  and then subsequently sent down to a specific account 
at bKash . BEFTN is also not able to process  biometric authentication so this original element of design is not 
available in the early piloting. So far, the BEFTN has held up well, breaking its record f or the number of daily 
transactions during the pilot. A2i can still transition to the  NPSB after undergo ing the necessary  upgrade.  
Mapper built and undergoing  testing . A2i procured a firm to develop the ID -account mapper  software and to 
seed the information of citizens involved in th e early pilots .4 So far , the mapper  has been able to facilitate 
payments to some 25,000 citizens. During  implementation, however, the programs have learned about challenges 
with the NID itself that has curtailed wider use. 
Figure 4: The original versus adjusted design of the G2P payments process.  
 
By mid -2018, A2i and the partnering Ministries had onboarded  128,000 G2P recipients  in 11 subdistricts , trained 
government  field staff and rolled out  their first  pilot with funds being routed into individuals’ accounts acr oss four 
banks and three MFS providers .5 Key aspects of the design were tested such as customer choice, involvement of 
multiple programs, the newly developed mapper and routing payments directly from Treasury. The pilot offered 
A2i important learnings and uncovered a few  challenges  that will need further fine -tuning as A2i plans scal ing up:  
Positive prospects for building a unified payment system across government.  Having different programs from 
different Ministries successfully participate represents an important validation of the design. It also points to a 
future process for onboarding more programs from across Government .  
Customer choice was implemented and tested —but not in all cases , everywhere . A2i carried out training  and 
introductory workshops  with local government officials and UDC agents to build their capacity for account 
opening, account seeding  (i.e., linking a customer ’s account to her ID in the payments mapper) , and cash -out 
services.  Whilst all participating recipient s’ information  had been  seeded in to the new payments mapper, the 
degree of  choice offered differed across pilot locations. Depending on the G2P program and citizen s’ location , 
citizen s were able to choose from either a fixed menu of  bank  options or, in some cases,  a single bank was selected 
for them . In some  areas they were  even  able to choose from a menu of MFS  providers . Despite not testing full 
choice for all citizen s in all locations, it was an important validation of the design that at least a subset of citizen s 
had been enabled  to choose their preferred provider . 
The business model for providers still needs to be figured out . The commissions and fees to be paid to 
participating payment providers are yet to be settled. A2i commissioned PiStrategy, a Bangladesh based 
                                                           
4 The same firm had developed Bangladesh’s bankin g switch for ATM and POS interoperability.   
5 The participating providers include Bank Asia, Mohtomuti Bank, NRB Commercial Bank, Sonali Bank, bKash, Rocket DBBL and Surec ash. 
  12 consultancy, to study different compensation models. Their study will recommend a rate for endorsement by 
Government, after which it can be applied.  
The National ID has some drawbacks . The pilot uncovered that 5 -8 percent  of G2P recipients  do not possess a n 
NID. In addition, the NID database against which citizen s are authenticating exhibited some data quality issues 
leading to failed transactions.  These issues will need to be addressed before scaling up from the pilot.  
Fees for authentication services need to be negotiated . A2i has held regular negotiations with the Election 
Commission on the pricing of biometric authentication services and the iss uance of IDs for citizens under 18 years 
of age. To reduce the costs of biometric authentication services through the NID database, A2i is considering a 
model that applies a fee for authentication during enrollment and no fee for subsequent authentication for cash -
in and cash -out transactions. The fee structure has not been settled yet and negotiations continue.  
A second, more ambitious pilot  that includes more banks and programs,  is planned for 2019. The parameters are 
still unclear but A2i envisions  to pilot the biometric authentication process with  the ID-account mapper. How they  
will overcome the inability of the BEFTN to link with the biometric component of the NID is still unclear.  However,  
some outstanding issues will need to be sorted out first , such as the quality issu es in the NID database , citizen s 
without an NID  and the fees  to be paid to  participating payment providers . Beyond the second pilot, A2i has the 
ambition to switch from the BEFTN to the NPSB an d integrate  bKash and Rocket  DBBL . Bangladesh Bank is also 
contemplating regulator y adjustments for allowing eKYC beyond a pilot test.  
 
    13 ANNEX  
 
Table 1. Summary of Key Context Findings and Implications for Design Choices  
As-Is Context Assessment  Design Implications  
Citizens have wide -ranging and diverse 
needs .  Enabling payments through multiple channels held out the 
promise that customers could choose the delivery methods that 
suited them.  
G2P r ecipients largely do not have their 
own mobile phones .  A fashionably mobile -only design would exclude precisely the 
population being targeted.  
There is limited literacy and numeracy 
capabilities.  Enabling biometric authentication would alleviate the common 
issues customers faced with remembering the PINs fo r cash out.  
Government schemes pursue a myriad of 
individual solutions. Each procure single -
payment providers for a limited term. 
Providers treat the government, rather 
than G2P recipients, as the customer .  By opening payments delivery to a variety —if not all —players 
would reduce vendor -lock and help create a more level playing 
field that would spur innovation in services and infrastructure. It 
would switch the providers’ focus from winning government 
contracts to improving service for citizens .  
Key pieces of payments infrastructure 
were in place .  
However, the largest distribution 
networks, including bKash, were not 
interoperable.  A focus on enhancing and linking the existing payment switching 
would make it possible to focus on interoperable systems  and, 
therefore, more choice. This choice also meant it might provide 
additional incentives for large players like bKash to interoperate. 
Or at least, to avoid establishing single provider systems that 
create more reasons not to interoperate.  
Distributio n was heavily dominated by 
providers outside the payments system.  This would mean starting from a narrower set of access points 
focusing on a few agent banking locations and the Union Digital 
Centers. The goal would be to add more access points as more 
providers join the payments system.  
NID had good coverage but was mostly 
used as a voter ID. The existing capabilities 
were not extended to government or 
private sector applications such as e -KYC 
or authentication.  This was assessed to be 
technically feasible.  Offering eKYC and authentication to financial services providers 
would allow for simplified account opening and  customer  
authentication.  
Demonstrate a use case for government to extend NID beyond 
its use excl usively as an election tool.  
 
    14 Table 2. Areas of collaboration with other arms of government  
Bangladesh Bank 
(Central Bank)  • Allow small -value accounts to be opened through biometric identification.  
• Allow eKYC verification through the NID database.  
• Enable biometric authentication for each transaction on NPSB.  
• Build and host an ID -account mapper.  
 
Election Commission 
(National Identification)  • Provide an open API to financial services providers for e -KYC verification for 
account opening and an open API to NPSB for biometric authentication of 
cash -out, cash -in, and payments transactions.  
 
Government Schemes  • Use a management information system that can generate a standard 
payments file or link with the ID account mapper to make payments.  
• Collect and seed citizen s’ ID numbers.  
• Generously cover fees (>3%) of cash payments to issuing banks.  
 
Banks and MFS 
Providers  • Provide small -value accounts  
• Ensure data connectivity to link NID for biometric authentication.  
• Establish biometric message format capability for biometric transactions.  
 
A2i Implementation 
Team  • Expand DFS coverage to all 5,000 UDCs —enabled as banking agents.  
• Prepare guidelines for standardizing technical infrastructure at the UDC level.  
• Negotiate with providers to make agent operation service -level agreements.  
 
 
 
 