 
 
1 
 The Future Is Mobile:  
Financial Inclusion and Technological 
Innovation  in the Emerging World  
 
Eleanor Lumsden * 
  
 
 * Associate Professor of Law, Golden Gate University School of Law, J.D., NYU School of 
Law, A.B., Princeton University. Born in Kingston, Professor Lumsden is a dual citizen of 
both Jama ica and the United States. She wrote this article as a Fulbright Scholar while in 
residence in Jamaica at the United Theological College of the West Indies. She would 
especially like to thank the Rev. Dr. Marjorie Lewis, the first female president of the 
college, for her hospitality and for her invaluable research assistance. She would also like 
to thank the following persons in Jamaica: Courtney Campbell at First Global Bank; 
Professor Rosalea Hamilton; Vice Chancellor Eon Nigel Harris; Nsombi Jaja; Deputy  
Director of Public Prosecutions (Financial Crimes) Maxine Jackson; Professor Claremont 
Kirton; Lloyd Laing; Professor Maurice McNaughton; Professor Verna Cassell; Reverend 
Trevor Edwards; Deputy Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, Livingtstone Morrison; 
Solicitor General of Jamaica, Nicole Foster -Pusey; Ingrid Riley; Robin Sykes; and 
Professor Michael Witter. Thanks also to GGU School of Law and the U.S. Fulbright 
Program for the research and scholarship assistance needed to complete this project.  FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
2 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Abstract  
The digital revolution is in full bloom and technology is being used to solve the world ’s most 
challenging problems, yet traditional banking excludes many of the world ’s poorest people from 
taking advantage of the full fruits of the financial system. Especially in emerging and developing 
economies, implementing m obile financial systems can speed financial inclusion and spur 
economic growth. There is space for regulatory reform that addresses concerns with data 
security and consumer privacy , yet does not stifle innovation. Throughout history, resistance to 
innovati on has generally proved futile, and countries that refuse to change risk missing 
opportunities.  
 
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  3 
Part I ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  9 
A. Poverty, a Dirty Word  ................................ ................................ ....... 9 
B. Financial Exclusion  ................................ ................................ ..........  16 
C. Entrepreneurial Hunger in Jamaica  ................................ ...............  21 
Part II  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 25 
A. Tech Innovation in the Emerging World  ................................ ...... 25 
B. Countries with Explosive Growth of Mobile Money  ..................  27 
C. Countries that Failed to Ignite, Where It Is Too Soon to Tell,  
or with Weak  Growth  ................................ ................................ ..... 28 
Part III  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 30 
A. Scandals and Financial Crime  ................................ ........................  31 
B. Regulatory Challenges  ................................ ................................ .... 33 
C. Beyond Legislation: History, Culture, and Community .............  36 
Part IV  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 40 
Tolling for a New Mandate  ................................ ................................ .... 40 
Concluding Thoughts  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  42 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  3 
Introduction  
Financial services are the lifeblood of an economy, enabling households and 
businesses alike to save, invest, and protect themselv es against risk. Yet in many 
emerging economies today, the majority of individuals and small businesses lack 
access to basic savings and credit products, which hinders economic growth and 
perpetuates poverty. Two billion people in the developing world lack  access to a 
bank, and 200 million small businesses cannot get the credit they need to grow, 
a gap estimated at $2.2 trillion.  
 
The solution can be summed up in two words: digital finance, the idea that 
individuals and companies can have access to payments , savings, and credit 
products without ever stepping into a bank branch. This is possible through 
digitization, which can essentially turn a smartphone into a n all-in-one wallet, 
checkbook, bank branch, and accounting ledger.  
 
Financial inclusion could help boost economies, especially in parts of the world 
that need it most .1 
 
Innovation and regulation are not natural enemies. They have been pitted as such 
by forces committed to tradition and resistant to change. Law can be used as a tool to 
foster in novation and impact social change while still protecting consumers from 
financial crime.2 Although “500 million economically active poor people in the world 
are operating microenterprises and small businesses, ”3 millions of people are still 
excluded from t he wide spectrum of credit, investment, and wealth -building financial 
services that are necessary for them to move beyond subsistence living. The question 
this paper seeks to answer is whether developing,4 economically -stable economies 
 
 1 James Ma nyika & Roger Voorhies, What Digital Finance Means for Emerging Economies , 
FORTUNE  (Oct. 24, 2016), http://fortune.com/2016/10/24/digital -finance -emerging -
economies.  
 2 Examples of financial (or “white collar ”) crime include identity theft, counterfeit 
currency, money laundering, or unauthorized banking activity: “Financial crime 
threatens the safety and soundness of financial systems world -wide. In some cases, these 
crimes threaten the security and safety of t he nation. These crimes range from fairly 
simple operations carried out by individuals or small groups to highly sophisticated rings 
seeking funding for criminal enterprises or terrorism. ” See Financial Crime , U.S.  DEP’T OF 
TREASURY : OFF. OF THE COMPTROLLE R OF THE CURRENCY , https://www.occ.gov/topics/bank -
operations/financial -crime/index -financial -crime.html. See also  PRICE WATERHOUSE 
COOPER , GLOBAL ECONOMIC CRIME SURVEY 2016:  FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY INSIGHTS  3, 
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/assets/gecs/gec s-fs-industry -cut-2016.pdf  (other examples 
of financial crime include cybercrime, accounting fraud, bribery & corruption).  
 3 Joana Ledgerwood, SUSTAINABLE BANKING WITH THE POOR: MICROFINANCE HANDBOOK : AN 
INSTITUTIONAL AND FINANCIAL PERSPECTIVE  1 (World Ba nk 2002).  
 4 Although the terms “developed ” and “developing ” are falling out of favor  – and perhaps 
rightly so  – the difference between the two can typically be boiled down to the amount of 
per capita, or average income per person; developed nations usually have a per capital 
income greater than USD $12,000 (and usually an average of $38,000), whereas 
developing nati ons have lower per capita incomes. Among developing nations, there is a 
further segmentation between moderately developed (per capita income between $1,000 
to $12,000) and less developed countries (per capita income of less than $1,000, and 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
4 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
should embrace emerg ing digital finance to foster financial inclusion.5 Can laws be 
created that minimize potential threats to individual privacy and data security, while 
still allowing mobile technology the breathing space that it needs to make a 
difference?6 
The Digital Rev olution has been taking the emerging world by storm for years, 
and this article will reveal some of the regulations in Jamaica that are being put in place 
to contain it. Often faced with poor physical and financial infrastructure and higher 
need, some deve loping nations have been apt to embrace technologies like mobile 
money without doing much diligence on the potential impacts of these technologies .7 
As a more developed country within a developing region, Jamaica is poised between 
a rock and a hard place. The question is whether the island nation should risk its 
economic stability (that nonetheless harbors great poverty and inequality) for an 
uncertain promise of greater things to come.  
It is the province of law to protect especially vulnerable populations.  Financial 
crime is on the rise,8 and consumer privacy and security cannot be taken lightly.9 As 
has already been shown in the United States, many laws are inadequate for the task of 
protecting consumer financial information.10 Why take the risk of exposing  developing 
and emerging economies to the risk of new technology that could cause economic 
instability? There are already so many challenges in the emerging world that many of 
these countries likely believe that the risk may not be worth any potential rewa rd. On 
 
typically aroun d $500). See Transcript of Margaret Cunningham, Economic Inequality: 
Differences in Developed and Developing Nations , STUDY .COM , 
http://study.com/academy/lesson/economic -inequality -differences -in-developed -and-
developing -nations.html. Given that these term s are still used widely in the academic 
literature, their use herein reflects that use (and not a desire to offend).  
 5 Jane K. Winn & Louis de Koker, Introduction to Mobile Money in Developing Countries: 
Financial Inclusion and Financial Integrity Confere nce Special Issue , 8 WASH. J.L.  TECH. & ARTS 
155, 156 (2013) ( “Financial inclusion is an important social and economic policy objective 
for many developing countries. ‘Mobile money  refers to the use of a mobile phone 
handset to deposit, withdraw or transfer funds; and it holds great promise as a policy 
instrument for promoting financial inclusion. It provides a practical and cost -effective 
channel to extend basic banking services to  many currently unbanked people in urban as 
well as remote rural areas. ”). 
 6 Eleanor Lumsden, Securing Mobile Technology & Financial Transactions in the United States , 
9 BERKELEY BUS. L.J.  139  (2013) (analyzing the regulatory challenges in the United Stat es 
of balancing consumer privacy with innovations in mobile banking).  
 7 Developed countries like the United States, Canada , and many of the countries of Western 
Europe, for example, generally have been slower in taking advantage of these 
developments —either because they already have existing infrastructure and systems that 
make doing so challenging, or because their citizens have not clamored for these services.  
 8 Holly Ellyatt, Why White Collar Crime is Here to Stay , CNBC  (Aug. 14, 2013) , 
https://www.cnb c.com/id/100961639 ( “White collar crime is estimated to cost the global 
economy more than $2 trillion a year . .  . . . .”). 
 9  See, e .g., Andrew Harris, Seymour Goodman, & Patrick Traynor, Privacy and Security 
Concerns Associated with Mobile Money Applica tions in Africa , 8 WASH. J.L.  TECH. & ARTS 245 
(2013).  
 10 Lumsden, supra  note 6, at 139.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  5 
the other hand, some feel strongly that banking technology (or regulation) should not 
be frozen at today ’s levels because mobile banking is “the future of banking. ”11 The 
balance between regulation and innovation is delicate, and must be tailored to the 
specific cultural, geopolitical , and economic needs of each community:  
 
If law and technology are to work together to improve the basic 
conditions of human social existence  . . .  this presupposes a 
regulatory environment that supports the development,  application 
and exploitation of technologies that will contribute to such an 
overarching purpose, an environment properly geared for risk 
management and benefit sharing.12 
 
This article will explore the ramifications of this delicate dance for Jamaica. Do the 
potential benefits of digital finance outweigh the potential costs? Can Jamaica safely 
adopt a comprehensive mobile financial system that provides greater financial 
inclusion throughout the country?  
Neither the developed nor the emerging world has succ essfully addressed the 
problem of income inequality.13 Despite governmental and non -governmental 
interventions, the gap between those living at the top of the economic pyramid and 
those at the bottom is still growing.14 Yet, in our current digital age, techn ology is 
trumpeted as a source of endless opportunity for the poor.  
For those who are committed to international development and social justice, 
technological innovations appear to present the best hope for eradicating some of the 
worst ills of poverty, including hunger, disease, and lack of access to education. The 
 
 11 Lloyd Gedeye, Cellphone Banking Needs Laws , MAIL & GUARDIAN  (Dec. 7, 2012), 
https://mg.co.za/article/2012 -12-07-cellphone -banking -needs -laws.  
 12 Roger Brownswood & Morag Goodwin, LAW AND THE TECHNOLOGIES OF THE TWENTY -FIRST 
CENTURY  46 (Cambridge Univ. Press 2012).  
 13 Anthony Reuben, Gap Between Rich and Poor Keeps Growing , BBC  NEWS (May 21, 2015), 
http://www.bbc.com/news/business -32824770  (“The gap  between the rich and the poor 
keeps widening, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
says. In its 34 -member states, the richest 10% of the population earns 9.6 times the income 
of the poorest 10%. There is no standard measure of inequality, but most indicators 
suggest it slowed or fell during the financial crisis and is now growing again. ”). See also 
UN Development Programme Bureau for Development , Humanity Divided: Confronting 
Inequality in Developing Countries  16 (Nov. 2013), 
http://www.undp.org/content/dam/undp/library/Poverty%20Reduction/Inclusive%20de
velopment/Humanity%20Divided/HumanityDivided_Full -Report.pdf ( “Over the last 
two decades, income inequality has been growing on average within and across countries. 
As a result, a  significant majority of the world ’s population lives in societies that are more 
unequal today than 20 years ago. ”). 
 14 See UN Development Programme Bureau for Development , supra  note 13  at 16 (“In fact, 
the sharpest increases in income inequality have occurred in those developing countries 
that were especially successful in pursuing vigorous growth and managed, as a result, to 
graduate into higher income brackets. Economic progress in these counties have not 
alleviated disparities, but rather exacerbate d them.”) 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
6 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Netherlands is using technology to combat hunger in the emerging world through a 
program that uses satellite data to improve food security.15 Low -cost, yet highly 
effective mosquito nets are be ing produced in large quantities to protect poor children 
from malaria throughout Africa and Latin America.16 Stanford MBA students created 
solar -powered lamps (to replace more dangerous kerosene lamps) for the poor.17 
Others are providing low -cost laptops t o poor rural children in Africa, Asia and Latin 
America.18 Unique development strategies are being utilized all over the world to 
target developing countries where help is most needed.  
Much like the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution in the United Stat es and in 
Europe, the Digital Revolution promises great change, especially for those 
traditionally located at the bottom of the economic pyramid.19 What does the Digital 
Revolution look like? In Indonesia, rural farmers use their mobile phones to access 
“information about fertilisers, pesticides and the prices of crops ” via text message.20 
Specifically, the technology startup, “8villages, ” gave 900 farmers the opportunity to 
test a business social networking service by entering a code on their mobile phones 
that allowed them to access product reviews written by senior farmers.21 As almost 
fifty percent of Indonesia ’s 230 million people live off the land, the use of mobile 
 
 15 G4AW, or the Geodata for Agriculture and Water Program, provides small scale farmers 
with agricultural advice on climate and weather -related information with the ultimate 
goal of combating food shortages; the program provides increased mobile connectivity 
and satellites to connect businesses to growers to accomplish this goal. G4AW has 
initiated “17 projects involving 80 organizations throughout 10 different countries. ” See 
Kristan Westad, Netherlands Aims to Fight Hunger in Developing Countrie s, THE BORGEN 
PROJECT  (Dec. 9, 2016), https://borgenproject.org/fight -hunger.  
 16 See Jeffrey Gettleman, Meant to Keep Malaria Out, Mosquito Nets are Used to Haul Fish in, 
NY  TIMES  (Jan. 24, 2015), https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/25/world/africa/mosquito -
nets-for-malaria -spawn -new -epidemic -overfishing.html ( “Western governments and 
foundations donate the money. Big companies like BASF, Bayer and Sumitomo Chemical 
design the nets. They are manufactured at about $3 apiece, many in China and Vietnam, 
shipped in  steel containers to Africa, trucked to villages by aid agencies, and handed out 
by local ministries of health, usually gratis. The World Health Organization says the nets 
are a primary reason malaria death rates in Africa have been cut in half since 2000. ”). 
 17 Marc Gunther, D.light: Solar Power for the Poor , MARC GUNTHER  (Mar. 3, 2013), 
http://www.marcgunther.com/d -light -solar -power -for-the-poor.  
 18 The MIT -originated “One Laptop per Child ” Initiative aims to provide “rugged, low cost, 
low power, and conn ected laptops to disadvantaged students around the world. ” See 
Steven Livingston, Classroom Technologies Narrow Education Gap in Developing Countries , 
BROOKINGS INSTITUTE  (Aug. 23, 2016), 
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2016/08/23/classroom -technol ogies -narrow -
education -gap-in-developing -countries. See also  Hannah Clark, The $100 Computer , FORBES  
(Jan. 27, 2007), http://www.forbes.com/2007/01/27/cheap -computers -poor -lead -citizen -
cx_hc_davos07_0127laptop.html.  
 19 See generally  C.K. Prahalad, THE FORT UNE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE PYRAMID : ERADICATING 
POVERTY THROUGH PROFITS  (2006).  
 20 Karishma Vaswani, Indonesian Farmers Reaping Social Media Rewards , BBC  NEWS (June 5, 
2012), http://www.bbc.com/news/business -18193993.  
 21  Id. 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  7 
phones in this regard should have a measurable impact on economic growth. Several 
studies have borne out this supposition: “[D]oubling of mobile data use leads to an 
increase of 0.5 percentage points in the GDP per capita growth rate across selected 14 
countries.22 Countries with higher level of data usage per 3G connections have seen 
increases in GDP per capita growth exceeding a percentage point. ”23 
While these results are clear in developed countries, the studies show positive 
increases in developing countries as well: “In developing markets, a 10% expansion in 
mobile penetration increases prod uctivity by 4.2 percentage points. ”24 Additionally, in 
2011 , Nokia tested a service called “Life Tools ” that allowed 600,000 Indonesian 
farmers with a Nokia handset to “get a text message about crop prices and weather 
patterns” at a cost of “about five U.S.  cents per day. ”25 Mobile farming and mobile 
fisheries in Kerala, India, have both “been associated with increases in fisherman ’s 
profits of 8% . . .”26 These examples of technological innovation hold great promise for 
increasing the economic outlook for thes e farmers, their families, and for their country.  
In Jamaica, as in many parts of the emerging world, the mobile phone has 
increased the ability of people to communicate and support their families remotely. A 
“mobile financial system ” contemplates a compre hensive approach to the delivery of 
financial products and services that allows mobile phone subscribers to access 
financial services without the necessity of a bank account as a precondition.27 
Furthermore, there are several country -based examples of attem pts to adopt mobile 
financial architecture that allow non -bank  bank participants alike to access finance, 
including providing subscribers with the ability to make deposits, deposit savings, 
transfer money, withdraw cash, pay utility bills, purchase goods in retail outlets, and 
 
 22  Maria Obiols, Countries with  Highest GDP Growth in 2017 , GLOBAL FINANCE  (Sept. 30, 
2017), https://www.gfmag.com/global -data/economic -data/countries -highest -gdp-
growth -2017  (“The Gross Domestic Product of a country can be defined as the total 
monetary value of the goods and services p roduced within its borders in a year. ”). 
 23 Already, studies indicate that mobile data impacts the growth of a country ’s gross 
domestic product (GDP): “The mobile telecommunications sector continues to offer 
unprecedented opportunities for economic growth in both developed and developing 
markets, and mobile services have become an essential part of how economies work and 
function  . . . . . . A series of studies have found a link between mobile penetration and 
economic growth. Mobile phones have improved communication, social inclusion, 
economic activity and productivity in sectors such as agriculture, health, education and 
finance.” See DELOI TTE, WHAT IS THE IMPACT OF MOBILE TELEPHONY  ON ECONOMIC GROWTH ? 
1-3 (2012), https://www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/wp -content/uploads/2012/11/gsma -
deloitte -impact -mobile -telephony -economic -growth.pdf.  
 24 Id. at 2.  
 25 Vaswani, supra  note 20.  
 26 DAWN RICHARDS ELLIOTT, EXPLORING THE ECONOMIC POTENTIAL OF A MOBILE FINANCIAL 
SYSTEM IN JAMAICA  24 (2011) , http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00K9JV.pdf . 
 27 Id. at 3.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
8 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
receive employment or health benefits from government agencies —all via basic 
handsets and SMS or text message -based platforms.28 
Adopting a comprehensive mobile financial system in Jamaica may: (1) 
supplement existing banking models; (2) increase the likelihood that more people will 
be able to access finance no matter where they live; (3) decrease income inequality; and 
(4) spur economic growth.  
Encouraging innovation by implementing mobile financial systems is a wholesale 
game changer  because a MFS potentially removes the traditional bank monopoly on 
providing financial products and services. As is discussed below, wittingly or 
unwittingly, banks often serve as major barriers to entry when it comes to the ability 
of the poor to access financial products and services. However, financial consumers no 
longer need to travel to urban centers or rely on traditional banking infrastructure to 
access such products and services. High mobile phone subscription rates are spurring 
the delivery of ne eded banking, healthcare, education and financial products and 
services in radically new ways.  
What kinds of regulation will work best to help fledgling mobile money services 
grow while still maintaining stability in financial markets? What has been the re sult 
thus far of attempts to adopt mobile financial systems that provide services and 
products that go beyond person -to-person remittance transfers?29 
Part I of this Article will address the problem of poverty, income inequality and 
the need for greater fin ancial inclusion in Jamaica. Part II will discuss the benefits that 
emerging technologies such as digital finance can bring to developing economies. Part 
III will address the possibilities for regulation that benefits, without stifling, 
innovation. Part IV  will propose a new mandate for Jamaica, further areas for study, 
and some concluding thoughts on how a mobile financial system could be 
implemented in Jamaica in a way that respects the uniqueness of the island while still 
providing financial access for a  much broader swath of Jamaicans. The Jamaican 
government has an opportunity to harness technological innovation to lead the 
country forward and to show the world, once again in the post -colonial era, that it is 
not afraid to step out and embrace change .30 
 
 28 People also use funds in mobile money accounts to “top up” their airtime minutes on 
their phones, to send and receive money between family members in “geographically 
separate regions ” within a country (domestic remittances) or to complete other basic 
financial services like lending or acquiring insurance. David S. Evans & Alexis Pirchio, 
An Empirical Examination of Why Mobile Money Schemes Ignite in Some Developing countries 
but Flounder in Most  20 (Chi. Coase -Sandor Inst. for Law and Econ., Working Paper No. 
723, 2015) , 
https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=https://www.google .
com/&httpsredir=1&article=2413&context=law_and_economics . 
 29 Remittance transfers, where migrants work to wire money back to their families in their 
countries of origin, is a common use of mobile phones.  
 30 It is worth noting that the Jamaican government has already shown itself ready to 
embrace economic development and financial inclusion: it adopted a “Mobile Money for 
Microfinance ” pilot under the auspices of the Development Bank of Jamaica through a 
collaboration with Transcel Limited, a technology com pany. One of the goals of the 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  9 
Part I  
A. Poverty, a Dirty Word  
For all the promises of prosperity and social justice, thousands of country folk 
continued to drift hard -broke into Kingston in search of non -existent jobs. 
The island ’s class and racial divides remained stubbornly in pla ce. The 
problem of the colour -line continues to haunt Jamaica.31 
 
“Charity begins at home, and justice begins next door. ”32 
 
No one likes to talk about poverty. In the United States, the issue often falls to the 
bottom of political platforms (if it manages to make an appearance at all).33 Yet the 
United States, the so -called leader of the free world, maintains a level of poverty that 
should be untenable in a country of such wealth: 50 million Americans (one in six) 
currently live below the poverty line, and 2 0 percent of the nation ’s children are poor.34 
In the European Union, “nearly 1 in 7 people are at risk of poverty. ”35 In the United 
 
program was to “give the unbanked and the under -banked greater access to financial 
services. ” The Bank of Jamaica voiced its “non-objection ” to the pilot program in 
December 2012. See Lena Phillips, DEVELOPMENT BANK OF JAMAICA  TO LAUNCH MOBILE 
MONEY PILOT PROJECT IN PARTNERSHIP WITH TRANSCEL , ALARIC , NATIONAL COMMERCIAL 
BANK, MICRO CAPITAL (Mar. 7, 2013), https://www.microcapital.org/microcapital -brief -
development -bank -of-jamaica -to-launch -mobile -money -pilot -project -in-partnersh ip-
with -transcel -alaric -national -commercial -bank/ . 
 31 Ian Thomson, THE DEAD YARD: A STORY OF MODERN JAMAICA  5 (2009).  
 32 Charles Dickens , MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT  462  (1844).  
 33 See The Editorial Board, The Failure to Talk Frankly About Poverty , N.Y. TIMES (Sept. 13, 
2016), https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/14/opinion/not -yet-talking -about -the-
poor.html?r=1 (arguing that in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, neither of the two 
candidates listed poverty on their agendas: “Poverty in the United States is deeper  than 
in all other wealthy nations. Yet neither Hillary Clinton nor Donald Trump has a specific 
anti-poverty agenda. ”). 
 34 Associated Press, U.S. Sees Highest Poverty Spike Not Seen Since the 1960s, Leaving 50 Million 
Americans Poor as Government Cuts Bill ions in Spending.  . .So Does That Mean There ’s No Way 
Out? , DAILY MAIL (Apr. 2, 2013), http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article -2302997/U -S-
sees-highest -poverty -spike -1960s -leaving -50-million -Americans -poor -government -cuts-
billions -spending.html#ixzz2PPtEqlqs . (noting that, in the mid -1960s, President Lyndon 
B. Johnson  launched the “War on Poverty; ” the current spike has been attributed to 
“government spending cuts of $85 billion ” that took effect “after feuding Democrats and 
Republicans failed to agree on a better plan for addressing the national deficit. ”). 
 35 The Eur opean Anti -Poverty Network , Poverty and Inequality in the European Union , 
POVERTY SITE (Sept. 30, 2017) , http://www.poverty.org.uk/summary/eapn.shtml . 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
10 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Kingdom, 16.8 percent of the population live in poverty,36 and one in four children live 
below the poverty line.37 And this is the “developed ” world.38 
But what does it mean to be poor? The metric set by the United Nations says that 
“poor” applies to people who living on less than a dollar a day: 1.2 billion live on less 
than a dollar a day, while approximately 2.8 of the 6 billion  people in the world live 
on less than $2 a day.39 
At its most basic level, poverty means that people cannot feed their families, that 
they are unemployed, or cannot find a consistent way of supporting themselves, or 
that they are without adequate shelter. Although they may long for long -term stability 
and living that is beyond subsistence or day -to-day survival, they cannot plan for, or 
ensure their financial future: there is no retirement fund, and they cannot purchase 
short or long -term insurance, includi ng for example, disability or life insurance that 
may be necessary in the event of “rainy days. ” They must scramble to adjust to life ’s 
vicissitudes as they come. When there are unexpected illnesses or deaths, they must 
scrape to try to come up with the mo ney to pay hospital bills or bury their dead. They 
may call on friends and relatives and beg for assistance. Sometimes, if someone has a 
large extended family, family members may be able to help. But they are often in dire 
financial straits as well, and al though they are stretching to help, one must in turn, 
reach to help them when their time of need comes. This reality ensures that any 
accumulated savings will in time disappear.  
Any savings may also be wiped out in case of natural disaster, including droug ht, 
hurricanes, fire and flood.40 People are also more vulnerable to man -made disasters, 
including rampant crime,41 or corruption (if stopped by a police officer for a moving 
 
 36 See Persistent Poverty in the  UK and EU : 2014 , OFF. FOR NAT’L STAT. (May 16, 2016), 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfinanc
es/incomeandwealth/articles/persistentpovertyintheukandeu/2014 . 
 37 Poverty in Britain , ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOC’Y, 
https://21stcenturychallenges.org/poverty -in-britain/  (last visit ed Sept. 30, 2017).  
 38 See World Factbook , CENT. INTELLIGENCE AGENCY , 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the -world -factbook/appendix/appendix -
b.html#D (last visited Sept. 30, 2017) (demonstrating that the current list of developed 
countries include: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bermuda, Canada, Denmark, 
Faroe Islands, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Portugal, 
San Marino, Sout h Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK, US).  
 39 WORLD BANK, WORLD DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2000/2001:  ATTACKING POVERTY (Oxford 
Univ. Press 3d ed. , 2001).  
 40 Eleanor Krause & Richard V. Reeves, Hurricanes Hit the Poor the Hardest , BROOKINGS 
INSTITUTION  (Sept. 18, 2017), https://www.brookings.edu/blog/social -mobility -
memos/2017/09/18/hurricanes -hit-the-poor -the-hardest/.  
 41 ANTHONY D. HARRIOTT & MARLYN JONES , CRIME AND VIOLENCE IN JAMAICA : IDB  SERIES ON 
CRIME AND VIOLENCE IN THE CARIBBEAN  53 (June 2016),  
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7773/Crime -and-Violence -in-
Jamaica -IDB-Series -on-Crime -and-Violence -in-the-Caribbean.pdf?sequence=4 ( “Gangs 
and organized crime are major engines of violence in Jamaica, particularly homicides. 
Organize d crime is a prime source of corruption in the state and polity. ”). 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  11 
violation, whether innocent or guilty, their choice is either pay a fine that they know 
that they cannot afford, or a hefty but still smaller bribe to save themselves further 
debt and an expensive trip to the courthouse), or interminable bureaucracy at every 
level of business life, which also saps any meager funds that they may be trying  to 
save.  
The causes of the global recession of 2008 -2009 are still not well understood by the 
masses who most felt its impact.42 The recession left its charcoal fingerprint on the 
working poor ’s collective consciousness, but already the mark seems to be fa ding. 
Cornel West, a professor and elder statesman who has eschewed political office to take 
his message to the streets, is still shouting his poverty platform from the rooftops. In 
August 2011, Dr. West, along with Tavis Smiley, conducted an 18 -city, 11 -state 
“Poverty Tour ” of the United States by bus.43 Both men co -authored a best -selling book 
about poverty that is a scathing indictment of the baffling inaction by the government 
and apathy of the public on the issue:  
 
Record unemployment and rampant corpor ate avarice, empty houses 
but homeless families, dwindling opportunities in an increasingly 
paralyzed nation — these are the realities of 21st -century America, 
land of the free and home of the new middle -class poor.44 
 
No one seems to be listening.  
Similarly , the United Nations has been trying to shout its way out of the padded 
cell into which it has been unceremoniously placed. Forced into inaction, its hands are 
often tied by the five permanent members of the Security Council. Those members, 
China, France, Great Britain, the Russian Federation and the United States,45 are 
frequently accused of stymying any chance of real reform whenever any of their 
domestic agendas are threatened.46 
 
 42 ALAN S. BLINDER , AFTER THE MUSIC STOPPED : THE FINANCIAL CRISIS, THE RESPONSE , AND THE 
WORLD AHEAD  (Penguin Books  2014).  
 43 A preview video of The Poverty Tour is available at: www.pbs.o rg/black -
culture/shows/list/tavis -smiley -the-poverty -tour/.  
 44 TAVIS SMILEY & CORNEL WEST, THE RICH AND THE REST OF US: A POVERTY MANIFESTO 
(SmileyBooks  2012)  (arguing that with 150 million Americans persistently poor or near 
poor, the highest numbers in o ver five decades, now is the time to confront the underlying 
conditions of systemic poverty in America before it ’s too late).  
 45 See Current Members , UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL ,  
http://www.un.org/en/sc/members/  (last visited Jan. 28, 2018) . 
 46 The U N Security Council , COUNCIL O N FOREIGN REL. (Dec. 6, 2013), 
http://www.cfr.org/international -organizations -and-alliances/un -security -
council/p31649 ( “Other critics of the Council include advocates of R2P, who say the veto 
gives undue deference to the political interests of the P5, leading to inaction in the face of 
mass atrocities. ”). 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
12 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Still, in September 2000, the U.N. announced policy goals aimed at eradicating 
poverty world -wide.47 The Millennium Development Goals are a series of aspirational 
targets for helping millions of people around the world who are living below certain 
minimum thresholds. The goals were first announced at the Millennium Summit,  “the 
largest gathering of world leaders in history. ” They include:  
 
1) Eradicate extreme hunger and poverty;  
2) Achieve universal primary education;  
3) Promote gender equality and empower women;  
4) Reduce child mortality;  
5) Improve maternal health;  
6) Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases;  
7) Ensure environmental sustainability; and  
8) Develop a global partnership for development.48 
 
The fact that the U.N. placed poverty, along with hunger, at the top of the list 
shows the significance of the issue.  
The U.N.’s goal  was t o try to reach these targets  by 2015. While there has been 
progress on many of the goals,49 “around 1.5 billion people in conflict -affected 
countries and on the extreme margins of society were unreached by the goals and 
unable to benefit from the tide that lifted their neighbours. ”50 
At the very least, alleviating poverty and building a future for the world ’s poor 
need to involve multifaceted approaches that consider not just economic and policy 
questions, but also moral, social, and cultural issues.51 None of  this can take place 
without the support and leadership of government leaders or the U.N. World leaders 
should focus on soliciting input from their most disenfranchised citizens, building a 
socially responsible business culture among multinational corporat ions (“MNCs”), 
and encouraging MNCs to partner with local businesses.52 
Nowhere is the word “poverty” dirtier than in Jamaica where many Jamaicans 
resent the fact that close allies like the United States and Great Britain seem to regard 
 
 47 See Millennium Development Goals and Beyond 2015 , UNITED NATIONS , 
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/bkgd.shtml  (last visited Jan. 28, 2018) . 
 48 Id. 
 49 Eradicate  Extre me Poverty and Hunger: Where Do We Stand??? , UNITED NATIONS 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME , 
http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/mdg_goals/mdg1 ( “The 
MDG target of reducing by half the proportion of people living in extreme poverty was 
achieved in 2 010, well ahead of the 2015 deadline. ”). 
 50 Were the Millennium Development Goals a Success? Yes! Sort of , WORLD VISION INT’L (July 3, 
2015) http://www.wvi.org/united -nations -and-global -engagement/article/were -mdgs -
success . 
 51 Djordjija B. Petkoski, V. Kasturi Rangan & William S. Laufer, Business and Poverty: Opening 
Markets to the Poor , DEV. OUTREACH , June 2008 , at 2-6. 
 52 Id. at 5. 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  13 
the fiercely indepen dent island nation with an equal measure of distrust and 
disrespect.53 Yet when many foreigners think of Jamaica, they tend to romanticize it as 
a highly sought -after vacation destination filled with blue skies, warm breezes and 
endless beaches.54 On the sur face, a week -long trip to any of the Caribbean islands will 
undoubtedly yield beautiful vistas and warm people. However, for those who are 
willing to open their eyes and venture beyond the beaches, tourist zones, and the gates 
of their luxurious, all -inclu sive resorts, it is impossible to ignore the poverty, especially 
in Jamaica.  
The adventurous do not have to travel far to be confronted with images of once 
picturesque colonial downtown spaces with crumbling infrastructure, tin -roofed 
roadside shacks withi n squalor -filled shanty towns, and barely passable roads strewn 
with garbage and often in a state of severe disrepair.55 What does one do with such 
sights? The relatively small size of the islands means that squalor and destitution are 
harder to avoid, even  if only glimpsed by those who are on the way to the sanctuary 
of a gated compound.56 A life of poverty is the reality for many people who live in 
developing economies, and even for those who count themselves more fortunate in 
supposedly developed countries  as well.  
Of course, there is another side of the story. The islands in the Caribbean were 
shaped by the colonial empires of Great Britain, France, the Netherlands, and Spain. 
Fifteen nations make up the Anglophone Caribbean,57 or the Caribbean Community 
(“CARICOM ”), including:  
 
• Anguilla (population 14,943);  
• Antigua and Barbuda (pop. 102,275);  
• the Bahamas (pop. 396,355);  
• Barbados (pop. 285,889);  
• Belize (pop. 376,639);  
 
 53 Thomson, supra  note 31, at 7 ( “Britain is no longer such an attractive destination, not least  
because Jamaican nationals must now have a visa to enter. The legislation, passed by 
Tony Blair ’s Labour government in March 2003, was intended to curb the number of 
Jamaicans entering the United Kingdom as drug couriers. Yet most ordinary Jamaicans 
come to Britain to visit family and friends; the visa requirement is deeply offensive to 
them.”) 
 54 Thomson, supra  note 31, at 325 (quoting Noel Coward ’s poem, ‘Jamaica’: “Every tourist 
who visits these shores can thank his benevolent Maker for taking time off from the rest 
of His chores to fashion the isle of Jamaica. ”) 
 55 Id. at 52 (quoting James Berry, the Jamaican poet and children ’s author who was speaking 
of the lack of discipline on the island since colonial days: “Look at the roads now, they ’re 
like hell holes. We can ’t even build a decent road!  . . . Jamaica’s stagnancy sickens me —
what progress have we made since independence? ”). 
 56 Id. at 41  (“In Kingston, as elsewhere in the West Indies, one can pass from enclaves of 
immense wealth to utter desolation in a matter of seconds. ”). 
 57 Note that two of these nations are not technically located in the Caribbean, including 
Belize (which is in Central America) and Guyana (South America).  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
14 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
• the British Virgin Islands (pop. 31,328);  
• Dominica (74,022);  
• Grenada (pop. 107,955);  
• Guyana  (pop. 778,967);  
• Jamaica (pop. 2,892,427);  
• St. Kitts and Nevis (pop. 55,473);  
• St. Lucia (pop. 179,053);  
• St. Vincent - Grenadines (pop. 109,974);  
• Trinidad and Tobago (pop. 1,370,007); and  
• the Turks and Caicos Islands (pop. 35,577).58 
 
CARICOM shares many thi ngs—English as a common language, a common 
enemy (hurricanes), a dwindling reliance on agriculture, and an increasing 
dependence on tourism and the service sector59—but most similarities end there.60 
Despite the islands ’ geographic proximity, outsiders need to be wary of simplistic 
comparisons that fail to take account of profound differences in socioeconomic status, 
political outlook, and cultural realities within the region —especially when attempting 
to consider the economic implications of allowing in new technologies. This article 
focuses on the prospects for financial innovation in Jamaica, which is taking seriously 
both the promise and challenge of emerging technology in the mobile sphere. Within 
CARICOM,Jamaica is considered a moderately developed count ry or an “MDC;” in 
contrast, the Republic of Haiti is considered a less developed country (an “LDC”).61 
Today, the difference is rooted more in geographic size rather than per capita income,62 
but is still important. The distinction is likely to impact attem pts to compare Jamaica ’s 
willingness to take on risk for an uncertain reward when it comes to technological 
innovation.  
Freed from British colonial rule on August 5, 1962, Jamaica has been slowly and 
cautiously making its way forward since independence. Ma ny, if not all, former 
 
 58  See World Factbook, supra  note 38.  
 59 Today’s Jamaican youth are less interested in farming and agriculture because they view 
it as “slave’s work.” As a result, many have left the countryside to go to Kingston in search 
of work. See Thomson, supra  note 31, at 156. In contrast, tourism “contributes US $1 billion 
a year to the  island’s economy. ” Id. at 325.  
 60 See Norman Girvan, Societies at Risk: The Caribbean and Global Change  (Mgmt. of Soc. 
Transformations Discussion Paper Series No. 17 , 1997) 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0011/001107/110757Eo.pdf  (noting that CARICOM 
“has a sound background of cooperation in trade, external economic negotiations, 
education, sports, and culture. ”). 
 61 Poorer C aricom  States Subsidizing Richer Ones , JAMAICA OBSERVER  (Sept. 26, 2012), 
http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/editorial/Poorer -CARICOM -states -subsidising -richer -
ones.  
 62 Id. (pointing out that despite being one of the larger countries within the community, 
Jamaica’s per capita income is USD$4,750, which is much lower than smaller nations such 
as Antigua (per capita $10,610) and St. Kitts (per capita $9, 980)).  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  15 
colonial territories like Jamaica share a decades -long struggle with poverty and its 
related ills —high illiteracy rates,63 low productivity, bureaucratic inefficiency,64 
sociopolitical turmoil, corruption,65 and crime66—ills that are oft en remnants of the 
haphazard division or joinder of formerly separate and autonomous peoples. Jamaica 
has not been immune to these sociopolitical impacts. Somehow, a country of just three 
million inhabitants is still is known for having one of the highest murder rates in the 
world.67 Jamaica also has a high incidence of financial crime.68 
On the other hand, Jamaica has many positive attributes far beyond Bob Marley, 
reggae music, and Usain Bolt: “No other West Indian island has generated such a 
widespread dia spora” or “exerts [such] a disproportionate influence abroad. ”69 
Jamaica has a stable economic climate and, according to the World Bank, Jamaica has 
a top climate for starting a business.70 In 2017, the small island ranked 12 th out of 190 
 
 63 Thomson, supra  note 31, at 5 ( “Jamaica currently has one of the highest illiteracy rates in 
the English -speaking West Indies. Though Jamaica has a vibrant literature of its own, 
reading seriously, at any age, is often associated w ith reading for examinations. ”). See also , 
Thomson, supra  note 31,  at 30 (“Illiteracy rates in Jamaica currently stand at between 13 
and 15 per cent of the population, reaching 70 percent in the Kingston ghetto: this ranks 
among the highest in the English -speaking Caribbean. ”). 
 64 Id. at 119 (“Jamaica is a land of waiting. ”). 
 65 Id. at 4 (“A system of ‘clientism ’ has evolved in the years since independence, in which 
patron -politicians provide their client supporters with jobs, protection and a flow of 
money , as well as narcotics and firearms, in return for their loyalty. ”). 
 66 Id. at 70 (quoting British politician, Michael Foot: “In the four decades since 
independence, Jamaica presents a world of ‘fear and distrust, ’ where each week a new 
crime of ‘hideous proportions ’ makes the headlines. ”) Id. at 113 (quoting a Canadian 
Jesuit priest residing for years in Kingston: “Jamaicans are, anyway, much more 
apprehensive these days —there’s a general atmosphere of violence  . . . . . . Jamaica has 
more poverty now, mo re marginality, unemployment and crime than it did when I 
arrived in the 1980s. Every house is grilled and double -grilled—and you only have to look 
at all of the guard dogs  . . . .”). 
 67 Id. at 7 (“Nearly every Jamaican knowns someone who has been threaten ed with a gun 
or knife—or murdered. With an annual murder rate of around 1,500 in a population of 
less than three million, Jamaica is now one of the most violent countries in the world, on 
a level with South Africa and Columbia. ”). 
 68 See World Bank , Jamai ca: The Road to Sustained Growth , WTO Rep. No. 29101 1, at 28  
(December 4, 2003), 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/962971468756325065/pdf/260880JM.pdf 
(“The fraud index shows an upward trend during the 1990s, during which there was a 
significant in crease in the number of financial crimes associated with the rapid growth 
and inadequate regulation of the financial sector. ”). 
 69 Thomson, supra  note 31, at 348.  
 70 See Karena Bennet, Jamaica Slips Two Ranks in 2017 Doing Business Report, But.  . ., JAMAICA 
OBSERVER  (Oct. 25, 2016), http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/business/Jamaica -slips -two-
ranks -in-2017 -Doing -Business -Report --but---_78375  (“With a new methodology in 
operation, Jamaica has slipped two spaces to stand at 67th in the world in the prestig ious 
Doing Business Report 2017, retaining its position as first in the Caribbean in respect of 
the ease of doing business . The ranking follows two consecutive years of rapid ascension 
for the island after it placed seven spots above its 2015 ranking to 65  in 2016. Now at 67, 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
16 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
countries in a ranking of best countries in which to start a business.71 Jamaica ranked 
67th out of 190 countries for ease of doing business overall.72 
In the end, maybe poverty doesn ’t have to be such a dirty word. Maybe instead, 
it could stand for opportunity. As will be discussed in more detail below, mobile 
financial systems have flourished most in countries that are known for being 
“desperately poor. ” Mobile money schemes “ignite” most successfully in countries 
with “very poor physical infras tructure, ” “extremely low penetration of banking, and 
poor physical transport in terms of road systems and automobiles. ”73 One thing these 
counties have in common is robust mobile phone activity.74 
What is the significance of the correlation between desperat e poverty and mobile 
money success? It has been suggested that in countries where mobile financial systems 
have succeeded, there is on the one hand great demand for expanded financial 
products and services, and on  the other hand, lighter governmental regul ation of those 
products and services due to desperation for new solutions to poverty.75 The question 
is, how desperate is Jamaica?76 
B. Financial Exclusion  
Globally 50% of the adult population in 2010 do not own savings or loan 
accounts, and as a result cann ot access financial services through account 
ownership, compared to 77%, who are mobile subscribers, the latter being 
achieved in less than a decade.77 
 
 
Jamaica’s current ranking is still three places better than Panama at 70 – viewed as one of 
the fastest -growing economies in the Latin American and Caribbean region. ”). See also  
WORLD BANK  GROUP , DOING BUSINESS 2016:  MEASURING REGULATO RY QUALITY AND 
EFFICIENCY  (13th ed. 2016) , 
http://www.doingbusiness.org/~/media/WBG/DoingBusiness/Documents/Annual -
Reports/English/DB16 -Full-Report.pdf  (“Besides Costa Rica, Jamaica is the only other 
economy in Latin America and the Caribbean that made it to the list of 10 top improvers ”). 
 71 Data on Trade & Competitiveness from Jamaica GDP and Economic Data: Country Report 
2017 , GLOBAL FINANCE  (Nov. 2, 2017),  http://www.gfmag.com/global -data/country -
data/jamaica -gdp-country report / (citing World Bank Doing  Business 2017 Report).  
 72 Id. 
 73 Evans & Pirchio, supra  note 28, at 19.  
 74 Id. 
 75 Id. at 19 (“On the one hand, people in the poorest countries have a much greater demand 
for mobile money schemes (mms) because their alternatives for sending and receiving 
money are so poor. On the other hand, the governments of those countries may choose to 
impose light regulations, and to allow non -banks to operate mms, because they are more 
desperate for a solution and because there is such a limited banking system to rely  on in 
any event. ”). 
 76 See id. at 27 (a local Jamaican pastor remarked to the author: “Misery cause people to act 
desperate and kill. And idleness, Ian, it breed vice. And you see what happen when a 
man idle? You see when a man hungry? A man go tief! A ma n go kill! ”). 
 77 Elliott, supra  note 21, at 8.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  17 
Financial exclusion is problematic because “financial access is positively 
correlated with poverty reduc tion, employment generation, assets and wealth 
accumulation and economic growth. ”78 Currently, “2.5 billion people globally do not 
have a credit report. [B]ringing unbanked consumers and businesses into the formal 
sector could generate $380 billion in new r evenue.”79 The problem of financial 
exclusion in developing countries is acute: “90% of those who do not own financial 
accounts live in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean. ”80 
Someone who lacks financial access does not have sufficient capital (per haps due 
to either insurmountable bureaucratic barriers or traditional banking prerequisites) 
and cannot access it to meet their needs: they cannot access credit to buy a house or to 
start a business, are ineligible to open a bank account or cannot use the  bank account 
that they do have for more than basic services. They have no formal access to savings, 
and the resources of the institutionalized financial system may be beyond reach.  
Someone who is unbanked has little or no access to formal systems of finan ce. 
Without a bank account, often they cannot cash a check, transfer money to others, pay 
bills, build for the future, or save for retirement.81 In order to do these things, they must 
pay cash. They pay a premium to go to a check cashing service, and they p ay when 
they use the partner system.82 In other words, they pay fees and additional penalties 
for the privilege of being poor. In contrast, having a bank account allows people “to 
access financial services typically at lower opportunity costs than acquiring  the same 
services outside of the regulated financial system. ”83 
There has been significant progress in increasing financial inclusion in Latin 
America and the Caribbean in recent years as the numbers of those registering for 
mobile money accounts has doubled.84 Still, in many countries, the gap between rich 
and poor is ever widening.85 
Jamaica is not immune. Bruce Bowen, the president of the Jamaica Bankers ’ 
Association and the president and CEO of Scotiabank Jamaica, stated: “Over the last 
many decades,  the gap between the have and the have -nots has been growing. Those 
 
 78 Id. at 14.  
 79 COMMU SCORE , DIGITISING TRUST , https://www.commuscore.com  (last visited Jan. 28, 
2018) . 
 80 Elliott, supra  note 21, at 8.  
 81 Id. at 9.  
 82 Claremont Kirton , UNREGULATED INVESTMENT SCHEMES (UIS)  IN JAMAICA : RECENT 
EXPERIENCES , PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS , 18 (2013) at 18 ( “The partner is the most popular 
informal savings and credit arrangement in Jamaica, with origins in West Africa and long, 
deep -rooted traditions in the Caribbean dating back to slave ry. The ‘partner’ involves a 
group of participants who make regular contribution to a fund, which in turn is given to 
each contributor over a specified time period until each member has received the fund. ”). 
 83 Elliott, supra  note 21, at 9.  
 84 CMC , Caribbe an Has Fastest Growth in Mobile Financial Services, JAMAICA GLEANER  (May 14, 
2015), http://jamaica -gleaner.com/article/business/20150514/caribbean -has-fastest -
growth -mobile -financial -services , (last visited June 1, 2015).  
 85 Reuben, supra  note 13.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
18 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
of us who have should be concerned because too many people are living in conditions 
that are unacceptable. ”86 
Although most (66.36%) Jamaicans are banked and do possess bank accounts, the 
numbers of the “underbanked ” are startling: “Only 12 percent of the population own 
the types of accounts which allow them to transfer money, write cheques or make 
credit card payments, ”87 and “77.9% - 86% of adult Jamaicans have limited access to 
low cost an d safe payments  . . . “.88 Frankly, the situation is dire:  
 
More than three out of every four Jamaicans have limited access to 
safe and low -cost payment channels  . . . Jamaica has a hidden problem 
as the majority of the population own bank accounts but only  a 
fraction of this group has access to full financial services, which allow 
them to participate easily and effectively in the economy.89 
 
Further, traditional banking in Jamaica is not for the faint of heart. In the United 
States, one can stroll into a loc al bank branch in the morning with identification, proof 
of address (often, just a driver ’s license will suffice), a small deposit, and have an 
account opened moments later. Opening a bank account in Jamaica requires tenacity, 
a significant investment of t ime, and an iron will.90 
After making an in -person inquiry regarding the process for opening an account 
at First Global Bank Limited in Kingston, I was presented with three forms: a 
“Documentation Checklist -Personal Account, ” and two blank “Character Reference 
and Address Verification ” forms. The Documentation Checklist requires the following 
mandatory items to open an account:  
 
✓ Source of funds (Employment Letter OR Salary Verification Letter OR 
Last 3 Pay Slips, Rental Agreement, etc.);  
✓ Current & vali d photo identification (Passport, Voter ’s ID or Driver ’s 
License);  
✓ Taxpayer registration number;  
 
 86 Rich Poor Gap a Cause for Concern , JAMAICA GLEANER (July 15, 2013) http://jamaica -
gleaner.com/gleaner/20130715/lead/lead5.html (citing specific “myriad challenges ” such 
as high unemployment, high crime, “compromised ” health care and “bureaucratic 
inefficiencies. ”). 
 87 SFCLN, Jamaicans Need Better Financial Access , SOUTH FLORIDA CARIBBEAN NEWS, (Dec. 30, 
2011), https://sflcn.com/jamaicans -need -better -financial -access -dawn -elliott/.  
 88 Elliott, supra  note 26, at 2; See also  Mozido, Mozido Partners wi th Jamaican Cooperative Credit 
Union League to Bring Mobile Financial Services to the Nation ’s Underbanked  (Sept. 4, 2014), 
http://mozido.com/mozido -partners -jamaica  (“Nearly 70% of Jamaica ’s population is 
underbanked. ” Also, Jamaica has “an estimated two million underbanked citizens. ”). 
 89 SFCLN, supra note 87.  
 90 This author, a Jamaican national by birth, decided that the effort required was not worth 
it. 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  19 
✓ Two reference letters;91 
✓ Verification of address;92 and 
✓ Opening balances — Local Currency Savings Account: $5,000  
o Foreign Currency Savings: 500 units of the curr ency (USD, GBP, 
EURO or CAD)  
o Local Currency Current Account: $10,000.93 
 
Imagine the consternation of the average potential customer upon viewing this list, 
much less the poverty -stricken person who has spent hours traveling to the capital 
from the country,  who might be underemployed or informally employed (and so 
unable to produce income verification like the “last 3 pay slips ”) and who might be 
unable to produce the minimum amount required for opening balances, the required 
identification, or sufficient re ferences.  
Identity verification has been cited as the number one obstacle to extending 
financial services to poor populations.94 There are several reasons for this, including : 
 
1) Low income people often lack formal identity documentation;  
2) Many low -income coun tries lack external, independently verified 
sources of data that could help identify and verify customers, such as 
voter registration records or credit bureaus; and  
3) National identification cards are not universal and standardized.95 
 
What if one is living rent -free with family and has no proof of a “rental agreement? ” It 
seems likely that such a person might leave the bank. Disappointed and with a sense 
of futility, the potential customer may decide to avoid the process altogether.96 
 
 91 References may come from Notary Public/Justice of the Peace, long -standing customer of 
First Global Bank Ltd. (> 3 years), Medical Practitioner, Minister of Religion, Attorney -at-
Law, Manager from First Global Bank. (This can be a call through reference by providing 
just the referee’s name and contact number.)  
 92 This usually means utility bill or  bank statement in your name.  
 93 Instruction Manual for Individual Accounts , FIRST GLOBAL BANK, https://www.firstglobal -
bank.com/Portals/0/downloads/Instructional_Manual_for_Individual_Accounts.pdf  
(last visited Jan. 28, 2018) . 
 94 Thomas Abnell & Vangelis Tsianaxis, AML/CFT: Balancing Regulation with Innovation  (Jan. , 
CONSULTIVE GROUP TO ASSIST THE POOR (Jan. 23, 2015) , http://www.cgap.org/blog/amlcft -
balancing -regulation -innovation/.  
 95 Id. 
 96 Jamaica is in the process of rolling out a national identification system, which is intended 
to take effect in January 2018. See National ID System to roll Roll Out 2018 , THE JAMAICA 
OBSERVER  (Oct. 10, 2016) , http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/news/National -ID-system -to-
roll-out-2018 .). 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
20 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
In fairness to the bank(s), they say that they have enhanced their entry 
requirements due to very real security concerns. They are guarding specifically against 
money laundering scams that criminals have been perpetrating through established 
bank accounts. T hey are also beholden to international “Know Your Customer ” (or 
“KYC”) standards that require banks to be familiar with the people transacting with 
their institutions.97 The purpose of KYC is to prevent banks from becoming vehicles 
for criminal activities. As evidenced by the recent Lotto Scam (discussed in Part III), 
even with these requirements, criminals in Jamaica are easily able to take their 
sophisticated operations up -market and overseas. They managed to swindle retired 
and elderly homeowners in Flori da and other parts of the United States into giving 
over significant monies.98 Bank executives also claim that when there are more lax 
standards, wealthy persons can take advantage and fraudulently open accounts; they 
then use those fraudulent accounts to l aunder money outside of the country —perhaps 
sending their ill -gotten gains to money havens like the Cayman Islands or to 
untraceable Swiss accounts. One can understand how banks reasonably justify their 
seemingly draconian entry requirements.  
In the end, a nd regardless of the best of intentions, Jamaica ultimately suffers, 
because overseas investors interested in starting businesses on the island may choose 
to store and use their money in financial institutions that have lower barriers to entry. 
The people of Jamaica also suffer because commercial banks dominate the 
marketplace: “In Jamaica there are more than 100 regulated financial institutions that 
operate in a highly concentrated market, with the commercial banks dominating as 
service providers. ”99 Just t hree banks own over eighty -five percent of the market in 
Jamaica.100 What is the problem with a financial system in which banks predominate? 
 
 97 Pierre -Laurent Chastain, Raúl Hernandez -Coss, Kamil Borowik, and Andrew Zerman, 
Integrity in Mobile Financial Services: Measures for Mitigating Risks from Money Laundering 
and Terrorist Financing  (World Bank Working Paper No.  36, 2008) ( “Customer due 
diligence and KYC procedures are intended to enable a financial institution to form a 
reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of each customer and, with an appropriate 
degree of confidence, knows the types of business an d transactions the customer is likely 
to undertake. ”). 
 98 In the “Lotto Scam, ” criminals targeted elderly residents in Florida and persuaded many 
to give up significant sums by telling them they had won the lotto but needed to pay up 
front to receive their  winnings. See Talesha Reynolds and Lisa Myers,  Authorities in US, 
Jamaica Team Up to Tackle Persistent Phone Scam , NBC  NEWS (Mar. 13, 2013, 4:40 AM), 
http://investigations.nbcnews.com/_news/2013/03/13/17289607 -authorities -in-us-
jamaica -team -up-to-tackle -persistent -phone -scam/  (“Jamaican con artists are defrauding 
mostly elderly targets by selling them a bogus dream. Millions of dollars, new cars and 
homes won in lotteries and sweepstakes the seniors never entered. Norman 
Breidenbaugh, 81, of Baltimore gave  over $400,000 to lottery scammers who promised 
him millions in cash and a new car once he paid the taxes on the winnings. Eventually, 
he lost his home and every penny he had. His experience is not unique. The Federal Trade 
Commission reported 30,000 compl aints related to Jamaican lottery scams in 2012. 
However, the number of actual victims is likely far higher. ”). 
 99  Elliott, supra  note 26, at 10.  
 100 RESEARCHING THE UNBANKED , PRESENTATION SHARING THE FINDINGS OF ECONOMIST DAWN 
ELLIOT  (2011).  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  21 
After all, banks are regulated by the central bank, the Bank of Jamaica (the “BOJ”), so 
they are safe, right? In Part  III (“Beyond Legislation: History, Culture and 
Community ”), we discuss cultural reasons why many in Jamaica do not trust banks 
and therefore exclude themselves from the financial system.  
For now, what we can say is that banks have little incentive to pote ntially redesign 
themselves to accommodate a mobile financial system overhaul (as opposed to 
piecemeal adoption of mobile payments products) without outside pressure to do so; 
while “shareholders are content with current profitability levels, competition i s limited 
to certain niches at the higher end of the market, and regulators do not remove obsolete 
restrictions that needlessly raise the cost of banking. ”101 If you do not have a bank 
account, or if you do have a bank account, but do not have a checking acc ount or access 
to credit through that account, there are few other banking options.102 
A society that has a significant number of people who are underserved by the 
financial system has a problem that is worthy of more attention. Implementing a 
mobile financi al system would increase financial access: “By enabling the transfer of 
financial resources over a mobile phone, a Mobile Financial System encourages open 
access to financial services without the need for physical bank branches and traditional 
bank account  ownership. ”103 If more people can participate in the financial system, the 
economy as a whole will benefit.  
C. Entrepreneurial Hunger in Jamaica  
In a knowledge -based global economy, we must instead rely on the 
intellectual capital of our people, including o ur creativity and 
innovativeness, in order to make our way in this highly competitive global 
economy.104 
 
Mobile finance is not just about helping the poor. It is also intended to increase 
economic activity among micro, small and medium -sized business owners: “[M]any 
entrepreneurs would like to start up their own businesses, but refrain from doing so 
due to th e lack of credit to finance their initial or subsequent operations. ”105 Small 
business owners, entrepreneurs and the already “banked” have much to gain from 
 
 101 Ignacio Mas, Why is the Progress of Mobile Money So Gradual and Patchy?  CONSULTIVE GROUP 
TO ASSIST THE POOR, (June 19, 2013) http://cgap.org/blog/why -progress -mobile -money -so-
gradual -and-patchy. In other words, it ’s a pain for them to redesign everything, especially 
for a payments framework that may allow people to do more for themselves (self -serve 
means fewer fees), and for an untested mobile money scheme that may or may not work.  
 102 Of course, credit unions do exist in Jamaica and as described above, may  meet some part 
of this need.  
 103 Elliott, supra  note 26, at 9.  
 104 Dr. Rosalea Hamilton, Caribbean Development, the CSME and Women in Politics: The 
Connection , Address at 5th Rose Leon Memorial Lecture, Mar. 6, 2006 , at 3. 
 105 TOR JANSSON , RAMON ROSALES , & GLENN D. WESTLEY , PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES FOR 
REGULATING AND SUPERVISING MICROFINANCE  15 (2004).  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
22 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
new mobile finance, especially in Jamaica where entrepreneurs hunger for increased 
efficiency and few er bureaucratic barriers to wealth -generating opportunities:  
 
[T]he economic opportunities offered by the mobile payments channel 
extend to all groups of people: banked and unbanked; farmers and 
fishermen, informal workers and formal workers; rich and poor ; 
educated and less educated; health service providers and health 
service users.106 
 
Many people both in and out of Jamaica ’s business community believe that 
conditions in Jamaica are ripe for the introduction and full -scale adoption of mobile 
financial serv ices. On the one hand, the business environment is one where even 
relatively small financial transactions are beset by inconvenience and high costs. On 
the other, Jamaica has a mobile phone penetration rate greater than 100 percent, and 
“deposit and remitt ance inflows ” have grown by “8.76% and 5.8% respectively ” over 
the past ten years.107 Besides having a “well -established telecomm[unications] base, ” 
Jamaica also has an “extensive banking and financial infrastructure, ” and is 
consequently “well positioned to  introduce and benefit from a meaningful, integrated 
Mobile Financial Services platform. ”108 
Female business owners also experience this entrepreneurial hunger. “Women 
make up 46 per cent of the Jamaican labour force, the highest per capita ratio in the 
worl d. . .”109 Women represent a seriously untapped and underdeveloped market in 
the Jamaican labor market.  
Young business leaders are also excited about what the future may hold. Kingston 
BETA,110 a burgeoning community of “aspiring and current Jamaican/Caribbean  
entrepreneurs, developers, designers, tech professionals and tech enthusiasts ” meets 
regularly to pitch new business ideas and to network.111 The group is organized 
through the web -based application, Meetup.com, and its stated mission is “to promote 
tech en trepreneurship and innovation in Jamaica and across the Caribbean so that it 
 
 106 Elliott, supra  note 26, at 8.  
 107 Winston Butler, Getting Jamaica Ready for Mobile Financial Services , MONA BUS. REVIEW , 
(Mar. 20, 2011), http://173.203.89.141/openpublish/article/getting -jamaicans.ready -
mobile -financial -services.  
 108 Id. 
 109 Thomson, supra  note 31 at 19 (in addition, “higglers, ” or market saleswomen known for 
their ferocious bargaining skills “run the peasant economy on which  the Jamaican capital 
depends for its daily food. ”). 
 110 About , KINGSTON BETA,  http://kingstonbeta.com/about/  (last visited Jan. 28, 2018)  
(describing Kingston BETA as a bi -monthly meetup of Jamaica ’s tech community that 
“kickstarted the Jamaican Startup Mo vement in 2007 ”). 
 111 This author attended one such meeting, held on April 25, 2013, at JAMPRO (Jamaica 
Investment Proportions) at 6:30 p.m. Panelists included: Wayne Jones, founder of Hybrid 
Tech Solutions, Kareem Sharpton, Lloyd Laing, J -Mobile and Gov. L ivingstone Morrison, 
BOJ. The comments here reflect her first -person account of that meeting.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  23 
leads to more successful tech entrepreneurs, startups and increased job creation. ”112 
Since their launch in 2007, Kingston BETA has “had over 80 events, 3,000 attendees 
and over 100  startups pitch their big ideas. ”113 Their pitch events and panel discussions 
are often standing room only, and the buzz is palpable.  
The question remains whether consistent demands for change and the urgency 
that is clearly felt by the young, business leade rs of both genders,114 and the unbanked 
will encourage the BOJ to further liberalize its course.  
Deputy Governor ( “Gov.”) Livingstone Morrison, a BOJ regulator, attended a 
Kingston BETA meeting and participated in a panel discussion. The focus of the 
discussion was how regulators should bridge the gap between regulation and 
technology. Gov. Morrison was called to answer questions about mobile money, 
payment system reform, and opportunities for tech entrepreneurs.115 Per Gov. 
Morrison, the BOJ “must deliv er confidence to the Jamaican people —that is their 
product—confidence in the banking system. ” He noted that his primary concern was 
to determine how the BOJ could promote innovation while assuring that regulatory 
rules were not broken. He noted that the re cent “Electronic Retail Payments 
Guidelines, ”116 were meant to strike a careful balance and address such questions, and 
had been posted on the Bank ’s website for three months already.117 
 
 112  Kingston BETA, supra  note 110.  
 113  Id. 
 114  Dep’t of Econ. and Soc. Aff. of the U.N. Secretariat, World Survey on the Role of Women 
in Development , U.N. Doc. A/64/93, at  4 (2009), http://www.unwomen.org/ -
/media/headquarters/media/publications/un/en/worldsurvey2009.pdf?la=en&vs=959 
(“Both economic and financial resources have important implications for women ’s 
economic roles in sustaining household livelihoods, in labour markets and in the wider 
economy. ”). 
 115 Per his remarks during this meeting, the BOJ was at that very moment working on a 
payment system reform project with the biggest tech service provider (JamClear). See also , 
National Payment System: JamClear -RTGS Payment Rules , BANK OF JAMAICA , (June 2014 ), 
http://boj.org.jm/pdf/RTGS%20Rules.pdf.  
 116 See Guidelines for Electronic Retail Payment Services , BANK OF JAMAICA  (Feb. 1, 2013), 
http://www.boj.org.jm/uploads/news/guidelines_for_electronic_retail_payments_servic
es_-_1_february_2013.pdf ( “The Guidelines as contained in this document are intended 
to foster the design, development and implementation of electronic reta il payment 
systems and instruments which take advantage of available technology to provide more 
efficient payment services in a safe, secure and competitive environment. This document 
provides the operating parameters for providers of electronic retail pay ment services. All 
entities intending to offer electronic retail payment services in Jamaica are subject to these 
Guidelines and are required to apply to the Bank of Jamaica (Bank) for authorization 
before commencing operations. ”). 
 117 In fact, the BOJ ’s we bsite has a comprehensive listing of the laws that “provide the legal 
and policy parameters for the licensing and supervision of deposit -taking financial 
institutions, as well as the various powers available to the BOJ and the Minister of Finance 
in the ev ent that bank distress or failure appears imminent or threatens the soundness of 
the financial system. ” One relevant statute is the Payments Clearing and Settlement Act 
(PCSA) of 2010. See Legislation, BANK OF JAMAICA , 
http://www.boj.org.jm/financial_sys/s upervised_legislation.php . (last visited Jan. 28, 
2018) . 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
24 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Several audience members expressed confusion and doubt about the guidelin es. 
Many could not tell how the guidelines would apply in certain situations. Others 
stated that people were not going to want to wait it out, and might instead “leapfrog 
ahead to facilitate services that are badly in demand. ” Several young business leader s 
expressed frustration with what they termed a “generational complex, ” meaning the 
older generation not allowing room for new ideas. They also called out the perceived 
disparity between “techies” and business, a lack of mentorship, outdated patent laws, 
high transaction costs, lacking infrastructure, red tape,118 “bureaucratic paralysis, ” and 
a “behind the times ” legal framework.119 Despite the confusion over the guidelines and 
general frustration, other audience members expressed optimism about the ingenuity,  
talent and collaborative culture within the business community in Jamaica: “We were 
never taught to be entrepreneurs, but a hustling mentality inspired people to become 
creative and transition to business. ” 
During the Q&A after Gov. Morrison ’s presentatio n, the attendees relentlessly 
pressed their points. As they saw it, Jamaica ’s bureaucracy was hampering the growth 
of small businesses. Less regulation was needed, not more. Several others pressed him 
to explain why it was so much easier to open a bank acc ount and do business in 
America? They asked what incentive young and eager entrepreneurs had to stay and 
do business in Jamaica when the environment was so much friendlier for business 
activity in Miami, New York or Silicon Valley.  
That night, Lloyd Laing,  an entrepreneur who develops music technology,120 
spoke eloquently and at length about the growth of Bitcoin and decentralized 
electronic currencies. He pointed out that cash is decreasing in significance, and 
suggested that the increasing relevance of elec tronic currencies is just one more reason 
to investigate and support digital finance. His comments sparked substantive interest 
and heavy commentary in the room. “Can you obtain money from your PayPal 
account in Jamaica? Also, what about mobile remittances ?” (For the record, the answer 
appeared to be “no.”) Other comments related to the cost and inefficiency involved in 
attempts to wire money. “We need to speed up the process, otherwise people will find 
other ways to collect fees earned from providing servi ces to clients overseas .”121 The 
overwhelming sentiment in the room was that financial innovation requires an 
acceptance of a higher degree of risk than the BOJ felt comfortable tolerating, at least 
for the time being.  
 
 118 One commenter asked: “Why does it take 10 days to register a company in Jamaica when 
it only takes 10 hours in the United States? ” 
 119 Per another audience comment: “The laws on the books haven ’t changed since 1857! ” 
 120 Xavier Murphy, A Conversation with Jamaican Entrepreneur, Lloyd Laing on the Future of 
Music Technology , JAMAICANS .COM  (2015), http://jamaicans.com/jamaican -entrepreneur -
lloyd -laing/ (last visited  Sept. 30, 2017).  
 121 Truth be told, it was a fascinating discussion. When I later met individually with Gov. 
Morrison to discuss the event, he chuckled and said that he had certainly felt the heat, but 
that he “really enjoyed ” the event. It seemed clear however, that his enjoyment of the 
passion in the room was not going to move him to change his stance on the need for 
regulatory caution.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  25 
The good news is that mobile money and other financial innovations are in fact 
already being rolled out in Jamaica.122 Despite having little incentive to do so, three big 
banks, Scotiabank, NCB, and First Caribbean, have been rolling out mobile money 
products.123 Their actions demonstrate “unequivo cally that there is a strong 
commercial interest in these opportunities. ”124 Jamaican credit unions are also getting 
involved by rolling out e -payment services ( “JCUES”). The JCUES mobile wallet 
allows customers to pay for goods and services, and gain access  to bill and loan 
payments as well as remittances, deposits and withdrawals. The Jamaican Cooperative 
Credit Union League expected 50,000 users by the end of 2014.125 The BOJ has fully 
supported the rollout of the JCUES mobile wallet pilot program.126 
The platform is cloud -based and interoperable, which means that it can work with 
any wireless carrier or mobile device, “interchanges easily with products from other 
vendors, ” and “serves people around the world who choose to manage their money 
using their  mobile phone rather than relying on traditional financial institutions.127 
Better still, this mobile wallet not only promises value to customers, but to merchants 
as well because it provides merchants “from an independent coffee stand or corner 
convenience store to a supermarket ” to better reach their consumers and inspire 
loyalty.128 
Part II  
A. Tech Innovation in the Emerging World  
A Mobile Financial System leads to greater economic transparency, lower 
transaction costs, employment and small business opportun ities and 
increases in GDP.129 
 
Cases abound in which developing countries have used mobile phones to deliver 
essential products and services, as is discussed in detail below. Approximately 77% of 
the world ’s population, or 5.3 out of 6.8 billion people, are  mobile subscribers; 109 
million mobile subscribers currently use their phones to make payments and 
 
 122  The Importance of Financial Sector Regulation , 6 FIN. SERV. COMPASS  1, 1-3 (2013).  
 123 It is the position in this paper that any approach to digital fina nce should be 
comprehensive rather than piece -meal.  
 124 Edwards, supra  note 150.  
 125 Mozido, supra note 88.  
 126 Id. (“After a one -year initial phase, the Bank of Jamaica has approved phase two pilot of 
JCUES, now allowing any Jamaican to sign up, add money, and pay for goods and 
services without the need for a bank account. ”) 
 127 Id. 
 128 Id. 
 129 Elliott, supra  note 31, at 8.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
26 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
remittances.130 Innovations in digital finance have the potential to do what the financial 
sector has so far proved itself unable to do — to reach millions of people around the 
world who still do not have low -cost access to financial products and services.131 
Where successfully implemented, mobile financial systems allow for the delivery 
of a wide spectrum of products and services. Although comprehensive data on t he 
success or failure of mobile money schemes is scarce, and “there is no centralized 
source of data that tracks mobile money transactions across countries and over 
time,”132 this section will examine recent and well -documented cases of both successful 
and l ess successful use of mobile financial systems to date.  
What should be the measure of “success” regarding digital finance and mobile 
financial systems? Most would likely agree that any increase to a country ’s gross 
domestic product ( “GDP”) would be a good thing. As it happens, there is some 
evidence of impact on GDP from mobile phone usage:  
 
The preponderance of evidence shows that mobile phones directly 
contribute to significant GDP growth in all countries and produce the 
most growth in poor countries with  previously low levels of phone 
penetration. ”133 
 
Specifically, it has been shown that “adding ten phones per 100 people adds 0.6 percent 
to the GDP. ”134 The spread of mobile phones in developing countries creates wealth 
for those living in rural areas and inc reases national income as well.135 
One study examined twenty -two countries where mobile financial systems were 
used with varying levels of success. It assigned the countries in four categories 
according to whether the MFS: (1) successfully “ignited with expl osive growth; ” (2) 
had “weak ignition; ” (3) “failed to ignite; ” or (4) where it was “too soon to assess. ”136 
First, we will begin with the successes.  
 
 130 Elliott, supra  note 31, at 7 (Currently “Asians [are] dominating the share of mobile 
payments users —63 of 109 million. ”). 
 131 Id. at 19.  
 132 Evans & Pirchio, supra  note 28, at 6.  
 133 See Lumsden, supra note 6 ( citing  Sullivan, at 149).  
 134 Id. at 35 (citing research from the London Business School. Sullivan further states that 
according to the U.N., one percent of GDP growth results in a two percent reduction in 
poverty).  
 135 Id. at 145  (“[A]s  new information technology rampages through the South, it is creating 
wealth and producing millions of new income opportunities in rural areas that translate 
into billions of dollars in a new national income ”). See also  Bethany Brown, Mobile Phones: 
Reshaping the Flow of Urban -to-Rural Remittances , 11 SUSTAINABLE  DEV. L. & POL’Y 50, 50 
(“Mobile money transfers from person to person via mobile phones stand ready to 
revolutionize traditional remittance models, allowing a greater percentage of urban 
laborers’ earnings to be remitted to rural recipients. ”). 
 136 Evans &  Pirchio, supra  note 28, at 4.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  27 
B. Countries with Explosive Growth of Mobile Money  
The study listed eight countries that launched extremely successful mobile 
financial systems:  
 
1) Bangladesh (population 165,099,845);  
2) Cote D’Ivoire (pop. 24,448,657);  
3) Kenya (pop. 50,014,913);  
4) Rwanda (pop. 12,282,167);  
5) Somaliland (pop. 3,500,000);137 
6) Tanzania (pop. 57,757,624);  
7) Uganda (pop. 43,216,412); and  
8) Zimbabwe (pop. 16,626,505).138 
 
Here, we will focus on the most famous of the eight —the launch of M -PESA (M is 
for mobile, Pesa means payment in the Swahili language) in Kenya.139 Just three years 
after its launch, 9.5 million users had signed up.140 More than 12 million Kenyans use 
the service, and an additional six million utilize competing mobile products.141 It has 
been suggested that Kenya ’s light regulatory model and strategy of coordinating with 
its existing banks was the reason for this success:  
 
 
 137 John Ford, You Think You Know Somalia? Meet Somaliland , MIC (Nov. 25, 2012), 
https://mic.com/articles/18992/you -think -you-know -somalia -meet -
somaliland#.GkdVGSg6J . See also  Somaliland Profile , BBC  NEWS (May 26, 2016), 
http://www.bbc.com/news/world -africa -14115069.  
 138 Evans & Pirchio, supra  note 28, at 4. Live population statistics acquired from 
Worldometers are included for the purposes of comparing scalability in these regions to 
Jamaica and the other member nations of CARICOM. Added together, the total 
population within CARICOM is 6,810,884. Uganda Population, WORLDOMETERS , 
http://www.worldometers.info/world -population/uganda -population  (last visited Sept. 
30, 2017).  
 139 See M-Pesa, INVESTOPEDIA , https: //www.investopedia.com/terms/m/mpesa.asp/  (last 
visited Jan. 28, 2018)  (defining M -Pesa as “[a] mobile banking service that allows users to 
store and transfer money through their mobile phones. M -Pesa was originally introduced 
in Kenya as an alternative wa y for the unbanked population of the country to have access 
to financial services. Safaricom, the largest mobile phone operator in Kenya as of 2016, 
launched M -Pesa in 2007 ”). 
 140 Gedeye, supra  note 11.  
 141 Id. at 11. See also Claudia McKay and Rafe Mazer, 10 Myths about M -Pesa: 2014 Update , 
CONSULTATIVE GROUP TO ASSIST THE POOR (Oct. 1, 2014), http://www.cgap.org/blog/10 -
myths -about -m-pesa -2014 -update/ ( “More than half the adult population now uses M -
PESA, which has contributed to a dramatic increase in the  percentage of adults with 
access to formal financial services since 2009, when just 41% of adults had access. Now, 
this figure is at 67%. ”). 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
28 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
All but one of the countries in which ignition with explosive growth 
have occurred have followed the “go light regulatory model ” 
pioneered in Kenya  . . . In all cases the leading mobile money schemes 
in these countries are operated by MNOs [multinational  
organizations], sometimes in close partnership with the banks.142 
 
The major benefit of implementing an MFS is that such a system lowers direct and 
indirect costs of conducting financial transactions. Higher costs are associated with 
traditional banking arc hitecture, in which certain privileges and services are tied to 
having an account.143 
Opportunity costs might include the costs of transportation, including the cost of 
getting to the physical bank location from wherever you live, time spent lining up, 
waiti ng to be helped, and security. In addition, there are costs that are associated with 
having access to check -writing privileges (again, as mentioned above, only 12% of 
banked Jamaicans have such access), having to make a payment in person, or a 
physical vis it to a branch or ATM to withdraw money. There are also costs associated 
with making domestic remittances.144 Lowering these costs means more financial 
access for greater numbers of people.  
In other words, digital finance is cheaper! That is, it is cheaper f or everyone, save 
traditional banks: “. . . sixteen countries that offer it, mobile banking is on average 19% 
cheaper compared to traditional banking and 54% cheaper than accessing financial 
services through informal channels except in “countries like India whose governments 
have made low -cost banking and financial inclusion a national priority. ”145 
Another interesting lesson from Kenya is that Kenyans also use M -PESA to save, 
and not just for remittances.146 In Part III, we will discuss the unique historic al, social, 
and cultural issues in Jamaica that may make adopting Kenya ’s approach to savings 
difficult to accomplish. Still, the Kenyan model points to a way forward on how to use 
MFS for wealth creation rather than just wealth redistribution in countries  that are 
open to seizing the opportunity.  
 
C. Countries that Failed to Ignite, Where It Is Too Soon to Tell, or with Weak 
Growth  
 
Three countries experienced weak growth after launching mobile financial 
systems:  
 
1) Ghana;  
2) The Philippines; and  
 
 142 Evans & Pirchio, supra  note 28, at 21.  
 143 Elliott, supra  note 26, at 22.  
 144 Id. 
 145 Id. (emphasis added).  
 146 Id. at 20.  FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  29 
3) Pakistan.  
 
Eight countries launched mobile financial systems that failed to take off:  
 
1) Burkina Faso;  
2) Haiti;  
3) India;  
4) Indonesia;  
5) Madagascar;  
6) Mexico;  
7) Nigeria; and  
8) South Africa.  
 
The eight countries in which mobile money failed to ignite were all countries that 
adopted a heavy -handed approach to regulation. Seven of the eight required banks to 
take the lead in overseeing emerging mobile technology.  
 
They required that banks take the lead role in operating the mobile 
money scheme and conversely prohibited mobile network ope rators 
from doing so. They then typically imposed other heavy burdens 
including stringent KYC requirements and restrictions on who could 
operate as an agent.147 
 
In Haiti, mobile money was ushered in with great fanfare. Following the 
devastating 2010 earthqu ake that destroyed almost all the major infrastructure in the 
country and shuttered the country ’s banks,148 the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
established a $10 million fund to create a mobile financial system.149 The Governor of 
the Central Bank of Haiti, Charles Castel, welcomed the introduction of mobile 
financial services. He believed that such services would especially benefit the 
displaced because they would not have to resort to a “brick and mortar edifice. ”150 
 
 147 Evans & Pirchio, supra  note 28, at 4.  
 148 During the quake, the building housing Citibank in Port -au-Prince collapsed, the offices 
of the World Bank, along with the “central political and economic core of the country ” 
were destroyed. See Mary Beth Sheridan, Haiti Earthquake Damage Estimated Up to $14 
billion , WASH. POST (Feb. 17, 2010), http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp -
dyn/content/article/2010/02/16/AR2010021605745.html . 
 149 Bill Gates Offers $10m fund for mobile banking in Haiti , BBC  NEWS  TECH. (June 9, 2010), 
http://www.bbc.com/news/10273158.  
 150 Al Edwards, Drumbeat Grows for Mobile Banking in the Caribbean , JAMAICAN OBSERVER  (Feb. 
11, 2011), http://www.jamaicanobserver.com/pfuersion/drumbeat -grows -for-mob.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
30 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Proceeding with caution, Haiti adopted a b ank-based model, in which banks were 
responsible “for all deposits and all compliance measures ” regarding fraud and money 
laundering.151 Said Castel: “We put the entire responsibility on the banks, but we as 
the Central Bank regulate and supervise the banks to ensure that they abide by all laws 
and regulations concerning the matter. ”152 Haiti apparently chose the bank -led model 
because Mexico, which had a similarly large remittance business, and other countries 
had done so already.153 As a result, Haiti did not h ave to reinvent the wheel.154 
Unfortunately, despite promising early sign -ups, the number of active users of the 
mobile system in Haiti has been underwhelming. It is possible that Haiti ’s mobile 
money failed to accumulate users due to this bank -based structu re. In contrast, in 
Kenya, which has seen excellent results, a widespread network of non -bank agents are 
authorized to conduct transactions.155 
It is also likely that Haiti ’s mobile money system failed due to issues with 
scalability in a small country. In co ntrast, Kenya ’s population of 50 million is 
approximately five times the size of Haiti.156 The size factor likely contributed to 
Kenya’s success in digital finance because of greater need and the more people using 
the system.  
In South Africa, mobile money lo oked similarly promising at the start: one million 
users signed up shortly after its initial launch, and even users with the most basic 
handsets could utilize mobile financial services due to the widespread distribution of 
their agent network.157 South Afric a’s telecom company, MTN, had a mobile money 
account that was available to customers free of charge (unless customers want to use 
other cellphone networks). MTN ’s system “allow[ed] customers to make payments, 
transfer funds between users, pay for groceries , buy prepaid electricity and airtime, 
and withdraw cash from the stores —all from their cell phones. ”158 But only a small 
percentage of MTN ’s customers were active users of the services. While there could be 
 
 151 Id. 
 152 Id. 
 153 Id. 
 154 Id. 
 155 Note that Haiti does allow agents. Haiti partnered with major telecommunications 
company, Digicel, to introduce a mobile wallet. Scotiabank then outsources (mobile) 
services to “super agents ” who charge the accounts for the mobile wallets. The account 
on a  phone acts like a wallet. An agent opens the account for you, provided you can 
provide a piece of identification and a minimum of 100 gourdes. Once the account is set 
up, you can begin: you can also top up your account and transfer funds to and from 
someo ne who has a Tcho Tcho mobile account. See id. 
 156 Kenya Population , WORLDOMETERS , http://www.worldometers.info/world -
population/kenya -population/ (last visited Nov. 7, 2017).  
 157 Gedeye, supra  note 11.  
 158 Id. Notably, MTN has recently (2016) given up on its  mobile money services in South 
Africa “due to a lack of commercial viability. ” See also Lynsey Chutel, MTN is giving up 
on mobile money in South Africa , QUARTZ  (Sep. 16, 2016) , https://qz.com/783230/mtn -has-
cancelled -its-mobile -money -service -in-south -africa-but-will-continue -to-move -into-
financial -services -in-africa/.  FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  31 
many reasons for this, the most consequential may be South Africa ’s very strict 
banking regulations, including those specifically tied to mobile services.  
Finally, two countries in the study launched mobile money schemes that could 
not yet be evaluated. The authors determined that it was too soon to draw any 
meaningful conclusions for these two countries:  
 
1) Democratic Republic of the Congo; and  
2) Sri Lanka.  
 
It will be interesting to track the progress of digital finance in these and other 
countries in the future. Although conclusions cannot be made yet about  the overall 
success of digital finance, some lessons can be drawn from the initial results thus far: 
digital finance does not have to replace existing banking systems, but it does need 
sufficient room to breathe.  
Part III  
A. Scandals and Financial Crime  
 
Banks  and the BOJ  have good reason to approach financial deregulation with 
caution . The 1990s Financial Sector crisis in Jamaica cost the country 40% of its GDP.159 
Fraud and financial crimes are not unique to Jamaica, but they do pose unique risks to 
countr ies with emerging economies . Any fraud in the mobile financial sector may only 
make any existing issues regarding consumer trust and confidence in financial 
institutions worse.160 In 1992, Bernie Madoff created a major Ponzi scheme that left 
many Americans r eeling when it collapsed in 2008.161 The scandal also led to the 
creation of more regulation in the financial sector, including the “Dodd -Frank” Wall 
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act,  162 and increased calls for greater 
transparency and accountability  in the financial services industry.163 Similarly, starting 
 
 159 The Importance of Financial Sector Regulation , supra  note 12 2. 
 160 Chastain, supra  note 9 7, at 37 -38 (“Regulators and policymakers are tasked with ensuring 
that [Mobile Financial Services] is safe from abuse in order to facilitate acceptance by the 
general public. For the industry, robust internal surveillance mechanisms are critical to 
protecting their business and reputation, and to building confidence among customers. ”). 
 161 Kirton, supra  note 82, at 9.  
 162 Some say the Madoff scandal also contributed to the financial crisis. See 25 People to Blame 
for the Financial Crisis: The Good Intentions, Bad Managers, and Greed Behind the Meltdown , 
TIME, 
http://content.time.com/time/specials/packages/ article/0,28804,1877351_1877350_187733
7,00.html  (last visited Sept. 30, 2017).  
 163 Terry Flanagan, Demand for Change Post -Madoff , MARKETS MEDIA  (Mar. 6, 2013), 
https://marketsmedia.com/demand -for-change -post -madoff  (“The goal [of Dodd -Frank] 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
32 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
in the 1990s, Jamaica was beset by a series of pyramid and Ponzi schemes that 
astonished, not only Jamaicans, but the world with their audacity. Eight major 
pyramid schemes started in 2000 in Jamaic a and collapsed in 2001.164 
Many Jamaicans were misled by the use of the word, “partner” (as described in 
more detail below) in the name of the Ponzi schemes.165 This was a deliberate attempt 
by the schemes to encourage Jamaicans long familiar with partners to  put their full 
trust in these new ventures.166 The large sums of money lost by Jamaicans affected both 
the rich and the poor, and the notoriety generated by these scandals left many 
Jamaicans even more cautious about new schemes.167 
In 2006 and beyond, at lea st four more financial scandals occurred — the names 
for which virtually all Jamaicans are familiar: (1) OLINT; (2) Cash Plus; (3) Worldwise 
Limited; and (4) Swiss Cash.168 Of the four, two —OLINT and Swiss Cash —especially 
tested the risk tolerance of many Jam aicans. (Another one, the “Lotto Scam ” affected 
more Americans than Jamaicans, but it still stirred an immediate response by the 
Government of Jamaica.)169 
OLINT stands for Overseas Locket International Corporation, which originally 
registered in Panama but had subsidiaries located throughout the Caribbean. OLINT 
Jamaica was founded in 2004; in July 2008, founder David Smith was arrested for theft, 
false accounting and a host of other charges, including breach of Section 26 of the 
Securities Act.170 Swiss Cash (also known as Swiss Mutual Fund) was started in 1948 
in the Commonwealth of Dominica and was originally intended for Dominican 
citizens. Although the company never opened a physical office in Jamaica, and the 
Financial Services Commission ( “FSC”) warned Jamaicans that the scheme was 
illegitimate, Jamaicans nevertheless deposited vast sums using the organization ’s 
website. Eventually, the website disappeared, along with the customers ’ money and 
the organization itself.171 
Typically, these crimes w ere either unregulated investment schemes that attracted 
customers “by offering unusually higher than market interest rates as short term 
 
is to increase transparency in the financial system and hold those accountable who do not 
abide.”). 
 164 Kirton, supra  note 82, at 21.  
 165 Id. at 18 for description of the partn er system.  
 166 Id. at 19.  
 167 Id. at 16.  
 168 Id. 
 169  Per Maxine Jackson, Jamaica ’s then Deputy Director of Public Prosecutions, Financial 
Investigations Division, earlier legislation, including the Mutual Legal Assistance 
Criminal Matters Act (1995) was alrea dy in place, but the Proceeds of Crime Act 
(“POCA”) (2007) was enacted almost immediately after the Lotto Scam came to light [in -
person interview]. Interview with Maxine Jackson, previous Deputy Director of Public 
Prosecutions in Jamaica  (Apr. 27, 2013) . 
 170 Kirton, supra  note 82, at 28.  
 171 Kirton, supra  note 82, at 31.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  33 
returns,”172 or they reeled trusting Jamaicans who possibly saw them as the only escape 
from desperate circumstances. In  Jamaica, “unregulated ” means that the owners and 
managers of the schemes “are not licensed by the regulatory authorities and 
customers ’ financial assets are not protected under any national legislation. ”173 The 
government had to intervene when these schemes  all collapsed, and the economy took 
time to recover.  
Jamaicans who were deceived by these schemes lost everything: “Potential 
depositors sold various personal assets including their homes, cars and consumer 
durables. ”174 These prominent scandals in Jamaica in the 1990s, and another major one 
in 2013, show that financial crime is on the rise.175 Consequently, the Jamaican 
government cannot be faulted for implementing stringent barriers to such crime as it 
threatens the financial stability and integrity of both developing and developed 
markets. Jamaica does not have to worry only about its own internal laws, but is also 
subject to increasing international pressure to comply with stringent requirements for 
regulations aimed at combating money laundering ( “AML”) and the financing of 
terrorism ( “CFT”).176 One major outcome is that these scandals may have increased the 
country’s skepticism and distrust in new “schemes” like mobile financial systems that 
promise great rewards.  
B. Regulatory Challenges  
Attempting to regul ate the banking and financial sector in Jamaica poses unique 
problems for regulators who are faced with a large informal sector that is part and 
parcel of Jamaican life.177 Some say that the lack of sufficient regulation is the reason 
 
 172 Id. at 3. 
 173 Id. 
 174 Id. at 24.  
 175 Patrick Linton, Det./Sgt. of the Major Organized Crime & Anti -Corruption Task Force, 
Address at seminar on the Law Reform (Fraudulent Transactions)(Special Provisions) Act  
“Cybercrime Elements of Lottery Scamming ” 2013 at the Jamaica Police College Lecture 
Theatre, Twickenham Park, St. Catherine, Jamaica (Apr. 27, 2013) ( “[C]ybercrimes amass 
$1 trillion worldwide and have overtaken drugs . . .”). 
 176 Abnell & Tsianaxis, supra  note 94.  
 177 See INTER -AMERICAN DEV. BANK, THE INFORMAL SECTOR IN JAMAICA  1-2 (2006), 
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/4326/The%20Informal%20Sector%
20in%20Jamaica.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y ( “The informal sector is a large and 
growing portion of the Jamaican economy. In 2001, informal activities represented around 
43% of official GDP and by some measures had more than doubled over the previous 
decade. Enterprises in the informal sector are concentr ated in low -productivity, labor -
intensive activities. Nearly 60% of Jamaicans in the informal sector work in the 
wholesale/retail trade or agriculture. Manufacturing is a distant third most important 
activity, involving only 9%. Most workers, 70%, do not h ave formal contracts. Work is 
usually part -time rather than full -time. Women make up a relatively large portion of the 
informal sector, 57% compared with 50% in the formal sector of the economy. Jamaican 
informal sector entrepreneurs are, on average, older  and better educated than workers in 
the formal sector. One third of small -firm entrepreneurs have university educations . . .”). 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
34 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
that vast numbers of Ja maicans comfortably operate outside the strict confines of the 
law. “[T]he informal sector operates beyond the law because of inadequate legislation 
and inefficient bureaucracy. Regulations and government are identified as the main 
barrier to informal sect or development. ”178 
In many developing countries, rural financial markets are buoyed by both legal 
and illegal transactions.179 Jamaica is not the exception to this rule. Part of the reason 
for the extra -legal and illegal transactions is that, “commercial bank s serve only ten to 
twenty percent of the population, excluding eighty to ninety percent of the population 
from the formal financial section. ”180 The problem with not addressing poverty is that 
people struggle to make ends meet however they can, regardless o f whether the 
sources of income are “under the table. ”181 
In the arena of digital finance, two important types of regulation exist — 
prudential and non -prudential. Prudential regulation deals with preventing systemic 
risks that may result from the failure of banks and other financial institutions. Non -
prudential regulation is more concerned about promoting transparency and 
establishing accounting standards and mechanisms for dispute resolution to protect 
consumers.182 In Jamaica, the BOJ is concerned with both p rudential and non -
prudential regulation when introducing a mobile financial system. Regulation of the 
financial sector is viewed as essential because such regulation: (1) provides stability to 
markets; (2) protects customers, workers and taxpayers from “moral hazards; ” (3) 
maintains confidence; (4) promotes business confidence; and (5) minimizes the risk of 
future financial crises.183 
 
 178 VICTOR E. TOKMAN , REGULATION AND THE INFORMAL ECONOMY : MICROENTERPRISES IN CHILE, 
ECUADOR AND JAMAICA 1 (Victor Tokman & Emilio Klein eds.,  1996)  (discussing 
microenterprises in Chile, Ecuador and Jamaica ). 
 179 HEYWOOD W. FLEISIG & NURIA DE LA PEÑA, LEGAL AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR 
EFFECTIVE RURAL FINANCIAL MATTERS 1 (Ctr. for the Econ. Analysis of L. 2003) 
https://www.m icrofinancegateway.org/sites/default/files/mfg -en-paper -legal -and-
regulatory -requirements -for-effective -rural -financial -markets -2003.pdf.  
 180 Ian Davis, Rural Banking: Designing an Effective Legal Framework for Microfinance , 2 PEPP. J. 
BUS. ENTREPRENEURSHIP  & L. ISS. 2 (2009) , 
http://digitalcommons.pepperdine.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1033&context=jbel  
(quoting Marguerite S. Robinson, THE MICROFINANCE REVOLUTION : SUSTAINABLE FINANCE 
FOR THE POOR 6 (World Bank 2001) , 
http://digitalcommons.pepperdine.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1033&context=jbel. ). 
 181 Thomson, supra  note 31, at 125 (quoting a local priest, “In Spanish Town, nearly every 
household was involved in some kind of criminal activity, large or small. Car thieves, 
cooks and cleaners, musicians, tailors, squeegee men: they all made their money under 
the table. How could they not? We have extremely high levels of unemployment here, 
not to mention  illiteracy and teenage pregnancy. Poverty breeds rage, and still the killings 
go on.”). 
 182 Robert C. Vogel & Gerald Schulz, Financial Regulation in the English -Speaking Caribbean: Is 
it Helping or Hindering Microfinance?  COMPETE CARIBBEAN , INTER -AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT 
BANK 4 (Nov. 2011).  
 183 The Importance of Financial Sector Regulation , supra  note 12 2. 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  35 
The law that is most relevant to digital or mobile finance in Jamaica is the Payment 
Clearing & Settlements Act of 2010 (the “Payments Act ”).184 According to Professor 
Michael Witter of the Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social Economic Studies, existing 
regulations (like the Payments Act) in Jamaica are insufficient to serve the needs of a 
mobile financial system that is not just a bout “payments and remittance channels, ” 
especially if Jamaica adopts an “agent -based bank model. ”185 For example, Professor 
Witter stated that the Money Order Act (issued by the BOJ) helps with a bank model 
but “there is a regulatory void regarding interope rability (a model that can work with 
any wireless carrier or mobile device) and the use of agents. ”186 The issue of 
interoperability and the regulation of agents is faced by all countries that are 
considering the adoption and scalability of digital finance o r mobile money 
architecture: banks are regulated, and are therefore safe. Banks are perceived to be less 
risky than allowing agents or telecom providers, or participants outside the pre -
existing banking sphere, to have unfettered access to consumers.  
There  is significant resistance from regulators within central banks, including the 
BOJ, to allowing unlicensed individuals to perform functions typically performed by 
banks— especially functions related to taking deposits from the public. According to 
Professo r Witter, anyone engaged in the business of taking money from the public 
must comply with the provisions of the BOJ ’s Depositor ’s Act. The problem is that tech 
companies do not want to comply with the Act and banks want all others, including 
telecom and te ch companies, to focus on their own sectors and to leave banking related 
issues alone. Professor Witter states that there is, however, a need for the legal system 
to embrace mobile so that banks, tech and/or telecom companies will work together 
for the gre ater good of the country.187 
In many ways, the overabundance of caution makes sense. Why introduce 
unnecessary risk into a seemingly stable and functioning financial system? Despite the 
major scandals noted above, Jamaica weathered the 2008 -2009 financial cr isis relatively 
well.188 
 
 184 Other relevant laws include the Primary and Secondary Legislative Acts of Parliament; 
Omnibus Banking Law; Banking Act; Financial Institutions Act, 1992 (2 004); Money 
Order Act of 2006; Proceeds of Crime Act; and the Building Societies Act, 1897 (2004).  
 185 Interview with Michael Witter, Professor at the Lewis Institute of Social and Economic 
Studies at the University of the West Indies, Mona Campus in Kingst on, Jamaica (Apr. 9, 
2013).  
 186 Id. 
 187 Per Robin Sykes, Gen. Counsel with the Bank of Jamaica, the Financial Services 
Commission ( “FINSAT”) and the Jamaica Deposit Insurance Corporation ( “JDIC”) 
regulate non -deposit taking institutions.  
 188 Interview with Li vingstone Morrison, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Jamaica for 
Finance and Tech Development, at BOJ headquarters in Kingston, Jamaica (May 22, 2013). 
See also The Importance of Financial Sector Regulation , supra  note 12 2: (The intervention of 
the Jamaican government meant that Jamaica largely escaped the 2008 global financial 
crisis unscathed).  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
36 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Gov. Morrison believes that “the unbanked can only be banked by banks, ” but 
that “non-bank agents may play a role in providing other services. ”189 According to 
Gov. Morrison, all non -bank service providers need to seek permission from the BOJ 
before commencing any operations in Jamaica.190 As he noted, the success of the 
deployment of additional products and services would be driven by volume (as 
demonstrated by the Kenyan model), and would depend on the public ’s confidence in 
trying out new, and largely unfamiliar and untested, financial products. From Gov. 
Morrison ’s perspective, such confidence could only emanate from a strong regulatory 
framework.  
His position makes sense and many regulators would agree based on the 
experiences of the countries in which mobile money schemes “failed to ignite ” (as 
discussed above in Part IV). Nevertheless, this regulatory stance may be overly 
limiting and bodes ill for the successful launch of a comprehensive mobile financial 
system in Jamaica.  
C. Beyond  Legislation: History, Culture, and Community  
[W]e are a resilient people. In the face of these global challenges our people 
continue to invent income earning option s . . . Activities of the so -called 
“informal sector ” or “hustle economy ” which today represents nearly 50% 
of GDP is indicative of this change.191 
 
How do specific conditions in Jamaica, including its history and culture, influence 
the Jamaican government ’s openness to implementing a comprehensive island -wide 
mobile financial sy stem?  
Although the wider world knows Jamaica as “a very small, Afro -British country, 
where tourism, trade, and services predominate, ”192 life on the island is more complex 
than it might otherwise seem. First, despite its small size, Jamaica has: “a strong 
democracy, high caliber bureaucracy and good regulatory framework. ”193 Also, as 
stated above, there are just under 3 million people currently living in Jamaica, 
including 1.2 million who are “economically active. ”194 The term “economically active ” 
encompasses bo th those who are employed in traditional jobs and those who hold 
 
 189 Per Gov. Morrison, Panel presentation at Kingston BETA event ( April 25 , 2013 ), JAMPRO 
“non-bank agents such as bill payment providers, card operators and other agent 
networks might, for example, play a role in providing mobile payment services ”.  
 190 Interview with Gov. Morrison, supra  note 188. During our meeting, an author asked about 
whether the BOJ had granted permission or licenses for any providers to provid e mobile 
financial services in the country; he said that several had requested licenses, but to date, 
none had been granted. From his tone, the success of future applications sounded 
extremely doubtful.  
 191 Hamilton, supra  note 104, at 2.  
 192 Tokman & Klein,  supra  note 178, at 3 . 
 193 World Bank, supra  note 68, at 3.  
 194 Tokman & Klein, supra  note 178, at 3.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  37 
some form of informal employment outside of agriculture.195 Most significantly, a 
“dual economy ” exists in Jamaica:  
 
One sector of the economy, the “modern sector, ” is the dominant 
sector where  large companies operate. The other sector, the 
“subsistence sector, ” has a great deal of self -employed persons, and 
others earning low wages or no wages at all. The existence of surplus 
labour in the subsistence sector creates low productivity, low wages 
& low standard of living.196 
 
Further, most Jamaicans rely exclusively on cash for everyday financial 
transactions. These numbers are no anomaly and reflect a situation common to much 
of the world, as “85 percent of transactions across the globe are still based on cash and 
checks.”197 Despite the touted benefits of mobile wallets or digital finance generally 
(including added protection and convenience), it may be hard to break any society ’s 
reliance on cash. Moving Jamaica from a cash -based economy will not be easy, but one 
developing country with significantly lower economic prospects has shown that a 
move away from cash is possible even in the most dire circumstances. Most financial 
transactions in Somaliland are not cash based,198 and (as documented above in  Part III), 
Somaliland is one of the eight countries that experienced explosive and successful 
growth in mobile money.  
Another feature of Jamaica ’s dual, cash -based economy is that unemployment is 
high, and is most keenly felt by young Jamaicans. In some i nner -city communities, 
youth unemployment is as high as 70%.199 Also, productivity is low, as “about 75% of 
our labour force has no training or certification. ”200 In 2017, it is estimated that the gross 
 
 195 Id. 
 196 Hamilton, supra  note 104, at 2 (citing Nobel Laureate, Sir Arthur Lewis).  
 197 Peter Svensson, Digital ‘Wallets’ Proliferate at Cellphone Show , ASSOCIATED PRESS (May 10, 
2012) http://news.yahoo.com/digital -wallets -proliferate -cellphone -show -215032239 —
finance.html  (citing Gary Flood, MasterCard ’s president of global products and 
solutions) .  
 198 Matthew Vickery, The Surprising Place Where Cash is Going Extinct , BBC  FUTURE  (Sept. 13, 
2017), http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20170912 -the-surprising -place -where -cash -is-
going -extinct  (“The self -declared c ountry, which broke away from Somalia in 1991 but 
remains unrecognised by the international community, has become something of a wild 
frontier for cashless payments as it charts a trajectory towards creating the world ’s first 
cashless society. Whether in a  shack on the side of a road or a supermarket in the capital 
of Hargeisa, mobile payments are fast becoming the standard in the country. ”). 
 199 Hamilton, supra note 104, at 2.  
 200 Id. 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
38 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
domestic product was $5,119.50 (USD) per inhabitant,201 and the minimum wage was 
$51 (USD) per month.202 
According to Professor Rosalea Hamilton, there is unprecedented debt in Jamaica, 
the trade gap is tremendous, and the “environment for doing business is getting 
worse.”203 Others note that there are “asymmetrical c redit relations ” in Jamaica.204 The 
barriers to credit are significant, but exist on both sides. On the one hand, banks have 
standards that few small business owners can meet; on the other, many small business 
owners do not request credit at all.205 
Despite th ese grim facts, Prof. Hamilton is determined and unbowed. She believes 
that the way forward must be rooted in several solutions. In her view, Jamaica needs 
to: (1) increase exports of locally produced goods and services; (2) move away from its 
reliance on manufacturing (as higher energy costs mean that sector is becoming less 
viable); and (3) come up with new, knowledge -based ideas, as well as innovative 
goods and services. Prof. Hamilton also believes that technology is the way forward 
for Jamaica:  
 
We now  have tech. It ’s staring us in the face, but we can ’t see it. 
Entrepreneurs are change agents who are seeking to maximize profits 
through innovative means. Change agents are known for their 
creativity. There has to be a process of capital accumulation. The re 
should also be social capital entrepreneurship. These opportunities 
have to be created and we need proactive, out of the box thinking.206 
 
She stressed important developments happening at the World Trade Organization, 
and the importance of Jamaicans under standing trade rules. From her perspective, the 
 
 201 GLOBAL FINANCE , supra note 71.  
 202 Denise Clarke , What is the Minimum Wage in Jamaica?, EPIC JAMAICA (July 26, 2014), 
http://www.epicjamaica.net/jamaica -facts—info/what -is-the-minimum -wage -in-jamaica.  
 203 Breakfast Meeting with Professor Rosalea Hamilton, PhD, the Vice President, 
Development at the Unive rsity of Technology, Jamaica and Founder and Director of the 
Institute of Law & Economics, and leaders of a women ’s group at the UTCWI (Tuesday, 
April 16, 2013). The purpose of this meeting was for Ms. Hamilton to brief the group 
regarding women ’s business  organizations and to brainstorm how to tackle the matter of 
women becoming owners of their own businesses and achieving financial freedom.  
 204 Tokman & Klein, supra  note 178 , at 21. This means that would -be entrepreneurs (those 
who could stimulate the econ omy while providing jobs for themselves and for others) are 
faced with a dilemma. At the outset, they cannot start and maintain their businesses 
without sufficient credit — receiving loans for start -up costs from banking institutions or 
receiving essential goods from suppliers. However, they face inadequate support from 
formal institutions (who may not want to lend without sufficient evidence of success). On 
the other side, they are “being forced to give credit to customers without being able to 
enjoy the sa me benefit in relation to their suppliers. ” Yet giving credit to consumers 
reduces the working capital available to small firms (23). This situation, according to the 
authors, eventually leads to liquidity problems and cash shortages —often dooming the 
business before it is well off the ground.  
 205 Id. at 25.  
 206 Interview with Prof. Hamilton, supra  note 203.  FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  39 
island has “internal” issues that need work, and she emphasizes the point that 
productivity in Jamaica is in “major decline. ” She wondered aloud: “How do you get 
workers to produce more while holding [high] w ages the same? ” She listed several 
other areas for improvement, including: “managing legal competencies, ” the problem 
of people running businesses without being registered or paying taxes, and further 
developing key skills within the population.  
Specifical ly, Prof. Hamilton called out a need to focus on human resources,  
marketing, record -keeping and accounting ( “You should know what ’s going in your 
business! ”), modern information technology, and increasing citizen ’s understanding 
of financing. (She suggeste d the pursuit of online degree programs or certifications.) 
Prof. Hamilton also detailed a Scotiabank -sponsored project that was intended to show 
business owners how to minimize or mitigate risks and facilitate their access to 
financing. She urged those as sembled in the room that day to “use the tools ” provided 
on the Internet ( “A virtual business is a real business! ”), but to still pay their taxes. As 
she concluded: “Jamaica is crying out for entrepreneurs. ” 
All the points discussed by Prof. Hamilton in this workshop illustrate many issues 
echoed by other scholars on the island. These problems are just a few of the serious 
challenges that Jamaica will need to, and can, overcome as it forges a path forward.  
One issue not discussed by Prof. Hamilton, but no netheless deeply rooted in 
Jamaica’s unique history and culture, is that many Jamaicans will say that they do not 
trust banks. 207 As a result, there is a strong  tradition of “savings cooperatives, ” also 
known as ROSCAS (rotating savings and credit associatio ns) or “partners, ” to which 
many people on the island belong.208 One question is not just whether there is the 
institutional will for mobile money, but whether, there is or would be popular interest 
and willingness to try out a system beyond the partner syst em. There may not be.  
While many Jamaicans do not trust banks, their distrust of politicians is almost on 
par. Politics in Jamaica also plays a major role in almost all areas of life.209 Many people 
in Jamaica believe that new businesses need to have politic al connections to obtain 
important contracts needed to survive, yet few have these contacts.210 In addition, 
many Jamaicans are resigned to the political link to crime. It is a well -known part of 
 
 207 Tokman & Klein, supra  note 178, at 20, 25 ( nothing that i n Jamaica, only 20% of the 
entrepreneurs surveyed stated that they tried to obtain formal credit (10% actually 
obtained credit); of those who didn ’t apply, half of the respondents said that they didn ’t 
like or need to borrow, and forty percent (40%) said that they were unable to comply with 
the formal requirements needed to obtain funds.) . 
 208 Tokman & Klein, supra  note 178, at 20.  
 209 See Harriott, supra  note 41, at 41 ( “facilitative political patronage ” as a factor in the 
development of organized crime), and 43 ( “The methods of political mobilization were 
implicated in the extraordinary rise in violent crimes. ”). 
 210 Tokman & Klein, supra  note 178, at 22 (noting that, i n Jamaica, only seven percent (7%) of 
new enterprises receive such contracts ). 
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
40 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
Jamaica’s historical legacy that political parties supply guns  to their supporters to 
bolster their position within inner -city communities.211 
High levels of crime adversely impact the economic and investment climate in 
Jamaica.212 The levels of crime on the island may also lead many young residents to 
question whether l ife is even worth living. 213 Per the UN: “armed violence can 
aggravate poverty, inhibit access to social services and divert energy and resources 
away from efforts to improve human development. ” Similarly, the World Bank notes 
that countries that are plague d by armed violence are behind in attaining the 
Millennium Development Goals (as described above in Part I), such violence often 
impedes economic growth.214 
Part IV  
Tolling for a New Mandate  
In some respects, twenty -first century Jamaica, with its mass pover ty, its 
social resentments, its skewed distribution of wealth, is like pre -Revolution 
 
 211 See, e.g. , Glaister Leslie, Confronting the Don: The Political Economy of Gang Violence in 
Jamaica,  SMALL ARMS SURVEY , GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AND DEVELOPMENT 
STUDIES  1-3 (Sept. 2010) , 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.4 69.1613&rep=rep1&type=pdf  
(“In 2009, the US State Department requested that Jamaica extradite one Christopher 
‘Dudus’ Coke on charges of drug and gun trafficking. Local officials had long accused 
Coke, alleged leader of one of Jamaica ’s most powerful gangs , of involvement in criminal 
activities. Yet the Jamaican government uncharacteristically delayed carrying out the 
request. Reflecting the country ’s legacy of political linkages to crime, however, most 
Jamaicans reacted with resignation when they recalled that Coke and his gang operated 
out of a political constituency with a long history of iron fisted gangs, enforcing voter 
support for the ruling political party. Politicians, people quietly commented, would not 
bite the hand that feeds them. Though the pol itical facilitation of crime has declined since 
the country ’s bloodiest national elections in 1980, it remains an enduring —though less 
overt—force. The persistent facilitation of gang activity by politicians continues to hinder 
targeted violence reduction efforts, despite the government ’s vociferous public 
condemnation of crime and violence and official support of both punitive and social 
approaches to violence reduction. ”) (emphasis added) . See also , Harriott, supra  note 41, at 
41 (“facilitative political patronage. ”). 
 212 Id. at 42 (“There is a body of literature, including considerable empirical work, that 
discusses the causes of these crimes and their impact on the social, political, and economic 
development of Jamaica. Among the adverse effects cited are  the negative impact on the 
investment climate (Francis et al. 2009), erosion of existing development, and prevention 
of the development of human and social capital (UNDP 2012. ”)). 
 213 Thomson, supra  note 31, at 42 ( “It was an unwritten rule that you never stop at night at 
the traffic lights on Spanish Town Road. ”). See also  Thomson at 123 (quoting Richard 
Albert) (“Right now, there ’s anarchy in Spanish Town. And the kids don ’t care if they die 
today, the next day, the next week: they don ’t care because they ’re already dying. ”) 
 214 See Beyond the Millennium Development Goals: Towards an OECD Contribution to the Post -
2015 Agenda , ORG. FOR ECON. DEV. (2015), https://www.oecd.org/dac/POST -
2015%20Overview%20Paper.pdf.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  41 
France; only in Jamaica there is no sign of a revolutionary movement, no 
glimmer even of organized political protest. So the wealthy will have nothing 
to fear: the poor a re too disorganized, too ill -educated, for social revolution. 
There is, however, something far worse: thousands of empty, wasted lives, 
and an endemic of violence, in which God is a US -import Glock.215 
 
Despite its problems, and maybe because of them, Jamaic a is uniquely positioned 
to take advantage of technological developments that have, and are, transforming the 
developing world. The risks of emerging technologies can be mitigated by re -
examining existing regulations. Developing laws that are transparent, fluid to change, 
and tailored to address the digital revolution is not an insurmountable task. However, 
to make it work, Jamaicans, from the bottom up, must decide to embrace change, and 
must agree that the current status quo is untenable. Before attemptin g any 
comprehensive regulatory reform that embraces technology, the government and 
regulators in the Bank of Jamaica need to listen to the demands and unmet needs of 
the people. Any new mandate should specifically include a commitment to provide 
increased access to financial products and services to a larger percentage of the 
population.  
The mandate should include not only the unbanked, but the underbanked, 
especially since 70% of Jamaica ’s population is underbanked.216 The mandate should 
improve financial access for small business leaders and entrepreneurs, as well as 
young community leaders. Jamaican youth are hungry for opportunity and the 
government should be prepared to help. There are many youths who are creative a nd 
driven enough to follow through on their desires to see a better Jamaica —one that is 
inclusive, productive, and more competitive.  
Outsiders may discount Jamaica due to its size. While Jamaica may not be in a 
position to compete on the same level with “China, India and other countries with 
significant cost advantages due to economies of scale and very low wages, ”217 there is 
no reason why regulatory reform could not put Jamaica in a much better economic 
position than it currently enjoys.  
Too often, leaders attempt to impose reforms from the top down. Instead, leaders 
should involve the population, and better yet, involve other Caribbean populations 
who are similarly hungry. Compete Caribbean, a “private sector development 
program ” that delivers “innovative a nd practical solutions that stimulate economic 
growth, increase productivity and foster innovation and competitiveness ” in 13 
 
 215 Thomson, supra  note 31, at 32 . See also , Ha rriott, supra  note 41, at 23 ( “Violent offenders, 
and in particular gang members, appear to have fairly easy access to illegally imported 
firearms. ”). 
 216 Jamaica’s Underbanked to Get Mobile Wallet with Mozido , FINEXTRA  (Sept. 4, 2014), 
https://www.finextra.com/pressarticle/56578/jamaicas -underbanked -to-get-mobile -
wallet -with -mozido/payments.  
 217 Hamilton, supra note 104, at 3.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
42 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
countries in the Caribbean,218 is just one example of such a push. Jamaica does not need 
to confront these challenges alone. Added t ogether, 6,810,884 people are living within 
CARICOM nations. There must be a way to better facilitate cooperation in the region 
for the purposes of economic development and financial inclusion.  
Others have made the case for a unified Caribbean economic com munity, similar 
to what is practiced in the European Union —the CARICOM Single Market and 
Economy (CSME). “It is fundamentally about moving on to a new development path, 
a path characterized by greater inputs of knowledge, new production and working 
practic es, new corporate arrangements, new business models. ”219 Currently, Jamaica 
may not have the numbers to scale up mobile financial services to a level that would 
be sustainable by themselves. That is not true however, if Jamaica is willing to look 
beyond its borders to similarly -situated countries in the region.  
Concluding Thoughts  
[A]ny new and genuine economic development of the Caribbean has to begin 
first of all with the involvement of the mass of the population  . . . Nobody 
knows what the Caribbean popula tion is capable of  . . . Nobody has even 
attempted to find out .220 
 
How do you convince an entire country to move beyond a traditional reliance on 
cash? The first step is to emphasize something that everyone in the world already 
knows, which is how insecure cash really is —simply having one ’s wallet stolen or lost 
is enough to throw most people ’s lives into a tailspin. Every facet of your personal and 
financial health becomes vulnerable —credit cards, bank accounts, passwords, yes, but 
also credit history, home  and family security (a U.S. driver ’s license generally carries 
the bearer ’s home address), insurance records, and much more.221 Second, one might 
demonstrate examples of where movements away from cash have worked. Take 
Bitcoin for example. Bitcoin is a type  of electronic currency that has seen both the 
highest of highs and the lowest of lows upon its first introduction to the world. Now 
however, some say that Bitcoin, “the Internet ’s version of money, ”222 is emerging as a 
stable and intriguing concept that is well worth continuing observation and analysis:  
 
 
 218 See COMPETE CARIBBEAN , http://competecaribbean.org/about -us/ (last visited Jan. 28, 
2018) . 
 219 Hamilton, supra note 104, at 3.  
 220 C.L.R.  JAMES , The Birth of a Nation , in CONTEMPORARY CARIBBEAN -A SOCIOLOGICAL READER  
(Susan Craig ed., 1981).  
 221 Peter Svensson, Digital ‘Wallets’ Proliferate at Cellphone Show , ASSOCIATED PRESS (May 10, 
2012) , http://news.yahoo.com/digital -wallets -proliferate -cellphone -show -215032239 —
finance.html (citing a speech by Gary Flood, MasterCard ’s president of global products 
and solutions).  
 222 Rebecca Grant, Bitcoin for Idiots: an Introductory Gintroductory uide , VENT URE BEAT (Feb. 17, 
2014), http://venturebeat.com/2014/02/17/bitcoin -for-idiots -an-introductory -guide/.  
 FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
Winter  2018 The Future Is Mobile  43 
Now Bitcoin is emerging out of its angsty adolescence into a more 
mature, adult, stable form. The Bitcoin ecosystem is growing more 
robust and legitima te, and the movement ’s evangelists are pushing 
hard for mainstream adoption — to turn Bitcoin into a currency rather 
than an asset or a financial lark and make the most of its unique 
capabilities.223 
 
Yet there are real dangers involved with Bitcoin and othe r so-called “crypto -
currencies ” that are often unregulated: “Those virtual currencies do not really know 
who their customers are, ” says Tom Kellermann, chief cybersecurity officer at the 
security company, Trend Micro. “Traditional money laundering has migr ated over to 
cyberspace. ”224 Given that Jamaica and other nations are already trying to limit these 
kinds of threats, in addition to documented threats to the vulnerable software from 
hackers,225 it seems that Bitcoin is probably not the best answer.  
One thing  seems clear — this topic needs further research. Several developing 
nations like Kenya have successfully adopted digital finance as the way forward, and 
that trend is likely to continue. The adoption of MFS in these countries has led to 
demonstrated increa ses in GDP.  
Here are some final thoughts on the prospects for future growth in Jamaica:  
 
1. Heavy regulation will doom mobile money.  
2. Regulation should allow for both bank and non -bank models.  
3. The government of Jamaica should establish a central regulatory 
body that, similarly to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
in the United States, coordinates regulatory actions of various 
governmental agencies, including the BOJ, the FSC, the Office of 
Utilities Regulation, and others.  
4. Mobile network operator (non -bank) models need to allow an 
agent network to engage in deposit -taking functions (such 
deposit -taking functions are currently prohibited for non -banks 
in Jamaica). Interoperability is essential.  
5. Any mobile financial framework needs to include coordination 
between the central bank, traditional banks, and mobile 
operators. Credit unions and other financial organizations should 
not be excluded . 
6. Barriers to increased sharing of customer data between 
institutional partners should be reduced.  
 
 223 Id. 
 224 Priya Anand, 10 Things Bitcoin Won ’t Tell You 5, MARKET WATCH  (Aug. 2, 2014), 
http://www.marketwatch.com/story/10 -things -bitcoin -wont -tell-you-2014 -07-25?page=5 . 
 225 Id. at 6 (Hacker attacks and a “software glitch ” caused Mt. Gox, a Bitcoin exchange to lose 
$400 million worth of bitcoins.).  FINAL LUMSDEN UPDATED (2) (1) (DO NOT DELETE ) 2/20/2018   2:45  PM 
44 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance  Vol 23:1 
7. The government of Jam aica should concurrently develop a 
national data security and privacy regulatory framework to 
preemptively address the dangers of digital crime.  
8. Banks alone cannot be allowed to determine the reach of mobile 
financial systems or develop exclusive deals wit h telecom 
providers. Both industries are by nature anti -competitive.  
9. The Jamaican business community should be asked for input and 
fully involved in designing whatever system is ultimately 
adopted.  
10. Focus on the creation and/or widespread monitoring of a na tional 
identity infrastructure that is reliable. Users should receive a 
standard ID that is paired with biometric data through which 
banks can verify customer identity via a central government 
repository, reduce complexity and lower costs currently 
associa ted with KYC requirements . 
11. The BOJ should continue to work on regulatory reforms and 
technological innovations that ease the burden (and cost) of AML 
requirements.  
12. The government of Jamaica needs to develop a strong mandate 
that encompasses financial inclu sion and access for all Jamaicans. 
Such mandate should include the goal of putting Jamaica at the 
forefront of innovation. Being at the forefront of innovation means 
considering what it would take to utilize technology to move 
towards a cashless society.  
 
As it is already a member of a larger economic and business -minded community, 
Jamaica is uniquely poised to reap the advantages of these new mobile business 
opportunities. Neither the Bank of Jamaica nor the government can afford to sleep on 
this particula r opportunity. The Jamaican people took one huge leap of faith in 1962. 
The Jamaican government needs to show the world that despite the country ’s 
challenges, it is willing to continue moving its small but mighty island forward.  
 