Toward Universal Financial  
Inclusion in China
Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
Toward Universal Financial  
Inclusion in China
Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
February 2018© 2018 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank and the People’s Bank of China
 
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of  
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent, or those of the  
People’s Bank of China.
The World Bank and the People’s Bank of China do not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this  
work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not  
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank or the People’s Bank of China concerning the legal status  
of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
 
RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank and the People’s Bank of China 
encourage dissemination of their knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for  
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank  
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;  
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.CONTENTS
Acknowledgments vi
Acronyms and Abbreviations vii
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 1
1.1  Purpose of the Report 2
1.2  Internet Finance, Digital Finance, and Fintech 2
1.3  Content and Structure of the Report 2
CHAPTER 2: KEY ELEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION 5
2.1  Accessibility 5
2.2  Diverse and Appropriate Products 7
2.3  Commercial Viability and Sustainability 9
2.4  Safety and Responsibility 10
CHAPTER 3: BENCHMARKING CHINA’S FINANCIAL INCLUSION PROGRESS 13
3.1  Physical and Remote Access Points 14
3.2  Accounts and Payment Instruments for Individuals 14
3.3  Saving and Borrowing for Individuals 17
3.4  Insurance for Individuals 19
3.5  Access to Finance for Firms 20
CHAPTER 4: CHINA’S FINANCIAL INCLUSION EXPERIENCE 25
4.1  The Role of Traditional Financial Service Providers in Financial Inclusion 26
 4.1.1 Improving Accessibility by Expanding the Physical Reach of Service Outlets 26
 4.1.2 Enhancing the Ease and Efficiency of Payments in Rural Areas 31
 4.1.3 Increase in Ownership and Use of Bank Accounts and Debit Cards 32
 4.1.4 Innovations in Financial Products to Enhance Access, Use, and Quality 33
 4.1.5 Reforming RCCs to Better Serve Sannong 35
 4.1.6 Innovations in the Insurance Industry to Contribute to Financial Inclusion 37
4.2  The Role of “New-Type” Rural Financial Service Providers in Financial Inclusion 39
 4.2.1 Village and Township Banks 39
 4.2.2 Microcredit Companies 40
  iiiiv  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
 4.2.3 Rural Mutual Credit Cooperatives 41
 4.2.4 Contributions 42
 4.2.5 Remaining Challenges 42
4.3  Development and Regulation of Fintech 43
 4.3.1 Nonbank Digital Payment Providers 43
 4.3.2 Peer-to-Peer Lending 45
 4.3.3 Internet-Based Microlending 48
 4.3.4 Internet Banks 49
 4.3.5 Internet-Based Insurance 51
 4.3.6 Internet-Based Fund Management 52
 4.3.7 Internet Equity-Based Crowdfunding 53
 4.3.8 Contributions of Digital Finance and Fintech Companies to Financial Inclusion and Remaining Challenges 54
4.4  The Role of the Chinese Government in Promoting Financial Inclusion 56
 4.4.1 Policy and Regulatory Environment for Financial Inclusion 56
 4.4.2 Financial Infrastructure 60
 4.4.3 Digitization of Government-to-Person Transfers 61
 4.4.4 Role of Policy Banks and the China Development Bank 62
 4.4.5 Financial Consumer Protection and Financial Capability 62
CHAPTER 5: REMAINING FINANCIAL INCLUSION CHALLENGES IN  
CHINA AND THE WAY FORWARD 69
5.1  Achieving an Evolved and Widely Accepted Conceptualization of Financial Inclusion 69
5.2  Recalibrating the Role of Government 70
5.3  Evolving Business Models and Practices to Achieve Commercial Sustainability 71
5.4  Managing Risks Associated with Digital Finance 71
5.5  Strengthening New-Type Rural Financial Service Providers 72
5.6  Improving the Financial Capability of Consumers 73
CHAPTER 6: GLOBAL LESSONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICYMAKERS 75
6.1  Reaching the Last Mile 75
6.2  Investing in Financial Infrastructure 76
6.3  Leveraging Online Networks 78
6.4  Enabling Market Entry and Innovation 78
6.5  Innovating with Policy Pilots 80
6.6  Protecting Consumers 80
References  83
BOXES, TABLES AND FIGURES
Box 2.1  Global Definitions of Financial Inclusion 6
Box 2.2  Store-of-Value Transaction Accounts 9
Box 4.1  Postal Savings Bank of China: Agent-Based Service Points Help Reach the “Last Mile” 28
Box 4.2  Agricultural Bank of China: Developing Innovative Products and Services to Serve Sannong  35
Box 4.3 Industrial and Commercial Bank of China’s Approach to Digital Finance  36
Box 4.4  MicroCred Nanchong: A Microcredit Company Committed to Serving Smaller Customers  41
Box 4.5  Tiered Account System for Nonbank Digital Payment Providers  46
Box 4.6  Special Campaign to Address the Risks of Internet Finance  48
Box 4.7  Tiered Account System for Banks  50
Box 4.8  Guidelines on Promoting Sound Development of Internet Finance  56
Box 4.9  China’s Plan for Advancing the Development of Financial Inclusion (2016–2020)  57
Box 4.10  Integrated Movables Financing Registration System   61
Box 4.11  PBOC Report on China Financial Consumers’ Capability Survey, 2017  65
Box 6.1  The G20 High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion 77Key Elements of Financial Inclusion  v
Table 3.1 Benchmarking Comparison Groups 13
Table 3.2 Obstacles to Account Ownership 17
Table 4.1  Overview of Select Financial Service Providers in China 26
Table 4.2  ATMs and POS Terminals 27
Table 4.3  Community Sub-Branches and Small and Micro Sub-Branches of Commercial Banks 27
Table 4.4  Number of Bank Accounts and Debit Cards, by Institutional Category and over Time 33
Table 4.5  Performance of the RCC System over Time  37
Table 4.6  Comparison of Baseline Information of New-Type Rural Financial Service Providers   40
Table 4.7  Industry Development of Nonbank Digital Payment Providers 44
Table 4.8  Overview of Key Nonbank Digital Payment Products  44
Table 4.9  Overview of Key P2P Lending Platforms  45
Table 4.10  Industry Development of P2P Lending  47 
Table 4.11  Overview of Internet Banks  49
Table 4.12 Key Products of Internet-Based Fund Management   53
Figure 3.1  Physical Access Points 14
Figure 3.2  Remote Access Points 15
Figure 3.3  Ownership of Store-of-Value Transaction Accounts over Time 15
Figure 3.4  Ownership of Store-of-Value Transaction Accounts across Selected Countries 15
Figure 3.5  Ownership of Store-of-Value Transaction Accounts Compared with GNI per Capita 16
Figure 3.6  Store-of-Value Transaction Accounts in China, by Individual Characteristics 16
Figure 3.7  Making Digital Payments 17
Figure 3.8  Digital Payments Use Cases 18
Figure 3.9  Saving 19
Figure 3.10  Borrowing 19
Figure 3.11  Account Ownership among Firms 20
Figure 3.12 Access to Finance for Firms 21
Figure 3.13  Reasons for Not Applying for a Loan or Line of Credit  21
Figure 3.14  Credit-Constrained Status of Chinese Firms 22
Figure 3.15  Access to Finance as Biggest Obstacle 22
Figure 3.16  Use of Banks to Finance Investment 23
Figure 4.1  Locations of Agent-Based Service Points  29
Figure 4.2  Transactions via Agent-Based Service Points  29viACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China: Models, 
Challenges, and Global Lessons was jointly written by 
staff of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) and the World 
Bank Group (WBG) Finance, Competitiveness & Innova-
tion Global Practice. 
The primary drafting team comprised Dangwei Bai 
(PBOC), Rundong Jiang (PBOC), Tiandu Wang (PBOC), 
Jennifer Chien (WBG), and Douglas Randall (WBG). The 
PBOC initially drafted chapters 1, 4, and 5, and the WBG 
initially drafted chapters 2, 3, and 6. The entire drafting 
team has extensively discussed and jointly revised all con-
tent in the report.
Additional drafting support and inputs were provided 
by Xiaoxiao Li (PBOC), Zhiyong Fan (PBOC), Sihui Feng 
(PBOC), and Yi Yan (WBG). Tian Wang (PBOC) and Jian 
Chen (WBG) provided administrative support. Sheldon 
Lippman and Tora Estep provided editorial assistance, 
and Naylor Design, Inc. provided design and layout assis-tance. We also acknowledge editorial and translation assistance from Lei Zhou (PBOC) and Fei Chen (PBOC). 
The team benefited from the overall guidance of  
Wenjian Yu (PBOC), Tianqi Sun (State Administration of 
Foreign Exchange), Shaogang Ma (PBOC), Douglas Pearce 
(WBG), James Seward (WBG), Irina Astrakhan (WBG), and 
Nancy Chen (WBG). 
The team is grateful to the WBG peer reviewers of the 
report—Douglas Pearce, Hoon Soh, Jinchang Lai, Harish 
Natarajan, Fiona Stewart, Serap Gonulal, Fangfang 
Jiang—as well as Eric Duflos (UN Secretary-General’s Spe-
cial Advocate for Inclusive Finance for Development) for 
their valuable comments. We also gratefully acknowledge 
the support and review from the China Banking Regula-
tory Commission (CBRC), China Insurance Regulatory 
Commission (CIRC), Ministry of Finance (MoF), and the 
relevant departments of PBOC.   viiACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
1RMB = US$0.151
ABC Agricultural Bank of China
AFI Alliance for Financial Inclusion
AML/CFT  anti-money laundering/combating financing of 
terrorism
ATM automated teller machine
CADB China Agricultural Development Bank
CAR capital adequacy ratio
CBRC China Banking Regulatory Commission
CCB city commercial bank 
CCB China Construction Bank 
CCRC Credit Reference Center of PBOC
CDB China Development Bank
CDD customer due diligence
CIRC China Insurance Regulatory Commission
CHFS  China Household Finance Survey
CNAPS China National Advanced Payment System
CPMI Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures
CRS cash recycling system
CSRC China Securities Regulatory Commission 
CUP China UnionPay
EAP L-MIC  East Asian and Pacific large middle-income countries
EximBank  Export-Import Bank of China
FATF Financial Action Task Force
FCPB Financial Consumer Protection Bureau of PBOC
FIP Plan for Advancing the Development of Financial Inclusion (2016–2020)
GNI gross national income
G2P government-to-personGPFI Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion
HIC high-income country
HLP G-20 High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion 
IBPS Internet Banking Payment System
ICBC Industrial and Commercial Bank of ChinaICT information and communication technology
IFC International Finance Corporation
FAS Financial Access Survey (IMF)
IT information technology
IMF International Monetary Fund
JD JingdongLTD loan-to-depositMCC microcredit company
MIC middle-income country
MNO mobile network operator
MoF Ministry of Finance
MSE micro and small enterprise
MSME micro, small, and medium enterprise
NEEQ National Equities Exchange and Quotations
NFC near field communication
NIFA National Internet Finance Association
NPL nonperforming loan
Other L-MIC  Other large middle-income countries
P2P peer-to-peerPAFI Payment Aspects of Financial Inclusion
PBOC People’s Bank of China
POS point of sale
PSBC Postal Savings Bank of China
RCOPB rural cooperative banks
RCOMB rural commercial banks
RCC rural credit cooperative
RMB renminbi (Chinese currency)
RMCC rural mutual credit cooperative
SAC Securities Association of China
SACCO savings and credit cooperative
SME small and medium enterprise
US$ U.S. dollar
VTB village and township bank
WBG World Bank Group 
1 Conversions to US$ are indicative only and included to assist global readers.INTRODUCTION
The conceptualization and practice of financial inclusion  
in China has undergone a significant transformation in 
recent years. From the reforms of rural credit coopera-
tives (RCCs) and policy banks, to the pursuit of agent 
banking models, to the emergence and scaling of fintech 
companies, a diverse range of providers, products, and 
policy approaches has characterized the recent evolution 
of financial inclusion in China. And indeed, significant 
progress has been made. China’s accomplishments 
include the development of a robust financial infrastruc-
ture that has reduced information asymmetries between 
lenders and borrowers and enabled the safe and effi-
cient transfer of money among individuals, firms, and the 
government. China has also established one of the larg-
est agent networks in the world, thereby extending the 
reach of the formal financial sector into previously under -
served rural areas. Consumers have responded with high demand for new financial products and services, which are increasingly offered via digitally-enabled business 
models. China’s rate of account ownership—a basic met-
ric of financial inclusion—is on par with that of other 
G-20 countries. 
Yet China still faces many challenges to achieving sus-
tainable and long-term financial inclusion. A modern 
conceptualization of financial inclusion must be more 
fully adopted and agreed upon by all relevant stakehold-
ers, in particular local government authorities, many of 
whom have not evolved past focusing on the provision 
of subsidized credit. Further efforts are required to ensure that existing models are sustainable and repre-sent a market-oriented approach, with the government 
playing an appropriate enabling role. Risks associated 
with new technology-driven providers and products 
must be better understood and effectively managed and 
balanced with encouraging innovations in product 
design and delivery that advance financial inclusion. Fur -
ther improvements to financial infrastructure are also required to keep pace with industry developments and 
enable the expansion of digital finance to underserved 
areas of the country. 
The current market and policy context represents a 
unique and potentially transformational period for finan-
cial inclusion in China. On the market side, China’s fin-
tech industry continues to grow and develop, and 
traditional providers are also actively pursuing digitally- 
enabled business models. On the policy side, the Chi-
nese government’s current focus on developing an inclusive financial sector is without precedent in the 
country’s history. One recent marker of this strong focus 
is the Plan for Advancing the Development of Financial 
Inclusion (2016–2020), which outlines an ambitious 
agenda for improving the availability, uptake, and quality 
of financial products and services in China, with a clear 
emphasis on expanding and deepening financial inclu-
sion for historically unserved and underserved popula-
tion segments, including micro and small enterprises 
(MSEs), rural residents, low-income urban groups, the 
poor, the disabled, and the elderly.1
  1
2  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
1.1 PURPOSE OF THE REPORT
China is not alone in prioritizing and pursuing financial 
inclusion. Globally, significant progress has been made in 
broadening the scope and ambition of financial inclusion, 
and many countries have achieved remarkable results. A 
supporting factor in this development is the role of inter -
national organizations and forums, including the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI), the Alliance for 
Financial Inclusion (AFI), and the World Bank Group 
(WBG). These organizations and forums allow countries—
and other global stakeholders—to share best practices 
and models; discuss common challenges; and, where fea-
sible, propel progress through coordinated action. One 
lesson from these activities is that each financial inclusion 
“success story” is a product of a unique combination of factors within a given country. The groundbreaking 
uptake of mobile money in Kenya, the spread of banking 
correspondents across Brazil and Colombia, and the 
establishment of niche banks in India and Mexico are 
examples of pioneering approaches that reflect the par -
ticular historical, cultural, political, and financial contexts of those countries. Yet these diverse approaches all seek 
to address common structural challenges: high transac-
tion costs of serving customers with small and irregular incomes or reaching consumers in rural and remote areas 
via traditional methods; informational asymmetries that 
prevent reliable and efficient assessments of creditwor -
thiness; and limited competition and innovation within the market, to name just a few. These are challenges that 
all countries must address to successfully increase finan-
cial inclusion.
Thus, the goal of this report—written jointly by the 
People’s Bank of China (PBOC) and the WBG—is to 
showcase China’s approach to financial inclusion over 
the past 15 years, highlight remaining challenges, and 
distill globally relevant lessons. The report builds on the 
tradition of peer learning now established among coun-
tries with a shared interest in expanding financial inclu-
sion. The hope is that the report will assist countries in 
developing and refining their own pathways toward sus-
tainable and long-term financial inclusion. 
1.2  INTERNET FINANCE, DIGITAL FINANCE, 
AND FINTECH
The opportunities for and challenges of leveraging tech-
nology to enable financial inclusion are cross-cutting 
themes throughout this report. The Guidelines on Promot-
ing Sound Development of Internet Finance jointly issued 
by PBOC and nine other Chinese ministries and commis-sions in July 2015 (“Guidelines”) states that “Internet finance” is a new financial business model that both tradi-
tional financial service providers and Internet-based firms 
have adopted to provide financing, payment, investment, 
and intermediary information services by leveraging the 
Internet and information and communication technolo-
gies (ICT).
2 The Guidelines also states that “deeper inte-
gration of the internet and finance would be a major trend 
and would have more profound impacts on financial prod-
ucts, operations, organizations and services.” 
The terms “digital finance,” “Internet finance,” and 
“fintech” are used interchangeably in China. Given this 
report’s global audience, the authors have chosen to use 
the term “digital finance” to refer to the broader con-
cept of applying digital technologies in the delivery of 
financial services that either traditional financial service 
providers or new entrants can leverage. For the purposes 
of this report, the term “fintech companies” refers spe-
cifically to those new entrants whose core business 
model is based on innovative digital finance. Digital 
finance therefore encompasses both the application  
of digital technologies by traditional providers (for exam-ple, agent-based models, payments infrastructure, 
online platforms, and the use of big data, which are dis-cussed in section 4.1) and fintech companies, which are 
discussed in section 4.3. Section 4.3.8 and chapters 5 
and 6 discuss the overall contribution and challenges of 
digital finance. 
1.3  CONTENT AND STRUCTURE OF THE 
REPORT
The rest of the report is structured as follows. Chapter 2 
establishes the conceptual foundations of financial inclu-
sion used throughout the report. The chapter defines and 
explores the critical elements of financial inclusion: acces-
sibility, diverse and appropriate products, commercial via-
bility and sustainability, and safety and responsibility. 
Chapter 3 provides a quantitative benchmarking 
analysis of China’s current state of financial inclusion as 
compared with peer countries. 
Chapter 4 summarizes China’s financial inclusion expe-
rience over the past fifteen years. The chapter is not meant 
to be comprehensive, but rather focuses on key develop-
ments, particularly those that may be of relevance or inter -
est to other countries. The chapter is roughly organized by categories of financial service providers—(1) traditional 
providers (e.g., banks, rural credit cooperatives, and insur -
ance providers), (2) “new-type” providers (e.g., village and township banks and  microcredit companies), and (3) fin-tech companies (e.g., nonbank digital payment providers, Introduction  3
Internet-based lenders, and Internet banks)—and explores 
the role of each type of provider in contributing to finan-
cial inclusion. This chapter also discusses the role of the 
Chinese government in promoting the development of 
financial inclusion.Chapter 5 discusses the major challenges remaining 
in China to achieving sustainable financial inclusion over the long term. 
Finally, chapter 6 discusses globally relevant lessons 
from China’s financial inclusion experience.
.
NOTE
2.  PBOC and nine other ministries and commissions (2015). KEY ELEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION
The concept of financial inclusion has advanced consider -
ably over the past few decades. From its initial beginnings 
in the product- and institution-specific microcredit and 
microfinance movements, financial inclusion is now viewed 
as a broader national and global policy objective—one 
that is multifaceted and encompasses a range of products 
and consumer segments, financial service providers, deliv-
ery channels, government actors, and stakeholders. For 
the purposes of this report, financial inclusion is defined as: 
The uptake and usage of a range of appropriate finan-
cial products and services by individuals and micro and small enterprises (MSEs), provided in a manner that is accessible and safe to the consumer and sustainable for the provider. 
This definition represents a holistic conceptualization of 
financial inclusion. It is broader than some alternative defi-
nitions, which have been limited to certain financial prod-
ucts or consumer segments. However, it shares many 
common elements with definitions offered by other 
national and global stakeholders, including the definition 
outlined in China’s Plan for Advancing the Development of 
Financial Inclusion (2016–2020) (FIP) (see box 2.1). The FIP 
highlights MSEs, farmers, urban low-income groups, 
impoverished groups, the disabled, and the elderly as par -
ticularly underserved segments.
This chapter defines and summarizes the key compo-
nents of financial inclusion in order to serve as a framework for the subsequent discussion of China’s progress and 
challenges in this area. To achieve this aim, this chapter 
expands on four key elements that are embedded in the 
aforementioned definition of financial inclusion: 
1) Accessibility,
2) Diverse and appropriate products,3) Commercial viability and sustainability, and
4) Responsibility and safety.
The following sections explore these four key compo-
nents in greater detail, describing their main elements, 
significance to financial inclusion, common obstacles, 
and strategies to address such obstacles. While these 
four components are segmented into separate subsec-
tions, clear linkages exist among them, which are noted and discussed. 
2.1 ACCESSIBILITY 
Consumers’ ability to conveniently access financial prod-ucts and services is a key driver of financial inclusion. 
Accessibility means that a consumer has sufficient physical 
proximity to access points—including branches, agents, 
automated teller machines (ATMs), and other outlets or 
devices—to enable him or her to easily select and use a 
range of financial products and services. Remote access 
channels like mobile phones and computers are also 
increasingly relevant to the uptake and usage of financial 
products. Lack of physical accessibility generates signifi-
cant transaction costs for underserved consumers (e.g., 
direct costs for transportation, indirect costs for lost time) 
that can limit the overall value proposition of financial 
products as tools to meet daily financial needs. Indeed, 
consumers place considerable value in accessibility when 
choosing whether and how to participate in the formal 
financial system. According to the 2013 China Household 
Finance Survey (CHFS), 45 percent of households with an account report that they chose their financial service pro-
vider mainly because of its “convenient location,” the 2
  5
6  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
Different stakeholders have defined financial inclu-
sion in different ways. China’s Plan for Advancing  
the Development of Financial Inclusion (2016–2020)  
begins by noting that “Financial inclusion means pro-viding financial service for all social strata and groups with appropriate and valid financial services, at afford-able cost, based on the principle of opportunity 
equality and commercial sustainability. Small and 
micro businesses, peasants, urban low-income groups, impoverished groups, the disabled, the aged and other special groups are the focus of the financial 
inclusion in China.”
The World Bank’s Global Financial Development 
Report 2014 includes a basic and straightforward definition of financial inclusion as “the share of indi-
viduals and firms that use financial services.”
The Center for Financial Inclusion provides a multidi-
mensional vision of financial inclusion, describing financial inclusion as “access to a full suite of financial 
services, to everyone who can use financial services, 
most commonly cited rationale.
3 Limited accessibility 
results in low uptake and use of formal financial products 
and services. Research indicates that improving the acces-
sibility of financial services increases consumer use and 
the many follow-on benefits of financial inclusion, includ-
ing increases in income, productive investment, and 
employment.4 
In many countries, the financial sector has developed 
around the economics of branch networks. Until recently, 
consumers’ choices for accessing financial products were 
limited to interactions at brick-and-mortar branches of 
financial service providers. However, the cost of building 
and operating brick-and-mortar branches often vastly  
outweighs the revenue gained by serving certain con-sumer segments. Thus unsurprisingly, some segments—
disproportionately rural and poor consumers, often with 
small and irregular income streams—were systematically 
unserved or underserved. 
Specialized financial service providers that focus 
explicitly on these underserved segments—such as village 
and township banks (VTBs) in China or savings and credit 
cooperatives (SACCOs) in Rwanda—have achieved mean-
ingful progress in improving the financial sector’s reach for 
rural and low-income consumers in many countries. Such providers typically have lower-cost, simpler operations 
than mainstream commercial banks.Yet even with a more diverse set of providers, branch 
economics remain a major constraint in most economies. 
Achieving financial inclusion therefore requires extending 
physical access beyond brick-and-mortar branches. The 
combination of technology, new business models, and 
evolving regulatory approaches has allowed further prog-
ress in bringing financial services even closer to the door -
step of the everyday consumer at relatively low costs to 
providers. ATMs were the first widespread nonbranch 
access point and are now more ubiquitous than brick-and-
mortar branches in 130 economies, including in China, 
where there are more than four times as many ATMs as 
branches.
5 A broad range of innovative approaches, from 
banking by boat, motorbike, or van (e.g., China, Indone-sia, and Maldives) to mobile ATMs (e.g., Vietnam) to pay-
ment kiosks (e.g., India and the Russian Federation), have 
also been successfully used to increase accessibility for 
consumers without investing in building and operating 
full-scale branches.
Agent-based models are a more recent widespread 
development, and a key component of China’s financial 
inclusion success story. In such models, small convenience 
stores, post offices, large retailers, or other outlets serve 
as third-party agents on behalf of traditional or mobile 
financial service providers. Point-of-sale (POS) terminals 
and/or mobile devices are most often used to enable BOX 2.1
Global Definitions of Financial Inclusion
provided with quality (i.e. convenient, affordable, 
suitable, provided with dignity and client protection.” In addition, financial services are provided through a 
diverse and competitive marketplace, with “a range 
of providers, robust financial infrastructure and clear regulatory framework.”
The Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) 
describes financial inclusion as “a state in which all working age adults, including those currently excluded by the financial system, have effective access to the following financial services provided 
by formal institutions: credit, savings (defined 
broadly to include current accounts), payments, and insurance.” “Effective access” is further defined as “convenient and responsible service delivery, at a 
cost affordable to the customer and sustainable for 
the provider, with the result that financially excluded and underserved customers can access and use for -
mal financial services.” 
Source: CFI (2011); GPFI (2011); World Bank (2014).Key Elements of Financial Inclusion  7
these agents’ operations. The prevalence of these models 
is driven by financial service providers’ desire to leverage 
existing retail infrastructure (particularly infrastructure that 
reaches into rural and remote areas), reduce transaction 
costs, reach new consumer segments, and benefit from 
payment-oriented businesses.6 Retail agents representing 
financial service providers outpace brick-and-mortar 
branches in several major economies, including Brazil, 
China, India, and Peru.7 
Despite these new approaches to increase accessibility, 
progress remains uneven. Although new access channels are less expensive for providers than full-service branches, 
such channels are still not inexpensive in absolute terms, 
and the cost-benefit calculus that historically posed an 
obstacle to financial inclusion is still relevant. For example, 
the costs of establishing ATMs and POS-enabled agents 
remain nontrivial, and in many cases the revenue stream 
from low-value transactions may be insufficient to justify 
up-front investment and operational costs. As a result, 
inequality in physical access to financial services remains a 
central characteristic across many economies. Globally, 
over 20 percent of adults without an account report dis-
tance as a major obstacle to account ownership, according 
to the 2014 Global Findex. This means at least 440 million 
adults worldwide are excluded from the financial system 
due to poor accessibility.
8 
In addition, not all provider types or access channels 
can be considered equal from the consumer perspective. The convenience, product offerings, functionality, and 
quality of operations of each type of access point create 
meaningful differences across types. In most countries, 
commercial bank branches still provide the most compre-
hensive set of financial products and services. Specialized 
financial service providers targeting rural and poor con-
sumer segments are critical for expanding physical access, 
but in some cases offer a more limited set of products, are 
not be fully integrated into key financial infrastructure sys-
tems (e.g., payments infrastructure and credit bureaus), 
and face regulatory and supervisory obstacles. For exam-
ple, microcredit companies (MCCs) in China are credit-only 
institutions with limited geographic scope (i.e., operations 
are typically limited to within a single county’s boundaries), 
limited funding options, and inconsistent regulation and supervision across provinces and counties, which in some 
cases results in high entry barriers and operating costs. 
These issues suggest that ultimately a diverse set of access 
points is necessary to provide a comprehensive degree of 
accessibility to consumers. 
The legal and regulatory framework and operational 
business models can determine the degree to which 
agents of financial service providers can match the basic 
functions of brick-and-mortar branches. While agents in 
Brazil and Peru can provide a broad range of services, 
agents in China currently perform limited cash-in transac-tions or account openings. Practical limitations on agents’ 
capacity, and legal restrictions such as those related to cus-
tomer due diligence requirements, impede the extent to 
which agent-based models can fully match the offerings of 
a physical bank branch.
Beyond physical access points operated by financial 
service providers, personal devices like mobile phones and 
computers increasingly provide a further avenue for con-
sumers to select and use financial products. These per -
sonal digital devices can facilitate product uptake for 
consumers with existing relationships with financial service 
providers (i.e., linking an existing account to a third-party 
payment platform) and provide a platform for convenient 
product usage (i.e., sending or receiving money), hence 
increasing consumer access. However, in most circum-
stances personal digital devices cannot fully replace the 
need for face-to-face interactions with financial service 
providers, in particular for consumers who are entering the 
formal financial system for the first time. Digital products 
often still require initial physical interaction with the pro-
vider for identification or documentation purposes. For 
example, in China, most customers of CreditEase (a peer-
to-peer [P2P] lender) still submit their appraisal documents 
in person.
2.2 DIVERSE AND APPROPRIATE PRODUCTS
Achieving financial inclusion requires a range of financial products and services that are appropriately designed 
and fit the needs of consumers, particularly the unserved 
and underserved. Appropriate design of financial prod-
ucts requires identifying the needs of particular customer 
segments and selecting product features that could meet 
those needs at a reasonable cost. Various aspects must be 
considered regarding the appropriateness, or quality, of 
financial products. As defined by the Center for Financial 
Inclusion, “quality” includes affordability, convenience, 
product fit, safety, dignity of treatment, and client protec-
tion.
9 Other definitions include suitability, transparency, 
and client value. These elements are often interrelated or 
overlapping.
How does quality product design affect financial inclu-
sion? The appropriateness of products can drive uptake 
and usage and increase entry by the unserved and under -
served into the formal financial sector. Conversely, poorly suited products will neither have significant uptake nor 
long-term usage, or they may actually harm low-income 
consumers. The World Bank’s Global Financial Develop-
ment Report 2014 notes that recent studies show that 
product design features can affect both the extent and the 
impact of use by individuals. Insufficient attention to prod-
uct design is cited as a driver of limited uptake and usage 
of transaction accounts.
10 8  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
Often, conventional financial products and services are 
not well suited to the needs of low-income consumers, 
who may require simplified, low-cost products without 
unnecessary features. One example of a simplified, low-
cost product is a basic bank account, which is typically a 
current account with no or low monthly fees and minimum 
balance requirements and the basic functionalities of a cur -
rent account, often with limitations on the number of monthly transactions allowed and without additional fea-
tures such as overdraft facilities. Microcredit focused on 
microenterprise lending is another traditional example of 
product design tailored to low-income consumers, as 
microcredit is designed to provide small amounts of credit 
over short cycles using collateral substitutes (e.g., reputa-
tional collateral, group guarantees), which is more suitable 
for informal and small microentrepreneurs. Digital finance 
unlocks the potential for even greater tailoring and cus-
tomization of products and services to fit individual con-sumer needs, based partly on the ability to use advanced 
data analytics on existing and potential customers to 
design products appropriately.
Appropriate product design must also account for the 
behavioral biases that affect all consumers of financial ser -
vices. Present bias often influences financial decision mak-ing, leading consumers to prioritize present consumption 
over saving for the future. Understanding and adapting to 
behavioral biases can be incorporated into product design 
for financial inclusion purposes. Examples of product 
designs that incorporate insights into behavioral biases 
include commitment accounts for savings products and 
accounts with automatic savings reminders.
Obtaining a deeper understanding of the unique char -
acteristics and needs of the unserved and underserved 
can also enhance appropriate product design. Although 
gaining detailed knowledge of a target clientele can be challenging, new methods have emerged in recent years. 
Financial diaries, which closely follow the financial lives of 
households at a granular level, and other types of market 
research can be used to gain a more detailed understand-
ing of consumer behavior. Emphasis on human-centered 
or customer-centric design, which goes beyond traditional 
market research, is also growing. The human-centered 
design process focuses on learning directly from custom-
ers by carefully listening to and observing them in their 
environment, allowing designers to understand customer 
needs, preferences, and behaviors and deliver solutions 
that work in specific contexts.
11 Findings are then incorpo-
rated into new or different product offerings. 
Convenience is another important component of the 
appropriateness of products and services. For consumers, convenience can refer to both physical access as well as 
the timeliness and bureaucratic efficiencies (or inefficien-
cies) of the financial service. Requirements related to loan 
documentation, number of days for approval of applica-tions, and language and literacy difficulties can all pose 
real barriers to consumers seeking to obtain and use 
financial products and services.
Affordability is also a critical component of the quality 
of financial products and services for the purposes of 
financial inclusion. The importance of product cost to a 
low-income consumer is self-evident. However, the more 
practical perspective to consider may be the value propo-
sition for providers more broadly, which is necessary for 
the provision of financial products and services to be sus-
tainable over the long term. Section 2.3 discusses this 
concept further.
The overall range and diversity of available products is 
another important component of financial inclusion. Research such as financial diaries reveals that the needs of 
low-income households are diverse and complex. They 
need access to the same basic financial products and ser -
vices as all others, not just a single product such as credit or payment services, to effectively manage risk, store 
money safely, conduct daily transactions, and meet credit 
needs. The concept of financial inclusion does not mean 
that consumers require products in all these categories at 
all times, but rather that they need access to various finan-
cial products and services that they can select from and 
use when necessary.
A further explained in box 2.2, basic payments and 
store-of-value instruments are valuable to most adults to 
facilitate common activities such as conducting economic 
transactions, sending and receiving money, and storing 
value. As low-income individuals are particularly vulnera-ble to financial shocks, which can have severe long-term 
consequences, insurance products are also necessary 
(e.g., life insurance, health insurance, funeral insurance, 
property insurance, agricultural insurance, etc.). A safe 
place to save money is one of the most demanded prod-
ucts by low-income individuals, who often have unpredict-
able and seasonal incomes. Without access to formal 
savings products, low-income individuals often resort to 
informal means of saving—in cash, in assets such as live-
stock, or through social networks—that are more vulnera-
ble to theft or loss in value. Finally, credit is useful for 
production and consumption purposes, and more broadly 
for income smoothing. Credit can include microenterprise 
loans, consumer loans, education loans, mortgages, 
home improvement loans, etc.
The role of digital finance has been expanding rapidly 
and has significant potential to increase product diversity for purposes of achieving financial inclusion. Digital 
finance encompasses new, innovative products and ser -
vices created for digital channels (such as mobile money and online lending); digitally enabled business models 
that leverage technology (such as big data analytics for 
credit scoring purposes and agent-based models); and 
digital access to traditional financial products and ser -Key Elements of Financial Inclusion  9
vices. The advent and use of digital technology applied to 
financial services has greatly increased the potential range 
of products and services available to the underserved by 
allowing providers to develop innovative new products at 
lower cost that reach a much broader range of consumers 
via more accessible channels.
Many of the aforementioned points relating to product 
range and appropriateness have policy and regulatory 
implications. The regulatory environment can help or hin-
der financial inclusion efforts. Financial sector authorities 
can play a high-level role in promoting innovation in prod-
uct design and delivery, and regulation can address spe-
cific issues. For example, flexible, risk-based know-your-  
customer and customer due diligence rules can help over -
come the obstacle of serving low-income consumers with-
out formal identification. As always, policymakers must 
balance the risks and benefits of new approaches to reach 
the underserved. 2.3  COMMERCIAL VIABILITY AND 
SUSTAINABILITY
Accessibility and diverse and appropriate products are 
critical elements of financial inclusion from the consumer 
perspective, but an important challenge is to develop and 
sustain a financial ecosystem in which providers can 
deliver these products and services in a cost-effective and 
sustainable manner over the long term. A financial system 
that expands its reach to previously underserved consum-
ers but does not do so sustainably ultimately fails at meet-
ing the long-term objectives of financial inclusion. 
A diverse, competitive, and innovative marketplace is 
critical to achieving sustainable levels of financial inclu-
sion. While consumers need a range of basic financial 
products and services, in most markets commercial banks 
alone are unlikely to provide this full range to all under -
served segments. Different types of providers, operating on a fair and level playing field and utilizing different busi -BOX 2.2
Store-of-Value Transaction Accounts
One product category where greater attention to 
appropriate product design can yield significant impacts is store-of-value transaction accounts. In 
recent years, a consensus has emerged that most 
adults can benefit from these types of basic prod-ucts, which allow them to store value and send and receive payments. This consensus is driven by a 
robust evidence base that finds significant and 
meaningful benefits to consumers from the adoption and use of these products and the near-universality of the types of behaviors that these products facili-
tate —most adults make or receive payments as part 
of their regular money management, and nearly all adults seek a safe place to store money. 
The 2016 Payments Aspects of Financial Inclusion 
(PAFI) report, prepared by the CPMI and the WBG, 
defines store-of-value transaction accounts as follows:
Store-of-value transaction accounts can be defined 
as accounts (including e-money accounts) held with banks or other authorized and/or regulated payment service providers, which can be used to make and receive payments and to store value. 
More specifically, this includes all deposit accounts 
held with banks and other authorized deposit-taking financial institutions that can be used for making and 
receiving payments and prepaid instruments based on e-money offered by banks, other authorized 
deposit-taking financial institutions, and non-deposit-  
taking payment service providers such as mobile net-work operators.
While evidence on the benefits of many financial 
products has been inconsistent, modest consensus 
exists among researchers that basic payments and 
store-of-value instruments offer meaningful benefits to their owners, as exemplified in the Global Financial Development Report 2014 (World Bank, 2014). At the 
global level, WBG President Dr. Jim Kim made a sig-
nificant acknowledgement of the value of these accounts and the existing gap in ownership of such accounts in late 2013 when he announced an initiative 
to achieve Universal Financial Access by 2020. The 
goal of this initiative is for all adults to own a store-of-value transaction account. 
Of course, the widespread uptake and use of store-of-
value transaction accounts will require more than just 
improvements to product design—it will require improvements related to many of the themes dis-cussed in this chapter. The PAFI report provides a 
framework for increasing uptake and usage of such 
accounts, structured around seven guiding principles and spanning a wide range of public and private sec-tor actions.10  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
ness models to target market niches and consumer seg-
ments, can collectively generate innovations in product 
design and delivery models and encourage the long-term 
development of a diverse and sustainable financial eco-
system. Commercial banks, rural banks, financial coopera-
tives, microfinance institutions, postal banks, payment 
service providers, mobile network operators (MNOs), and 
fintech companies can all contribute to financial inclusion. 
For example, rural banks and financial cooperatives often 
have long-standing ties in the communities where they 
operate and may be better positioned to build trust and 
to understand and meet the specific needs of their cus-
tomer base. Postal banks and agent-banking models pro-
vide the opportunity to leverage broad infrastructure 
networks in remote areas to increase access. China has 
also recognized and followed this approach, first with the 
creation of new types of providers (including VTBs and 
MCCs), and more recently with the licensing of Internet banks, as well as the entry of new fintech companies such 
as Internet-based lenders.
Business practices can also be adapted to lower oper -
ational costs and overcome the inherent obstacles to prof-
itably and sustainably serving the unserved and 
underserved. One common obstacle is information asym-
metries. Providers often lack access to credit histories of 
potential borrowers among the unserved and under -
served. Past strategies to address this challenge included relying on group lending or reputational collateral. The 
increasing availability of “big data” and “alternative 
data,” including transactional and social data, gives pro-
viders further sources of information to utilize for credit-
worthiness assessments and risk management, among 
other uses. Digital technologies can also be leveraged for 
operational processes, such as loan repayments and pro-
cessing, further lowering the ongoing administrative and operational costs of serving low-income consumers.
Another critical factor for the sustainable provision of 
financial services is a robust financial infrastructure that 
supports efficient transmission of information and transac-
tions among a wide range of market participants. Finan-
cial infrastructure primarily consists of credit infrastructure 
(including credit reporting systems, secured transaction 
systems, collateral registries, and insolvency systems) and 
national payment systems. Credit reporting systems that 
collect and disseminate relevant and in-depth data (e.g., 
repayment data) among all relevant credit providers 
enables the reliable and cost-effective evaluation of con-
sumer creditworthiness, thereby reducing informational 
asymmetries and transaction costs that often deter pro-
viders from lending to low-income individuals and MSEs. 
Secured transaction systems and collateral registries allow 
businesses to leverage their immovable assets (e.g., land) and movable assets (e.g., equipment and inventory) as collateral to obtain capital for investment and growth. Insolvency and debt resolution systems that effectively 
save struggling firms when possible or productively reallo-
cate the assets of failing firms can encourage entrepre-
neurs to make investments and take informed risks and 
increase financial service providers’ willingness to lend to 
such firms. 
As noted in the Payment Aspects of Financial Inclu-
sion (PAFI) report, prepared by the Bank for International 
Settlement’s Committee on Payments and Market Infra-
structures (CPMI) and the WBG, key elements of a 
national payments system include an interbank system 
for retail electronic funds transfers, a payment card pro-
cessing platform or platforms, and a large-value inter -
bank clearing system. Interoperability among payment systems—which allows for seamless interaction of two or 
more proprietary acceptance and processing platforms—
can promote competition and allow providers to avoid large sunken investments in parallel infrastructure sys-
tems. Efforts to restrict access to shared payment systems 
for some providers, especially new or nontraditional pro-
viders, via anticompetitive measures can hinder market 
entry and long-term competition and market dynamism. 
Further development in mobile and retail payment infra-
structure can also facilitate the expansion of digital 
finance models.
Finally, a key element of commercially viable and sus-
tainable provision of financial services to underserved and 
unserved segments is recognizing the appropriate role  
of government. Well-intentioned government efforts to expand financial inclusion can sometimes have distortion-
ary impacts on market dynamics that are ultimately detri-
mental to consumers. One example is imposing overly 
strict interest rate caps that limit the amount of credit 
available. Another example is providing subsidized lend-ing that may encourage poor repayment behavior from 
consumers and discourage market entry by the private 
sector. The efforts and resources of financial sector author -
ities should instead be directed at developing (1) well-co-ordinated policy dialogue and engagement with the 
private sector, (2) an enabling legal and regulatory envi-
ronment with proportionate regulatory requirements and 
adequate supervisory capacity, and (3) a far-reaching and 
robust financial and information and communication tech-
nology (ICT) infrastructure. 
2.4 SAFETY AND RESPONSIBILITY
Achieving long-term financial inclusion requires that prod-
ucts and services be responsibly delivered to consumers 
and that the policy objectives of financial inclusion align 
with those of financial stability and market integrity. Over -Key Elements of Financial Inclusion  11
all, this balance requires financial sector authorities to con-
tinually assess the risks and trade-offs among these 
various policy objectives.
The core elements of financial consumer protection, 
such as clear disclosure and transparency of the terms and 
conditions of products and services, fair treatment of con-
sumers, and accessible recourse mechanisms, are neces-
sary to ensure that consumers obtain the products and 
services that best meet their needs and do not suffer harm 
in their interactions with financial service providers. Finan-
cial consumer protection plays an important role in build-
ing trust in the financial system, particularly for consumers 
who are new to the formal financial sector. The legal and 
regulatory environment should ensure that a sufficient 
framework is in place for financial consumer protection 
that sets clear rules regarding the conduct of financial ser -
vice providers.
Low levels of financial capability can present a further 
obstacle to the responsible uptake and usage of financial 
products and services, regardless of the level of accessibil-
ity or appropriateness of products. Financial capability is 
defined as the internal capacity to act in one’s best finan-
cial interest and encompasses the knowledge, attitudes, 
skills, and behaviors of consumers with regard to manag-
ing their resources and understanding, selecting, and 
using financial services that fit their needs.12 Individuals 
with low levels of financial capability may distrust formal financial providers and/or may be unaware of the poten-
tial benefits or uses of financial products and services. 
Improved financial capability can lead to increased uptake 
and usage of financial products and services to effectively 
meet the needs of consumers. Both providers and finan-
cial sector authorities should consider and pursue 
approaches to improving the levels of financial capability 
of the unserved and underserved. Realizing long-term financial inclusion also depends 
on the overall safety and soundness of the financial sys-tem. For example, financial sector authorities incentivizing 
certain types of providers or delivery channels by relaxing 
regulatory requirements to meet financial inclusion objec-
tives should ensure that sufficiently robust regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks remain to allow long-term finan-
cial stability and protect consumers. Particularly in the 
realm of fintech, balancing risks and innovation is neces-sary to enable continued growth in new products, new 
delivery mechanisms, and new business models and part-
nerships that expand the potential for achieving full finan-
cial inclusion.
Maintaining market integrity while pursuing financial 
inclusion objectives also requires striking the right bal-
ance. As the PAFI report notes, national authorities may 
struggle to achieve a regulatory regime that protects the 
financial system from money laundering and terrorist 
financing activities while building in sufficient flexibility to 
address customer identification issues that impede serv-
ing the underserved, enable the entry of new providers, 
and allow the development of innovative financial prod-
ucts. The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) supports a 
risk-based approach to implementing FATF recommenda-
tions, particularly with respect to customer due diligence 
(CDD). However, some authorities’ fear of being found noncompliant with FATF recommendations can outweigh 
the perceived financial inclusion benefits of a risk-based 
approach. As a result, overly restrictive anti-money laun-
dering/combating financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) 
regimes will have some impact on the development of 
financial inclusion.
NOTES
 3.   Thirty-five percent of respondents chose “because designated bank to receive salary/wages or subsidy payment”; 10 percent 
chose “because it has convenient hours”; 7 percent chose “because of good service”; 5 percent chose “because it has many 
ATMs”; and less than 5 percent chose reasons related to online banking, low fees, simple business procedures, unlimited 
withdrawals, small risk of bank failure, and lack of another option. 
 4.   For examples, see Banjeree and others (2013); Bruhn and Love (2014); Burgess and Pande (2005); Sanford (2013).
 5.   IMF FAS (2016).
 6.   Kumar (2011). 
 7.   IMF FAS (2016); World Bank GPSS (2016). 
 8.   Demirguc-Kunt and others (2015). The Global Findex is a World Bank database on financial inclusion in over 140 countries. The data is collected triennially through surveys with individuals conducted as part of the Gallup World Poll. 
 9.   www.centerforfinancialinclusion.org. 
 10.   World Bank (2014). 
 11.   McKay and Seltzer (2013); Kilara and Rhyne (2014). 
 12.   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/publications/financial-capability. BENCHMARKING CHINA’S FINANCIAL  
INCLUSION PROGRESS
This chapter provides a quantitative, cross-country bench-
marking analysis of China’s progress in expanding financial 
inclusion. The analysis contained herein is from a high 
level; chapter 4 explores the trends highlighted here and 
the drivers and factors behind these trends in greater 
depth. This chapter leverages various global and national 
databases relevant to financial inclusion, including the 
China Household Finance Survey (CHFS), the WBG Global 
Findex, the International Monetary Fund Financial Access 
Survey (IMF FAS) database, the WBG Global Payment Sys-
tem Survey (GPSS), the WBG Enterprise Surveys. Key indi-
cators for the analysis derive from the recently updated 
G-20 Financial Inclusion Indicators, including new indica-
tors on digital financial inclusion developed by the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) under the leader -
ship of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) during 2016. 
The benchmarking analysis employs four groups of com-
parison countries to provide context to China’s current 
state of financial inclusion:
1) G-20 high-income countries (G-20 HIC), 
2) G-20 middle-income countries (G-20 MIC),
3) East Asian and Pacific large middle-income countries 
(EAP L-MIC), and 
4) Other large middle-income countries (other L-MIC). 
Table 3.1 provides an overview of these comparison 
groups. 3
  13
TABLE 3.1 Benchmarking Comparison Groups   
     RURAL  
  # OF   AVERAGE POPULATION GNI PER  
COMPARISON GROUP ABBREVIATION COUNTRIES INCLUDES POPULATION   (% TOTAL) CAPITA (US$)
China — 1 China 1,378,665,000 43.2 8,260
G-20 high-income  G-20 HIC 12 Argentina; Australia; Canada; France;  88,170,704 17.8 34,990  
countries   Germany; Italy; Japan; Korea, Rep.;  
   Russian Federation; Saudi Arabia;  
   United Kingdom; and United States
G-20 middle-income  G-20 MIC 6 Brazil, India, Indonesia, Mexico,  342,650,232 34.6 6,603  
countries   South Africa, and Turkey 
East Asian and Pacific large EAP L-MIC  4 Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, and 74,018,025 48.6 5,280  
middle-income countries   Vietnam   
Other large middle- other L-MIC  12 Algeria; Bangladesh; Colombia; Egypt,  83,669,777 47.2 3,030  
income countries    Arab Rep.; Iran, Islamic Rep.; Kenya;  
   Nigeria; Pakistan; Peru; Sudan; Ukraine;  
   and Uzbekistan  
Source: World Development Indicators 2017. All data as of 2016.
Note: “Large” is defined as an adult population above 20 million. “Middle-income” is defined according to the World Bank Group (WBG) income classifications. China 
and the European Union are excluded from the two G-20 comparison groups. Gross national income (GNI) per capita calculated using Atlas method, current US$. 
14  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
3.1 PHYSICAL AND REMOTE ACCESS POINTS
As discussed in section 2.1, physical access is a key ele-
ment of financial inclusion. Overall, available data show 
that the physical reach of China’s financial sector—includ-
ing branches, ATMs, and agents—is on par with that of 
the median G-20 HIC and significantly higher than that of 
the G-20 MIC and L-MIC group medians, a result largely 
driven by China’s vast agent network (figure 3.1). The 
reach of China’s branch network lags behind that of the 
median G-20 HIC, though it is on par with that of the 
median G-20 MIC. China’s automated teller machine 
(ATM) network is larger than that of the median G-20 MIC, 
median EAP L-MIC, or median other L-MIC, though 
smaller than the median G-20 HIC.
China’s branch network is complemented by a large 
and far-reaching agent network which, at close to 1 million agents, is the largest in the world by absolute size.
13 How-
ever, when normalized by population, China’s agent den-sity rate (88 agents per 100,000 adults [age 15+]) is 
roughly equivalent to that of Brazil (84 agents per 100,000 
adults), but lags behind those of Kenya (156), Peru (344), 
and Bangladesh (505).
14 The limited functionality of agents 
in China is also an important consideration, as agents cur -
rently do not fully facilitate the uptake of financial prod-ucts (i.e., account opening and loan repayments), nor do 
they facilitate the deposit of funds into customer accounts.
High rates of mobile and Internet access provide Chi-
nese adults with additional channels through which to 
access and use financial products and services. Indeed, 
many emerging fintech models in China (e.g., nonbank 
digital payment providers and peer-to-peer lending plat-
forms) rely on access to mobile or Internet devices or 
build off data gleaned from the mass scale of digital trans-actions. Mobile phone access is virtually universal in 
China, with 97 percent of adults reporting that they or 
someone in their household has a mobile phone (figure 
3.2).
15 By contrast, just over half of adults report that their 
household has access to the Internet, which, while lower than the average in G-20 HICs, is far above the average in 
G-20 MICs and L-MICs. In fact, the increasing prevalence 
of smartphones that facilitate Internet access may poten-
tially reduce the significance and utility of traditional 
broadband Internet connection.
3.2  ACCOUNTS AND PAYMENT INSTRUMENTS 
FOR INDIVIDUALS
China has achieved considerable success in expanding 
uptake of a basic but essential financial instrument: the 
store-of-value transaction account. According to data 
from the 2014 Global Findex survey, 79 percent of Chi-
nese adults report owning at least one store-of-value 
transaction account, a category that includes transaction 
and deposit accounts at regulated financial insitutions or 
e-money providers (figure 3.3). The 2014 value represents 
a significant increase from 2011, and the value has likely 
increased further since 2014 (new Global Findex data is 
forthcoming in 2018). It should be noted that PBOC cur -
rently estimates account ownership to be above 90 per -
cent in China. Nevertheless, Global Findex data is used in 
this report in order to undertake a cross-country and 
time-series benchmarking analysis.16
While several drivers are likely behind the impressive 
increase in account ownership, it almost certainly reflects the explicit efforts of financial sector authorities and 
financial service providers (discussed in detail in chapter 14  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons  
All183 
19 3388
3030 2876130
61
38
121913 9179
100 
81 96 
ChinaBranches Agents ATMsFIGURE 3.1 Physical Access Points
Median number of access points per 100,000 adults
Source: IMF FA S 2016; WBG GPSS 2016; national authorities. 050100150200
G-20 HIC G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MICBenchmarking China’s Financial Inclusion Progress  15
4) and broader economic and demographic trends, 
including migration, urbanization, formal labor market 
participation, and the evolving role of technology in 
everyday life in China. 
Across G-20 countries, the average rate of ownership of 
store-of-value transaction accounts in 2014 fell just under 
that of China, at 76 percent, ranging from 36 percent in 
Indonesia to 99 percent in Australia, Canada, Germany, 
and the United Kingdom (figure 3.4). When considering 
that China’s GNI per capita is significantly lower than that 
of the G-20 average, China is clearly far ahead of its peers regarding this core metric of financial inclusion—a finding 
that is also apparent when China is compared with the 140 
countries for which Global Findex data are available (figure 
3.5). Among EAP L-MICs, the average ownership rate of store-of-value transaction accounts is 55 percent, and 
among other L-MICs, it is 42 percent.
However, despite the significant progress made in 
recent years, some Chinese adults still lack a basic finan-
cial instrument to make and receive payments and store 
value (as of 2014).
17 These adults are disproportionately 
poor and live in rural areas (figure 3.6). The rate of account Mobile phone in household Internet access in householdFIGURE 3.2 Remote Access Points
% adults (age 15+) re porting household-level access to mobile phone
or Inter net
China
Source: Gallup W orld Poll 2014.G-20 HIC G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MIC0%20%40%60%80%100%
29327797
91
8295
87
52
29
China G-20 HIC G-20 MICE AP L-MIC Other L-MICFIGURE 3.3 Ownership of Stor e-of-V alue T ransaction 
Accounts over Time
% adults (age 15+) r eporting ownership of a stor e-of-value 
transaction account
2011
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demir guc-Kunt and others 2015).
Note: V alues for other L-MICs do not include the Islamic Republic of Iran as 
2011 data for the country ar e unavailable. Including the Islamic Republic of 
Iran, the 2014 value for this gr oup is 42 per cent.2014
0%20%40%60%80%100%
6479 8088
4254 55
38
2847Pakistan
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Sudan
Peru
Vietnam
Bangladesh
Philippines
Indonesia
Colombia
Mexico
Tanzania
Uzbekistan
Nigeria
Argentina
Algeria
Ukraine
India
Turkey
Venezuela, RB
Russian Federation
Brazil
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Kenya
Thailand
China
Malaysia
Italy
Iran, Islamic Rep.
United States
Korea, Rep.
France
Japan
Germany
Australia
United Kingdom
Canada1314152931313136394041445050535357576768697075999999999797949492
87
817978
39FIGURE 3.4 Ownership of Stor e-of-V alue T ransaction Accounts acr oss Selected Countries
% adults (age 15+) re porting ownership of a stor e-of-value transaction account
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demir guc-Kunt and others 2015).
Note: Figur e includes countries fr om all comparison gr oups defined in table 3.1.16  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   16  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons  
ownership among rural residents in China is lower than 
the corresponding value for urban residents. Given that 
the Chinese population is overall considerably more rural 
than that of the average G-20 country, achieving rural-ur -
ban financial inclusion parity is a larger and more signifi-cant challenge in China than elsewhere. 
Ownership is of course distinct from usage. Eleven per -
cent of accountholders in China report not making any 
deposits or withdrawls from their account in the past year, 
similar to the average across G-20 countries. Account 
holders in China with a primary education or less and 
those in the bottom income quintile are significantly more 
likely to hold inactive accounts. Beyond ownership and use of store-of-value transac-
tion accounts, using digital instruments to transact is a key indicator of digital financial inclusion. Overall, 31 percent 
of Chinese adults report using a debit card, Internet plat-
form, or mobile platform to make payments in the past 
year (figure 3.7). While on par with the corresponding rate 
in G-20 MICs and above the rates of EAP L-MICs and 
other L-MICs, the prevalence of digital payments in China 
is lower than that of G-20 HICs. 
The popularity of e-commerce and social network–
based nonbank digital payment platforms have made 
Internet-facilitated payments and mobile phone pay-
ments (not mutually exclusive categories) relatively preva-FIGURE 3.5 Ownership of Stor e-of-V alue T ransaction Accounts Compar ed with GNI per Capita
% (age 15+) adults re porting ownership of a stor e-of-value transaction account
56100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
789China
10 11 12
Log GNI per capita (Atlas method US$)% of adults with store-of-value
transaction account
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demir guc-Kunt and others 2015); W orld Bank Development Indicators 2017. 
FIGURE 3.6 Stor e-of-V alue T ransaction Accounts in China, by Individual Characteristics
% adults (age 15+) re porting ownership of a stor e-of-value transaction account
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demirg uc-Kunt and others 2015).0% 20%Women
MenGender Urban/RuralEducation
levelIncome
distributionLower 40%
Upper 60%
Primary or less
Secondary or mor e
Rural
Urban
40% 60% 80% 100%76
73
7481
72
84
90
84Benchmarking China’s Financial Inclusion Progress  17
lent in China. Nineteen percent of Chinese adults report 
having made a payment over the Internet in the past year, 
while 14 percent report having made a payment from 
their account using a mobile phone. While the prevalence 
of Internet payments lags behind that of G-20 HICs, it  
far exceeds that of G-20 MICs, EAP L-MICs, and other L-MICs. With respect to mobile phone payments, Chinese 
adults are almost as likely as their G-20 HIC counterparts 
to report a mobile-based transaction (14 and 18 percent, 
respectively), though other L-MICs have also achieved 
similar rates in mobile-based transactions, primarily driven 
by successes in Kenya and similar branchless banking pio-
neers. In comparison to other G-20 countries, while indi-
viduals in China are relatively likely to own debit cards, 
they are less likely to use this particular payment instru-
ment, which may be partly due to the increasing preva-
lence of (and preference for) Internet- and mobile-based 
payments. Significant growth has likely occurred in the uptake and usage of digital financial instruments since the 
data was collected in 2014. 
Data on specific payment use cases provide further 
insight into the integration of digital payments into the 
financial lives of Chinese adults. For example, the vast 
majority of social transfer recipients in China report receiv-
ing these payments directly into an account (figure 3.8). 
Across the four comparison groups, approximately 12–20 
percent of adults report having received a social transfer 
payment from the government in the past year. In China, 
66 percent of these adults report that the payment was 
made into their account, below the G-20 average of 77 
percent but above the averages of EAP L-MICs and other 
L-MICs (41 percent and 64 percent, respectively). 
What are the main obstacles to full financial inclusion 
in China? Available data on barriers to account owner -ship provide some insight. As discussed previously, a 
portion of adults in China still lack a store-of-value trans-
action account, a basic and essential financial tool that 
addresses the need to make day-to-day payments and 
store value and can also open up access to other finan-
cial products and services. An adult may not be able to 
own, or may choose not to own, an account for several 
reasons. This analysis focuses on those reasons that 
public and private sector actions can help address: dis-
tance, cost, and documentation. Of adults without a 
transaction account in China, 19 percent report that they 
do not have an account because “financial institutions 
are too far away” (table 3.2). This may be related to the 
fact that while there are many agents and they provide 
convenient channels to use accounts for certain transac-
tions (e.g. consumption, cash withdrawals, and trans-
fers), they generally cannot be used to open accounts, 
make deposits, or conduct other types of transactions. Exclusion because of lack of physical access is reported 
at similar rates among the unbanked in G-20 and other FIGURE 3.7 Making Digital Payments
% adults (age 15+) reporting having made a digital payment in the past 12 months
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Any
ChinaDebit car d Internet payment Mobile payment
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demirg uc-Kunt and others 2015).G-20 HIC G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MIC1419456074
31 32
212624
1017 17
8 95 618 
515
TABLE 3.2 Obstacles to Account Ownership
% of adults (age 15+) without an account reporting obstacle to account ownership
 REPORTED OBSTACLES  
 (% OF ADULTS WITHOUT AN ACCOUNT) 
COUNTRY GROUPING DISTANCE COST DOCUMENTATION
China 19 10 10
G-20 HICs  4 13 13
G-20 MICs  28 33 28
EAP L-MICs  29 31 24
Other L-MICs  19 28 17
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demirguc-Kunt and others 2015).
18  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   18  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons  
L-MICs. Cost and documentation are less commonly 
cited as an obstacle in China, compared with both dis-
tance and with corresponding levels for these obstacles 
in other countries. 
3.3  SAVING AND BORROWING FOR 
INDIVIDUALS
Savings behavior is relatively prevalent among Chinese 
adults. Approximately 72 percent of Chinese adults report 
having saved or set aside money in the past year, signifi-
cantly more than adults in G-20 HICs and MICs but in line 
with the rate in EAP L-MICs (figure 3.9). Most savers in 
China use formal financial institutions to do so, a pattern 
that distinguishes China from EAP L-MICs and is likely 
related to the high ownership rate of accounts. Current 
data do not indicate whether these savings accounts are 
linked to digital platforms (e.g., mobile apps and nonbank 
digital payment platforms) that would facilitate conve-
nient deposit and withdrawal. 
However, 31 percent of adults in China report saving, 
but not at a formal financial institution. Formalizing the 
“hidden” savings of these informal savers remains a signif-
icant opportunity for the financial sector and may also 
indicate the need to develop simple, accessible, and low-
cost savings products, particularly for individuals with low and irregular incomes. 
Saving for old age is the most commonly reported rea-
son for saving, reported by 39 percent of Chinese adults, 
followed closely by saving for education or school fees (30 
percent) and saving to start, operate, or expand a busi-
ness (22 percent).Chinese adults are as likely as adults in G-20 HICs to 
report having borrowed in the past year, but are signifi-cantly less likely to report having done so from a regulated 
financial institution. Overall, 36 percent of adults in China 
reported borrowing money in the past year, with less than 
a third of those adults (i.e., 10 percent of all adults) having 
reported borrowing from a regulated financial institution 
(figure 3.10). Among rural residents and adults in the bot-
tom 40 percent of income distribution in China, formal 
borrowing is even less common: just 6–7 percent of these individuals reported borrowing from a regulated financial 
institution, despite no difference between these groups 
and the population as a whole with respect to overall bor -
rowing prevalence. 
Credit cards represent a significant source of short-
term credit for adults in China. Sixteen percent of adults report owning a credit card, and 14 percent report hav-
ing used a credit card in the past year. Ownership and 
use of credit cards is higher in G-20 countries, at 37 and 
32 percent respectively. However, credit cards do not 
appear to be a widely used financial tool among rural 
residents and the poor in China. Just 4 percent of adults 
in the bottom 40 percent of the income quintile and 6 
percent of rural residents report having used a credit 
card in the past year. 
Existing demand-side date may not capture either 
peer-to-peer (P2P) borrowing or borrowing from family or friends, given that respondents likely do not consider 
such form of borrowing to be from a regulated financial 
service provider. Certain forms of short-term digital 
credit may also not be included. These gaps highlight 
the need for continued development in the measure-
ment of financial inclusion to cover evolving models and 
ensure comprehensive data.FIGURE 3.8 Digital Payments Use Cases
% adults (age 15+) reporting use of digital payment instrument, of those who re port undertaking each activity
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Receiving gover nment
transfers
ChinaSending domestic
remittancesReceiving domestic
remittancesReceiving agricultural
paymentsPaying utility
bills
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demirg uc-Kunt and others 2015).G-20 HIC G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MIC132643
3654
49
43
313484
66
60
4164
2723
1969
16
718
6 46Benchmarking China’s Financial Inclusion Progress  19
0%20%40%60%80%100%FIGURE 3.9 Saving
% adults (age 15+) saving in the past 12 months
Any savings
ChinaAt a re gulated
financial institutionFor education/
school feesTo start, operate,
expand businessFor old age
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demirg uc-Kunt and others 2015).G-20 HIC G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MIC72
6473
4441
303739
33
1540
10 91117132217212144
26
131850
0%20%40%60%80%100%FIGURE 3.10 Borr owing
% adults (age 15+) borr owing in the past 12 months
Any borr owing
ChinaFrom a r egulated
financial institutionFrom family/friend sT o start, operate,
expand businessFor health/medical
purposes
Source: Global Findex 2014 (Demirg uc-Kunt and others 2015).G-20 HIC G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MIC36385256
42
101216
92534
16131073771637
27
16
8517
3.4 INSURANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS
Global data on individual and household uptake of insur -
ance products are limited, thus preventing comprehensive 
benchmarking of the inclusiveness of China’s insurance 
market. National insurance data do exist, however, and the 
2015 CHFS provides valuable context for the insurance 
aspects of chapter 4. The CHFS data indicate that approx-
imately 87 percent of working age (21 or older) and retired 
adults in China are covered by social health insurance, a 
category that includes various insurance programs like 
basic medical insurance for urban workers, new rural coop-
erative medical insurance, student health insurance, etc., 
but does not include commercial health insurance. Among adults living in rural areas, social health insurance cover -
age reaches 91 percent. 
As of 2015, approximately 7 percent of all Chinese 
individuals (all ages) purchased or were covered by non-
vehicle commercial insurance, which includes business 
life insurance (covering 4 percent of Chinese individuals), 
commercial health insurance (2 percent), and other com-
mercial insurance (1 percent). 
Among households that report owning a vehicle (in-  
cluding cars, trucks, motorcycles, etc.), 95 percent report having vehicle insurance, though this varies between 91 
percent among rural households and 97 percent among 
nonrural households. The most commonly reported 
forms of vehicle insurance are traffic insurance (reported 20  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   20  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons  
by 72 percent of vehicle-owning households), third-party 
liability insurance (47 percent), and loss of vehicle insur -
ance (33 percent).
3.5 ACCESS TO FINANCE FOR FIRMS
Firm-level access to credit is a policy priority in China. This analysis draws on recent data from the WBG’s Enter -
prise Surveys (World Bank 2017(a)), a cross-country data-base of firm-level data collected from firms with five or 
more employees. Firms are segmented into three size 
categories: 
1) Small, defined as firms with 5–19 employees; 
2) Medium, defined as firms with 20–99 employees; and
3) Large, defined as firms with 100 or more employees. 
The analysis uses data collected between 2012 and 2016, 
varying across countries. The data on Chinese firms were 
collected in 2012 and must therefore be interpreted in this 
context. Due to limited data availability, no G-20 HIC 
grouping is used and the sample of countries included in 
the remaining categories are defined in the notes below 
each figure. 
At the basic level of access to payment and savings 
services, account ownership is nearly universal in China, with more than 96 percent of firms reporting owning a 
checking or savings account (figure 3.11). Even among the 
subsample of small firms in China, 95 percent of respon-
dents report owning an account. This compares favorably 
with G-20 MICs, where account ownership among firms is 
considerably lower, on average. Approximately 25 percent of Chinese firms report hav-
ing a loan or line of credit, though the percentage varies 
significantly from 14 percent among small firms, to 35 per -
cent among medium firms, to 51 percent among large firms (figure 3.12). Indeed, while the average prevalence 
of loans among Chinese firms is on par with that in other 
G-20 MICs and above that of other L-MICs, significantly 
more variation exists in access to finance across firm size 
in China. The result is that while large and medium firms in 
China are more likely than large and medium firms in 
other country groups to have a loan or line of credit, small 
firms in China are far less likely than their counterparts in 
G-20 MICs and EAP L-MICs to report the same.
Among firms that report not having applied for a loan or 
line of credit in the past year, the most common reason is 
“no need for a loan—establishment has sufficient capital” (reported by 57 percent of firms that have not applied for a 
loan), followed by “collateral requirements were too high” 
(10 percent), and “application procedures were complex” 
(10 percent) (figure 3.13). Between 5 and 10 percent of 
firms that did not apply for a loan or line of credit in the past 
year report the following reasons: “interest rates were not 
favorable,” “did not think it would be approved,” and “size 
and maturity of loan not sufficient.” Relatively little variation 
exists across firm size categories in these responses, though 
small and medium firms are significantly less likely to report 
“no need for a loan.” Compared with other country group-
ings, small and medium Chinese firms are less likely to 
avoid applying for loans due to interest rates and more 
likely to cite high collateral requirements as an obstacle. 
Measuring and defining the degree to which a firm is 
credit constrained can be done in many ways. One method, 
developed by WBG researchers in the Enterprise Survey 
0%20%40%60%80%100%FIGURE 3.11 Account Ownership among Firms
% firms with an account at a bank 
Source: WBG Enterprise Surveys 2012–2016.
Note: Countries with available Enterprise Survey data since 2012 include Bangladesh (2013); China (2012); Egypt, Arab Rep. (2013); India 
(2014); Kenya (2013); Malaysia (2015); Nigeria (2014); Pakistan (2013); Phili ppines (2015); Sudan (2014); Thailand (2016); and Tu rkey (2013).All Large fir ms Medium fir ms Small fir ms9699 97
8183
7274 7472
68 69 6995
7773
69
G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MIC ChinaBenchmarking China’s Financial Inclusion Progress  21
FIGURE 3.13 Reasons for Not Applying for a Loan or Line of Cr edit
% firms responding af firmatively to each re ason   
Source: WBG Enterprise Surveys 2012–2016. 
Note: Countries with available Enterprise Survey data since 2012 include Bangladesh (2013); China (2012); Egypt, Arab Rep. 
(2013); India (2014); Kenya (2013); Malaysia (2015); Nigeria (2014); Pakistan (2013); Philippines (2015); Sudan (2014); Thailan d 
(2016); and T urkey (2013). No need
Complex application pr ocedur es
Interest rates not favorable
Collateral re quirements too highSize of loan and maturity insuf ficient
Didn’ t think it would be appr oved
Other0% 20%4 0% 60% 80% 100%Small
Medium
Large
Small
Medium
Large
Small
Medium
Large
Small
Medium
LargeOther L-MIC China EAP L-MIC G-20 MIC
6754575353575466666666 75
55
55
5
5
515
15
147
7
78
87
15 766
66510
12
1110
10
10 106
67
8
886
9
9
3
7
5
10 10
1111
81 27 333 34
4
4
4
4468G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MICFIGURE 3.12 Access to Finance for Firms
% firms with loan or line of credit  
Source: WBG Enterprise Surveys 2012–2016.
Note: Countries with available Enterprise Survey data since 2012 include Bangladesh (2013); China (2012); Egypt, Arab Rep. (2013); 
India (2014); Kenya (2013); Malaysia (2015); Nigeria (2014); Pakistan (2013); Philippines (2015); Sudan (2014); Thailand (2016); and Turkey (2013).All Large firms Medium firms Small firms25263251
253335
2533
11141132
27
1311
0%20%40%60%80%100%
China22  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   22  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons  
FIGURE 3.14 Cr edit-Constrained Status of Chinese Firms
% firms corr esponding to each category   
Source: Kuntchev and others 2014.
Note: Countries with available Enterprise Survey data since 2012 include 
Bangladesh (2013); China (2012); Egypt, Arab Rep. (2013); India (2014); Kenya 
(2013); Malaysia (2015); Nigeria (2014); Pakistan (2013); Philippines (2015); Sudan 
(2014); Thailand (2016); and T urkey (2013). Fully cr edit constrained
Maybe cr edit constrained
Partially cr edit constrained
Not cr edit constrained29
1846
7finance is an obstacle to their operations and growth. 
Indeed, Chinese firms report access to finance as their big-
gest business environment obstacle. The Enterprise Survey 
questionnaire asks responding firms to rank their biggest 
business environment obstacles from a list of options. 
Approximately 22 percent of Chinese firms report that 
access to finance is their biggest obstacle, more than the 
informal sector (20 percent), tax rates (15 percent), and 
poorly educated workers (13 percent) (figure 3.15). Rela-
tively little variation exists across firm size categories in 
reporting access to finance as the biggest obstacle. Chi-
nese firms are far more likely than their counterparts in 
other country groupings to report access to finance as the 
biggest constaint. Between 9 and 12 percent of firms in 
G-20 MICs, EAP L-MICs, and other L-MICs report the same.
Approximately 78 percent of Chinese firms report that 
their most recent loan or line of credit required collateral. 
This is on par with what is observed in other country groupings. 
The survey data reveal that Chinese firms primarly fund 
investments (e.g., fixed assets such as machinery, vehicles, 
land, buildings, etc.) through internal financing (figure 
3.16). On average, firms in China finance 90 percent of 
their investments using internal sources of finance (e.g., 
retained earnings). Relatively little variation in this indica-
tor is observed across firm size. Fifteen percent of firms in 
China report using banks to finance investments, and 
bank financing accounts for approximately 5 percent of 
funding for investments. Among small firms, just 4 percent 
use banks to finance investments, and bank financing 
accounts for less than 1 percent of funding for invest-
ments. Across all firm size categories, Chinese firms are 
less likely than their counterparts in G-20 MICs and EAP 
L-MICs to use banks to finance investments. 
G-20 MIC EAP L-MIC Other L-MICFIGURE 3.15 Access to Finance as Biggest Obstacle 
% firms (>5 employees) reporting that access to finance is their biggest business environment obstacle  
Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys 2012–2016.
Note: Countries with available Enterprise Survey data since 2012 include Bangladesh (2013); China (2012); Egypt, Arab Rep. 
(2013); India (2014); Kenya (2013); Malaysia (2015); Nigeria (2014); Pakistan (2013); Philippines (2015); Sudan (2014); Thailand (2016); and Turkey (2013).All Large firms Medium firms Small firms 0%20%40%60%80%100%
22
10 9132025
8131178 7151122
6
ChinaUnit, establishes four categories—“not credit constrained,” 
“maybe credit constrained,” “partially credit constrained,” 
and “fully credit constrained”—and categorizes respond-
ing firms based on responses to questions including 
whether or not the firm has any source of external finance, 
whether or not the firm has applied for a loan or line of 
credit, whether or not the firm was granted financing, and 
why the firm chose not to apply for a loan or line of credit. 
The analysis finds that 29 percent of Chinese firms are fully 
credit constrained, 7 percent are partially credit con-
strained, 18 percent are maybe credit constrained, and 46 
percent are not credit constrained (figure 3.14).18
Another method to assess the degree to which firms are 
credit constrained is to ask firms directly whether access to Benchmarking China’s Financial Inclusion Progress  23
NOTES
 13.  PBOC reports 983,400 “rural cash withdrawal points” (i.e., agents) in China at end of 2016.
 14.  IMF FAS 2016, GPSS 2016, and author calculations.
 15.  Gallup World Poll 2014. 
 16.  From the supply-side perspective, PBOC also reports more than 6.5 billion accounts in China, which translates to more than one 
account per individual when compared with China’s overall population. However, the analysis in this chapter utilizes demand-side 
data such as Global Findex, as demand-side data can more accurately account for the prevalence of dormant accounts and the 
fact that many individuals own multiple accounts, which is of greater relevance for assessing financial inclusion at the individual level.
 17.  According to Global Findex 2014 data, 21 percent of Chinese adults do not own a store-of-value transaction account.
 18.  See “What Have We Learned from the Enterprise Surveys Regarding Access to Credit by SMEs?” at https://www.enterprisesur -
veys.org/~/media/GIAWB/EnterpriseSurveys/Documents/ResearchPapers/Enterprise-Surveys-access-to-finance-and-SME.pdf.
. 0%20%40%60%80%100%FIGURE 3.16 Use of Banks to Finance Investment
% firm s using banks to finance investments, among fir ms having made investments in the past year 
Source: W orld Bank Enterprise Surveys 2012–2016.
Note: Countries with available Enterprise Survey data since 2012 include Bangladesh (2013); China (2012); Egypt, Arab Rep. (2013); 
India (2014); Kenya (2013); Malaysia (2015); Nigeria (2014); Pakistan (2013); Philippines (2015); Sudan (2014); Thailand (2016); and Turkey (2013).All Large fir ms Medium fir ms Small fir ms33
202327 283335
14 151326
13
4935
28
G-20 MIC
EAP L-MIC Other L-MIC ChinaCHINA’S FINANCIAL INCLUSION EXPERIENCE
China’s financial inclusion experience has evolved through 
many phases. Expanding access to financial services first 
became an explicit policy priority in the early 1950s with 
the establishment of rural credit cooperatives (RCCs). 
While the full scope and impact of marketization and pri-
vatization on the financial sector in the decades that fol-
lowed are outside the purview of this report, this evolution 
is important context for understanding China’s financial 
inclusion experience since 2000. By the early 2000s, the 
impacts of marketization and financial sector reforms had 
led to the closure of tens of thousands of financial service 
providers in rural areas, leaving RCCs and the postal sav-
ings system as the primary providers of financial services 
for rural residents.19 As of 2005, there was just one depos-
it-taking institution at or below the county level for every 
20 villages.20,21 Compounding the relative lack of access to 
financial products and services were RCCs’ limited capacity to meet rural households’ financial needs (due in part to a 
legacy of high levels of nonperforming loans [NPLs]) and 
the postal savings system’s limited range of product offer -
ings (primarily money transfer services and savings accounts). Banks, for their part, focused mainly on lending 
to state-owned enterprises, leaving a vast informal credit 
market and significant market gaps for underserved indi-
viduals and firms.
22  
In the early 2000s, Chinese financial sector authorities 
turned their attention to improving the banking system’s commercial viability and leveraging the financial system 
to support the national goals of social harmony and sus-
tainable development.
23 In line with the latter objective, 
financial inclusion policy objectives focused on three 
main areas: (1) universal access to basic banking services 
(i.e., bank accounts and payment services), (2) productive 
credit for rural households, and (3) bank credit for micro 
and small enterprises (MSEs). In pursuing these objec-tives over the last 15 years, China’s financial inclusion 
experience has features in common with other coun-
tries—including the use of agents and the establishment 
of new institutional types meant to serve underserved 
populations—as well as characteristics that are unique to 
China, such as the significant role of development-ori-
ented financial service providers and policy banks and 
the proliferation of nonbank digital payment platforms 
linked to e-commerce and social networks.
This chapter provides a targeted summary of China’s 
financial inclusion experience in recent years. It is not 
meant to be comprehensive, but rather focuses on key 
developments, particularly those that may be relevant or interesting to other countries. The first three sections of 
this chapter are roughly organized by categories of finan-
cial service providers and the role of each in contributing 
to financial inclusion. 
• Section 4.1 addresses “traditional” financial service 
providers, including state-owned commercial banks 
(e.g., Postal Savings Bank of China [PSBC] and Agricul-
tural Bank of China [ABC]), joint-stock commercial banks and city commercial banks, rural commercial 
banks (RCOMBs), rural cooperative banks (RCOPBs), 
and RCCs. 
• Section 4.2 covers “new-type” providers such as vil-
lage and township banks (VTBs) and microcredit com-
panies (MCCs). 
• Section 4.3 addresses fintech companies, including nonbank digital payment providers, peer-to-peer (P2P) 
lending platforms, Internet-based microlenders, Inter -
net banks, Internet-based insurance, Internet-based fund management, and Internet equity-based crowd-
funding. 4
  25
26  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
• Finally, section 4.4 focuses on the role of the Chinese 
government in promoting financial inclusion, including 
via fiscal and monetary policies, financial infrastructure, 
development-oriented and policy banks, and financial 
consumer protection. 
Table 4.1 provides an overview of these different pro-
viders. 
4.1  THE ROLE OF TRADITIONAL FINANCIAL 
SERVICE PROVIDERS IN FINANCIAL INCLUSION
Traditional financial service providers have played a criti-
cal role in expanding financial inclusion in China. With pol-
icy guidance from the Chinese government, traditional 
financial service providers have significantly expanded the 
physical reach of their service networks, modernized Chi-
na’s payments infrastructure, and innovated at the product 
level, including through partnerships with fintech compa-
nies. The result has been a significant increase in product 
uptake and usage, most notably for bank accounts and 
bank cards. 
4.1.1  Improving Accessibility by Expanding the 
Physical Reach of Service Outlets
As discussed in chapter 2, accessibility is a core element 
and driver of financial inclusion. As in many countries, tra-
ditional financial service providers in China have histori-
cally been characterized by limited and uneven geographic 
coverage. Yet in recent years, government policies, 
increased competition, and business opportunities have 
motivated financial service providers to expand the physi-cal reach of their service networks into remote and rural areas by establishing special sub-branches, agents, mobile 
branches, and self-service outlets. In 2007, CBRC launched 
the China Rural Banking Services Distribution Map on its 
website, emphasizing its policy objective of increasing the 
physical reach of the financial sector.
Government authorities have actively promoted the 
expansion of basic financial coverage. In 2014, the CBRC 
issued the Guidelines on Promoting Village-Level Cover -
age of Basic Financial Services, which stated an overall target of achieving coverage of basic financial services in all villages in three to five years. Local governments at all 
levels have also taken active measures to support further 
expansion of basic financial services. These measures 
vary in form, but many relate to subsidies, tax deductions 
and exemptions, risk compensation, guarantee mecha-
nisms, and adapted branch security requirements. For 
example, the finance department of Fengdu County in 
Chongqing gives a subsidy of RMB 20,000 (US$3,000) to 
each bank outlet newly established with deposit, with-
drawal, and lending functions in villages or towns. 
In addition, increased per capita income in rural areas 
and improvements in physical and financial infrastructure, 
combined with strong competition among financial ser -
vice providers in urban areas, have incentivized many financial service providers to develop new customer 
bases and take advantage of untapped business oppor -
tunities in rural and remote areas. Table 4.2 shows that 
automated teller machine (ATM) and point-of-sale (POS) 
infrastructure has increased rapidly in recent years, with 
approximately 924,000 ATMs as of 2016 (37 percent of 
which are located in rural areas) and approximately 
24,535,000 POS terminals as of 2016 (28 percent of 
which are located in rural areas). The absolute numbers of TABLE 4.1 Overview of Select Financial Service Providers in China 
  TOTAL ASSETS  
CATEGORY OF FINANCIAL  # OF  (BILLION RMB TOTAL # OF  
SERVICE PROVIDER  PROVIDERS [BILLION US$])  BRANCHES REGULATOR
State-owned commercial banks 5 86,598 (12,990) 68,953 CBRC
Joint-stock commercial banks 12 43,473 (6,521) 15,366 CBRC
City commercial banks 134 28,238 (4,236) 16,156 CBRC
Rural Commercial Banks (RCOMBs) 1,114 20,268 (3,040) 49,307 CBRC
Rural Cooperative Banks (RCOPBs) 40 436 (65) 1,381 CBRC
Rural Credit Cooperatives (RCCs)  1,125  7,950 (1,193) 28,285 CBRC
Insurance companies 203  15,120 (2,268) —  CIRC
Village and Townships Banks (VTBs) 1,443 1,238 (186) —  CBRC
Microcredit companies (MCCs) 8,673 — — Local government
Nonbank digital payment providers 266 — — PBOC
P2P lending platforms 3,709 — — CBRC 
Source: CBRC, CIRC and PBOC. Data is of 2016. “Branches” includes special branches, but does not include agent-based service points. China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   27
ATMs and POS terminals in rural areas have increased in 
recent years (although the total share of ATMs and POS 
terminals in rural areas has decreased due to relatively 
greater increases in absolute numbers in urban areas).
Special Sub-Branches of Commercial Banks
Since 2013, CBRC has actively encouraged small- and 
medium-sized commercial banks to open simplified or 
“special” sub-branches. Such sub-branches benefit from 
lighter licensing requirements and approval processes. 
Establishing special sub-branches allows these banks to 
achieve a more geographically diverse range of opera-
tions and provide professional and accessible financial 
services to underserved communities and MSEs.
The two types of special sub-branches are (1) commu-
nity sub-branches and (2) small and micro sub-branches. 
Community sub-branches provide services to customers 
through a “self-service + consulting” model. The main activities of community sub-branches are to accept 
deposits and sell financial products, including microloans 
in some sub-branches. Usually, community sub-branches 
are equipped with ATMs or CRS (cash recycling systems, 
which are similar to ATMs but also facilitate cash deposits 
and other financial transactions). Normally, a community 
sub-branch has two to three employees to provide coun-
seling, product marketing, and other services. 
Small and micro sub-branches are similar to commu-
nity sub-branches, but focus on providing basic financial 
services to MSEs. These sub-branches tend to be located 
in industrial parks. Special sub-branches are also able to 
offer flexible hours that align with the operating hours 
and shift schedules of workers within the industrial clus-
ters they serve.
In recent years, commercial banks have actively estab-
lished many community sub-branches and small and micro sub-branches. China Minsheng Bank, Shanghai 
Pudong Development Bank, and the Bank of Communi-
cations, among others, have received licenses to estab-
lish special sub-branches. Regulatory authorities formally approved the first batch of community sub-branch licenses in 2014. By the end of 2015, more than 5,000 
community and small and micro sub-branches had been 
established. Site selection of special sub-branches typi-
cally avoids highly centralized areas such as city centers 
and actively targets the extension of banking services to 
the county, town, and village level. For example, in Zheji-
ang Province, approximately 48 percent of community 
sub-branches are located in towns and approximately 22 percent in villages. Small- and medium-sized commercial 
banks, especially city commercial banks, have leveraged 
sub-branches to shorten the geographic distance to cus-
tomers. Some city commercial banks have established 
sub-branches in peri-urban areas and urban villages to 
further expand into underserved markets. Table 4.3 pro-
vides an overview of community sub-branches and small 
and micro sub-branches. 
From the perspective of commercial banks, network 
expansion through special sub-branches has many 
advantages. Special sub-branches attract new clientele in 
underserved areas where rent and operating costs are 
often relatively low. From the perspective of regulatory 
authorities, establishing special sub-branches helps to 
promote the development of financial inclusion and 
improve vulnerable groups’ access to financial services. TABLE 4.2 ATMs and POS Terminals
  NUMBER OF ATMS (THOUSANDS) NUMBER OF POS (THOUSANDS)
 YEAR NATIONWIDE % IN RURAL AREAS NATIONWIDE % IN RURAL AREAS
2011 334 41% 4,827 60%
2012 416 43% 7,118 56%
2013 520 39% 10,632 42%
2014 615 41% 15,935 33%
2015 867 36% 22,821 28%
2016 924 37% 24,535 28%
Source: PBOC, 2016. 
TABLE 4.3 Community Sub-Branches and Small and Micro Sub-Branches of Commercial Banks 
 COMMUNITY SUB-BRANCH SMALL AND MICRO SUB-BRANCH 
Location Residential areas at county, town, and  Clusters of MSEs  
 village levels 
Target segment Provide community residents with basic  Provide MSEs with basic financial services  
 financial services 
Business scope Provide basic financial services like  Provide basic financial services like savings,  
 savings, payments, financial management,  payments, financial management, buying  
 buying national debt, etc.  national debt, etc.; lending up to cap (see below)
Restricted activities No manual cash business   No manual cash business; single-entity maximum 
line of credit of RMB 5 million (US$750,000)
Source: CBRC. 28  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
Specialized sub-branches are helpful in meeting the 
unique needs of their customers. A key objective of 
community sub-branches is to meet the financial needs 
of middle-aged and older customers, who often have 
low financial capability and familiarity with digital 
finance. Such customers prefer to have financial trans-
actions conducted tangibly and in person, within their 
community. The flexible hours of special sub-branches 
provide an additional convenience. Small and micro 
sub-branches can leverage their knowledge of specific 
industry segments to offer more tailored financial prod-
ucts and services to meet the needs of their MSE cus-
tomers, including innovations related to supply chain 
financing. 
However, at present, community sub-branches and 
small and micro sub-branches face several challenges, 
including limited independence from their parent 
branches, a narrow range of product and service offer -
ings, and difficulties in achieving profitability. To be sus-
tainable, such sub-branches must clearly define and 
leverage their unique market position, improve opera-
tional models, improve managerial practices, and pro-
vide more tailored and adapted products to meet the 
financial needs of MSEs and residents in rural and urban 
communities.Agent-Based Models for Cash Withdrawal Services in 
Rural Areas 
In recent years, China has issued and implemented vari-
ous subsidies and programs for rural and agricultural 
households, such as subsidies supporting agricultural 
activities, new rural social endowment insurance, and new 
rural cooperative medical insurance. According to the 
2013 China Household Finance Survey (CHFS), approxi-
mately 40 percent of all households and 68 percent of 
rural households report having received some form of 
subsidy or grant payment from the government in the 
past year.24 However, many subsidy recipients living in 
remote areas historically had limited access to basic finan-cial services, requiring an expensive and inefficient distri-
bution system of cash payments. To address this problem, 
as well as to achieve the broader goal of improving finan-cial access, the PBOC launched a pilot program in 2010 
to test cash withdrawal services for rural residents via an 
agent-based model using debit cards linked to bank 
accounts. These pilots were initially undertaken in part-
nership with ABC, PSBC, and other financial service pro-
viders in select towns in Chongqing, Shandong, Zhejiang, 
Hunan, and Shaanxi (see box 4.1). 
In 2011, the PBOC-issued Notice on Promoting Bank-
card Withdrawal Services for Rural Residents established 
PSBC has positioned itself to serve sannong (the agricultural 
sector, farmers, and rural areas), MSEs, and small communities 
since its establishment in 2007. Thanks to its extensive physical 
network, PSBC now has more than 40,000 access points all 
over the country covering 98 percent of counties nationwide 
and with 71 percent of outlets located in counties and sub-
county areas. This makes PSBC the most broadly represented 
financial service provider in rural China. 
Increasing financial inclusion in rural areas has been an inte-
gral part of PSBC’s strategy. In response to the PBOC’s policy, 
PSBC began deploying agent-based service points in 2010, 
which became part of its “village service point—town out-
lets—county-level branch” strategy. By the end of February 
2016, PSBC had established 21,888 access points in the cen-
tral and western regions of China (comprising 54.6 percent of 
all PSBC access points), and had set up nearly 152,000 agent-
based service points nationwide. The transaction volume and 
turnover of PSBC agent-based service points are among the largest nationwide. BOX 4.1 
Postal Savings Bank of China: Agent-Based Service Points Help Reach the “Last Mile” 
In addition to financial accessibility, PSBC also strives to 
make agent services safer, more reliable, efficient, and adapted 
to rural consumers’ diverse needs. For example, “shangyitong” 
(easy commerce settlement) machines (similar to POS termi-
nals) were developed to facilitate rural agent transactions and 
improve settlement.29 PSBC has also attempted to diversify 
transactions at service points beyond cash withdrawals and 
balance inquiries. A broader range of services are now avail-
able in pilot areas, such as minimum livelihoods guarantee pay-
ments, grain subsidies, rural medical insurance subsidies, utility 
payments, remittances, e-commerce services, loan applica-
tions, and investment counseling. To ensure operational and 
transaction security, agent screening and selection are con-
ducted in a strict manner. Selected agents are usually affiliated 
with reputable and credible merchants or stores, and business 
operation and risk prevention trainings are required. PSBC also 
conducts onsite and offsite inspections and monitoring of 
agents. In cases of operational abnormalities, customer service 
managers are informed for further investigation.
Source: PSBC.China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   29
the policy objective of scaling up initial pilots such that by 
the end of 2013, agent-based service points for cash 
withdrawal would cover nearly all rural towns in China. 
The notice prohibited agent-based service points from 
accepting deposits and stipulated a daily cash withdrawal 
limit of RMB 1,000 (US$150) per card. In 2014, via the 
Guiding Opinions on Promoting the Development of 
Rural Payment Service Environment, PBOC removed 
restrictions on providing remittance and bill payment ser -
vices via agent-based service points, subject to applica-tions from acquirers. The withdrawal limit was also raised 
to RMB 2,000 (US$300), but discretion was given to 
PBOC branches at the sub-province level and above to 
adjust these limits. Currently, agent-based service points 
can also provide person-to-person transfers. 
By the end of 2016, the number of agent-based ser -
vice points across China had reached 983,400, covering 
more than 90 percent of administrative villages and aver -
aging 1.8 service points per administrative village. Agent-
based service points have been established by financial 
service providers (since expanded beyond ABC and 
PSBC to include local banks, RCCs, and nonbank digital 
payment providers with a “bank card acquirer” license) in 
towns and villages and equipped with POS terminals and 
other tools. Approximately 2 percent of service points 
have been established by nonbank digital payment pro-
viders (e.g., Alipay and Tenpay). 
Agent-based service points are typically located in 
local retail stores and commune offices, though the 
breakdown varies significantly across and within prov-
inces. For example, among the more than 2,800 service 
points in the rural areas of Ningbo in Zhejiang province as 
of mid-2017, approximately 41 percent of service points 
are located in retail locations, 27 percent in post offices, 
and 20 percent in commune offices (figure 4.1). Among the nearly 5,000 service points in Qinghai province as of 
mid-2017, approximately 82 percent are located in retail 
locations, 11 percent in public clinics, and 4 percent in 
commune offices. 
To promote electronic payment and e-commerce in 
rural areas, some provinces have made efforts to encour -
age resource sharing between agent-based service points and e-commerce outlets in rural areas. For exam-
ple, some agent-based service points and e-commerce 
outlets (e.g., a retail store or household that facilitates the 
sale of goods on the Taobao e-commerce platform for 
the village) are integrated or share common information 
technology and human resources. 
In 2016, agent-based service points conducted a total 
of 495 million payment transactions totaling RMB 424.78 
billion (US$63.72 billion), representing year-on-year 
growth rates of 14 percent and 6 percent, respectively. Cash withdrawal services account for 52 percent of all 
transactions, but represent only 30 percent of the total transaction value; the average amount of a cash with-
drawal is RMB 493 (about US$74) (figure 4.2). Transfers 
and remittances constitute 27 percent of all transactions 
but represent 68 percent of the total transaction value; 
the average amount of a transaction is RMB 2,131 (about 
US$320). Finally, bill payments account for 21 percent of 
all transactions but represent just 3 percent of the total 
transaction value; the average bill payment amount is RMB 105 (about US$16).
25 
As in many countries with large agent networks, a sig-
nificant share of service points in China have low levels of 
FIGURE 4.1 Locations of Agent-Based Service Points
% of service points in each ar ea by location type   
Source: PBOC.Retail locations
Post of fices
Commune of fices
OthersNingbo (Zhejiang Pr ovince) Qinghai Pr ovince
Retail locationsPublic clinicsCommune of fices
Others41% 20%12%
27%82%3%
11%4%
FIGURE 4.2 T ransactions via Agent-Based Service Points
% shar e of transactions by number and value   
Source: PBOC.Cash withdrawalsTransfers/r emittances
Bill paymentsNumber of T ransactions Value of T ransactions
Cash withdrawalsTransfers/r emittances
Bill payments20%52%
27%21%
30%3%
68%30  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
activity. Though no national, comprehensive data exist on 
agent activity levels, data from select areas illustrate this 
trend: among the more than 2,800 service points in the 
rural areas of Ningbo in Zhejiang province, 57 percent 
had a monthly average of more than 30 transactions, 14 
percent had a monthly average of 3–30 transactions, and 
29 percent had a monthly average of 0–2 transactions as 
of mid-2017.26 Low activity of some service points may be 
driven by consumers substituting with online channels 
and declining population in rural areas.
The agent-based service point model in rural areas 
was established to create a mutually beneficial situation 
for all participants and stakeholders, including consum-
ers, financial service providers, merchants, the govern-
ment, and so on. First, the model allows consumers the 
convenience of withdrawals, transfers, and bill payments 
without having to leave their villages, thus eliminating 
direct and indirect costs associated with transportation to 
branches and other outlets. Second, the model comple-
ments the existing retail business model of merchants 
operating such points, providing them with additional 
income sources and higher foot traffic for cross-sales. 
Third, financial service providers (mostly local small- and 
medium-sized banks and RCCs) can achieve market 
expansion in rural areas through transactional services and enhance brand awareness and loyalty with rural resi-
dents. Moreover, they can more accurately understand 
rural consumers’ transaction behaviors, providing infor -
mation to support business development. Fourth, national and local government bodies that provide subsi-
dies supporting agriculture, rural social endowment 
insurance, and rural cooperative medical insurance have 
a means to disburse such subsidies more efficiently and 
cost-effectively. Such subsidies usually occur in small 
amounts and large frequencies, involving multiple links 
and high costs when released in cash. To simplify these 
transactions and reduce these costs, the PBOC and rele-
vant departments encourage local governments to pro-
vide subsidies to financial service providers for installing 
POS terminals, given the long-term cost savings for all 
involved. Fifth, agent-based service points can be lever -
aged to disseminate financial knowledge and carry out 
financial education of rural consumers. 
Since 2010, China has learned important lessons from 
both the success and challenges of developing the agent-
based service point model. One important lesson and 
ongoing challenge is the need to ensure the model’s sus-
tainability. At present, service fees charged by agents are 
capped by regulation, which in practice often means that 
an agent cannot cover his or her operational costs through 
cash withdrawal services only. Expanding to additional 
permissible services such as transfers and remittances and 
bill payments may partially address this issue. Strategic 
efforts will need to be undertaken to better cover opera-tional costs, improve efficiency, and promote the sustain-
able development of agent-based service points. Financial 
sector authorities will need to consider whether further 
expanding agent functionality (e.g., to include cash-in 
transactions) is an effective way to further strengthen the 
viability of the business model. 
Balancing interoperability and investment incentives is 
also a challenge for government authorities. To increase convenience and utility for rural residents, PBOC has 
developed the financial infrastructure for interbank clear -
ing in rural areas, lowered the cost of interbank clearing, and encouraged acquirers to accept debit cards issued by 
other institutions. However, acquirers can be resistant to 
such requests, as their aim is to expand their market share 
in rural areas via agent-based service points. If govern-
ment authorities require acquirers to provide interbank 
services, the latter’s enthusiasm for installing the equip-
ment necessary to further expand such points may be 
compromised to a certain degree. To address this issue, 
local PBOC branches would, in the initial phases of devel-
oping the service point network, sometimes gave acquir -
ers a temporary period during which POS terminals could be made exclusive to the respective acquirer.
27 More 
recently, the typical approach has been to allow acquirers 
to charge a small interchange fee to customers using a 
debit card from a different financial service provider. 
Another important lesson is the need to strengthen 
supervision to monitor and manage risks. The agent-
based service model, which outsources part of the cash 
business of traditional banking outlets to agent-based ser -
vice points, represents a delivery channel and business model innovation. As always, new businesses and new 
models generate new risks. To manage these attendant 
risks, the PBOC issued management requirements, trans-
action ceilings, service point qualifications, location distri-
bution requirements, and operational management 
requirements to control risks effectively while ensuring 
further and sound development of agent-based service 
points in rural areas.
28  
Finally, given that regulatory authorities heavily pro-
moted and guided the piloting and initial expansion of 
the agent network in China, reconsidering government’s 
appropriate role in this model will be necessary going for -
ward. Indeed, many service points currently do not oper -
ate profitably because of infrequent, limited, and 
low-value transactions, but remain open due to social 
responsibility commitments by banks. It has been noted 
anecdotally that some service points have only one trans-
action every few days, or even less frequently (although 
reliable data on transaction volumes are lacking). Finan-
cial sector authorities (and consequently providers as 
well) have traditionally viewed expanding service point 
coverage to all villages as a social responsibility rather 
than as a strategic, market-based decision.China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   31
The very terminology used for service points (which 
are often referred to as “cash withdrawal service points” 
in China) illustrates that they are not fully leveraged for 
their potential as proactive agents of financial service 
providers—mainly due to policy concerns regarding con-
trolling for risks—although they could be capable of pro-
viding a broader range of financial services. A more 
flexible, market-based policy approach is needed that 
allows financial service providers to innovate to improve 
commercial sustainability, including considering adjacent 
revenue streams and developing strategies to increase 
traffic and transaction volume and thus better realize the 
potential of service points as fully functional agents. 
Research to more closely analyze the characteristics of 
agent-based service points and segment such points by 
their potential would also be helpful, as the optimal strat-
egy will likely differ by type of service point.  
Mobile Service Outlets 
In areas that have poor or no access to financial services, 
but which cannot support the establishment of a full-ser -
vice outlet, financial service providers have used innova-tive approaches to lower operational costs and still 
provide basic financial services to residents. Mobile ser -
vice outlets are one important innovative approach. Some financial service providers provide mobile services 
in surrounding villages based on existing town-level out-
lets, thus expanding their service radius to nearby villages 
and expanding accessibility to village residents. For 
example, to address the “last mile” challenge, Shangyu 
Rural Cooperative Bank of Zhejiang began operating a 
“bank on wheels” in September 2014 to provide financial 
services to rural residents. The “bank on wheels” is a bus 
equipped with service counters and ATM machines that 
are connected to the host bank network via 3G. The bus itself is made of secure materials (i.e., bulletproof) to pre-
vent theft. Customers can use the “bank on wheels” to 
open or close current and deposit accounts, deposit or 
withdraw money, make remittances and payments, pay 
bills, etc. In Xiapu county, the number of mobile banking 
clients has grown dramatically from 189,500 in 2014 to 
339,330 in 2016.
Another example comes from mountainous Shouning 
county in Fujian province, where the Shouning Rural 
Credit Cooperative launched a “Backpack Bank” pro-
gram. Members of the “Backpack Bank” team visit 
remote villages and provide onsite financial services to 
residents in their homes. Village residents can submit 
loan applications to the team, who review the application 
and make a decision. If the loan is approved, the appli-
cant’s account is credited within 20 minutes. As of the 
end of March 2017, the “Backpack Bank” service pro-gram covers more than 40 villages in Shouning county. 4.1.2  Enhancing the Ease and Efficiency of 
Payments in Rural Areas
The limited physical presence of bank outlets in rural and 
remote areas has historically constrained the supply of 
financial payments and settlement services for many Chi-
nese individuals. Over the past fifteen years, PBOC has pri-
oritized establishing a payment service system that can 
meet the demands of rural areas for payment and clearing 
services and facilitate the development of agriculture, rural 
areas, and farmers. Since 2004, PBOC has issued several 
guidelines with the objective of promoting and guiding the 
expansion and improvement of payment systems in remote 
and rural areas. These guidelines include the following: 
• Guidelines on the Connection of Rural Credit Cooper -
atives to the Payment System (issued 2004) sought to 
leverage the expansion of PBOC’s large-value pay-ment system to support and guide RCCs in connecting 
to the PBOC’s transbank payment system.
• Guidelines on Implementing Effective Payment and 
Settlement Activities in Rural Areas (issued 2006) 
aimed to accelerate development of rural payment 
systems, expand the reach of clearing systems in rural 
areas, and promote the use of noncash payment 
instruments. 
• Guidelines on Improving Payment Service Environ-
ment in Rural Areas (issued 2009) emphasized the fac-
tors needed to transition to account-based payments 
for subsidy transfers and sought to further encourage 
the integration of rural financial service providers into 
payment and clearing systems. 
• Guidelines on Comprehensively Promoting the Devel-
opment of Rural Payment Service Environment (issued 
2014), among other things, established basic princi-ples to guide payment system development in rural 
areas, provided modifications and guidance on agent-
based service point models, outlined policy support 
(e.g., tax incentives) for expanding payment systems, 
and emphasized risk management requirements for 
payment systems in rural areas. 
PBOC has also established new payment and clearing systems over the past fifteen years to meet the needs of 
small and medium banks and rural areas for payment and 
clearing. Developing integrated urban and rural payment 
systems in China has reduced the gap between urban 
and rural payment environments. For example, to facili-
tate transbank, transregion, and transborder use of debit 
cards, China UnionPay (CUP) was established in March 
2002 to provide an interbank transaction clearing system. 
The main shareholders of CUP are more than one hun-
dred commercial banks, and it is currently the only 
domestic bank card association in China. CUP has more 32  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
than 400 domestic and overseas associate members, and 
its networks have been extended to both rural and urban 
areas in China. As a result, bank card holders can not only 
use cards via ATMs, POSs, and other devices, but also for 
consumption purposes, such as payment of utility bills, 
air ticket and hotel reservations, credit card repayments, 
and self-service transfers via emerging channels such as 
the Internet, mobile phones, landlines, self-service termi-
nals, and smart TV terminals.
PBOC has also developed several interbank clearing 
systems, including the China National Advanced Pay-
ment System (CNAPS), China Domestic Foreign Currency 
Payment System, and local clearing systems, to support 
the application of negotiable instruments, payment 
cards, and other payment instruments. In addition, PBOC 
operates the Internet Banking Payment System (IBPS), 
which offers near real-time interbank direct credit and 
debit transfers for Internet banking initiated transactions. 
To address difficulties in transregion clearing by city 
commercial banks in different regions, the Clearing Cen-ter for City Commercial Banks was set up in September 
2002, which operates as a national payment and clearing 
services provider jointly sponsored by city commercial 
banks (CCBs) across China. To provide better funds 
clearing services to all rural small- and medium-sized 
financial service providers in China, the Rural Credit 
Banks Funds Clearing Center, jointly established by pro-
vincial Rural Credit Unions, RCOMBs, and RCOPBs in 
April 2006, operates as a national payment and clearing 
services provider of professional payment and clearing 
services to rural areas. PBOC encouraged the develop-
ment of both clearing centers, and both centers are con-
nected to PBOC’s system, thereby enabling transactions 
among the providers in these centers and other nation-
wide banks. 
As of the end of 2016, 382 member institutions have 
been connected to the Clearing Center for City Commer -
cial Banks, including 127 CCBs and joint-stock banks, 248 
VTBs, and seven other financial service providers (for 
example, private banks). As of the end of 2016, the Rural 
Credit Banks Funds Clearing Center covers about 80,000 
outlets of small- and medium-sized rural financial service 
providers, such as RCCs, RCOPBs, RCOMBs, and VTBs. 
As such, an effective cross-province real-time payment 
and clearing network has taken shape, enabling many 
small and medium rural financial service providers to pro-
vide a broader range of services, such as issuance of bank 
drafts and universal cash deposit and withdrawal for indi-
viduals, particularly rural residents who previously lacked 
convenient access to such services. In addition, the Rural 
Credit Banks Funds Clearing Center has also actively 
developed innovative payment service products, expanded payment and settlement channels, and pro-
moted the use of noncash payment tools in rural areas. The Rural Credit Banks Funds Clearing Center has coop-
erated with nonbank digital payment providers repre-
sented by Alipay and TenPay to provide rural customers 
with access to more opportunities to make consumption 
payments and a more convenient consumption payment 
experience. Coordination of China’s payment systems 
infrastructure has been strengthened through the estab-
lishment of the China Payment and Clearing Association 
in 2011. 
4.1.3  Increase in Ownership and Use of  
Bank Accounts and Debit Cards30 
The aforementioned efforts to expand the physical reach 
of service networks and improve payments infrastructure 
have supported the dramatically expanded uptake of 
bank accounts and debit cards. Opening a bank account 
enables a consumer to access the broader range of 
financial services that a formal financial service provider 
offers, such as payment, credit, savings, and insurance 
products and services. Therefore, the ownership rate of 
bank accounts is an important indicator of financial 
inclusion. Chinese financial sector authorities pay close 
attention to this rate and to two indicators in particular: 
(1) the number of debit cards issued and (2) the number 
of bank accounts.
The first debit card in China was issued in 1985 by 
Bank of China. Initiated by the State Council in 1993, the 
“Jinka Gongcheng” program was used to encourage 
electronic payments via debit cards. Debit cards have 
since become the noncash payment tool most used by consumers in China. Thanks to the establishment of 
national payment and clearing systems and the contin-
ued expansion of commercial banks’ networks in recent 
years, the foundation has been laid for opening a large 
number of bank accounts and for greater usage of debit 
cards. According to PBOC, the number of accounts 
issued by traditional providers grew from 2 billion to 8.3 
billion between 2006 and 2016, and the number of debit 
cards issued grew from 1.1 billion to 5.7 billion over the 
same period (table 4.4). 
As described in chapter 3, the proportion of adults in 
China with a bank account increased from 64 percent in 
2011 to 79 percent in 2014, according to the Global Fin-
dex database, representing an increase in the number of 
adults with a bank account of 180 million.
31 In particular, 
significant gains were made among previously under -
served segments of the population. The bank account penetration rate of adults from the bottom 40 percent of 
households increased by 26 percentage points (the rate 
for the top 60 percent of families grew by only 8 percent-
age points); the growth rate in rural areas was higher 
than in urban areas; and the rate among rural adults and 
seniors also saw a robust growth. That said, given the China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   33
discrepancy between demand- and supply-side data on 
the penetration of bank accounts and debit cards, a 
need exists for better data and research to understand 
the degree to which adults are holding dormant and/or 
multiple accounts and cards. Anecdotal evidence sug-
gests that while many consumers own multiple cards, 
they only use one or two of them and use the rest infre-
quently, if at all. 
From a policy perspective, the Chinese government 
helps residents obtain bank accounts and debit cards by 
requiring commercial banks to provide bank accounts 
that are free of charge (for example, with no application 
fees or annual fees) and debit cards at no additional cost 
when such products are used to receive government sub-
sidies, thus encouraging consumers to use their accounts 
and cards. The government has also been encouraging 
banks to introduce debit cards to facilitate the transfer of 
various subsidies on behalf of the government to increase disbursement efficiency and reduce costs. Between 2010 
and the first half of 2015, a cumulative total of 9.77B non-
cash payments of subsidies were made via bank accounts 
and debit cards, amounting to a total value of RMB 3.15T. 
These subsidies include new rural endowment insurance 
subsidies, new rural cooperative medical care subsidies, 
and fiscal subsidies supporting agriculture, farmers, and 
rural areas. The establishment of agent-based service 
points in rural areas has enabled farmers to withdraw 
their subsidies without leaving their villages. PBOC has 
also recently introduced a risk-based tiered account sys-
tem to enable online banks to offer low-value transaction 
accounts (discussed further later in box 4.8). 
In recent years, PBOC has directed financial service 
providers operating in rural and agricultural areas to pilot 
innovative approaches to enhance farmers’ awareness of 
finance and payments and meet their payments needs through issuing debit cards, deploying mobile phones  
for money transfers, expanding rural cash withdrawal 
services, strengthening public communications, and 
other approaches. Other factors that have contributed to 
increased bank account ownership include dynamic eco-
nomic growth; stronger consumer demand; and more 
competition, providing incentives for financial service 
providers to compete for customers and hence driving 
greater numbers of debit cards issued and bank accounts 
opened.
4.1.4  Innovations in Financial Products to Enhance 
Access, Use, and Quality 
As discussed in chapter 2, financial inclusion is more than 
just physical access and ownership of basic accounts. 
Meaningful and long-term financial inclusion requires a 
range of financial products and services that are appropri-
ately designed and fit the needs of consumers, particu-
larly the unserved and underserved. While much attention 
has focused on financial service innovations by new 
entrants to the consumer financial market, such as Alibaba 
and Tencent, traditional financial service providers have 
also made concerted efforts to develop innovative prod-
ucts that are more appropriate for the underserved and 
leverage new technologies.
Payment Products and Services 
In addition to expanding their physical reach, traditional 
financial service providers have substantially increased 
the availability of basic payment services through product 
design and delivery channels that leverage modern tech-nologies. Financial service providers have actively pro-
moted the development of noncash payment businesses, 
including promissory notes and debit cards. From 2012 TABLE 4.4 Number of Bank Accounts and Debit Cards, by Institutional Category and over Time 
 BANK ACCOUNTS (MILLIONS) DEBIT CARDS (MILLIONS)
INSTITUTIONAL CATEGORY 2006 2016 2006 2016
State-owned commercial bank 1,635 5,937 816 3,817
Joint-stock commercial bank 164 804 173 462
City commercial bank 69 411 51 347
Village and township bank — — — 13
Rural credit cooperatives 94 857 22 447
Rural cooperative bank — — — 30
Rural commercial bank 14 262 19 542
Other — 32 — 2
Total 1,976 8,303 1,081 5,660
Source: PBOC.
Note: “State-owned commercial bank” includes figures for Postal Savings Bank of China. “Other” includes figures for urban credit cooperatives, 
foreign banks, and others.34  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
to 2016, these noncash payment businesses grew rapidly. 
In 2016, noncash payment transactions by traditional 
financial service providers in China numbered 125.1 bil-
lion with a total transaction value of RMB 3,687.24 trillion 
(US$553.09 trillion), reflecting growth of 304 percent and 
287 percent, respectively, since 2012. The development 
of Internet-based and mobile payment businesses has 
enabled customers to make payments without traveling 
to a financial service provider or retail outlet, greatly 
improving the convenience and security of payments and 
reducing payment costs.
CUP has launched a trial payment service with CUP 
cards that allows procurement of agricultural products in 
grain-producing areas. With the support of the CUP non-
cash clearing system, grain brokers and purchasers may 
pay farmers directly in real time through POS terminals, 
thereby not only increasing convenience to farmers but 
also reducing operational costs for purchasers. Accord-ing to data from CUP , transaction turnover in 2015 across 
the country exceeded RMB 200 billion (US$30 billion).
Some commercial banks and RCCs are also innovating 
using mobile encryption chips that can be integrated into 
a SIM card, which enables financial services to be carried 
out on mobile phones via near field communication 
(NFC). The chip provides customers with high-quality, 
secure, and portable mobile payment functionality 
through their phones rather than debit cards. This tech-
nology has been leveraged in multiple applications, 
including mobile phone credit, travel applications, credit 
services, and identification certification.
Section 4.3 discusses further payment innovations by 
new, digitally-driven fintech companies.
Innovations in Deposit and Financial Management 
Products 
Many commercial banks are actively developing innova-
tions in deposit and financial management products to 
increase customer loyalty, convenience, and profitability 
and to attract and retain new customers. Commercial 
banks are improving the design of deposit and financial 
management products and services to increase their 
appropriateness to attract the general public, rural resi-
dents in particular, to deposit their money in banks.
To compete with Internet-based, Yuebao-like finan-
cial management products (discussed further in section 
4.3) and meet untapped market demand, commercial 
banks have launched products with flexible buying and 
selling terms that are more accessible and convenient to 
low-income consumers. Most of these products are 
linked with money market funds launched by fund com-
panies and support instant selling and rapid transfer. 
Some commercial banks have upgraded former financial management products to enable instant selling. In terms 
of rates of return, the gains on such products are similar to those of Internet-based financial management prod-
ucts. These innovations in Yuebao-like products are likely 
to help better satisfy the general public’s needs for 
investment and financial management and have broad 
potential for expansion. 
In addition, commercial banks such as Shanghai Pud-
ong Development Bank have launched new business 
lines such as “agreed transfer between fixed and demand 
deposits” in debit cards, which can help customers 
increase their deposit income while improving conve-
nience. For this business line, customers can determine 
the rules of transfer between fixed and demand deposits 
in advance, according to their own financial management 
arrangements, allowing for more flexible, tailored prod-
ucts to meet the specific needs of consumers.
Some banks have developed tools to help MSEs  
manage their accounts which span multiple banks. For 
example, the cross-bank funds management system, developed by Huaxia Bank, can link all of an MSE’s vari-
ous bank accounts. Through this system, the MSE can 
make transfers and inquiries in real time across its various 
accounts and use various other financial management 
tools, reducing overall transaction costs. 
Section 4.3 discusses further deposit and financial 
management product innovations by new, digitally-driven 
fintech companies.
Innovations in Credit Products 
In recent years, regulatory authorities have actively 
encouraged commercial banks and other financial service 
providers to expand lending to the agricultural sector, 
rural residents, and MSEs. In doing so, regulatory authori-
ties have aimed not only to create a favorable lending 
environment, but have also set forth specific lending 
requirements for commercial banks. For example, author -
ities have implemented differentiated monetary and 
credit policies, agriculture-associated loan incentives, risk 
compensation funds, and government guarantee funds 
and tax incentives (see section 4.4). CBRC also issued 
Guidelines on Financial Services for Micro and Small 
Enterprises in 2015, which specifies the “Three No-less-
thans Goal”: 
• Loan growth for MSEs is no less than the average 
growth of all loans,
• The number of MSEs receiving loans is no less than 
that over the same period of the previous year, and
• The approval rate of MSE loan applications is no less than the rate over the same period of the previous year.
To meet regulatory authorities’ specific requirements and 
in response to growing market competition, commercial banks and other financial service providers have sought 
to develop innovative business models, including innova-China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   35
tive product design for loans, new types of collateral, 
innovative credit evaluation methods, and new loan 
repayment approaches. These efforts—some of which 
are discussed elsewhere in this report—have contributed 
to achieving the “Three No-less-thans Goal,” though 
their respective magnitudes and the targeted impact of 
these contributions are difficult to quantify. Overall, as of 
the end of March 2017, CBRC data show that the number 
of customers with an outstanding MSE loan reached 13.6 
million, an increase of 1.2 million over the same period 
the previous year; the balance of loans from banks to 
MSEs represented 24.1 percent of the total balance of all 
types of loans, and the balance of loans to MSEs grew by 
14.4 percent over the same period in the previous year, 
1.9 percentage points higher than the average growth of 
all types of loans.
Traditional methods of risk assessment and a narrow 
range of acceptable collateral have often restricted farm-ers and MSEs from accessing loans. In recent years, regu-
latory authorities have actively encouraged commercial 
banks to innovate in this area and expand the scope of 
acceptable collateral. In 2010, PBOC, CBRC, and CIRC 
jointly issued Guidelines on Comprehensively Advancing 
Innovations in Rural Financial Products and Services, 
which requires financial service providers to improve 
operational procedures for loans related to agriculture, 
farmers, and rural areas; develop sound evaluation, man-
agement, and disposal of properties used as collateral for 
such loans; and leverage a broader range of information 
to assess customer creditworthiness. In response, finan-
cial service providers have explored ways to improve risk 
management of credit portfolios. 
In the past fifteen years, PBOC and CBRC have 
encouraged commercial banks and other financial service 
providers to use movable assets—including receivables, inventory, equipment, and title documents—as the basis 
for lending or for issuing debt instruments (box 4.2). After 
a new property law was approved in 2007, PBOC estab-
lished a unified system to register security interests in 
movable assets under the PBOC’s Credit Reference Cen-
ter (see section 4.4). For example, government transfers 
and subsidies (in effect, a form of receivable) have been 
leveraged in an innovative manner as collateral by ABC, 
RCOMBs, RCOPBs, RCCs, and other providers. Loans 
that use government transfers or subsidies as collateral 
typically equal 5–10 times the subsidy amount. These 
changes have expanded the scope of permissible collat-
eral, improved the transparency of collateral interests, 
and allowed lenders to establish the priorities of their 
security interests, thus giving them confidence to develop 
movable asset finance products. Over the years, the two 
financial sector authorities have also organized or sup-ported numerous outreach, training, and knowledge 
development activities on movables finance product development, often together with the WBG’s Interna-
tional Finance Corporation (IFC). Current products in the 
market range from simple receivables, inventory, or 
equipment loans to complex, structured, and heavily 
monitored movables credit. 
Supply chain finance based on receivables and inven-
tory has also grown rapidly. A diversified pool of lenders 
has provided services in this field. With the assistance of 
the IFC, at the end of 2013, PBOC established a supply 
chain finance platform based in Tianjin. Cumulatively, the 
platform has facilitated RMB 4.5 trillion (US$675 billion)  
in credit for agricultural borrowers, MSMEs and large enterprises by April 2017.
32
Section 4.3 discusses credit innovations by new, digi-
tally-driven fintech companies.
4.1.5 Reforming RCCs to Better Serve Sannong 
Rural Credit Cooperatives have historically been the finan-
cial service providers with the most widely distributed out-
lets in China’s rural areas and are thus a critical institution 
BOX 4.2 
Agricultural Bank of China: Developing Innova-
tive Products and Services to Serve Sannong  
Since 2007, the Agricultural Bank of China (ABC), one of China’s 
largest state-owned commercial banks, has been a leader in imple-
menting the government’s three-pronged policy of serving the 
agricultural sector, rural communities, and farmers (sannong). Over 
the past few years, ABC has made strides in product and service 
innovation to better serve these three areas. 
Movable Asset Finance Innovation. Given that the National Peo-
ple’s Congress only authorizes a few select pilot areas to use con-
tracted land management rights and farmer housing property rights as collateral for loans, ABC developed various nonland related col-
lateral, such as farming equipment, agricultural inventory, and direct 
grain subsidies, to facilitate secured lending in rural areas. 
Sannong Product Innovation. Jinyinong (gold that benefits farmers) 
is a composite brand that consolidates 149 sannong-targeted prod-
ucts ABC has developed in recent years and that offers many finan-
cial services to farmers, rural residents, and entrepreneurs. Special 
financial products, such as grain production loans and offseason commercial reserves of fertilizers, were developed to accommodate 
production seasonality of leading agricultural enterprises. Urbaniza-
tion construction loans and new rural residence loans were also 
developed to facilitate urbanization.
Source: Agricultural Bank of China.36  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
for achieving China’s financial inclusion goals. Since its 
economic reform and opening-up in 1978, China has 
gone through several RCC reform phases to improve 
operations and effectiveness. At the end of 2016, 1,125 
RCCs were operating in China. In addition, 1,154 RCOMBs 
and RCOPBs had transformed from RCCs following the 
2003 reforms. 
RCCs were founded in the 1950s, yet prior to China’s 
economic reform and opening-up, they failed to play an 
effective role in serving sannong, the government’s broad 
three-pronged policy of serving the agricultural sector, 
rural development, and rural residents. In early 1979, the 
State Council shifted the management of RCCs to the 
Agricultural Bank of China. By 1984, constrained by poor 
governance and poor financial health, RCCs were still 
thought not to serve sannong effectively. The State Coun-
cil implemented a comprehensive program to reform 
equity arrangements, organization, and management of RCCs to restore their cooperative financing function and 
enable them to better serve rural and county economies. 
Thereafter, RCCs existed mainly in the organizational form 
of a village- or town-level corporate body. The reforms 
during this phase helped to improve the financial strength 
of RCCs and effectively promoted their business develop-
ment, but new problems also emerged, such as local 
interference in RCCs’ rights for independent management 
and operation, impairing their ability to realize their finan-
cial inclusion potential. In 1996, the State Council issued its Decisions on the 
Reform of Rural Financial System, which stated that RCCs would no longer be affiliated with ABC and would be reg-
ulated according to the cooperative principle. To enhance 
the risk management and operational capacity of RCCs, 
the General Office of the State Council forwarded the 
PBOC-issued Guidelines on Further Reform of the Admin-
istration Mechanism of Rural Credit Cooperatives in 1997, which again confirmed the cooperative principles accord-
ing to which reforms of RCC’s administration mechanisms 
were to be conducted. While these reforms improved the 
administration system of RCCs as a whole, the withdrawal 
of branches of state-owned commercial banks from county-  
level operations led RCCs to further take on the primary role of serving sannong. However, due to heavy historical 
financial burdens, poor quality assets, and poor opera-tions, RCCs experienced widespread losses in the ensuing 
years. By the end of 1999, owners’ equity had a negative value across the whole RCC industry, significantly affect-
ing RCCs’ capacity to serve sannong. 
In June 2003, the Central Government initiated fur -
ther RCC reforms. In this reform, RCCs no longer had to 
maintain the “cooperative” nature of their ownership 
structure, governance, or business operations. Two new 
institutional forms were created: Rural Commercial Banks 
(RCOMBs) and Rural Cooperative Banks (RCOPBs). Many 
RCCs have been transformed into these new forms to 
improve governance arrangements and to reorient As China’s largest state-owned commercial bank, 
the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) 
has developed various digital finance products and 
platforms to better serve MSEs and individuals. 
Over the years, ICBC has developed e-Payment, 
an online tool for fast payment of small amounts; 
e-Link, the bank’s online investment service and 
online financial management tool; and several 
online financing products targeted at MSEs. For 
example, “Corporate Easy Loan” is an unsecured 
microcredit product for MSEs that benefits from 
ICBC’s proprietary database and big data analysis to 
assess creditworthiness. “Online Revolving Loan,” 
another product targeted to MSEs, offers online, 
self-service revolving loans that allow borrowers to 
withdraw and repay the loan online by themselves. 
Since their launch, these two products have proven BOX 4.3 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China’s Approach to Digital Finance  
to be popular with MSEs because they are tailored 
to meet MSEs’ actual needs.
In addition to various digital finance products, 
ICBC also launched its e-ICBC business line in 2015, 
which consists of three platforms and one center. 
The mobile messaging application platform aims to 
provide a secure and convenient communications 
channel that allows customers to communicate with 
ICBC staff. The e-commerce platform offers various 
financial products with a high level of attention paid 
to vendor access, pricing, and dispute resolution 
procedures. An online direct banking platform and 
an Internet financing center have also been set up, 
with the latter leveraging a combination of ICBC’s 
historical data, online platform data, and offline 
investigation information to better serve MSEs and 
individuals with facilitated access to financing. 
Source: Industrial and Commercial Bank of ChinaChina’s Financial Inclusion Experience   37
towards a commercially sustainable business model. 
Local governments were empowered to conduct further 
reforms and subsequently developed and implemented 
policies to help write off bad loans and contribute to 
RCCs’ ownership reform. As of the end of 2016, 1,114 
RCOMBs and 40 RCOPBs are operating in China. 
To facilitate the goals of RCC reform, PBOC designed 
and implemented various policies and measures accord-
ing to the principles set by the State Council.33 PBOC 
developed and issued special notes and special loans to strengthen RCCs’ capital base, with the amount approved 
of both special notes and special loans amounting to the 
equivalent of 50 percent of the actual insolvency amount 
of RCCs at the end of 2002. Various incentive mechanisms 
were also designed and implemented. Special notes were 
issued to those county/municipal rural credit unions that 
met certain prerequisites, with issuance and redemption 
linked to the process and effectiveness of RCC reforms. 
These special notes could be cashed in by PBOC condi-
tional on RCC improvements, such as meeting require-
ments regarding increase in capital adequacy ratio (CAR) 
and reduction in NPL ratio. The disbursement of special 
loans in one province was also linked to the process and 
effectiveness of reforms of RCCs. In Q1 2004–Q1 2014, 
PBOC issued and paid special notes of RMB 169.9 billion 
(US$25.5 billion) to RCCs from 2,408 counties and granted special loans of RMB 1.4 billion (US$210 million) 
to Xinjiang, Jilin, and Heilongjiang provinces/autono-
mous regions. 
The 2003 reforms have helped to stabilize RCCs. By 
March 2009, RCC portfolio quality and earnings had 
improved considerably and significant progress had been 
made in RCC business operations, ownership structure, 
and corporate governance. As a result, RCCs have entered 
into its fastest development period in history, with overall 
business conditions and capacity continuing to improve. In 
2016, the net earnings of RCCs across the country reached 
RMB 51.9 billion (US$7.8 billion); by the end of 2016, the 
NPL ratio of RCCs was 7.3 percent, capital adequacy ratio was 8.4 percent, and the total balance of sannong-related 
loans was RMB 2.7 trillion (US$405 billion; table 4.5).
In this latest reform and development period, the tar -
get has been to further transform RCCs into market-ori-ented financial enterprises with sufficient capital, strong 
compliance, and steady growth. A further objective was 
to leverage the advantages of RCCs’ flexibility and 
encourage their timely adaptation to the new require-
ments of agricultural modernization and rural economic restructuring for financial services. As the reforms deepen, 
the hope is that RCCs will play an even greater role in 
serving sannong and in promoting financial inclusion.
Yet several challenges continue to constrain RCCs’ 
role in financial inclusion. Poor governance, small cus-
tomer bases, and excessive interference from local 
authorities continue to plague some RCCs. As a whole, 
RCCs have also demonstrated relatively limited capacity 
to innovate and, in particular, leverage digital technolo-
gies to improve product design and delivery models for 
underserved segments. They therefore face significant 
competition from new market entrants. Further strength-
ening is needed, otherwise whether RCCs can success-
fully compete for client segments that are drawn to 
digitally enabled financial products and services or fulfill 
their intended mandate to serve rural consumers on a 
sustainable, market-oriented basis remains to be seen. 
4.1.6  Innovations in the Insurance Industry to 
Contribute to Financial Inclusion
In recent years, insurance companies have broadened 
their target markets to include previously unserved and 
underserved market segments. This evolution has been 
pursued through innovations in delivery channels, prod-
ucts, procedures, and management, as well as through 
regulatory reforms and encouragement. The entrance of 
new providers that have demonstrated the viability of new 
technology-driven models and thereby increased compe-
tition in the sector has also impacted the insurance market.BOX 4.3 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China’s Approach to Digital Finance  
TABLE 4.5 Performance of the RCC System over Time 
    BALANCE OF  
 NET EARNINGS CAPITAL NONPERFORMING SANNONG-RELATED  NUMBER OF  
  (BILLION RMB  ADEQUACY LOANS LOANS (BILLION RMB NUMBER OF RCOPBS AND  
YEAR [BILLION US$])  RATIO (%)  RATIO (%)  [BILLION US$]) RCCS  RCOMBS
2002 −5.8 (–0.9) −8.3 36.9 — 35,540 3
2005 18 (2.7) 8.45 14.8 — 27,036 70
2009 22.8 (3.4) 2.9 15.3 2,244 (337) 3,056 239
2012 65.4 (9.8) 9.1 7.2 3,129 (469) 1,927 484
2015 66.4 (10.0) 8 7.8 3,196 (479) 1,373 930
2016 51.9 (7.8) 8.4 7.3 2,679 (402) 1,125 1,154
Source: CBRC.38  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
Digitalizing marketing and delivery channels in partic-
ular has increased the availability and uptake of insurance 
products and services. Indeed, the Internet is the fastest 
growing delivery channel for nonlife insurers, which the 
State Council and the CIRC actively encourage. Inter -
net-based channels allow consumers to explore and pur -
chase insurance products more conveniently and allow 
insurance companies to benefit from lower customer 
acquisition and policy management costs. Broadly speak-
ing, four digital distribution models exist: 
1) A general insurer that sells through its own platform.  
Given the increasing number of consumers accessing 
the Internet on their mobile phones and consumers’ 
increasing familiarity with using their mobile devices for 
transactions and financial management, insurance 
companies’ sales platforms have begun to extend to 
Internet-based and mobile devices.
2) A general insurer that sells through a third-party bro-ker platform. Several third-party broker platforms, 
such as Ubao or Zhongmin, have emerged in recent 
years allowing consumers to compare and obtain 
insurance products from a range of insurance compa-
nies, effectively providing “one-stop” shopping for 
consumers. Some platforms offer simple and standard-
ized insurance products such as automobile insurance 
and accidental injury insurance. 
3) A general insurer that sells through social or e-  
commerce network platforms. Insurers are increas-
ingly tapping into social and e-commerce network 
platforms such as Taobao, Jingdong, and Ctrip (and 
their large, existing customer bases) to market insur -
ance products.
34 
4) An online-only insurer. New, online-only insurance pro-
viders such as Zhong An Online P&C Insurance Co—
which has both Ant Financial and Tencent as major 
shareholders—are discussed further in section 4.3.5. 
In all cases, an important development is the “online-to-offline” business model, where an inquiry initiated through 
the Internet is closed by a call center operative or an agent. 
According to the CIRC, income from insurance premi-
ums exceeded RMB 3.1 trillion (US$465 billion) in China 
in 2016, with year-on-year growth of 27.5 percent. Income 
from Internet-based insurance premiums was approxi-
mately RMB 234.8 billion (US$35.2 billion), or 7.5 percent 
of the total annual premium income in China,
35 compared 
with approximately 15 percent in the United States. Though still a small share of the overall industry, online 
insurance is growing rapidly: nonlife premiums grew by 
113.7 percent in 2014 to RMB 50.6 billion (US$7.6 billion) 
and by a further 69 percent in the first six months of 2015. 
In 2016, Internet-based property insurance premium income dipped 34.6 percent from the previous year, 
while Internet-based life insurance premium income 
increased 22.6 percent (reaching RMB 179.7 billion 
[US$27 billion]).
Applying digital technologies has allowed for the cre-
ation of various innovative insurance products. For exam-ple, “returned cargo insurance” is a new insurance scheme 
arising from the development of e-commerce, reflecting a 
more targeted insurance product geared toward consum-
ers’ evolving consumption behaviors. Another area of 
product innovation is in insurance schemes that the tradi-
tional insurance sector has difficulty underwriting, for 
example, catastrophe insurance such as earthquake insur -
ance. The traditional insurance sector often has trouble pooling homogenous risks to a sufficient scale to let the 
law of large numbers work. In contrast, Internet-based 
insurance can utilize digital channels to overcome physical 
constraints and quickly and easily reach a large number of 
consumers over wide geographic areas, allowing them to 
better address the issue of risk pool size and better evalu-
ate and underwrite homogenous risks.
Insurance companies have also actively explored and 
applied new technologies to improve operational proce-dures, the precision of underwriting, and the speed of 
claims settlement. For example, PICC Property and Casu-
alty Company Limited offers basic agricultural insurance 
products that employ novel technologies such as remote 
sensing technology, an integrated field information col-
lection system and integrated management and informa-
tion service platform, and a mobile investigation device 
building on the Beidou Navigation System (a satellite 
system) and a drone hardware platform. These efforts 
have resulted in the creation of an integrated, three-di-
mensional “air-space-ground” system to support insur -
ance operations. Such application of new information and digital technologies offers more accurate spatial data 
for underwriting and claims settlement, addresses prob-
lems with difficult insurance verification and slow claims 
settlement, and enhances insurance companies’ risk 
management capacity. Furthermore, such technologies allow insurance companies to accumulate a vast amount 
of data to price insurance more precisely. 
The central and local governments have implemented 
measures that promote the development of agricultural 
insurance, leading to adaptations of agricultural insur -
ance products so that they are more accessible to the underserved and more appropriate for their specific 
needs. These measures include premium subsidies to 
farmers. Insurance companies have developed innova-
tive insurance products tailored to production cycles and 
livelihoods of underserved segments, such as weather 
index insurance, price index insurance, crop yield insur -
ance, income insurance, and agricultural product quality insurance. For example, at the end of 2016, pilot pro-China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   39
grams existed across 33 provinces and municipalities, 
with a total of 50 pilot price index insurance products, 
400,000 insured rural households/insurance policies, and 
a risk insurance portfolio value of RMB 16 billion (US$2.5 
billion). A coinsurance entity comprising several insur -
ance companies jointly underwrites insurance in some pilot programs, with premiums primarily subsidized by 
local government, and smaller percentages subsidized 
by enterprises and paid for by farmers. However, the 
large-scale viability and commercial sustainability of 
these pilot programs remains to be seen. 
While insurance innovations have contributed to 
increased access to more appropriate insurance prod-
ucts, there remains a need to accelerate the develop-
ment of well-designed, accessible, and affordable 
insurance products. In 2014, the State Council issued 
Guidelines on Speeding up the Development of Modern 
Insurance Service Industry, encouraging reforms in insur -
ance market access and exit mechanisms and product 
and service innovation with the aims of increasing com-
petition and providing more personalized service in 
insurance markets. Expected increases in competition in 
the insurance market may be able to play a catalytic role 
in this regard. To grow their market share, small and 
medium insurance companies will need to develop their 
competitive advantage in understanding user needs, 
product innovation, and actuarial models to develop 
new products that are better tailored to the actual needs 
of consumers. Internet-based companies are also 
expected to increase activity in the Internet-based insur -
ance sector and become an important driver of sector innovation. Traditional large insurance companies still 
have several advantages in large-scale underwriting, 
special insurance schemes, and application of spatial 
information technologies. With the gradual rise of qual-ity small and medium insurance companies and Inter -
net-based companies, the hope is that the insurance sector will exhibit a more diversified, competitive land-
scape that benefits the underserved in accessing better 
insurance services. 
4.2  THE ROLE OF “NEW-TYPE” RURAL 
FINANCIAL SERVICE PROVIDERS IN FINANCIAL INCLUSION
Between 2006 and 2008, the Chinese government intro-
duced regulations for establishing “new-type” rural finan-
cial service providers, including “new-type” rural financial 
institutions such as village and township banks (VTBs) and 
rural mutual credit cooperatives (RMCCs), as well as 
microcredit companies (MCCs), a new type of credit pro-
vider. The intended policy objective was to increase finan-
cial inclusion among traditionally unserved and under-  served customers. In some sense, establishing these new-
type rural providers can be viewed as an extension of and 
complement to ongoing efforts to strengthen RCCs’ role 
in serving sannong and as a mechanism to promote com-
petition in financial service provision at a rural level.
These providers share several common features, 
including an explicit target population and relatively light regulatory requirements for establishment (table 4.6). The 
target population includes rural residents and medium, 
small-, and micro-sized enterprises. The new-type rural 
financial service providers are characterized by differenti-
ated and lighter requirements for registered capital, orga-
nizational structure, and ownership arrangements.
36 The 
flexible regulations of new-type rural financial service providers allow legally sanctioned individuals to invest in 
a provider as an independent enterprise within a limited 
geographic sphere of operation. VTBs and MCCs can 
establish branches, while branches are not allowed for 
RMCCs. This approach is intended to strengthen the 
management flexibility of these institutions and adapt-
ability to the local target population. Since 2010, govern-
ment authorities have offered subsidies (of no more than 
2 percent of average loan balance) to VTBs and RMCCs 
that meet certain requirements, such as achieving a cer -
tain level of growth in total loan balance or reaching a certain percentage of sannong and MSE loans to total 
loans. The costs of such subsidies are shared between 
central and local finance departments, for example at 
ratios of 30/70 percent, 50/50 percent, and 70/30 per -
cent in the eastern, central, and western regions, respec-
tively.
37 In 2015, funds of RMB 2.9 billion (US$435 million) 
were designated by the MoF as targeted subsidies to 
these efforts.
4.2.1 Village and Township Banks
The national pilot program for VTBs was officially initiated 
in December 2006, followed by the issuance of the Provi-
sional Rules for Management of Village/Town Banks in 
January 2007. Pursuant to relevant national regulations, 
permitted activities for VTBs include accepting deposits; 
short-, medium-, and long-term loans; domestic settle-
ments; bill acceptance and discount; interbank borrowing; 
bank card issuance; government bond underwriting; 
agent service of funds receipt/payment and insurance.  
In terms of governance structure, VTBs are independent enterprises and legal entities. However, a “sponsor sys-
tem” applies, whereby commercial banks serve as princi-
pal sponsoring banks, provided they meet certain 
supervisory and regulatory requirements. Sponsoring 
banks must have at least a 15 percent ownership stake in 
their sponsored VTB,
38 and provide some level of over -
sight. As of the end of 2015, all “Big Five” banks39 and 
approximately 40 percent of joint-stock banks had estab-40  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
lished VTBs. Further, approximately 15 percent of RCOMBs 
and 76 percent of city commercial banks had established 
VTBs. For these latter institutions, VTBs present a valu-
able opportunity to reach new customer segments in 
rural areas. 
Pursuant to relevant law, the outstanding loans issued 
by a VTB to the same borrower cannot exceed 10 percent 
of the VTB’s capital balance (the same as for typical com-
mercial banks). Given that VTBs’ operational scale is gen-
erally small, under normal circumstances, the loan 
balances for individual customers are therefore typically 
not very large. Data from the CBRC illustrate this point. As 
of the end of 2016, the average loan balance of VTBs to 
a single borrower was RMB 410,000 (US$61,500).
As of the end of 2016, 1,519 VTBs were operating in 
China, with 65 percent located in the central and western 
regions of the country. VTBs’ total assets were RMB 1,238 
billion (US$186 billion), and their total loan balance was RMB 702 billion (US$105 billion). The total balance of 
loans to sannong and MSEs amounted to RMB 653 billion 
(US$98 billion), representing 93 percent of the total loan 
balance. Loans of less than RMB 5 million (US$750,000) 
accounted for 80 percent of all VTB loans. 4.2.2 Microcredit Companies 
An MCC is a limited liability company or joint-stock com-pany established by natural persons, corporations, or 
other social organizations, which offers microcredit ser -
vices and does not accept public deposits. The PBOC ini-tiated the pilot program for MCCs in 2005, and CBRC and 
PBOC jointly issued the Guidelines on Pilot for Microcredit 
Companies in May 2008.
An MCC that is established with private capital has 
independent corporate properties and bears civil liabili-
ties to its debts with all its assets. MCC shareholders are 
entitled to asset returns, participation in major decisions, 
and selection of managers, and are responsible for the company relative to their shareholdings. The MCC corpo-
rate governance structure is relatively independent, with 
separation between ownership and management. MCCs 
operate in line with market-oriented principles. They face 
certain restrictions on borrowing.
MCCs do not engage in savings, only in loans. There-
fore, they are not allowed to take public savings, and are 
encouraged to focus on serving farmers, agriculture, and 
rural areas and MSEs. Like VTBs, MCCs’ focus on target 
underserved segments of the market is defined by regu-
lation in some provinces; for example, 70 percent of an 
MCC’s outstanding credit portfolio must be issued to TABLE 4.6 Comparison of Baseline Information of New-Type Rural Financial Service Providers  
 VILLAGE AND TOWNSHIP  MICROCREDIT RURAL MUTUAL CREDIT  
 BANKS COMPANIES COOPERATIVES
Number (as of 2016) 1,519 8,673 48
Pilot year 2006 2005 2006
Supervision  CBRC Provincial governments, CBRC  
  financial offices, or relevant  
  departments 
Normative  CBRC and PBOC jointly  CBRC issued Provisional  
documents  issued Guidelines on Pilot  Rules for Management of  
  for Microcredit Companies  Rural Mutual Cooperatives  
  on May 4, 2008. Based on  on January 22, 2007.  
  these guidelines, provinces  
  also issued management  
  methods of microcredit  
  companies.  
Key features An independent enterprise  An independent enterprise An independent enterprise  
 and legal entity, wherein the  and legal entity that provides and legal entity that is  
 largest shareholder, or the  small loans, but does not absorb composed of famers from  
 only shareholder, must be a  public savings. Capital includes a town or village and rural  
 banking financial institution  capital paid by shareholders small enterprises. A  
 with a shareholding ratio of  and capital endowment. The community mutual banking  
 no less than 15 percent of  funds balance collected from financial institution that  
 the total stock of a VTB.  banking financial institutions provides deposit, loan, and  
  shall be no more than 50 settlement services. Services  
  percent of net capital. are limited to members. 
Source: CBRC.China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   41
small-sum borrowers, defined as those with a loan bal-
ance of not more than RMB 0.5 million (US$75,000). The 
remaining 30 percent must be lent to borrowers whose 
outstanding loans do not individually exceed 5 percent of 
net capital of the MCC. 
By the end of 2016, 8,673 MCCs were operating 
throughout the country. Total paid-in capital of MCCs was 
RMB 823 billion (US$123 billion), and total loan balances 
were RMB 927 billion (US$139 billion). Seven provinces, 
including Jiangsu, Hebei, Inner Mongolia, Liaoning, Jilin, 
Anhui, and Guangdong had established more than 400 
MCCs each, with Jiangsu having established 629 MCCs, 
the most among these provinces (box 4.4).
4.2.3 Rural Mutual Credit Cooperatives 
In 2007, CBRC issued the Provisional Rules for Manage-
ment of Rural Mutual Cooperatives to cultivate the devel-
opment of RMCCs. RMCCs are established with links to 
villages or farmers’ specialized cooperatives, handle 
members’ deposits, loans and settlement, and buy and 
sell government debts and financial bonds. The establish-
ment of RMCCs aims to unite farmers, fill gaps in financial 
services, address difficulties in access to finance in rural areas (especially in poor, economically lagging areas), and 
achieve farmers’ self-development through the mutual 
funding approach. 
In 2007, the first RMCC to be voluntarily established in 
China by farmers was formed—Jilin Lishu Yanjiacun Vil-
lage Baixin Rural Mutual Credit Cooperative. By the end 
of 2016, 48 RMCCs had been established throughout the 
country, distributed across 16 provinces although central-
ized in Zhejiang, Heilongjiang, and Shanxi. Membership 
of RMCCs reached 60,000, deposit balance reached RMB 
2.7 billion (US$405 million), and loan balance stood at 
nearly RMB 1.9 billion (US$285 million), including RMB 
1.8 billion (US$270 million) of loan balance to farmers, 
accounting for 96.8 percent of total loans.
By 2012, it had become clear that the RMCC model 
was not achieving its objectives, and CBRC has stopped 
issuing new RMCC licenses in order to focus on other pol-icy approaches. The main problems impeding the devel-
opment of RMCCs include improper internal governance 
and their small size. In addition, there were several inci-
dences of improper fund-raising or absorption of depos-
its from the general public by organizations using the 
guise of financial cooperatives, hurting the reputation of 
the sector as a whole. 
Established in September 2007, MicroCred Nanchong was among the first batch of microcredit pilot projects initiated by 
the PBOC. It was also the first foreign-funded MCC in China.
a 
MicroCred Nanchong disbursed its first batch of loans in Octo-
ber 2007. It currently has three branches, 11 outlets, and 268 
employees, 184 of whom are portfolio managers. 
Since its establishment, Microcred Nanchong has been 
committed to serving underserved segments and smaller cus-
tomers, such as farmers, individual business owners, and 
MSEs. The company demonstrates the following four opera-
tional principles: (1) More focus on credit analysis as opposed 
to collateral. Unlike traditional lending models that rely on col-
lateral and guarantees, Microcred Nanchong’s lending opera-
tions focus more on customer cash flow analysis and on 
customer’s operational stability and business outlook. About 
90 percent of Microcred Nanchong’s loans are unsecured. (2) 
Adherence to the principle of providing “small-amount (single 
loan), large-volume (total loans), dispersed and short-term 
loans.” As of the end of 2015, the cumulative number of loans had reached 81,158, but the average size of a single loan was 
only RMB 44,100 (US$6,615). While the company now has 16,601 customers and a loan balance of RMB 615 million BOX 4.4 
MicroCred Nanchong: A Microcredit Company Committed to Serving Smaller Customers  
(US$92 million), single loans smaller than RMB 100,000 (US$15,000) account for 90 percent of all loans. (3) Adherence 
to the “quick decision-making and quick disbursement” prin-
ciple. Microcred Nanchong has standardized its lending deci-
sion-making process, adopted a streamlined credit review 
process, and developed information system-based manage-
ment and remote approval of loans. It takes only 2.3 days on 
average from loan application to loan disbursement. Loan 
applications from frequent customers can be approved and 
disbursed within one day. (4) Adherence to the twin goals of 
achieving commercial sustainability and generating social 
benefits. Since 2011, Microcred Nanchong has conducted 
social performance management of enterprises and carried out customer protection activities. As a result, Microcred Nan-
chong was awarded the Smart Campaign’s Customer Protec-
tion Certification and became the first MCC to get such 
certification in China.
a  MicroCred Nanchong is a wholly owned subsidiary of MicroCred China, 
which is owned by Microcred S.A, International Finance Corporation, KfW, 
AXA Belgium S.A and Developing World Markets.
Source: MicroCred Nanchong.42  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
4.2.4 Contributions 
Since their establishment, these three new-type rural 
financial service providers have leveraged their unique 
features and respective advantages to serve target under -
served segments of the population and fill the gaps of traditional financial service providers. Specifically, their 
respective advantages include the following: 
1) New-type rural financial service providers have loca-
tional advantages in reaching the underserved. Most 
VTBs are located in counties or towns, RMCCs are 
located in rural areas, and many MCCs are located in 
areas or communities where MSEs concentrate. The 
target groups that these providers serve are located or 
live close to each other. 
2) They have a clear market position and key target cus-
tomer groups. VTBs and MCCs mainly serve MSEs and 
farmers, while RMCCs mainly serve their members, 
partly due to regulatory requirements regarding target 
customers. 
3) Their advantages in management and information enable them to better serve their target customers. 
Compared with traditional banks, new-type rural finan-
cial service providers have fewer management hierar -
chies and more accessible and faster loan approvals and are thus better able to meet the financing needs 
of farmers and MSEs for small, short-term loans on a 
frequent and rapid basis. To a large extent, new-type 
rural financial service providers operate within defined 
communities. As in the case of traditional microfi-
nance, these providers know their customers well and have a lower degree of information asymmetry and 
thus lower transaction costs. The awareness of the rep-
utation of farmers and MSEs in villages and communi-
ties also helps overcome risks resulting from the lack 
of collateral. 
In addition, VTB sponsors play a critical role in providing 
hardware, training professionals, and managing and con-
trolling risks at their sponsored VTBs.
As a result, new-type rural financial service providers 
have had many positive effects. They can provide easier access to rural finance, have filled gaps in financial ser -
vices in rural areas, and have reduced the dependence of farmers and MSEs on civil society finance, thereby con-
tributing to the improvement of the financial environment 
in rural areas. 
4.2.5 Remaining Challenges 
The establishment of new-type rural financial service pro-viders represents one of China’s most important attempts 
to promote financial inclusion and has achieved positive results. However, these new types of providers also face several challenges. Some of these problems are common 
across all three types of providers—such as limited inno-
vation—while other problems are specific to a particular 
kind of new-type rural financial service provider. 
The main problems confronting VTBs relate to man-
agement costs, operational flexibility, and the ability to innovate. VTB sponsors face high management costs. As 
specified by CBRC, VTB outlets must be established both 
in developed and underdeveloped areas. If a sponsoring 
bank does not have a branch office in a province, the VTB 
is usually managed by the head office of the sponsoring 
bank. This increases management costs and reduces the 
operating flexibility of the VTB. Due to its smaller scale, the 
capability of VTBs to innovate with respect to products and 
services can be weak. Given ownership requirements, 
VTBs may also be heavily influenced by their sponsoring 
banks (as opposed to the influence of other potential 
investors). As a result, the operational models of VTBs can 
end up closely resembling that of sponsoring banks and 
VTB products and services are often not differentiated 
from those of traditional banks, diminishing their ability to 
provide target market segments with more tailored, appro-
priate product offerings initially intended by policymakers. High management costs, limited operational flexibility, 
and homogenous products contribute to low margins and 
difficulties in scaling up to sustainably serve greater num-
bers of underserved consumers with innovative products.
The main challenges confronting MCCs include limited 
differentiation in market positioning from commercial 
banks, weak risk management, limited access to sources of 
funding, heavy tax burdens, and geographic restrictions 
on operations. First, some MCC operations have deviated 
from targeting underserved customers and thus failed to 
fill the gaps in financial inclusion. In practice, many MCCs 
also operate similarly to traditional financial service provid-
ers and do not target “micro” segments with small loans. 
The results of a survey of 279 MCCs in China conducted in 
2015 show that the average loan amount for sampled 
MCCs is RMB 1.90 million (US$285,000) and the median is 
RMB 1.27 million (US$190,500). The number of loans less than or equal to RMB 50,000 (US$7,500) account for only 
11.7 percent of all loans, and the total amount of these 
loans accounts for 1.5 percent of the total portfolio. In 
contrast, the number of loans over RMB 1 million 
(US$150,000) accounts for 38.3 percent of all loans, and 
the total amount of these loans accounts for 67.9 per -
cent of the total portfolio.
40  
Second, risk prevention and control has become a 
core challenge impeding sustainable development of the MCC sector. Some MCC customers are from industries 
limited by regulatory policies or enterprises with high debt ratios and lacking in financial sustainability. Some 
MCCs have problems such as limited types of guaran-China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   43
tees, poor procedures, weak internal management, and 
low capacity in risk prevention and control, thereby 
increasing operational risks.
Third, under their lending-only regulatory framework, 
MCCs must issue loans that rely on the equity capital con-
tributed by shareholders. The CBRC Guidelines on Pilots 
for Microcredit Companies issued in 2008 specifies that 
“the main sources of funds include capital funds paid by 
shareholders, capital endowment, and funds raised from 
no more than two banking financial institutions […and] the 
balance of funds collected from the banking financial insti-
tutions shall not be more than 50 percent of the net capi-
tal.” These provisions have limited the availability of funds 
for MCCs, equating to corresponding constraints on their 
lending operations. Regulatory requirements are inconsis-
tent across provinces, with some provinces imposing high 
entry barriers due to high initial minimum capital require-
ments. The tax burden of MCCs was also generally higher than those of typical financial service providers in the past, 
and MCCs did not enjoy preferential state-promulgated 
tax policies to support rural areas and MSEs. However, this 
situation was addressed in the beginning of 2017, when 
MCCs began to enjoy preferential tax policies as well. 
Fourth, MCCs’ operations are typically limited to 
within a single county’s boundaries. Expanding opera-
tions to a neighboring county requires reapplication and 
setting up a new, independent entity, limiting scalability 
and efficient expansion of operations.
As a result of these various risk management, finan-
cial, and geographic challenges, MCCs have difficulty 
achieving scale and commercial sustainability. Many 
MCCs are undergoing financial difficulties. Such chal-
lenges in the legal and regulatory environment must be 
addressed to enable MCCs to play a greater role in con-
tributing to financial inclusion.
Finally, following the temporary suspension of new 
licenses for RMCCs, CBRC faces a challenge to determine the future role of these providers (or similar providers) in 
facilitating cooperative-based finance for agricultural 
households in rural areas. 
4.3  DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION  
OF FINTECH 
In recent years, China has emerged as a global fintech leader. New entrants to the Chinese financial sector have 
innovated with new models, delivery channels, and prod-
ucts, many of which leverage the massive scale and net-
work effects of online e-commerce and social media 
platforms. The rapid growth of fintech companies in China 
can also be partly explained by their ability to tap into 
unmet demand from consumers and MSEs that were 
often neglected by traditional financial service providers focused on serving state-owned enterprises. Yet assess-
ing the contribution of fintech companies to financial 
inclusion is not straightforward. While many customers 
have been able to access new products that are well tai-
lored to their needs, not all products offered by fintech 
companies are necessarily appropriate for the needs of 
underserved populations, and many last-mile customers 
have not benefited from the fintech revolution. Different 
types of fintech models also represent new risks to finan-
cial stability and consumer protection.
41  
Due to these various factors and considerations, Chi-
nese regulatory authorities have sought to maintain a bal-anced policy approach toward the entrance and scaling of 
fintech companies. The objective of this approach has 
been to encourage innovation while introducing moder -
ate and proportionate levels of supervision. This balanced approach is referenced in the 2015 Guidelines on Promot-
ing Sound Development of Internet Finance, which notes 
the need to “give ample room for innovations in internet finance” while also highlighting the need for “ensuring 
the healthy development of internet finance so that inter -
net finance can better serve the real economy, via mutu-ally supporting enhancing supervision and regulation as 
well as encouraging innovation.” The Guidelines clearly 
references “law-based, moderate, differentiated, coordi-
nated, and innovative supervision and regulation” as the 
principles for regulating and supervising internet finance—including fintech—in China. To what degree 
authorities have successfully adhered to these principles 
has varied by provider and product and is discussed in 
more detail in subsequent sections.
The following subsections cover seven main types of 
fintech companies in China: (4.3.1) nonbank digital pay-
ment providers, (4.3.2) peer-to-peer lending, (4.3.3)  
Internet-based microlending, (4.3.4) Internet banks, (4.3.5) Internet-based insurance, (4.3.6) Internet-based 
fund management, and (4.3.7) Internet equity-based 
crowdfunding. Finally, subsection 4.3.8 summarizes the 
contributions of fintech—and digital finance more 
broadly—to financial inclusion and remaining challenges. 
4.3.1 Nonbank Digital Payment Providers 
Nonbank network payment has emerged in China with the explosive growth of online e-commerce and social 
network platforms. Nonbank network payment  refers to 
payments a payer makes through a nonbank payment
42 
platform, such as Alipay, developed by the Alibaba 
Group’s affiliate Ant Financial, or Tenpay, developed by 
Tencent, which operates the social media platforms 
WeChat and QQ. 
Alipay launched in 2004 as a means to facilitate pay-
ments (and thus, commercial transactions) on the e-com-
merce platforms owned by Alibaba (e.g., Taobao, Tmall). 44  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
Alipay provided a mechanism through which funds pro-
vided by the buyer could be stored in “escrow” until the 
buyer received the purchased product and confirmed that 
it was satisfactory, at which point the funds would be 
released to the seller. This arrangement addressed a fun-
damental issue that hampered e-commerce in China in its 
early days: a lack of trust between buyers and sellers. The 
following year, Tencent introduced a payment platform 
called Tenpay on its messaging platform QQ, allowing its 
users to pay for online gaming and music purchases. 
Beginning in 2009, these Internet-based payment prod-
ucts were adapted to mobile applications to facilitate 
mobile payments.43 For example, Tenpay was integrated 
into the WeChat app in the form of an e-wallet linked to an existing bank account or credit card, allowing for a 
greater range of payment uses including person-to-per -
son transfers, bill payments, and travel reservations, QR codes facilitate some of these transactions. Other non-
bank payment providers also entered the digital pay-
ments space, including China UnionPay and China 
Telecom. By 2010, Alipay and Tenpay had cumulatively 
reached hundreds of millions of users. 
Despite the rapid initial growth, Chinese regulatory 
authorities initially took a “wait and see” approach, allow-
ing the emerging industry to innovate and grow with rel-
atively few restrictions. Not until 2010—six years after the 
launch of Alipay—did PBOC issue regulations addressing 
nonbank digital payment providers, setting out licensing 
requirements and procedures covering topics such as 
minimum capital requirements and investor require-ments.
44 Five years later, in December 2015, the PBOC 
issued the Administrative Rules for Network Payment of 
Nonbank Payment Institutions,  setting forth requirements 
related to customer identification and anti-money laun-dering/combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) 
compliance, capping monthly payment activity for indi-
vidual users, and establishing data privacy requirements. 
The “wait and see” approach appears to have had 
certain benefits. As of the end of 2016, more than 260 
licensed payment institutions were operating under these regulations, with a combined reach of hundreds of mil-lions of customers (table 4.7).
45,46 The top two nonbank 
digital payment providers with the largest payment vol-
ume in 2016 were Alipay (China) Internet Technology Co., 
Ltd. and Shenzhen TenPay Co., Ltd (table 4.8). For many 
Chinese consumers—particularly those in urban areas—
payments on these platforms have effectively replaced 
cash and bank cards for many day-to-day transactions. 
 The rapid growth in use of nonbank digital payment 
platforms can be attributed to their common, core fea-
tures:
1) Reliability and recourse. Nonbank digital payment 
providers such as Alipay were established to facilitate 
an escrow system in which payment to the retailer is 
not made until the customer reports that he or she has 
received the product and is satisfied. 
2) Use of existing platforms. The largest nonbank digital 
payment providers (e.g., Alipay and Tenpay) integrate a payment functionality into existing e-commerce and 
social media platforms with large user networks, which 
enables economies of scale. WeChat’s Red Envelope 
campaign, launched in 2014, was a notable success in 
using digital payments to send monetary gifts, with 
more than 8 billion red envelopes sent over WeChat 
during Chinese New Year in 2016.
47  
3) Affordability. Customers of many nonbank digital pay-
ment providers (including Alipay and Tenpay) can 
transfer money into their e-wallets and make payments 
at no cost. This relates to the integration of payment 
tools into existing e-commerce and social media plat-
forms; the adjacent revenue streams of these social 
and e-commerce platforms effectively subsidize the 
payment services, which are offered at low cost to cus-tomers. Most nonbank digital payment platforms allow 
a certain free withdrawal amount, and charge their cus-
tomers a withdrawal fee e.g., 0.1 percent of the 
amount withdrawn exceeding the free amount. The 
cost structure is also enticing for merchants and has led 
TABLE 4.7 Industry Development of Nonbank  
Digital Payment Providers
  2013 2014 2015 2016
Number of providers  250 269 268 266
Number of transactions  371.34  538.97 917.91 1,854.76  
per year (100 million) 
Volume of transactions  17.57 35.30 63.71  119.51  
per year (trillion RMB  (2.64) (5.30) (9.56)  (17.93)  
[trillion US$])
Source: PBOC.TABLE 4.8 Overview of Key  
Nonbank Digital Payment Products 
 ALIPAY TENPAY
Year launched 2004 2005
Affiliated company  Ant Financial  Tencent
Number of customers  450 n/a 
(million) Market share (%)   54  37
Source: Company disclosures (number of customers with 
identity verified), Analysys (2016; market share values). China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   45
to a shift toward using nonbank digital payment plat-
forms (instead of credit or debit cards) for various retail 
transactions. 
4) Convenience and interoperability. Mobile applications by nonbank digital payment institutions provide con-
sumers with convenient and fast payment services. 
Currently, use cases include online shopping pay-
ments, prepaid (mobile phone) recharge, transfers, air 
travel ticket payment, catering, and credit card repay-
ment. Most nonbank digital payment providers inte-
grate the internal payment platforms of several banks, 
which allows customers to use their existing accounts 
and enables more convenient and faster transactions. 
5) Cost savings for retail firms. Retail firms can use non-
bank digital payment providers to accept electronic 
payments—including via a simple printout of a QR 
code—thus avoiding costs associated with cash and 
fees typically associated with card-based payment 
instruments. 
Ant Financial is a good illustration of leveraging an inte-
grated online financial service platform, building off the 
core Alipay platform. Launched in October 2014, Ant Financial consolidates several Alibaba-affiliated business 
units, including Alipay, Alipay Wallet, Yuebao, Zhaocai-
bao, Ant Micro, and MYbank (further described in section 
4.3.4), to provide a range of financial services that span 
payment, investment and financial management, micro 
lending, and insurance. The associated data resources 
across business units allow Ant Financial to better under -
stand customers’ financial behaviors and needs, enabling Ant Financial to better manage risks and develop innova-
tive, appropriately tailored products.
However, nonbank digital payment platforms also 
pose potential risks, including fraud and money launder -
ing—one of the potential drawbacks of the “wait and see” approach if pursued for too long and without proper 
monitoring. The China Internet Finance Report of 2016 
cites an example of fraud wherein buyers who ordered products on an e-commerce platform such as Taobao 
would subsequently receive a fraudulent link (closely 
resembling a real payment link) asking the buyer to make 
a direct payment. In reality, the link would send the buyer 
to a phishing site simulating the real webpage. If the 
buyer filled out his or her information on the phishing 
site, the fraudster would then have access to the buyer’s 
account and password. 
With the aim of addressing fraud and money launder -
ing issues while not stifling the development of digital 
payments, PBOC introduced a tiered account system for 
nonbank digital payment providers in 2015 (see box 4.5).
4.3.2 Peer-to-Peer Lending 
P2P loans refer to a direct peer-to-peer loan transacted on an Internet platform. A P2P online platform typically 
undertakes detailed due diligence on borrowers’ qualifi-
cations and credit status, selects borrowers with low 
default risks, and refers them to individual investors who 
are expected to lend (invest) money. Pursuant to relevant 
regulations, online P2P platforms are information interme-
diaries by nature rather than credit intermediaries, as they 
provide information collection, disclosure, credit evalua-
tion, information exchange, matching of borrowers and 
lenders, and other services for direct transactions between 
borrowers and lenders. As a result, they cannot absorb 
deposits from the general public, gather funds or set up 
pools of funds, or provide guarantees in any form to lend-
ers.
48 Some P2P platforms utilize an online-to-offline 
model, with offline teams performing assessments of potential borrowers and risk control activities due to a lack 
of comprehensive credit information. Paipaidai is a typical 
online model, while Creditease and Renren Dai represent 
an online-to-offline model.
In recent years, online lending via P2P platforms has 
been increasing rapidly in China. Many online P2P lending 
platforms have been launched, including PPDAI, Renren 
Dai, Lufax, CreditEase, and Hongling Capital (table 4.9). 
Unlike in other countries, P2P platforms primarily obtain 
TABLE 4.9 Overview of Key P2P Lending Platforms 
KEY INDICATORS PPDAI RENREN DAI CREDITEASE LUFAX
Year launched  2007 2010  2012   2011
Affiliated company PPDAI   Renren Ucredit  CreditEase Ping An 
Number of investors   240,000 319,925 420,584 546,767 
Number of borrowers  3,380,000  333,965 386,634  903,836
Number of loans 7,110,000 133,687 462,453 —
Volume of loans (billion  19.9  11.2 33.8  87.3  
RMB [billion US$])  (3.0) (1.7) (5.1) (13.1)
Source: Respective companies’ data, 2016.46  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
In December 2015, PBOC released the Administrative Rules 
for Network Payment of Nonbank Payment Institutions (the 
“Administrative Rules”). 
The objective of the Administrative Rules was to establish 
distinct tiers or categories of payment accounts provided by 
nonbank digital payment providers to balance financial inclu-
sion objectives with the integrity, safety, and efficiency of the 
These account-level restrictions can be adjusted depending 
on provider-level ratings from PBOC. For example, platforms 
with an “A” rating from PBOC and more than 95 percent of 
Type II and III accounts having verified identification would be 
allowed to use alternative methods for ID verification, subject   NONBANK PERSONAL DIGITAL PAYMENT ACCOUNT
FEATURES  TYPE I  TYPE II TYPE III (FULLY FUNCTIONAL)
Transaction volume limit RMB 1,000 (US$150)  RMB 100,000 (US$15,000) RMB 200,000 (US$30,000)  
 (accumulated lifetime limit, (accumulated annual (accumulated annual  
 including transfers to own  limit, not including transfers limit, not including transfers  
 bank account) to own bank account) to own bank account)
Daily transaction limit RMB 1,000 (US$150) or  RMB 1,000 (US$150) or RMB 1,000 (US$150) or RMB  
 RMB 5,000 (US$750) or other  RMB 5,000 (US$750) or 5,000 (US$750) or other  
 amount stated in the customer  other amount stated in the amount stated in the customer  
 agreement, depending on  customer agreement,  agreement, depending on  
 security level of transaction  depending on security level security level of transaction  
 validation (excluding transfers  of transaction validation validation (excluding transfers  
 to own bank account) (excluding transfers to own  to own bank account)  
  bank account) 
Identification verification  Identity verified remotely via Identity verified in person or Identity verified in person or  
requirements to open at least one legal and secure  remotely via at least 3 legal remotely via at least 5 legal and  
 external database, and applicant  and secure external databases,  secure external databases, with  
 must be opening a payment  with aim of multiple validation aim of multiple validation of  
 account with the provider for  of identity by payment institution identity by payment institution  
 the first time itself or cooperating institutions itself or cooperating institutions
Functionality Consumption purchases and  Consumption purchases and Consumption purchases,  
 transfers transfers transfers, financial product  
   purchases (e.g., investment or  
   wealth management)BOX 4.5 
Tiered Account System for Nonbank Digital Payment Providers  
payments system. The tiered system clearly separates non-
bank payment accounts from bank accounts. The Administra-
tive Rules established three types of nonbank payment 
accounts that are differentiated by their respective know-your-
customer requirements and the type and size of transactions 
that can be made using the account. 
to PBOC approval and filing in PBOC branches. Around the 
same time as it released the Administrative Rules, PBOC also 
issued separate regulations to establish a tiered account sys-
tem for banks, further discussed later in box 4.7.
Source: PBOC.
China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   47
TABLE 4.10 Industry Development of P2P Lending  
KEY INDICATORS  2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Number of providers  50 200 800  1,575  2,595  2,448
Number of investors  
(tens of thousands) — —  25  116 586 1,375
Number of borrowers  
(tens of thousands) — — 15  63  285 876 
Volume of transactions per  3.1 21.2 105.8 252.8 982.3 2,063.9  
year (billion RMB [billion US$])   (0.5) (3.2) (15.9)  (37.9) (147.3)  (309.6)
Average rate of return (%) — 19.1 21.3   17.9  13.3 10.5 
Average maturity (months) — 6.0 4.7  6.1  6.8 7.9 
Source: Wangdai Zhijia, (2014, 2015, and 2016). funding from retail investors, rather than institutional 
investors. By the end of 2016, 2,448 online P2P lending 
platforms were in operation, decreasing slightly compared 
with the number at the end of 2015 (table 4.10). As of the 
end of 2016, the total outstanding loan balance of online 
P2P lending had reached RMB 816.2 billion (US$122.4 bil-
lion),49 equivalent to 4.3 percent of the balance of house-
hold loans issued by deposit-taking financial service providers in China. The total transaction volume of online 
P2P lending reached RMB 2,063.9 billion (US$309.6 bil-
lion) in 2016, an increase of 110 percent over 2015. The 
overall rate of return on online P2P lending in 2016 was 
10.5 percent, which decreased by 284 base points over 
2015. In 2016, the average maturity of online P2P loans 
was 7.9 months and the number of investors and borrow-
ers in the online P2P lending sector reached 13.8 million 
and 8.8 million, respectively, up by 135 percent and 207 
percent, respectively, over 2015.
50  
Several factors account for the rapid development of 
online P2P loans in China. First, the previous climate of financial repression (e.g., interest rate caps) limited 
investment channels for idle funds, making obtaining 
loans from formal financial service providers difficult for 
potential loan seekers and limiting options for retail 
investors. In this context, P2P platforms emerged as a 
much needed alternative source of credit for individuals 
and firms that were otherwise not served by the financial 
system and provided higher rates of return to retail 
investors. Second, regulatory policies provided the 
opportunity for easy entry of P2P platforms into the mar -
ket and their subsequent growth. Financial sector author -
ities initially adopted a “wait-and-see” approach with 
close observation and timely interventions that created 
the conditions for a rapid increase in P2P platforms. 
Third, advances in and the application of information technology significantly reduced information asymmetry 
between debtors and creditors and the cost of matching investors and borrowers, thereby significantly lowering 
P2P loan transaction costs.
As the P2P industry evolves, Chinese financial sector 
authorities have determined that changing the regulatory 
strategy from the “wait-and-see” approach to an active 
regulatory approach is more appropriate (further dis-
cussed in sections 5.4 and 6.4). The first Chinese online 
P2P company, PPDAI, was launched in 2007 and, as in 
other countries, regulation lagged behind industry devel-
opment in its initial stages. By 2010, the size of China’s 
P2P market was estimated at RMB 1.4 billion (US$206 
million), with about 15 platforms linking investors and 
borrowers, yet no specific regulation on P2P had been 
issued.
51 In August of 2011, CBRC issued the Circular on 
Risks Associated with Peer-to-Peer Lending, which identi-
fied risks such as money laundering and fraud, but did 
not yet provide any specific rules governing P2P plat-
forms. In practice, many online P2P platforms had by 
then deviated from their initial function as information 
intermediaries and become credit intermediaries by pro-
viding guarantees and setting up pools of funds, an activ-
ity in conflict with existing financial sector regulations. 
Other P2P platforms were engaged in outright fraud. In 
one high-profile case, the company Ezubao was shut 
down in 2015 after authorities discovered it had been 
operating a Ponzi scheme in which it sold fraudulent 
investment products to nearly one million investors.52  
These activities created financial risks, undermined the 
legitimate rights and interests of investors, and signifi-
cantly harmed financial security and social stability. 
Therefore, CBRC, the Ministry of Industry and Informa-
tion Technology, the Ministry of Public Security, and the 
State Internet Information Office jointly issued the Interim  
Rules for the Administration of the Business Activities of Internet-Based Lending Information Intermediary Institu-
tions in August 2016 (“Interim Rules”), with the objective 
of reforming and standardizing the industry to ensure 48  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
healthy and sustainable development. The Interim Rules 
clarified that P2P lending platforms were information 
intermediaries, specified activities that P2P lending plat-
forms were prohibited from engaging in,53 established 
business rules and risk management requirements for P2P 
lending and obligations of borrowers and lenders, and 
determined the joint and coordinated supervisory respon-
sibilities of various authorities overseeing the industry. The 
Interim Rules also included procedures designed to pro-
tect consumers, such as requirements related to informa-
tion disclosure, third-party custody of consumer funds, 
and limits on loan concentration risk. By the end of 2015, 
1,171 P2P service providers had closed due to fraudulent 
business practices, with 804 providers doing so in 2015 
alone.54 How the industry will evolve remains to be seen, 
though the financial sector authority approach of shifting 
from “wait and see” to taking concrete action appears to 
have been timely and impactful (box 4.6).
4.3.3 Internet-Based Microlending
Internet-based microlending refers to the practice of Internet companies providing small loans to their custom-
ers through an MCC under their control. Internet-based microlending can be roughly divided into the following 
three types:
1) Financing for online store operators. An example is 
loans provided by Ant Financial for Taobao store own-
ers, which were piloted beginning in 2010. Given that 
many Taobao store owners are typically underserved 
segments with unmet needs for financial services, Ant 
Financial launched Taobao credit-based loans. Taobao 
determines the credit scores of store owners based on the comments of shoppers on Alipay and Taobao. 
Qualified owners can get loans released directly via 
Alipay. This lending approach enables convenience 
and speed. These loans were an important enabler of 
the escrow model used to facilitate online payments, 
allowing merchants to cover their short-term financing 
needs while waiting for payments to arrive.
2) Consumer lending for online shoppers. An example is 
“Ant Check Later”, a financing product for e-com-
merce shoppers. Shoppers can apply directly for 
financing online in the payment link for online shop-
ping, and Ant Financial assesses the creditworthiness 
of applicants through big data, resulting in rapid loan 
disbursement.
Beginning in April 2016, PBOC and 16 other agen-cies jointly began carrying out a special campaign 
approved by the State Council to address the risks 
of Internet finance to promote the healthy and 
orderly development of Internet finance. The 
objectives of the campaign are to reverse and rec-
tify improper behaviors in some types of Internet 
finance, exclude those institutions that violate laws 
and regulations in the name of innovation and set 
clear standards for the industry, support and pro-
tect institutions that engage in useful innovation 
and operate in accordance with laws and regula-
tions, guide Internet finance toward the right track 
of innovation, clarify the division of labor among 
relevant government authorities and strengthen 
collaboration, and balance short- and long-term 
objectives. 
The Implementation Plan for the Special Cam-
paign to Address Risks of Internet-Based Finance (“Plan”) notes that the potential risks of Internet BOX 4.6
Special Campaign to Address the Risks of Internet Finance 
finance are mainly in P2P online lending, Inter -
net-based financial asset management, and adver -
tising of Internet finance. The Plan notes that the 
campaign should work to tighten standards for mar -
ket entry for new participants, strengthen fund monitoring, establish whistle-blowing and “ample 
reward and severe punishment” systems, intensify 
efforts to rectify unfair competition, enhance inter -
nal controls, and leverage technology to increase the campaign’s effectiveness.
A working mechanism has been established for 
the campaign, stressing the need to improve orga-
nization and coordination and increase relevant 
authorities’ accountability. The campaign aims to 
identify and address problems, regulate collabora-
tively, treat both symptoms and root causes, and 
eventually promote the establishment of a mecha-
nism to support the long-term development of a healthy and responsible Internet finance sector.China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   49
3) Small loans to agricultural households. These loans 
occur through Internet and mobile platforms to help 
agricultural households solve financing problems dur-  
ing production. Examples of providers include Ant Financial (via Ant MCC) and Jingdong (via JD MCC), 
two Internet-based companies that also serve rural 
areas. In this model, loans to farmers can usually be 
used for seeds, fertilizer, and other inputs used for  
production. Goods are then required to be sold on e-commerce platforms such as Taobao and JD.com, 
and the revenue generated goes to the lender as 
repayment for the loan. 
The rapid development of Internet-based microlending in China can be attributed to the following factors. First, the 
Internet has developed quickly in China, enabling people 
to use Internet technology to perform operations related 
to small loans, thus lowering the cost of origination. Sec-
ond, the development of e-commerce has led to the 
emergence of new types of consumers who demand 
Internet-based microlending, including online shoppers 
and online store owners. Third, the development of 
e-commence and advances in information technology 
have enabled institutions to capture and leverage new 
data sources to assess repayment capacities of potential 
borrowers. For example, lenders associated with an 
e-commerce platform can use an online merchant’s trans-action history to assess his or her creditworthiness. These 
factors have lowered costs, improved the efficiency of 
small loan origination, and made small loans more conve-
nient and accessible for consumers.
However, companies engaging in Internet-based 
microlending operations for small loans are still limited in 
number and only target individuals and MSEs on their 
respective e-commerce platforms. Meanwhile, their online 
lending operations rely on information technologies and 
transaction data that have only been in use for a short 
period of time and still need to be tested. 
4.3.4 Internet Banks 
With advances in information technology, many Inter -
net-based enterprises have achieved success in e-com-
merce and digital payments and developed large 
customer bases, transactional data, and experience with 
online businesses. These enterprises have recognized the 
competitive advantages of these attributes and have 
entered into Internet banking. At present, three estab-
lished “Internet banks” exist in China. WeBank and 
MYbank were granted commercial banking licenses by 
CBRC in 2014, and XW Bank was granted a license in 2016 
(table 4.11). These Internet banks have no outlets or 
counter services. Their current focus is to leverage tech-
nology and data rather than offline resources and to target individuals and MSEs with credit products. MYbank, for example, has a customer base mainly composed of online 
stores on the e-commerce platform of its parent company 
Alibaba. MYbank can leverage big data on such consum-
ers for creditworthiness assessments and loan-granting 
decisions. WeBank, for its part, launched its own unse-
cured microloan (Weilidai) and auto microloan (Weichedai) 
products in September 2015. For Weilidai, consumers can 
borrow up to RMB 200,000 (US$30,000) without guaran-
tee or collateral. 
While their banking licenses allow them to accept 
deposits, the 2015 tiered-account regulations (see box 
4.7) thus far limits the degree to which remote identifica-
tion can be used to open accounts with full functionality 
(such as accepting cash deposits). Internet banks can open Type II and Type III accounts, but such accounts 
must be linked to an existing Type I bank account (pre-
sumably at a traditional bank).
By the end of 2016, the loan balance managed by 
WeBank had reached RMB 57.2 billion (US$8.6 billion), 
including its own loan balance of RMB 30.8 billion 
(US$4.6 billion; representing 697 percent year-on-year 
growth) and loan balance of RMB 26.4 billion (US$4.0 
billion) from banks operating via its intermediary plat-
form. All of these loans were extended to individual con-
sumers. The consumer lending balance of unsecured 
microloans (Weilidai) amounted to RMB 25.2 billion 
(US$3.8 billion, an 82 percent share of its own loan bal-
ance), while the lending balance of auto microloans 
(Weichedai) amounted to RMB 5.5 billion (US$0.8 billion, 
an 18 percent share). MYbank opened in June 2015, and 
by the end of 2016, its balance of loans to MSEs (includ-ing personal businesses) had reached RMB 28.7 billion 
(US$4.3 billion). 
TABLE 4.11 Overview of Internet Banks 
KEY INDICATORS WEBANK MYBANK XW BANK
 Year launched 2015 2015 2016 
 Major shareholder Tencent Group Ant Financial  New Hope Group
Total assets (RMB billion  52 (7.8) 61.5 (9.2) 5 (0.8)  
[US$ billion]) 
Deposit balance (RMB  23.1 (3.5) 23.2 (3.5) 0.6 (0.1)  
billion [US$ billion]) Outstanding loan balance  30.8 (4.6) 34 (5.1) 4 (0.6)  
(RMB billion [US$ billion]) Number of outstanding  7 n/a 1 
loans (million) Average size of loans 4,368 (655) n/a 2,550 (383)  
 (RMB [US$]) 
Source: Respective companies’ data. Data for WeBank and MYbank is as of December 2016, 
data for XW Bank is as of June 2017. 50  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
In December 2015, PBOC released the Notice on Improving 
Services of Personal Bank Accounts and Strengthening Account 
Management, which was later supplemented in November 
2016 by the Notice on Implementing the Rules for the Catego-rized Management of Individual Bank Accounts. The objective 
of these notices was to establish distinct tiers or categories of 
bank accounts provided by banks to balance financial inclusion 
objectives with integrity, safety, and efficiency. The first notice 
established three types of bank accounts that are differentiated BOX 4.7
Tiered Account System for Banks 
by their respective know-your-customer requirements and the 
type and size of transactions that can be made using the 
account. The second notice require each bank account to have 
a unique individual identification number and be associated 
with a unique phone number to prevent fraud.
Around the same time, PBOC also issued separate regula-
tions to establish a tiered account system for nonbank digital 
payment providers, further discussed in box 4.5.
 
Categorized Management of Personal Bank Accounts
FEATURES  TYPE III  TYPE II TYPE I (FULLY FUNCTIONAL)
Daily transaction Account balance limit of RMB No account balance limit None  
and balance limits 1,000 (US$150).   
    
 Daily transaction limit on funds Daily transaction limit on funds  
 transfers from non-linked transfers from non-linked accounts 
 accounts of RMB 5,000 (US$750),  of RMB 10,000 (US$1,500), and  
 and annual transaction limit of  annual transaction limit of RMB  
 RMB 100,000 (US$15,000). 200,000 (US$30,000).
    
 Daily transaction limit on consumption Daily transaction limit on consump-  
 purchases, bill payment, and fund tion purchases, bill payment, and
 transfers to non-linked accounts of fund transfers to non-linked accounts  
 RMB 5,000 (US$750), and annual  of RMB 10,000 (US$1,500), and  
 transaction limit of RMB 100,000  annual transaction limit of RMB  
 (US$15,000). 200,000 (US$30,000).
Identification  • In-person via bank counter or • In-person via bank counter or • In-person via bank counter 
verification  self-service machine  or self-service machine  or self-service machine  
requirement to         (if the latter, needs to verify  
open account • Remote via electronic channel • Remote via electronic channel  applicant’s identification in  
   (need to activate account by   (need to link to the applicant’s  person)  
  transferring any amount from   type I account or credit card  
  existing bank account and   account)  
  verifying that the applicant is  
  the bank account owner)     
Functionality Consumption purchases (with limits), Deposits, consumption purchases  Cash deposit/withdrawal,   
 bill payments (with limits), transfers  (with limits), bill payment (with limits),  transfers, consumption  
 to/from non-linked bank accounts  financial product purchases (e.g.,   purchases, bill payment,  
 (with limits) investment or wealth management),   financial product purchases  
    transfers to/from non-linked bank   (e.g., investment or wealth  
    accounts (with limits)   management)
Source: PBOC.
China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   51
The business models of Internet banks are still evolv-
ing, yet current players demonstrate some common 
characteristics. Internet banks must have a powerful 
Internet service provider that can handle high amounts 
of traffic and online transactions. The online-only model 
allows Internet banks to minimize transaction costs and 
use big data to analyze customer behaviors, including 
creditworthiness. Due to their wealth of data, sophisti-
cated analytical tools, and their own funding constraints 
(i.e., lack of deposits), Internet banks have incorporated 
partnerships with traditional banks into their business 
model. Through these partnerships, Internet banks link 
traditional banks to potential borrowers, providing tradi-
tional banks with basic personal information and basic 
profiles about the credit limits and borrowing of poten-
tial borrowers. The customer resources and revenues 
from loans disbursed through this type of partnership 
arrangement are then shared between the Internet bank and the traditional bank.
55 
Important differences exist between Internet banks as 
they currently operate and traditional banks. First, they have different operating philosophies. Traditional banks 
mainly depend on their own resources for business devel-
opment, whereas Internet banks integrate and leverage 
various resources for business development from their 
parent companies, including data and information 
acquired from e-commerce platforms and generated in 
operational processes, including logistics, and industrial 
and commercial activities. 
Second, they have different customer bases. Internet 
banks’ target customers are MSEs, entrepreneurs, and 
individual consumers who are often familiar with and 
active in e-commerce.
Third, Internet banks have different operating chan-
nels. Traditional banks still depend on physical counter 
services; their existing e-banking business is an affiliated service with traditional products, adapted for delivery via 
the Internet. Internet banks have adopted the Internet 
model from the outset; for example, the whole process of 
lending is conducted digitally. 
Fourth, Internet banks have different measures to 
identify and assess customers. Traditional banks mostly 
identify customers and assess their creditworthiness 
based on financial statements and face-to-face communi-
cations. However, Internet banks depend on Internet 
technologies and draw from data from their parent com-
panies to conduct customer identification and creditwor -
thiness assessments through a combined approach of data models for automatic assessment and video or tele-
phone credit investigations. 
Fifth, Internet banks have different risk management 
means and technologies. Traditional banks to some 
extent rely on their staff to undertake risk management activities, while Internet banks rely on big data and data models for risk management. 
To date, Internet bank operations remain limited, and 
their business models are still evolving, as are regulatory approaches. At present, Internet banks mainly focus on 
small loans and lending to certain types of customers. 
These banks face challenges in expanding their business 
beyond credit products or leveraging retail deposits, 
because Type II and III accounts (the only types of bank 
accounts that can be opened remotely) have certain 
restrictions on deposit taking, and Internet banks have no 
offline (physical) access points. As mentioned previously, 
remote identification technology has not yet been 
deemed sufficiently robust to facilitate remote account 
opening for fully functional bank accounts, and financial 
sector authorities require customers to be physically pres-
ent when first opening a fully functional account. Although 
not yet approved, banks are exploring the use of remote 
identification technology in the hopes of using such tech-nology in the future to open higher-tier accounts and 
expand to a more diversified product offering. 
4.3.5 Internet-Based Insurance 
The development of Internet-based insurance rep-
resents a significant milestone in China’s insurance 
industry. These new, Internet-only fintech insurance 
companies leverage new business models and plat-
forms to design and deliver new types of Internet-based 
insurance products and services to consumers. Tradi-
tional insurance companies and other providers have 
subsequently followed suit and have pursued partner -
ships with Internet companies, as previously discussed in section 4.1.6. In November 2013, the first online-only 
insurance company in China, Zhong An Online P&C 
Insurance Co., Ltd. was founded. Major shareholders in 
Zhong An Online include Ant Financial, Tencent, and 
Ping An. Following the establishment of Zhong An 
Online, other Internet-based insurance companies have 
been approved and established.
Internet-only insurance companies leverage digital 
technologies to conduct transaction processing and data storage, analyzing faster and on a much larger scale than 
traditional insurance companies. Such companies can 
utilize big data analytics to develop a wider variety of 
discrete insurance products and use online processing 
and digital channels to serve customers more efficiently 
and conveniently. Their products are mainly low value, 
short term, and standardized, with simple contract terms 
and easy operational processes. For example, Zhong  
An Online launched products mainly related to e-com-merce and Internet transactions, including household 
property insurance, returned cargo insurance, liability 52  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
insurance, credit and guarantee insurance, high tem-
perature insurance, and flight delay insurance. That said, 
not all “innovative” insurance products that Internet-only 
insurance companies offer contribute to financial inclu-
sion, because many products are targeted to high-in-
come customers and do not offer meaningful risk 
mitigation for the underserved. 
The Chinese government has provided policy support 
to promote the development of the Internet-based insur -
ance sector, including the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Electronic Signature, issued in August 2004 and 
revised in 2015, which stipulated the legal force of elec-
tronic signatures and safeguarded the legal rights of all 
parties, helping to facilitate the delivery of online services 
and electronic policies. The Guidelines on Promoting 
Sound Development of Internet Finance established 
operating principles and business requirements and pro-
hibited certain Internet finance behaviors (such as mis-leading descriptions or misrepresentations), which benefit 
the healthy development of Internet-based insurance. 
The Provisional Rules for Supervision and Administration 
of Internet Insurance, issued by CIRC in July 2015, clearly 
sets out the provisions for business entity, business scope, 
and access criteria to develop Internet-based insurance, 
establishing the supervision system for Internet-based 
insurance services in China and paving the way for the 
entry of such companies. 
4.3.6 Internet-Based Fund Management 
Before Yuebao emerged in 2013, Chinese fund compa-nies achieved moderate levels of online sales of fund 
products via official websites and third-party sales plat-
forms. However, such companies did not focus on serving 
underserved segments of the population. Typically, the 
minimum subscription of public funds to fund companies 
was RMB 1,000 (US$150), while various service charges 
would be levied for subscription, redemption, and conver -
sion of funds. 
Yuebao introduced a very different product to the 
market in June 2013. Yuebao is an Internet-based fund management product provided by the Ant Financial 
Services Group (an affiliate of Alibaba) in partnership 
with Tianhong Asset Management. Yuebao is accessed 
via Alipay, which enables individual users to make pay-
ments and transfers easily at any time without service 
charges.
56 The Yuebao product was developed to mobi-
lize the dormant funds sitting in millions of Alipay accounts, with customers earning returns on their invest-
ment (Yuebao means “leftover treasure”). The following 
product design and operational features were critical to 
Yuebao’s success: • Low investment threshold. Alipay users can open a 
Yuebao account with just RMB 1 (US$0.15), allowing a 
new “investor class” into the market. 
• Withdrawal at any time. Yuebao customers can with-draw their money virtually immediately, an attractive 
advantage over traditional time-bound financial man-
agement products that typically have penalties for 
early withdrawal. 
• Daily interest. Interest on Yuebao accounts accrues 
daily, can be tracked in real time, and can be used for 
direct consumption by the customer via Alipay, provid-
ing easy accessibility for consumers (and synergies for Alipay and Alibaba). 
• Relatively high investment returns. The accumulated 
funds across Yuebao customers’ accounts are used to 
purchase money market funds, a portion of which are 
then placed in a bank as a deposit of a financial institu-
tion. Due to the large amount of funds, the higher 
interest rate received on this deposit (compared with 
an ordinary deposit), and tight liquidity on the market in the early stage of Yuebao’s creation, the interest rate 
on such deposits was relatively high. Therefore, Yue -
bao could pay relatively high returns to investors, while still earning profits due to its low cost of opera-
tions and large pool of customers. Shortly after 
launching, Yuebao’s maximum annualized rate of 
return was nearly 7 percent. Since 2015, the rate has 
declined to below 3-4 percent. Rates of return have 
decreased in the money market sector in general. In 
addition, for commercial banks, reserve requirements 
are now applied to the deposits of Yuebao funds in 
banks (although reserve requirements are temporarily 
zero at the moment).
• Simple interface. Yuebao is a simple financial man-agement product, and its interface is easy to use and 
intuitive for customers, particularly those without any 
previous investment experience. 
Due to these features, Yuebao rapidly accumulated a large number of users and a large amount of funds soon 
after it was officially launched. As of the end of 2014, the 
number of existing customers had reached 185 million 
and the size of the fund totaled RMB 579 billion (US$87 
billion). As of the end of 2016, the number of customers 
had grown to 324.6 million and the fund size had reached 
RMB 808 billion (US$121 billion). 
By providing a feasible and convenient channel for 
engagement in financial management, Yuebao’s success 
revealed the significant untapped opportunities in profit-
ably providing financial services to middle- and low-in-
come groups in the Internet era. Yuebao has become an 
important driving force pushing Internet-based financial China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   53
asset management to a stage of rapid development 
(table 4.12). Indeed, less than a year after Yuebao hit the 
market, Tencent launched a similar product called Licai-
tong, which quickly grew to more than 10 million users. 
Jingdong (JD) also launched the “JD private coffer” 
product linked to the JD e-commerce platforms and dig-
ital payment tool. In all cases, such products are pro-
vided online at low cost and easily scalability to providers, 
and they are easily accessed and used by consumers, 
including low- and middle-income consumers. More 
broadly, Yuebao’s success has encouraged the entire 
financial management sector to review its products, ser -
vices, and target markets and to begin thinking about how to attract middle- and low-income groups that were 
previously excluded and how to serve them sustainably 
and profitably using similar digital business models, 
technologies, and channels.
4.3.7 Internet Equity-Based Crowdfunding 
Internet equity-based crowdfunding was established in 
China with the objective of offering equity in small busi-
nesses to the general public via online platforms. Specif-
ically, it refers to small public equity-raising activities 
that are carried out by MSEs via platforms of equi-
ty-based crowdfunding financing intermediaries (Inter -
net websites or similar electronic media). Internet equity-based crowdfunding in China was initially charac-
terized by openness to the general public, the small size 
of investments, and the large numbers of investors. 
Entrepreneurs and MSEs disclose their real information 
such as business form, operation and management 
models, financial situation, and fund utilization to inves-
tors via the digital platforms of equity-based crowdfund-
ing financing intermediaries. Internet equity-based 
crowdfunding financing typically involves innovative 
technical projects with high risk and high return, in early 
stages of development and seeking seed and angel rounds of financing. Investors can choose to provide 
small equity investments based on the risks posed by 
the financing activities and their own risk tolerance. Plat-
forms may include lead and following investors and may 
TABLE 4.12 Key Products of Internet-Based Fund Management  
   JINGDONG SUNING  
KEY INDICATORS  YUEBAO LICAITONG XIAOJINKU LINGQIANBAO
Year launched 2013 2014 2014 2014
Affiliated company  Ant Financial  Tencent Jingdong (JD) Suning
Number of users (millions) 324.6  n/a n/a n/a
Assets under management  808 (121) n/a n/a n/a 
(billion RMB [billion US$])  
Source: Company disclosures, as of end of 2016. 
specify qualifications for investors. Platforms utilize dif-
ferent fee arrangements, including commission based 
on a percentage of financing, equity, or fees for val-
ue-added services.
Equity-based crowdfunding developed rapidly in 
China in recent years, with various equity-based crowd-
funding financing platforms established. More recently, 
to protect investors and consumers, regulation and 
guidelines have been issued to regulate the market 
more formally. The Administrative Rules on Private Equi-
ty-based Crowd-Funding Financing (Trial) (draft for com-
ments) issued by the Securities Association of China 
(SAC) at the end of 2014 and the Circular on Conducting 
Special Supervision on Institutions Engaging in Equity 
Financing via Internet issued by CSRC in August 2015 
require that all internet equity-based crowdfunding plat-
forms in China be restricted to qualified investors and 
not open to the general public, with a cap on the total number of investors.
Internet equity-based crowdfunding has significant 
growth potential in China and can help to address 
MSEs’ financing needs. China’s underdeveloped capital 
markets lead to a lack of suitable products and insuffi-
cient financing channels for MSEs, as well as high 
financing costs. The problem is particularly stark for 
enterprises in the early stages of development. How-
ever, with the increase of private wealth in China, con-
sumers are increasingly willing to participate in equity 
investment to achieve higher investment returns than 
they can from savings products. Driven and enabled by 
the progress in information technology, private equi-
ty-based crowdfunding has developed to a certain 
extent in China.
However, obstacles still hinder internet equity-based 
crowdfunding from playing a larger role in financial inclu-sion, such as the high investment threshold (which was 
established for financial consumer protection purposes) 
and the limited total number of investors. Internet equi-
ty-based crowdfunding has also yet to achieve wide-
spread appeal among investors partly due to a lack of 
regulatory clarity regarding such financing platforms. 
According to the division of responsibilities for regula-54  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
tion of Internet finance specified in the 2015 Guidelines, 
CSRC is responsible for formulating regulatory rules for 
internet equity-based crowdfunding. Future regulatory 
rules for internet equity-based crowdfunding financing 
are anticipated to help make the operations of such plat-
forms more secure for investors and accessible for enter -
prises seeking financing.
4.3.8  Contributions of Digital Finance and  
Fintech Companies to Financial Inclusion  
and Remaining Challenges
The rapid rise of digital finance—including fintech compa-nies—in China, its impact on financial inclusion, as well as 
remaining challenges can all usefully be considered from 
the perspective of the four elements of financial inclusion 
discussed in chapter 2: accessibility, diverse and appropri-
ate products, commercial viability and sustainability, and 
safety and responsibility. 
Accessibility
Chapter 2 explains that the emergence of digital finance 
has lessened consumers’ reliance on physical access 
points, enabling them to use mobile phones, computers, 
and other personal devices to take up and use various 
financial products and services. In this way, digital finance 
has contributed to groups who were previously not well 
served by traditional financial service providers, such as 
small farmers and MSEs, low-income individuals, and 
those living in remote and rural areas. For example, non-bank digital payment providers not only provide payment 
services to stores and MSEs on e-commerce platforms, 
but also provide convenient payment channels to con-
sumers in rural and remote areas who otherwise have lim-
ited access to such services. As of the end of March 2017, 
Alipay users in rural markets numbered 163 million. Farm-
ers can likewise access small loans via e-commerce plat-
forms—rather than in brick-and-mortar branches—to 
address their daily production and consumption financ-
ing needs. 
That said, many adults who make up the last mile are 
elderly or live in areas with poor information and commu-
nication technology (ICT) infrastructure and thus remain 
excluded from the reach of digital finance. Digital models 
can contribute to, but may not be able to fully close, the 
“accessibility gap” in China, and alternative methods 
(including rural financial service providers and agents) will still need to be employed. Further improvements to ICT 
infrastructure to reach the last-mile are also needed. 
Diverse and Appropriate Products
Digital finance has contributed to increased conve-
nience, greater affordability, and better designed prod-
ucts for underserved segments. The digitization of payments in China demonstrates how technology-driven 
product design can contribute to financial inclusion. 
With the proliferation of reliable and efficient digital 
payment products, consumers can now enjoy the conve-
nience of making payments anytime and anywhere. 
Mobile payments offer a new approach for shopping, 
utility bill payments, bank account inquiries, transport 
fee payments, cash transfers, investment-oriented finan-
cial management, and other transactions. Digital pay-
ments have changed people’s financial transaction 
behaviors; for many consumers, digital payments have 
replaced cash. Furthermore, as a result of digital pay-
ments, millions of transactions are now recorded, allow-ing fintech companies to use information technologies 
such as big data and cloud computing to design and 
deliver low-cost, accessible financial products and ser -
vices to consumers more precisely. 
Thanks to online sources of credit such as “Ant Check 
Later,” underserved groups can access more convenient financing channels for consumption loans. Some online 
store owners and MSEs can access loans urgently needed 
in their business operations via online borrowing and 
Internet-based supply chain finance—critical services to 
help grow their businesses that are often not easily acces-
sible from other sources. 
The emergence of P2P and equity-based crowdfund-
ing platforms has not only provided asset-based income 
generation opportunities to individuals with idle funds, 
but also addressed financing challenges faced by individ-
uals and MSEs starting up their businesses. Digitally enabled business models have also allowed providers to 
offer a wider range of low-cost, innovative, and tailored 
products, such as Internet-based insurance products and 
fund-based financial management products. 
These innovations in product design and operational 
processes have generated extensive positive impacts, 
lowering operational costs for providers, increasing the 
ability to serve more customers efficiently, and expanding 
the available range of appropriate products.
However, not all digital finance products are beneficial 
to consumer welfare or appropriate for the underserved. 
For example, products such as digital credit that target 
unsolicited offers directly to consumers via mobile phones 
pose potential risks of overindebtedness. Financial con-
sumer protection frameworks need to be strengthened to 
address the risks raised by digital finance related to prod-
uct appropriateness and other broader issues (further dis-cussed below).  
Commercial Viability and Sustainability
Fintech companies’ business models are market based 
and, for the most part, operate without subsidies or 
influence from government authorities. Not only are fin-
tech companies succeeding via market-based and com-China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   55
mercially viable approaches, but such providers have 
also served as a “demonstration effect” for the rest of 
the financial ecosystem. The rise of fintech companies 
has created shocks to China’s traditional financial service 
providers and prompted them to innovate, adopt digital 
finance approaches, and compete for previously under -
served market segments. As a result, digital finance in China is increasingly not limited to fintech companies 
providing direct products and services to consumers, 
but traditional providers are now also serving new cus-
tomer segments with innovative products in a more effi-
cient, digitally enabled manner. In addition, an increasing 
number of other types of fintech service companies have 
emerged in China, leveraging advanced ICT as 
described previously to provide credit scoring, risk man-
agement, and other valuable services to traditional 
financial service providers, with the same positive 
impacts previously noted. Partnerships between fintech companies and traditional financial service providers 
hold much promise, as both sides bring different com-
parative advantages to the table: technological and 
analytical efficiencies on the one hand and reputation, 
risk management and controls, and financial product 
knowledge on the other hand.
Safety and Responsibility
It is important to recognize that digital finance also 
poses risks. Given the new types of risks posed by digital 
finance, the business practices of some new fintech 
companies, and the still-nascent regulatory and supervi-
sory framework, consumers face risks ranging from loss 
of funds and violations of data privacy to false promo-
tion and outright fraud, and money laundering risks also 
exist. Indeed, the nature of digital finance is still finance, 
including the essential attributes of financial risk man-agement. In addition, compared with traditional finance, 
the risks posed by digital finance are potentially more 
implicit, contagious, and extensive. In general, fintech 
companies have infringed upon the rights and interests 
of consumers in more cases than formal, traditional 
financial service providers have, and the nature of such 
infringements has been more serious, illustrating the 
drawbacks of the “wait and see” approach. Unlike tradi-
tional financial service providers, the threshold for fin-
tech companies to enter the market is low, which allows 
in providers with both good and bad intentions. The 
results are many potential risks and many recent cases of 
actual harm to consumers. 
For example, customer funds may not be properly 
entrusted to a third party, or customers’ personal infor -
mation may be leaked, stolen, or sold, infringing upon their privacy. Some P2P platforms have stepped beyond the mandate of information intermediaries, illegally 
establishing a pool of funds, providing guarantees for lenders, and even making loans. Other fintech compa-
nies have intentionally exaggerated returns from invest-
ment products or concealed product risks. Some fintech 
companies have conducted fraud, resulting in huge 
economic losses to investors and harm to vulnerable 
consumers.
Fintech, and digital finance more broadly, require 
new approaches for consumer protection and educa-
tion. An effective consumer protection framework is 
required to address the features of digital financial 
transactions that pose potential threats to consumers. 
Consumer education urgently needs to be strength-
ened to enhance consumers’ skills to better understand 
and use digital technologies to obtain appropriate 
products and services. 
In addition, relevant laws, regulations, and supervisory 
practices for digital finance providers need further 
improvement. Digital finance is relatively new, and there is little precedent to follow. In order to facilitate its devel-
opment, the Chinese government has chosen to remain 
relatively open to the integration of digital technologies 
and finance and the market entry of fintech companies. 
However, to ensure that fintech continues to develop sus-
tainably in a way that benefits consumers, authorities 
have increasingly recognized the need to take action and 
establish comprehensive, proportionate legal frame-
works and clear standards for emerging models. At this 
stage, China’s fintech rules are still under development 
with significant gaps remaining, though progress has 
recently been made as Chinese financial sector authori-
ties consciously shift away from the “wait and see” 
approach to a stage of more active regulation and super -
vision (see box 4.8).
57 
In sum, digital finance—including fintech providers—
has played a role in improving financial inclusion in China 
and enriched digital financial inclusion practices for the 
world as a whole. Chinese fintech companies have lever -
aged opportunities created by the advancement of infor -
mation technologies to target populations neglected by 
traditional financial service providers or sectors without 
financial services, expanded the accessibility of financial 
service channels, developed innovative and low-cost 
products and services, and diversified the financial  
ecosystem, thereby playing a multifaceted role in con-tributing to the “democratization” of finance in China. 
However, significant challenges remain for market play-
ers and government authorities to ensure that fintech 
companies can effectively and safely contribute to Chi-
na’s financial inclusion objectives (further discussed in 
chapter 5). 56  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
4.4   THE ROLE OF THE CHINESE 
GOVERNMENT IN PROMOTING FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
The Chinese government has actively pursued a range of 
measures over the past 15 years to increase financial inclu-
sion. This section describes key efforts to improve the pol-
icy, legal, regulatory, and supervisory environment for 
financial inclusion, as well as the underlying financial infra-
structure. 
4.4.1  Policy and Regulatory Environment for 
Financial Inclusion 
The Chinese government has actively taken a broad range 
of policy measures to promote financial inclusion, includ-
ing through monetary and credit policies, tax policies, and 
supervision policies. The objectives of these policies have 
been to encourage marketization, reduce operational costs of financial service providers serving target under -
served populations, encourage financial service providers 
to leverage technology and financial infrastructure to 
reach new consumer segments, and promote the devel-
opment of well-designed financial products for target 
underserved populations. 
Monetary and Credit Policies to Support Financial 
Inclusion
In recent years, PBOC has incentivized financial service 
providers to expand credit services to sannong and 
MSEs through various policies, including differentiated 
reserve ratios, loan refinancing, and rediscounted loans. 
As of the end of 2016, the reserve ratio for rural commer -
cial banks registered in county areas was 12 percent, and the reserve ratio for RCOPBs, RCCs, and VTBs was 9 per -
cent. These ratios are 5 percentage points and 8 per -
centage points lower, respectively, than the reserve ratio 
for large commercial banks. If any of the aforementioned The Chinese government issued the Guidelines on Promoting 
Sound Development of Internet Finance (“Guidelines”) in July 
2015. Jointly issued by PBOC and nine other ministries and 
commissions, the Guidelines is the first guiding document on 
Internet finance regulation and supervision since 2013, when 
Internet finance first saw rapid growth.
The Guidelines defines major Internet finance business 
models and proposes a series of measures and objectives, 
which include (1) promoting innovation of Internet finance 
platforms, products, and services; (2) encouraging coopera-
tion between financial institutions and Internet finance compa-
nies; (3) improving access to capital for Internet finance 
companies; (4) streamlining administrative approvals and 
other procedures to better service the industry; (5) implement-
ing appropriate favorable fiscal and tax policies; and (6) foster -
ing the development of credit infrastructure and the cultivation of supporting intermediary services. 
The Guidelines clarifies the regulatory mandates of different 
financial sector authorities with respect to Internet finance. PBOC is responsible for the regulatory oversight of Inter -
net-based payments; CBRC is responsible for oversight of Internet-based lending, Internet-based trusts, and Inter -
net-based consumer finance; CSRC is responsible for oversight of Internet equity-based crowdfunding and Internet-based 
fund sales; and CIRC is responsible for oversight of Inter -
net-based insurance.BOX 4.8
Guidelines on Promoting Sound Development of Internet Finance 
The Guidelines notes areas where additional regulation is 
required, including: safeguarding of customer funds, informa-
tion disclosure and transparency, consumer protection, and 
information security, as well as anti-money laundering and pre-
venting financial crimes. The Guidelines also calls for the 
strengthening of the industry’s self-regulatory capacity, regula-
tory and supervisory coordination among financial sector 
authorities, and data and statistical monitoring.
Following the issuance of the Guidelines, PBOC issued 
new rules for the nonbank digital payment sector (Administra-
tive Rules on Network Payment of Nonbank Payment Institu-
tions). CBRC took the lead in drafting rules on Internet lending 
(Interim Rules for the Administration of the Business Activities 
of Internet-Based Lending Information Intermediary Institu-
tions). CIRC also issued Provisional Rules for Supervision and 
Administration of Internet-Based Insurance. CSRC is in the 
midst of formulating relevant rules within its mandate. In 
addition, the National Internet Finance Association of China (NIFA), an organization committed to enhancing self-disci-
pline of Internet finance, was established in March 2016. NIFA 
has more than 400 members, including many key fintech 
companies. The Association is currently developing various 
self-regulatory standards, beginning with disclosure guide-
lines for Internet-based lending.China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   57
rural financial service providers in county areas used a 
certain portion of its newly-taken deposits to disburse 
loans in the local area, its reserve ratio is 1 percentage 
point lower than that of a similar financial service pro-
vider. In addition, any commercial banks that meet cer -
tain prudent operation requirements and whose loans to sannong and MSEs have reached a certain percentage 
may be granted a lower reserve ratio than that of similar 
institutions. To encourage financial institutions to better 
develop financial inclusion, the PBOC decided in Sep-
tember of 2017 to make targeted reductions, effective 
from 2018, to the deposit reserve ratio for commercial 
banks that have complied with prudential requirements 
and have reached the required ratios in their lending to 
underserved market segments, including loans to micro-
enterprises (credit limit less than RMB 5 million to a sin-gle microenterprise) and seven other types of loans to underserved segments.
PBOC has also used lending and discounting facili-
ties to encourage financial service providers to expand 
credit to underserved segments, including sannong, 
MSEs, and the poor. Financial service providers that 
demonstrate higher outreach to these groups receive 
better access to these facilities. For the purpose of sup-
porting the aforementioned groups in getting more 
loans from financial service providers, the total amount 
of loans issued in 2016 under the PBOC lending facility 
was RMB 439 billion (US$66 billion), and the outstand-
ing balance of loans as of the end of 2016 was RMB 375 
billion (US$56 billion). The total amount of loans issued 
in 2016 under the PBOC discounting facility was RMB 
381 billion (US$57 billion), and the outstanding balance On December 31, 2015, the State Council issued Chi-na’s Plan for Advancing the Development of Financial 
Inclusion (2016–2020) (“FIP”). The FIP defines finan-
cial inclusion as “providing appropriate and valid 
financial services to all social strata and groups with 
demands for financial services, at affordable costs, 
based on the principles of opportunity, equality, and 
commercial sustainability.” It further notes that 
“MSEs, farmers, urban low-income groups, impover -
ished groups, the disabled, the aged, and other spe-cial groups are the targeted customers of financial 
inclusion in China.” 
The FIP notes that financial inclusion in China still 
faces several issues and challenges, including “imbal-
anced” financial services (i.e., a lack of appropriate 
products for the underserved, while less suitable 
products exist in the market), and more work remains 
to be done to further develop financial infrastructure and to strengthen the commercial sustainability of 
financial services provision.
The FIP establishes the following financial inclu-
sion policy objectives for China:
• Establish a servicing and supporting system of 
financial inclusion that corresponds to completing 
a moderately prosperous society in all respects;
• Effectively improve the availability of financial ser -
vices, significantly increase the sense of fulfilment 
of the people for financial services; BOX 4.9
China’s Plan for Advancing the Development of Financial Inclusion (2016–2020) 
• Significantly improve the people’ satisfaction with financial services; and
• Satisfy the people’s increasing demands for finan-
cial services, especially enabling MSEs, farmers, 
urban low-income groups, impoverished groups, 
the disabled, the aged, and other special groups 
to obtain financial services at a reasonable price in 
a convenient and safe manner. 
The FIP outlines pathways to achieve these 
objectives, including through increasing the diver -
sity and coverage of financial service providers 
within the financial system, innovating in the design 
of financial products and services, accelerating con-
struction of financial infrastructure, improving laws 
and regulations related to financial inclusion, 
enabling the role of policy guidance and encourage-
ment, and bolstering financial education and finan-cial consumer protection. 
The FIP also notes that the relationship between 
the government and the market should be correctly 
arranged, and market principles should be fully 
respected, with the aim to ensure that the market 
plays a decisive role in the allocation of financial 
resources. The government is expected to better 
play its role in guiding overall planning, organization 
and coordination, and balanced distribution, as well 
as in providing policy support.58  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
of loans as of the end of 2016 was RMB 117 billion 
(US$18 billion).
PBOC has also prudently advanced pilots of mort-
gage loans in rural areas with “two rights” as collateral 
(i.e., management rights to contracted rural land and 
farmers’ housing property rights); encouraged SMEs to 
utilize debt financing instruments from nonfinancial insti-
tutions; supported qualified financial service providers to 
raise funds through issuing financial bonds to be used 
exclusively for loans to MSEs; and urged financial service 
providers to provide livelihood-oriented financial services 
to rural migrants, university graduates, minorities, the dis-
abled, and other groups. These efforts have improved 
financial services to sannong, MSEs, and other key tar -
geted underserved segments. 
Fiscal and Tax Policies 
The following are select examples of fiscal and tax policies 
used by Chinese financial sector authorities  to incentivize 
financial inclusion efforts via market-based approaches, 
across various financial products and services.
1)  Risk compensation funds for agriculture-related 
lending and lending to MSEs
 The central government has encouraged local gov-ernments to establish risk compensation funds to 
encourage financial service providers to increase agri-
culture-related lending and lending to MSEs. For 
example, in 2009, with local government support, 
China Construction Bank (CCB) launched an innova-
tive product through which local governments and CCB jointly select a group of MSEs. Funds provided 
by local governments and by member MSEs are 
pooled into a guarantee assistance fund. CCB 
releases loans equivalent to 10 times the amount of 
the fund to member MSEs, with flexible disbursement 
and repayment schedules. PSBC launched a similar 
product in October 2014. 
2)  Earmarked funds for local governments to support financial inclusion 
 Government authorities have actively promoted the 
implementation of guidelines to improve access to 
credit for poor households. In 2014, PBOC and six other ministries and commissions jointly released the 
Guidelines on Comprehensively Delivering Financial 
Services for Poverty Alleviation and Development. Later 
in 2014, the State Council Leading Group Office of Pov-
erty Alleviation and Development (CPAD), the MoF, 
PBOC, CBRC, and CIRC jointly released Guidelines on 
the Innovation and Development of Microcredit for 
Poverty Alleviation. These two guidelines encouraged 
the increased provision of unsecured loans by financial 
service providers, the establishment of risk compensa-tion funds and support to the poor with interest subsi-
dies by local governments, as well as the provision and 
purchasing of micro-credit insurance to diversify the 
related risks.
To provide additional financial support to local gov-
ernment efforts to expand financial inclusion, in Sep-
tember 2016, the MoF issued Administrative Rules for 
the Administration of Earmarked Funds for Financial 
Inclusion. These funds are earmarked transfers of cen-
tral finance to support and guide local governments at all levels, financial service providers, and private capi-
tal in support of financial inclusion in China. The funds 
include the following uses: (1) awards for incremental 
increases in sannong-related loans by county-level 
financial service providers; (2) special subsidies for the expenses of rural financial service providers; and (3) 
interest subsidies for guaranteed loans to business 
startups, as well as allowances to related banks orother financialservice providers. 
Since 2009, the government has implemented a 
pilot award program for incremental sannong-related 
loans specifically to county-level financial service pro-
viders. In recent years, with continual expansion of its 
scope, the pilot program now covers 25 provinces in 
China, including major grain production areas and 
most of the central and western areas. In 2016, the 
central government granted RMB 16.7 billion (US$2.5 
billion) in “financial inclusion special funds” to local 
governments, and local governments could use these 
funds to facilitate financial inclusion by awarding finan-
cial service providers at the county level and below 
that increase their sannong-related loans, among other 
measures. 
In addition, some local governments have estab-
lished business startup loan guarantee funds through which financial service providers issue guaranteed 
loans to qualified entrepreneurs to support individuals 
to startup businesses or to expand employment. The 
interest on such loans is subsidized by fiscal funds. 
3)  Encouraging and supporting the development of 
government-owned guarantee companies
The Chinese government has actively encouraged 
and supported the development of guarantee com-panies with the objective of improving financial inclu-
sion for underserved market segments. Many local 
governments have established government-owned 
guarantee companies to share the credit risk with 
financial service providers. For example, in Zhejiang 
Province, government-owned guarantee companies 
can provide a guarantee that is 50 percent of total 
investment and does not exceed RMB 10 million 
(US$1.5 million) for financing technology firms at their 
initial and growth stages.China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   59
4)  Agricultural insurance
 To encourage uptake of agricultural insurance, CIRC, 
the MoF, the Ministry of Agriculture, and local govern-
ments have actively promoted agricultural insurance. 
Building on the market-oriented operations of insur -
ance companies, the central government, provincial governments, and municipal and county governments 
provide premium subsidies for agricultural insurance 
for economic losses caused by natural disasters, major 
plant diseases and pests, and accidents. In 2007, a 
pilot program of premium subsidies began in six prov-
inces. The pilot program provided approximately RMB 
2 billion (US$300 million) in premium subsidies cover -
ing five types of agricultural insurance. In 2015, CIRC, the MoF, and the Ministry of Agriculture jointly issued 
the Circular on Further Improving the Drafting of Terms 
and Conditions for Agricultural Insurance Products with Premium Subsidized by Central Government. As a result, the average coverage of new agricultural insur -
ance products increased by 15–20 percent; insured liability was further expanded, covering the main risks 
in relevant insured areas; premium rates were reduced; 
claim criteria were improved; and the average rate of 
indemnity for total losses increased by 10 percent. As 
of the end of 2016, the regional scope of the central 
government’s agricultural insurance premium subsidies 
had expanded to the whole country covering 15 types 
of agricultural insurance products, including crop farm-
ing, livestock breeding, and forestry. Agricultural 
households normally pay 15–30 percent of the pre-
mium, depending on their income level and the types 
of insured products. In 2016, the central government 
allocated RMB 15.8 billion (US$2.4 billion) in premium 
subsidies (a 7.5 percent year-on-year growth), repre-
senting 38 percent of total agricultural insurance pre-miums in the whole country.
5)  Tax policies
 As mentioned in section 4.1, tax policies are a tool that government authorities in China have leveraged to 
promote financial inclusion. By reducing overall opera-
tional and transaction costs, these policies aim to 
encourage financial service providers to expand their 
physical reach and serve targeted underserved groups, including MSEs and sannong. 
Several specific tax exemptions have been estab-
lished to achieve these objectives. Past and current 
examples include:
• The value-added tax (VAT) is exempted for the 
interest income of financial institutions and MCCs 
on small loans to farmers;
• The taxable income was calculated on only 90 per -
cent of financial institutions’ interest income on 
small loans to farmers; and• The stamp tax is exempted for loan contracts 
signed between financial institutions and MSEs.
Additional Regulatory and Supervisory Approaches to Advance Financial Inclusion
Chinese authorities have actively leveraged supervisory 
tools to promote financial inclusion, mainly focusing on 
differentiated supervision, preferential policies, support to priority sectors, cultivation of new market players, and 
institution building. 
In recent years, PBOC and CBRC have issued various 
measures to improve access to finance for sannong and 
MSEs, including promoting the use of financial bonds by 
commercial banks exclusively for MSE loans and the use 
of differentiated calculation and assessment of loan-to-
deposit (LTD) ratios and NPL ratios for MSE loans. For 
example, commercial banks are allowed to issue financial 
bonds specifically for MSE loans, increasing banks’ avail-
able funding sources for MSE lending. When calculating 
LTD ratios for MSE business lines, the MSE loans that cor -
respond to such bonds can be deducted from the numer -
ator. As of the end of 2015, 66 commercial banks 
nationwide had issued RMB 549 billion (US$83 billion) in 
financial bonds specifically for MSE lending. CBRC also 
allows NPL ratios for MSE loans to be up to 2 percent higher than industry-wide targets, with no adverse conse-
quences on the financial service provider. Commercial 
banks are also allowed to issue special sannong financial 
bonds to raise funds for lending to sannong clients, with similar preferential treatment in the calculation and 
assessment of LTD and NPL ratios for the sannong loans 
that correspond to the special bonds. 
In recent years, CSRC has supported the financing 
needs of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and pro-
moted the more formal operation and healthy develop-
ment of these enterprises with various measures, including 
improving the SME board’s institutional measures, lower -
ing the financial standards for including innovative and growth-oriented enterprises into the Growth Enterprise 
Board, expanding the pilot program of the National Equi-
ties Exchange and Quotations (NEEQ) to the entire coun-
try, clearly defining regional equity markets as private equity markets for serving MSMEs in the region, further 
expanding the scope of pilots for private bond issuance by 
SMEs, and guiding private equity investment funds and 
venture capital funds to focus their support on MSEs in the 
initial stage or growth stage.
In 2012, aiming to establish a more comprehensive 
legal and regulatory framework to encourage the healthy 
development of the agricultural insurance sector, the 
State Council issued Regulation on Agriculture Insurance, 
which stipulates the operational principles, contract provi-
sions, and operational regulations of agricultural insur -
ance. In 2015, CIRC also developed Provisional Rules for 60  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
the Administration of Agricultural Insurance Underwriting 
and Claims Settlement to further specify the operational 
procedures of agricultural insurance. In 2014, CIRC sup-
ported the establishment of China Reinsurance Commu-
nity for Agricultural Insurance, jointly sponsored by the 
China Property & Casualty Reinsurance Company Ltd. and 
23 insurance companies (such as PICC P&C) qualified for 
agricultural insurance. By the end of 2016, the Community 
had 32 members and its total insuring capacity reaches 
RMB 360 billion (US$54 billion). Establishing the Commu-
nity has improved agricultural insurance risk diversification 
mechanisms for insurance companies and lays the foun-
dation for insurance companies to provide agricultural 
insurance. The CIRC also established a national agricul-
tural insurance information management platform, which 
helps to pool nationwide insurance data for crop farming 
and enhance real-time monitoring and dynamic manage-
ment of agricultural insurance, and has greatly improved agricultural insurance information management. 
CIRC has supported and encouraged insurance com-
panies to develop innovative price insurance products for 
agricultural goods. For such insurance products, if the 
price for an agricultural good is lower than the contractu-
ally agreed-upon price due to factors beyond the exemp-
tion of insurance contract liabilities, the insurance 
company shall provide appropriate compensation. As a 
result, agricultural households can take advantage of 
insurance products that cover not only natural risks, but 
market risks as well. By the end of 2016, 33 provinces or 
municipalities launched or formulated their pilot pro-
grams for price insurance for agricultural goods. These 
pilots cover 50 agricultural goods, such as wheat, rice, 
pigs, and vegetables and with 400,000 insured farmer 
households/insurance policies.
In recent years, agricultural insurance coverage has 
significantly expanded in China. From 2007 to 2016, the area of main crops insured by China’s agricultural insur -
ance companies increased from 230 million mu
58 to 1.72 
billion mu, and more than 210 types of agricultural prod-ucts were insured, covering almost all sectors including 
planting, forestry, herding, and fishery. The insurance 
coverage of corn, rice, and wheat exceeded 70 percent 
of total planting areas. Around 353,700 basic agricultural 
insurance service branches or agents were established in 
town or village areas, 95 percent of towns had access to 
agricultural insurance providers, and the number of 
insured farmer households/insurance policies increased 
from 49.8 million to 204 million. From 2007 to 2016, risk 
coverage provided by agricultural insurance increased 
from RMB 172 billion (US$26 billion) to RMB 2.16 trillion 
(US$324 billion), insurance indemnities of RMB 154.4 bil-
lion (US$23.2 billion) were paid to 240 million farmer 
households/insurance policies, and the catastrophe risk reserve fund of nearly RMB 10 billion (US$1.5 billion) was accumulated and became an important source of financ-
ing for post-disaster production restoration and recon-
struction of affected areas.
4.4.2 Financial Infrastructure 
Credit infrastructure and payments infrastructure are the foundational elements of a country’s financial infrastruc-
ture and critical to addressing the informational asym-
metry and transaction cost challenges that often hinder 
financial inclusion. A significant portion of China’s prog-
ress in advancing financial inclusion can be attributed to 
efforts taken in recent years to strengthen the country’s 
financial infrastructure, though more work still needs to 
be done.
In collaboration with other stakeholders, the PBOC 
has established a comprehensive and robust national 
payments system infrastructure in China. Government 
authorities have prioritized the development and mainte-
nance of a sound payment settlement infrastructure in 
rural areas, which has facilitated growth in physical access 
networks, improved diversity and efficiency of payment 
products, and allowed for the digitization of govern-
ment-to-person (G2P) transfers. Section 4.1.2 discusses these developments in greater detail. 
In recent years, PBOC has been actively developing 
the credit reporting system to reduce information asym-
metries between lenders and borrowers and increase the 
responsible provision of credit to households and firms. 
This effort has been undertaken mainly through the 
Credit Reference Center of PBOC (CCRC), a public credit 
registry established in 2006. The CCRC collects data from 
more than 3,000 financial service providers, including 
banks, RCCs, MCCs, insurance companies, and other 
nonbank financial service providers. The CCRC distrib-
utes information to these institutions in response to inqui-
ries. As of end June 2017, the registry covered 930 million 
individuals, including 450 million with a borrowing his-
tory. It also covers 24 million legal entities, including 6.6 
million with a borrowing history. During the first half of 
2017, the CCRC handled an average of 3.4 million inqui-ries per day relating to individuals, and 220,000 relating 
to legal entities. However, the PBOC registry does not 
currently collect credit records from P2P lenders. 
PBOC has also acknowledged the role that the private 
sector—and new fintech companies in particular—can 
play in improving China’s credit infrastructure. In early 
2015, PBOC granted permission to eight companies 
(including companies affiliated with Alibaba, Tencent, 
and Ping An) to apply for licenses for credit bureaus for 
individuals within a six-month provisional period. How-
ever, as of mid-2017, no licenses had been issued to China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   61
these new companies due to policymaker concerns 
regarding corporate governance, independence, and 
conflicts of interest. More work is needed to clarify the 
licensing requirements for credit bureaus and to more 
clearly distinguish between credit bureaus and credit 
scoring and data analytics companies, as each type of 
company provides useful supplemental data for provid-
ers to overcome information asymmetries. 
In addition, greater access to public information could 
benefit financial inclusion. Government agencies such as 
tax, commerce, and judicial authorities hold vast amounts 
of valuable data on both individuals and MSEs, but such 
information is difficult to access. As a starting point, a 
comprehensive legal framework for data protection and 
privacy is needed in China to address data issues, includ-
ing with respect to public information and the use of big 
data and alternative data.
Several other developments have contributed to 
expanding the scope and improving the quality of China’s broader credit infrastructure. A basic legal framework and 
a registry system for secured transactions were estab-
lished in the mid-2000s, spurring the development of a 
movable asset finance market and a collateral manage-
ment industry. The IFC estimates that, as of the end of 
2016, loans involving movable assets represent approxi-mately 40 percent of outstanding commercial loans in China, up from 12 percent in 2004.
59 Other notable 
developments that have strengthened China’s credit 
infrastructure include the 2006 Enterprise Bankruptcy 
Law, which allows flexibility for distressed SME borrowers 
and their lenders to support long-term and sustainable 
SME lending, and the 2007 Property Law.
4.4.3  Digitization of Government-to-Person 
Transfers 
In recent years, China has launched numerous subsidy 
programs supporting agriculture, rural social endowment 
insurance, and rural cooperative medical insurance. 
According to the 2013 China Household Finance Survey 
(CHFS), approximately 40 percent of all households and 
68 percent of rural households receive some form of sub-
sidy or grant payment from the government.60 Such subsi-
dies often comprise small amounts delivered in large frequencies, involving multiple logistical links and high 
costs when distributed in cash. The Chinese government 
therefore began to shift to distributing subsidies to recip-
ients via debit cards linked to accounts to increase account 
ownership and usage (as discussed in section 4.1.3). A key 
function of the payments infrastructure as discussed in 
As mandated by the 2007 Property Law, PBOC established a modern collateral registry, the Inte-
grated Movables Financing Registration System, 
under the CCRC in 2013. The system began as an 
Internet-based filing system for security interests on 
accounts receivables and has now expanded to 
cover most interests on most movable assets, includ-
ing finance lease, lien, title retention, hire-purchase, 
security deposit pledge, inventory, warehouse 
receipts, etc. Two notable exceptions are (1) security 
interests on movable assets with an existing regis-
tered title (which are registered together with their 
title registrations) and (2) mortgages (i.e., nonpos -
sessory security interests) of equipment and inven-tory (which are still under the State Administration 
of Industry and Commerce). 
In recent years, with the support of the IFC, CCRC 
has continued to improve its registry services and promote movable asset finance more generally. This 
has provided transparency to the market, stimulated BOX 4.10
Integrated Movables Financing Registration System  
capacity building, and increased lender confidence. 
The second-generation registry information technol-
ogy (IT) system is expected to launch soon. A robust 
registry along with a series of complementary initia-
tives by the authorities (e.g., extensive training of 
financial sector authorities and lenders, develop-
ment of the collateral management industry, creation 
of a digital supply chain finance platform under 
CCRC, and the recent joint action plan issued by the 
seven ministries on accounts receivable finance) has 
helped to develop a large movable assets-based 
debt finance market in China. By end June 2017, the 
CCRC registration system alone had about 230,000 
users and had recorded 2.7 million registrations and 
12.6 million inquiries, cumulatively. Seventy percent 
of the borrowers and lessees in the system are SMEs. 
The next challenge for the CCRC will be to achieve a 
truly integrated registration system; the related new content of the Civil Code offers a promising opportu-
nity to do just that.
Source: IFC.62  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   62  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons  
sections 4.1.1 (agent-based service points) and 4.1.2 (set-
tlement systems) is to support the electronic disburse-
ment of G2P transfers, which has the potential to advance 
financial inclusion via links to accounts. Various govern-
ment departments that distribute these subsidies can now 
do so more efficiently and cost-effectively. Given their 
own cost savings over the long term, relevant depart-
ments have therefore been open to providing subsidies to 
acquirers for installing POS terminals to facilitate such 
electronic disbursement.
In 2016, more than two billion transfer payments total-
ing RMB 499 billion (US$75 billion) were disbursed to 
recipients’ bank accounts and debit cards from rural pen-
sion insurance and rural medical insurance schemes and 
subsidies for rural households.61 Rural residents can con-
veniently and efficiently withdraw their subsidies without leaving their villages through such rural debit card with-
drawal services.
4.4.4  Role of Policy Banks and the China 
Development Bank
China Agricultural Development Bank (CADB) and China 
Export and Import Bank (EximBank), China’s two policy 
banks, and China Development Bank (CDB), a develop-
ment-oriented financial service provider, help support 
the implementation of national financial inclusion priori-
ties and policies. These institutions are viewed as a use-
ful complement to the commercial banking system and 
have been leveraged to expand access to finance for 
university students and to support MSE and sannong 
development. 
In late 2014 and early 2015, a series of reforms were 
approved, which helped to further clarify and define the 
role of CADB, EximBank, and CDB, modernize their 
enterprise systems, and improve their capacity to support 
priorities and weak areas, with the aim of developing 
society and the economy in a sustainable manner.
Educational Loans for Students 
The Chinese government has actively carried out activities 
to improve access to education-oriented credit for stu-
dents to enable children from poor families to access 
quality education and prevent intergenerational transmis-
sion of poverty. Since 2004, CDB has created a national 
model of providing student loans through collaboration 
with local government or education authorities. In recent 
years, CDB has reformed its lending processes and simpli-
fied its lending procedures. It has launched a pre-applica-
tion mechanism for loans under which an applicant’s 
qualifications can be verified in advance; introduced 
online repayment and repayment via CUP POS terminals, 
allowing students to repay loans online and offline in 
many convenient locations with no surcharge; and imple-mented pilots digitizing student loan contracts in Henan, 
Hebei, Shanxi, and other provinces. As of the end of 
November 2016, CDB has issued 18.6 million loans total-
ing RMB 110.8 billion (US$16.6 billion) to 9 million stu-
dents from families with financial difficulties.62
MSE Development
CDB, EximBank, and CADB have played active roles in 
carrying out the government’s MSE finance policies, 
mainly by providing low-cost financing to institutions that 
then on-lend funds to MSEs. CDB has also provided loans for emergency revolving funds for SMEs, lowering their 
financing costs and allowing them to rapidly meet their 
financing needs. As of the end of September 2016, CDB’s 
SME loan balance amounted to RMB 3.31 trillion (US$497 
billion), which includes RMB 1.2 trillion (US$180 billion) in 
outstanding loans to MSEs, benefiting MSEs, the self-em-
ployed, farmers, young people starting up a business, 
urban laid-off workers, and other civil society groups, and 
covering about 20 sectors, including manufacturing, agri-
culture, forestry, animal husbandry, fisheries, and whole-
sale and retail. 
Since 2006, EximBank has implemented pilots of 
loans for MSEs and explored viable and sustainable mod-
els for credit services supporting MSE development. As 
of the end of June 2017, the credit balance under this 
model totaled RMB 28 billion (US$4.1 billion), supporting 
80,890 MSEs.
63
Supporting Sannong Development 
Development-oriented financial institutions and policy 
banks have actively leveraged their respective compara-
tive advantages to support key sectors or weak compo-
nents via financing, such as modern agriculture and the 
construction of water conservancy projects. In collabora-
tion with the MoF, CDB has combined fiscal funds with 
private funds, via both loan interest subsidies and allow-
ances, to support state and family farms and other agri-
cultural operators to build high-standard farmland 
(covering a total area of more than 100 million mu). CDB 
has also explored innovative agricultural financing mod-els in modern agriculture demonstration zones. 
EximBank has also worked to support sannong devel-
opment and poverty alleviation. In collaboration with the 
State Council Leading Group Office of Poverty Allevia-
tion and Development, EximBank has developed 347 key 
projects to develope export-oriented economies in poor 
areas by supporting local unique and competitive indus-
tries and local enterprises across the value chain that ben-
efit poverty alleviation. 
CADB has developed a model to provide funds for 
grain purchases, ensuring that farmers receive payments 
from selling their grain and addressing problems farmers 
previously faced, such as having difficulties in selling grain China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   63
or having to receive IOUs. In addition, CADB has played a 
role in supporting unique agricultural subsectors and 
strengthening construction of agricultural infrastructure. 
4.4.5  Financial Consumer Protection and Financial 
Capability 
The Chinese government recognizes that encouraging 
the uptake and active use of financial services and prod-
ucts by underserved segments of the population must 
be accompanied by robust financial consumer protec-
tion and efforts to improve consumers’ financial capabil-
ity. Financial consumer protection and education can 
help build awareness of and trust in the financial sector 
and thereby encourage the uptake and use of products 
and services. It can also help authorities manage risks 
associated with changes in the types of providers, prod-
ucts, and consumers in the market and encourage fair 
competition in the market. Recent developments in 
China—including the rapid emergence of P2P lending 
platforms, widely accessible digital investment products, 
and nonbank digital payment institutions—highlight the 
need for robust consumer protections and greater finan-
cial capability. 
In recent years, China’s four financial sector regulatory 
authorities have respectively established internal financial consumer protection departments. The PBOC’s Financial 
Consumer Protection Bureau is responsible for protecting 
consumers as part of the PBOC’s mandate (i.e., for pay-
ments and credit reporting) and for comprehensively 
studying major issues related to financial consumer pro-
tection in China and coordinating financial consumer pro-
tection for cross-sector financial products (e.g., bank-sold 
insurance). The Banking Sector Consumer Protection 
Bureau of CBRC, the Investor Protection Bureau of CSRC, 
and the Insurance Consumer Protection Bureau of CIRC 
are responsible for protecting consumers and investors in 
the banking sector, securities sector, and insurance sec-
tor, respectively.
In 2014, the revised Law of the PRC on the Protection 
of Consumer Rights and Interests came into force. For the 
first time, the revised law explicitly mentions the obliga-tions of financial service providers in the banking, securi-
ties, and insurance sectors relating to disclosure of 
charges, safeguards, and warnings regarding risks. The 
revised law also adds provisions on personal data protec-
tion, standard contract terms, and other aspects that are 
closely related to the financial sector.
In 2015, the General Office of the State Council issued 
the Guidelines on Strengthening the Protection of Rights 
and Interests of Financial Consumers, which includes the following: 
• Outlines in detail financial consumers’ rights to safe-
guarding of funds, product information disclosure, free choice, fair treatment, redress and compensation, edu-cation, respect, and information security; 
• Defines requirements for activities of government departments, financial service providers, and social 
organizations in the field of financial consumer pro-
tection; 
• Proposes building six mechanisms to strengthen finan-
cial consumer protection, including a long-term and 
effective program for financial literacy and the estab-
lishment of comprehensive dispute resolution mecha-
nisms; and 
• Proposes the activities and tasks that require attention 
from government departments and financial service 
providers in promoting the development of financial 
inclusion.
In 2016, PBOC issued the Implementation Rules on the 
Protection of Rights and Interests of Financial Consumers, 
which was the first general regulation focusing on financial consumer protection issued by the PBOC. It consisted of 
the following main elements: (1) the conduct of financial 
service providers, (2) specific requirements regarding the 
protection of personal information, (3) the complaints-  
handling regime of financial service providers and PBOC, (4) the redress mechanism of financial service providers, 
and (5) supervision and enforcement mechanisms. The 
measures apply to all providers regulated by PBOC, 
including commercial banks and nonbank digital payment 
providers.
In addition, in 2015, PBOC published the Administra-
tive Rules for Network Payment of Nonbank Payment 
Institutions (which went into effect on July 1, 2016). These 
rules contained various provisions related to online pay-
ments and consumer protection, including data protec-
tion and data security, disclosure and transparency in 
service agreements, and dispute resolution mechanisms.
In 2014, CIRC published the Guidelines on Strength-
ening the Protection of Rights and Interests of Insurance Consumers. These guidelines highlighted the responsi-
bilities of insurance companies, disclosure requirements, redress mechanisms, insurance literacy and risk aware-
ness for consumers, coordination with civil society, super -
vision and monitoring, etc.
Financial Consumer Protection Supervision
Over the past several years, Chinese authorities have 
gradually developed mechanisms for financial consumer 
protection supervision. Financial consumer protection 
departments have carried out in-depth on-site inspec-
tions, including targeted, thematic inspections related to 
debit cards and protection of personal information, bank-
sold insurance, deposit disputes, protection of small and 
medium investors in the capital markets, misleading insur -64  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   64  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons  
ance sales, and difficulties in insurance claims settlement. 
Actions resulting from these supervisory activities have 
included “soft” measures, such as consultations with 
senior management of financial service providers with 
poor practices to improve their services.
Financial consumer protection departments have also 
conducted off-site supervision. PBOC has initiated insti-
tutional and environmental assessments focused on 
financial consumer protection and further explored meth-
ods of “soft” supervision. CBRC has guided banking sec-
tor financial service providers to fully integrate consumer 
protection requirements into their operational manage-
ment and performance assessment systems, ensuring 
that all operational management activities reflect the 
objective of protecting consumers’ rights and interests, 
similar to the concept of “treating customers fairly.” CIRC 
has initiated the establishment of an insurance company 
service evaluation system and created a basic framework and indicator system for it.
To raise awareness among the general populace and 
among market participants, PBOC has established a 
database of typical cases and a regulatory information 
disclosure system and selects representative financial 
consumer protection cases for publication each year. 
CIRC has also established a system for publicly disclosing 
typical cases of harm to the legitimate rights and interest 
of consumers. Nine such cases have been publicly dis-
closed, involving insurance sales underwriting and insur -
ance claims and payment.
Dispute Resolution 
PBOC, CSRC, and CIRC have respectively opened the 
“12363” financial consumer complaint and inquiry hotline; 
the “12386” securities, futures, and funds investor protec-
tion hotline; and the “12378” insurance complaint and rights safeguarding hotline for handling complaints and 
inquiries from financial consumers. These authorities have 
also reinforced the primary responsibility of financial ser -
vice providers in dealing with consumers’ complaints. PBOC has established a PBOC-based complaint informa-
tion platform that is linked with financial service providers. 
PBOC receives complaints directly from consumers and 
forwards them to the responsible financial service pro-
vider. The PBOC system then tracks resolution processes. 
PBOC has also initiated a pilot in five provinces to develop 
a unified standard for how providers classify complaints 
from consumers.
Financial consumer protection departments are also 
promoting the establishment of an external and alterna-
tive dispute resolution to ensure financial consumer dis-
putes can be brought to various neutral, objective, and 
easily accessible entities (such as financial regulatory authorities, industry associations, government depart-
ments, courts, etc.) and be settled in a fair, timely, and effective manner. Third-party mediation of financial con-
sumer disputes has been carried out in a few regions in 
China on a pilot basis, allowing financial consumers to 
access convenient mediation services. Financial consumer 
protection departments are strengthening cooperation 
with justice departments and arbitration agencies, pro-
moting the establishment of a litigation and mediation 
docking mechanism for financial consumer disputes and 
enhanging the legal effect of the results of mediation.
Financial Capability and Consumer Education
The consumer protection departments of financial regula-
tory authorities have prioritized financial education efforts, 
most often through large-scale awareness campaigns. 
Various regulatory authorities participate in the National 
Consumer Protection Day on March 15. PBOC declares 
every September to be the national “Month for Populariz-
ing Financial Knowledge” and regularly launches activities such as expanding financial knowledge in rural areas, mil-
itary camps, schools, and communities to help financial 
consumers accurately understand their legal rights and 
avoid illegal financial activities. PBOC also organizes the 
compilation, publication, and distribution of the Book of 
Financial Knowledge Dissemination and explores how to 
evaluate the financial capability and literacy of consumers 
(box 4.11).
Each year, CBRC organizes banking sector institutions 
across the nation to conduct a month-long thematic 
financial knowledge dissemination awareness campaign, 
“Financial knowledge reaching every household.” During 
these activities, banks accept inquiries from consumers; 
introduce financial knowledge dissemination tools such 
as books, cartoons, and apps targeting various groups; 
and disseminate financial knowledge through different 
channels.
CSRC has organized successive thematic activities 
such as “Advocating Value Investing,” “Actively Reward-ing Investors,” “Securities Industry Rights Protection in 
Action on March 15th,” and the special investor protec-
tion campaign “Fairness on Your Side.” CSRC also sup-
ports establishing investor education bases as one-stop 
education and service places where investors can receive 
fair and high-quality education and services in a concen-
trated, systematic, and convenient manner.
CIRC has designated July 8 of each year as the 
“National Insurance Publicity Day,” during which public-
ity campaigns for insurance services are conducted for 
the public. CIRC also publishes education columns on 
online education platforms, official microblogs, WeChat, 
and general media; produces literacy books; and orga-
nizes educational activities to disseminate insurance 
knowledge and advocate for sound and rational insur -
ance consumption. In addition, CIRC requires a “risk 
warning” column be placed on the homepages of offi-China’s Financial Inclusion Experience   65
Since 2013, PBOC’s Financial Consumer Protection 
Bureau (FCPB) has conducted the Financial Con-
sumers’ Capability Survey every other year. For the 
third round of the survey in 2017, the survey ques-
tionnaire gauged financial consumers’ attitudes, 
behaviors, knowledge, and skills to comprehen-
sively reflect the financial capability and literacy of 
Chinese consumers.
Results of the 2017 survey show that Chinese 
consumers view financial consumer education posi-
tively and tend to be rational about consumption, 
savings, and credit, but still need to enhance their 
risk awareness. Families often have a budget but 
sometimes fail to stick to it. Consumers have limited 
understanding of contracts and statements of finan-
cial products and services. Consumers generally BOX 4.11
PBOC Report on China Financial Consumers’ Capability Survey, 2017 
know how to access financial education and how to resolve financial disputes with providers. Consum-
ers’ overall level of financial knowledge is relatively 
low, and a significant financial knowledge imbalance 
exists between rural and urban areas and among dif-
ferent regions. Consumers pay most attention to 
financial knowledge that is closely related to the 
preservation and appreciation of their wealth.  
The survey suggests that (1) financial literacy 
should be linked with the enhancement of financial 
skills, as well as the risk awareness of financial con-
sumers, (2) low income individuals should be a target 
group for financial education, and (3) financial knowl-
edge should be included into the national education 
system to educate consumers at an early age.  
Source: PBOC. 
NOTES
 19.  Sparreboom and Duflos (2012) provide a useful overview of the development of China’s financial sector since 1949, including the 
relevance for financial inclusion. 
 20. Zhang and others (2010). 
 21.  Administrative units in China from largest to smallest include province, city, county, town, and village. According to the 2016 
China Statistical Yearbook, China comprises 334 prefectures/cities, 2,850 counties, and 39,789 towns. According to PBOC’s 
Overall Developments of Payment Services in Rural Areas (2015), in China’s rural areas, the average population per county is approximately 420,000; the average population per town is approximately 28,700; and the average population per village is 
approximately 900.
 22.  According to Tsai (2006), less than 1 percent of bank loans in 2005–2006 went to private enterprises. 
 23.  The financial sector is overseen by one central bank (the People’s Bank of China [PBOC]) and three specialized regulatory and 
supervisory authorities: China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), and China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC). The Ministry of Finance (MoF) is also actively involved in various fiscal policies to 
support financial inclusion.cial websites of insurance companies to disclose the 
risks associated with insurance consumption and to dis-
seminate risk prevention knowledge.
Remaining Challenges
Several challenges remain in the areas of financial con-
sumer protection and financial capability in China. The 
legal and regulatory framework for financial consumer 
protection requires further adaptation to ensure that con-
sumer protection risks with respect to fintech and digital 
finance are comprehensively covered. In particular, a crit-
ical need exists for a comprehensive legal framework for 
data protection and privacy, as noted in section 4.4.2. 
Rules regarding disclosure and transparency, sales and marketing, safety of funds, and dispute resolution should be expanded to include new fintech companies and 
adapted as necessary to digital finance business models. 
Supervision efforts require further strengthening, as does 
coordination across PBOC, CBRC, CSRC, and CIRC, par -
ticularly as many financial consumer protection issues are cross market and cross product. Enforcement of viola-
tions is currently weak. Regarding financial capability, 
improvement in the effectiveness of financial education 
efforts is required. Special groups such as the elderly 
require more tailored efforts. Finally, how to better lever -
age digital technologies to efficiently and effectively deliver financial education that meets consumers’ needs 
should be further explored.66  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons   
 24.  The relevant survey questions refer to “cash subsidies for agricultural production” (reported by 28 percent of all households and 
56 percent of rural households), “welfare grants” (4 and 6 percent), “one child incentives” (3 and 2 percent), “five guarantee 
grants” (1 and 2 percent), “pensions” (1 and 1 percent), “relief subsidies” (1 and 1 percent), “food subsidies” (2 and 4 percent), 
and “afforestation grant” (3 and 5 percent).
 25.  PBOC (2016).
 26.  Source: Ningbo Central Sub-branch, PBOC.
 27.  The payment service providers with business licenses that facilitate bank card transaction services to designated entities (and network) merchants and complete the fund settlement. 
 28.  PBOC (2011); PBOC (2014).
 29.  Shangyitong refers to a kind of upgraded and transformed telephone-based device into which the card reader and related 
equipment are integrated, and to which PSBC customers’ debit cards are linked, allowing customers to bank easily and 
conveniently, including making balance inquiries, real-time transfers and bill payments and so on. It is extensively used in the agent-based service points of PSBC.
 30.  In this report, bank cards refer to both credit cards and debit cards. This section focuses specifically on debit cards. 
 31.  As noted in chapter 3, estimates of account ownership in China vary. PBOC estimates that over 90 percent of adults own an 
account. Regardless, it is clear that significant increases in account ownership have been achieved over the past few years.
 32.  PBOC.
 33.  These principles included (1) tailoring measures to local conditions, (2) preventing moral hazard, and (3) creating positive 
incentives. 
 34.  The Internet’s extraordinary potential for selling conventional insurance is illustrated by one second-tier insurer that recently opened a virtual shop in WeChat. After only three months in operation, the shop was selling RMB 3 million (US$450,000) in new 
motor premiums a day.
 35.  Source: CIRC.
 36.  The minimum registered capital for a VTB (established and operates at the town level), RMCC (established and operates at the 
administrative village level), and MCC is RMB 1 million, RMB 100,000, and RMB 5 million (US$150,000, US$1+5,000, and US$750,000) , respectively. In comparison, the minimum registered capital of a nationwide commercial bank is no less than RMB 
1 billion (US$150 million) and the minimum registered capital of a municipal commercial bank is no less than RMB 100 million 
(US$15 million).
 37.  The Administrative Rules for the Earmarked Funding for Financial Inclusion (MoF, 2016).
 38.  See Implementation Rules of CBRC for Administrative Licensing Items for Rural Small and Medium Financial Institutions, CBRC (2016) [Regulation 3].
 39.  The “Big Five” banks refer to the Agricultural Bank of China, the Bank of Communications, the China Constructions Bank, the 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, and Bank of China. 
 40.  Zhang Rui and others (2015).
 41.  Definitions for digital finance, Internet finance, and fintech, and how these terms relate to one another, are discussed in section 
1.2.
 42.  According to the Administrative Rules for Network Payment of Nonbank Payment Institutions released by PBOC in 2015, “network payment” refers a payee or drawee initiating payment instructions remotely through the public network information 
system by utilizing computer, mobile terminals, or other electronic equipment with payment institutions providing money transfer 
services between them, and there is no interaction between the electronic equipment of the payee and the exclusive equipment of the drawee.
 43.  Traditional financial service providers also provide mobile payments (as discussed in section 4.1.4.1) and, to a lesser extent, so do 
the three major telecom operators (China Telecom, China Mobile, and China Unicom).
 44.  Administration Rules on Payment Services of Non-Financial Institutions (PBOC, 2010 [Regulation 2]) and Implementation 
Measures of the Administration Rules on Payment Services of Non-Financial Institutions (PBOC, 2010 [Regulation 17]).
 45.  PBOC.
 46.  Worth noting is a key difference between the innovative payment products previously described and those that have developed in some other countries. Alipay and similar products operate via traditional bank accounts rather than by creating new accounts 
and e-money issuance, as mobile network operators have done in other economies. As such, an Alipay transaction remains 
integrated with a prudentially licensed and supervised financial institution, which may have facilitated the ability to have a relatively long “wait and see” period. 
 47.   https://qz.com/613384/over-8-billion-red-envelopes-were-sent-over-wechat-during-chinese-new-year/.
 48.  CBRC and others (2016).
 49.  Wangdai Zhijia (www.wdzj.com/news/yanjiu/51827.html) operates a Chinese P2P online lending portal.
 50.  Wangdai Zhijia (http://www.wdzj.com/news/baogao/25555.html). 
 51.  Wangdai Zhijia.
 52.  “26 on trial over China P2P fraud” http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2017-04/28/content_29125729.htmChina’s Financial Inclusion Experience   67
 53.  These include absorbing public savings, establishing capital pools, providing guarantees and commitments for guaranteed 
principal and interest, selling financial products, and carrying out credit assignment in such forms as asset securitization.
 54.  NIFA. 
 55.  Similar types of partnerships and service arrangements are also emerging between fintech companies and traditional financial 
service providers, such as fintech companies working with traditional banks to provide credit scores (e.g., Ant Financial’s Sesame 
Credit) or to improve creditworthiness assessments and risk management systems (e.g., Netease Financial).
 56.  At present, Alipay’s customers are asked to pay fees for transferring funds from a payment account to any bank accounts, but with a free annual limit of RMB 20,000 (US$300), provided the transfers do not exceed the annual limit, in which case the 
customer would have to pay fees for the transfer. Howerer, Alipay’s customers do not have to pay fees for transfers from a 
payment account to another payment account via smartphone.
 57.  For further discussion on the principles that should be carefully considered and balanced with respect to digital finance, see the G-20’s High-Level Principles on Digital Financial Inclusion, described in box 6.1.
 58.  1 mu = 0.06667 hectares.
 59.  IFC, China. 
 60.  The relevant survey questions refers to “cash subsidies for agricultural production” (reported by 28 percent of all households and 
56 percent of rural households), “welfare grants” (4 and 6 percent), “one child incentives” (3 and 2 percent), “five guarantee 
grants” (1 and 2 percent), “pensions” (1 and 1 percent), “relief subsidies” (1 and 1 percent), “food subsidies” (2 and 4 percent), and “afforestation grant” (3 and 5 percent).
 61.  PBOC.
 62.  http://news.xinhuanet.com/money/2016-12/29/c_1120215186.htm.
 63.  http://www.zzg.org.cn/zhtbd5658/cyzdjxs/shgg/201709/t20170930_667541.html.REMAINING FINANCIAL INCLUSION  
CHALLENGES IN CHINA AND THE  
WAY FORWARD
Despite China’s impressive progress in expanding financial 
inclusion in recent years, significant challenges remain. 
These challenges must be addressed for China to achieve 
its financial inclusion objectives and to leverage financial 
inclusion to support complementary economic and social 
development goals. This chapter summarizes six key re-  
maining challenges for financial inclusion in China. China’s  
Plan for Advancing the Development of Financial Inclusion 
(2016–2020) addresses many of these challenges. 
5.1  ACHIEVING AN EVOLVED AND WIDELY 
ACCEPTED CONCEPTUALIZATION OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
Although the concept of financial inclusion has become 
increasingly popularized in China, significant variations 
remain in its definition and practice across and within  
Chinese government agencies, local and national author -
ities, financial service providers, and nongovernmental 
organizations, often with counterproductive results. Mis-
understandings about financial inclusion have negatively 
influenced the strategies deployed to promote financial 
inclusion to date and have played a role in compromising 
the innovative capacity and incentives of financial service 
providers and the overall dynamism of the financial sector. 
For many in China, financial inclusion remains synony-
mous with credit subsidies, directed lending, and charita-
ble activities. Many stakeholders also believe that only a 
narrow range of financial products are relevant to financial 
inclusion (e.g., credit) and fail to consider the diverse set of 
products underserved segments need or the appropriate 
design of available products. Furthermore, some believe that no demand for financial services exists in underserved areas and that financial service providers operating in these areas must be heavily subsidized. The reality is more 
nuanced. Yet in China, numerous stakeholders still main-
tain a simplistic view of financial inclusion and do not fully 
comprehend the nuances of financial inclusion as 
described in chapter 2, or as outlined in China’s Plan for 
Advancing the Development of Financial Inclusion.
Going forward, government authorities who drive and 
coordinate China’s financial inclusion agenda must ensure 
that a comprehensive conceptualization of financial inclu-
sion is understood and practiced at all levels of govern-
ment and across all public and private stakeholders. This 
may be particularly true with respect to subnational 
authorities who do not benefit from access and exposure 
to global forums and resources. A broad shift in the con-
ceptualization of financial inclusion is necessary to outline a vision for achieving full financial inclusion in China and to 
evolve government practices and policies to address the 
remaining challenges to achieve such a vision. This vision 
should clearly articulate what pursuing market-based, 
commercially sustainable approaches to financial inclu-
sion means in practice, and it should ensure that this com-
mon understanding is implemented across all levels of 
government, with improved coordination and communi-
cation to allow harmonized, consistent approaches.
Financial inclusion and digital finance must also be rec-
ognized as separate concepts. Digital finance—including 
as practiced by fintech companies—is not the automatic 
equivalent of financial inclusion. Rather, digital finance is 
the combination of innovative technologies applied to the 
financial sector, while financial inclusion combines specific 
business models and design of financial products and ser -
vices intended to serve underserved population segments. 
Digital technologies can be used to further financial inclu-5
  69
70  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
sion, but they are an approach and not the objective itself. 
However, many fintech companies in China currently 
advertise themselves as “financial inclusion” institutions, a 
notion that many in the general public consequently share. 
In reality, several fintech companies operate businesses 
that have little to do with financial inclusion. While many 
financial products offered by fintech companies may serve 
a legitimate consumer need, such products do not mean-
ingfully expand access for unserved and underserved con-
sumer segments. As discussed in chapter 4, some fintech 
companies also infringe upon the interests of consumers 
through fraud and questionable business practices. This 
not only undermines the industry’s reputation, but also 
negatively affects the general understanding of financial 
inclusion.
5.2  RECALIBRATING THE ROLE OF 
GOVERNMENT
As this report clearly shows, extensive and active govern-
ment support for financial inclusion has been a hallmark of 
the Chinese experience. National and local governments 
have used a mixture of direct and indirect interventions to 
spur financial inclusion, including a wide range of policies, 
regulations, and promotional measures. These govern-
ment efforts have achieved considerable levels of success 
along certain metrics. As noted in chapter 3, high levels of 
account ownership have been obtained in China. Absolute 
numbers of access points have increased in rural areas, and 
greater numbers of SME units are present within banks.
After the broad economic reforms of the late 1970s 
and early 1980s, China has continued to promote the pro-
cess of marketization, including in the financial sector. 
However, China’s economy and financial sector still retain 
many features of emerging and public sector–dominated 
economies. Sustainability of the business models many 
financial service providers use to advance financial inclu-sion efforts has been a perennial concern, limiting the 
potential for ongoing viability and further expansion. For 
example, as noted previously, a nontrivial share of agent-
based service points are dormant or have limited traffic. 
Similarly, the extent to which SME units in banks have 
translated into greater access to finance for underserved 
SMEs is unclear. High levels of state intervention in state-
owned commercial banks or state-influenced financial ser -
vice providers also discourage competition and innovation, as these providers are often inefficiently run 
and do not operate on market-based principles, while 
having a distortive effect on the market. Highly subsidized 
products such as credit or insurance products can have a 
similarly distortive and chilling effect over the long term. 
Finally, administrative intervention by some local govern-
ments in the routine operations of financial service provid-ers raises questions of interference and issues of 
mismanagement. Overall, this approach fails to lay the 
groundwork for long-term, sustainable financial inclusion.
Therefore, one key challenge for Chinese authorities 
going forward is the need to think clearly and strategically about the appropriate role of government, the appropri-
ate mix of direct and indirect public sector measures, and 
the interplay between the public and private sectors. The 
public sector alone cannot drive financial inclusion, at least 
not beyond a certain point and not on a long-term, sus-
tainable basis. The private sector must play a critical role 
and do so based on market principles and via viable busi-
ness models for positive impacts of financial inclusion to 
be sustainable. This new thinking is reflected in Plan for 
Advancing the Development of Financial Inclusion (2016–2020), which highlights commercial sustainability as one of 
its core guiding principles. As basic metrics of financial 
inclusion such as access to transaction accounts are 
achieved and Chinese markets evolve, a shift in focus is 
required toward more market-based approaches and pri-
vate sector–driven efforts, particularly to encourage inno-vation and competition in providing a broader range of 
appropriate financial products and services and to ensure 
scalability. The entry and subsequent successes of fintech 
companies—in China and elsewhere—show the potential 
impact of this approach. Continuing down the path toward 
marketization is critical to fostering a dynamic and innova-
tive financial sector, which in turn is a key enabler of finan-
cial inclusion. 
The public sector still has a critical, meaningful role to 
play. However, the role of government should not (and 
cannot) be to “mandate” commercial sustainability. 
Rather, the appropriate role of government is to develop 
an enabling environment for financial inclusion—including 
the overall policy and coordination framework, legal and 
regulatory environment, and supporting financial and 
information and communication technology (ICT) infra-
structure—and to correct market failures where they exist, so that providers can serve the underserved in a commer -
cially viable manner. A legal and regulatory framework that provides clear market participation rules and estab-
lishes a fair, open, and level playing field for market partic-
ipants, considering relevant risks and supervisory capacity, 
is a critical function of the government, as noted in the 
G-20 High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion. 
Chinese authorities should also continue to prioritize the 
development of credit infrastructure, payments infrastruc-
ture, ICT infrastructure, and data infrastructure to support 
financial inclusion. The government must also continue to 
play a key role in protecting and educating consumers 
and ensuring the soundness and integrity of the financial 
system as a whole. Finally, government efforts to 
strengthen the rule of law by improving law enforcement 
efficiency, cracking down on improper and illegal financial Remaining Financial Inclusion Challenges in China and the Way Forward  71
activities, and protecting the legitimate rights and inter -
ests of creditors and debtors can contribute meaningfully 
to long-term and sustainable financial inclusion. 
Careful thought should be given to those particular cir -
cumstances where a more direct public sector role is war -
ranted. In such cases, the public sector role should be clearly articulated and delimited, with an exit strategy 
where appropriate. For example, expanding financial 
inclusion to reach the final stretches of the last mile is one 
instance that may require more direct government involve-
ment. But in such cases, sophistication is required to direct 
government assistance in a productive and minimally dis-
tortive manner (such as integrating with social safety net 
payments) to target appropriate individuals and clearly 
articulate the gap in needs and the intended impact.
5.3  EVOLVING BUSINESS MODELS AND 
PRACTICES TO ACHIEVE COMMERCIAL SUSTAINABILITY
Commercial sustainability is not only a foundation for sus-
tainable financial inclusion but also a basic condition for 
maintaining the overall financial system’s efficiency and 
soundness. However, significant barriers remain in achiev-
ing commercial sustainability for many providers in China. 
In remote or rural areas with small populations, low 
per-capita income, undiversified economies, and under -
developed infrastructure, financial service providers may struggle to operate profitably. In urban areas, financial ser -
vice providers also face such problems as information asymmetry, lack of pledges or mortgages, incomplete 
credit data, and high transaction costs.
Improving commercial sustainability requires a cultural 
and business model shift by some financial service provid-
ers toward market-driven innovation and customer cen-
tricity. Financial service providers’ corporate governance, 
internal management systems, and product design and 
delivery approaches must adapt and innovate to achieve commercial sustainability and compete with new market 
entrants. Chapter 4 includes several examples of tradi-
tional financial service providers leveraging new technolo-
gies and adapting to a more dynamic and competitive 
marketplace, to the benefit of financial inclusion. More of 
this trend is required to achieve operational efficiency, 
improved customer service, better product and service 
offerings for the underserved, and more conducive deliv-
ery channels to a broader range of customers. The suc-
cess of various financial products and services now offered 
via digital means by new market entrants clearly illustrates 
that traditionally underserved segments can be served 
profitably. Indeed, the Plan for Advancing the Develop-
ment of Financial Inclusion attaches great importance to 
the use of technology for expanding the breadth and depth of financial services for the underserved. To this 
end, the plan proposes to carry out explorations in the 
following three areas: (1) encouraging financial service 
providers to innovate with respect to financial products 
and services, (2) enhancing the capacity of financial ser -
vice providers to use technology, and (3) leveraging the 
useful role of the Internet in promoting the development 
of financial inclusion.
The experience of establishing broad agent networks 
in China provides an instructive example. As described in 
section 4.1.1, due to high prioritization and strong sup-
port from financial sector authorities (including subsidiz-
ing set-up costs in some provinces), initial successes have 
been achieved on a significant scale in terms of expand-
ing the network of agents in rural areas across China utiliz-
ing POS terminals for transactional services. The next 
stage to achieving long-term financial inclusion is now 
determining how these agent-based service points can be 
reoriented to operate in a more sustainable manner and 
be more fully leveraged for financial inclusion purposes 
(i.e., moving from rural cash withdrawal points to fully 
fledged, multifunctional agents). Such a shift in thinking requires reconsidering the business models of agent 
operations and analyzing the actual needs, demands, and 
behaviors of rural consumers to ensure that market-driven, 
sustainable models are developed. For example, reforms 
could allow for a broader range of services to be provided 
by certain agent-based service points, encourage greater 
optimization in the placement of agents, integrate the 
other payment needs of merchants and users into digital 
payment products, and loosen caps on agent fees and 
daily transaction limits.
For its part, the government should reconsider prac-
tices that disincentivize the achievement of commercial 
sustainability, such as excessive, poorly targeted, and/or 
open-ended subsidies and tax reductions/exemptions, 
targets for directed lending, and interference in gover -
nance and management. As discussed previously, the government must also reorient its focus to developing the overall enabling environment for financial inclusion. 
Aspects of the legal and regulatory framework that hinder 
the achievement of commercial sustainability should also 
be reformed, for example with respect to ownership and 
geographic restrictions imposed on microcredit compa-
nies (MCCs) and village and township banks (VTBs).
5.4  MANAGING RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH 
DIGITAL FINANCE
Achieving long-term and sustainable financial inclusion 
requires innovation, particularly to fully leverage digital 
technologies. Yet digital finance models carry significant 
risks. The 2016 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion 72  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
(GPFI) white paper64 points out that the evolving risk land-
scape for financial inclusion reflects characteristics that are 
inherent to digital finance: (1) new providers and new 
combinations of providers, (2) digital technology, (3) use 
of agents as a primary interface with customers, (4) new 
products and services and their bundling, and (5) the pro-
file of financially excluded and underserved customers. 
The implications of these risk characteristics are wide 
and varied. Operational risk is heightened due to the use 
of digital technologies, mass scale, and the possibility of 
large system failures. Consumer risk is heighted due to 
concerns such as possible loss or abuse of client informa-
tion or lack of disclosure regarding the practices of new 
business models. All such risks are further heightened 
when regulation lags significantly behind and does not 
constrain irresponsible market practices—factors that are 
particularly relevant for new fintech companies, which 
often operate under still-evolving legal and regulatory frameworks. Indeed, at their core, fintech companies per -
form the basic functions of finance and therefore have risks common to traditional providers, including liquidity 
risk, settlement risk, operational risk, money laundering 
and terrorist financing risks, and consumer protection 
risks. However, many fintech companies have distinct 
characteristics that heighten or expand these common 
risks and in some instances generate new risks. China’s 
experience with the peer-to-peer (P2P) industry highlights 
these risks and the consequences if such risks are not well 
understood and actively managed (the Ezubao case is a 
notable example, as discussed in section 4.3). The impli-
cations of these risks of course extend beyond financial 
inclusion. They affect the overall safety, soundness, and 
integrity of the financial system and the degree to which 
consumers are protected. Of course, providers can also 
use digital technologies to reduce risks, for example to reduce information asymmetries in lending decisions. 
Regulatory authorities in China, as elsewhere, there-
fore confront the challenge of balancing the dual objec-
tives of creating an enabling environment for innovation 
while monitoring and managing risks. Indeed, China’s 
own Plan for Advancing the Development of Financial 
Inclusion emphasizes the need to effectively manage risks in the financial system. Addressing this challenge requires 
evolution in supervisory approaches and capacities. The 
clarification of regulatory and supervisory responsibilities 
in the 2015 Guidelines on Promoting Sound Develop-
ment of Internet Finance was an important first step in this 
regard. The 2016 Implementation Plan for the Special 
Campaign to Address Risks of Internet-based Finance was 
another critical development toward managing risks asso-ciated with financial sector innovation (see box 4.6). More 
work remains to establish a comprehensive legal and reg-ulatory framework that reflects the new or heightened 
risks posed by digital finance. In addition, supervisors must be equipped with expertise and knowledge about 
new providers, products, and business models, and suffi-
cient staffing and resources will be required, including 
leveraging digital tools for supervision. In this regard, 
supervisors can also leverage digital technologies to mon-
itor and manage risks via “regtech,” which Chinese 
authorities are already exploring. For example, modern 
reporting platforms can improve the scope, frequency, 
accuracy, and granularity of data provided to financial sec-
tor supervisors, allowing them to monitor the market in 
near real time. Strong and active coordination among 
supervisory bodies, including outside the financial sector, 
will also be necessary to reduce overlaps, gaps, and inef-
ficiencies—the value of coordination in balancing innova-
tion and risk is highlighted in the G-20 High-Level 
Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion. Learning from other countries and international bodies that are dealing 
with similar issues in this fast-moving space will be critical.
5.5  STRENGTHENING NEW-TYPE RURAL 
FINANCIAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
VTBs and MCCs were established in China as new-type 
rural financial service providers with the specific objective 
of improving financial inclusion in rural areas. As described 
in section 4.2, though these providers have achieved a 
certain degree of success—within each provider type, 
high-performing providers can be found—significant 
improvements are needed in the operations, governance, 
and regulatory environment for such providers to better 
realize their potential to contribute to financial inclusion. 
For example, major problems VTBs face include high 
operational and management costs and limited innova-
tion. Major problems MCCs face include a narrow range 
of funding sources, high costs, and heavy tax burdens. An 
urgent need also exists to enhance MCCs’ risk manage-
ment capacity. Recent years’ practices suggest a severe 
neglect of risk controls by MCCs seeking to achieve short-
term profits. For example, MCCs have lent large amounts 
in loans to steel and iron, trade, and coal enterprises, all of whose operations are heavily subject to impacts of the 
economic cycle. Both VTBs and MCCs face other regula-
tory constraints to their operations, resulting in low mar -
gins and challenges to sustainable growth. 
Various reforms would be beneficial to improve the 
development of VTBs. Fostering more independent gov-ernance by reducing excessive intervention and control by 
sponsoring banks is necessary and will allow VTBs to more 
fully leverage their comparative advantages of operational 
efficiency and flexibility. More flexible capital sources for 
VTBs should also be permitted. For example, where cer -
tain conditions are met, private capital should be allowed to establish VTBs as the main investors. Multiple VTBs Remaining Financial Inclusion Challenges in China and the Way Forward  73
NOTES
64.  GPFI (2016).
65.  This survey comprehensively reflects the financial literacy status of existing Chinese consumers from multiple angles such as 
attitudes, behaviors, financial knowledge, and financial skills (PBOC, 2017).  could also form linkages in the same geographic areas to 
achieve efficiencies of scale in management costs. Regula-
tory reforms may be needed to enable such actions.
With regard to MCCs, the following reform options 
should be considered: (1) define the role and purpose of 
MCCs more clearly and incorporate this purpose into 
high-level institutional documents; (2) review the legal and 
regulatory framework to remove barriers to MCC opera-
tions, such as increasing the permitted percentage of 
external financing, providing more flexible leverage ratios 
for qualified MCCs, and allowing for expanded operations 
beyond a single county’s boundaries; (3) establish greater 
consistency across provinces with regard to the regulatory 
and supervisory framework for MCCs, in particular 
addressing those localities where high entry barriers are 
imposed; (4) undertake efforts to enhance MCCs’ risk con-
trol capacities; (5) leverage tax policies to incentivize 
MCCs to serve target sectors and populations; and (6) conduct ratings of MCCs for financial inclusion objectives 
and allow those MCCs that obtain higher ratings to trans-
form into VTBs. These reforms can help to increase MCC’s 
commercial sustainability and allow them to further con-
tribute to reaching the underserved.
In addition, new-type rural financial service providers 
should better leverage digital technologies. With the 
development of telecom infrastructure, improvements in 
rural financial infrastructure, and rapid dissemination of 
smartphones in rural areas, digital technologies have pen-
etrated into all economic and social sectors. Such expan-
sion in ICT infrastructure should be better utilized by 
new-type rural financial service providers to reach custom-
ers via new models and faster, lower-cost channels. To 
achieve further development, new-type rural financial ser -
vice providers should also leverage digital technologies in management, product research and development, mar -
keting, customer service, and other fields.
5.6  IMPROVING THE FINANCIAL CAPABILITY 
OF CONSUMERS
The financial literacy and financial capability of consumers 
is a critical supporting element of financial inclusion. It is 
particularly important given the increasingly digital nature 
of finance, which requires additional capabilities for con-
sumers to successfully identify, take up, and use appropri-
ate financial products and services. Principle 6 of the G-20 
High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion empha-  sizes the need to “support and evaluate programs that enhance digital and financial literacy in light of the unique 
characteristics, advantages, and risks of digital financial 
services and channels.”
A 2017 PBOC survey revealed that Chinese consumers 
perform well in some aspects.
65 For example, they view 
financial consumer education positively and tend to be 
rational in consumption, savings, and credit; families often 
have expenditure plans; consumer behavior on loan appli-
cations and credit card repayment is reasonable; and con-
sumers usually know how to get financial knowledge and 
how to resolve financial disputes. 
However, the 2017 survey revealed less satisfactory 
aspects, including relatively low risk awareness among 
consumers, lack of execution on family expenditure plans, 
and insufficient understanding and usage of contracts and 
statements of financial products. The overall level of finan-
cial knowledge is relatively low, and a significant imbal-
ance exists between rural and urban areas and among 
different regions. Relatedly, in some regions, a poor credit 
culture exists among enterprises, individuals, and even 
local governments, with some parties having a low regard 
for commercial credit or the financial obligation that it entails. In addition, financial consumers’ lack of knowl-
edge about digital technologies discourages them from 
using digital financial services or leaves them vulnerable 
to inappropriate products and services, undermining their 
self-interest and leading to problems and risks in the 
development of digital finance. 
Effective financial consumer education can facilitate the 
development of financial inclusion. To achieve this objec-
tive, financial literacy surveys conducted on a regular and 
long-term basis can help establish and monitor the knowl-
edge level of consumers and their behavioral changes. By 
identifying the weaknesses in financial knowledge and 
behaviors of consumers, these surveys can also help to 
inform the design and improve the effectiveness of finan-
cial education activities. Such activities should focus on 
conveying the basic financial knowledge needed in daily 
life, tailored for various types of consumers, to ensure that consumers obtain financial knowledge compatible with 
their needs, behavioral characteristics, and existing knowl-
edge levels. Educational efforts should also help guide 
consumers in how to correctly use financial knowledge and 
how to conduct self-appraisal of risks and select suitable 
financial products according to their own risk-bearing 
capacity and the risk characteristics of relevant products.GLOBAL LESSONS AND IMPLICATIONS  
FOR POLICYMAKERS
The preceding chapters of this report have traced  
China’s path to financial inclusion and highlighted remain-
ing challenges. This chapter aims to distill six significant 
and globally relevant lessons from China’s financial inclu-
sion experience to guide other countries in meeting their 
own financial inclusion objectives. China’s multifaceted 
experience with financial inclusion provides a wealth of 
lessons concerning such globally relevant issues as reach-
ing the last mile, allowing regulatory space for digital 
innovation, moving toward a market-based and sustain-
able approach, leveraging financial infrastructure, and 
determining the appropriate role of government in 
enabling financial inclusion.
A caveat to keep in mind regarding the following les-
sons: progress and successes achieved in reaching full 
financial inclusion necessarily reflect each country’s 
unique culture, political economy, and development 
context. Lessons from any one country’s experience must therefore be considered in the context of these factors. 
For example, China’s savings culture has been an import-
ant driver of high account penetration. Similarly, the suc-
cess of nontraditional financial service providers in China 
is closely linked to the structure of China’s financial mar -
kets in the early 2000s, which created significant “pent-up” demand for financial products and services 
among the general population. China’s progress in 
reaching the last mile also cannot be separated from the 
active role and function of the government in Chinese 
society. And finally, China’s impressive track record of 
economic growth and poverty alleviation in recent 
decades is important context for analyzing the latest 
gains in financial inclusion. 
Therefore, just as China has pursued its own path to 
financial inclusion through a mix of global and domestic approaches, policymakers in other countries that seek to 
emulate China’s successes should assess the degree to 
which the cultural, political, and economic factors in their 
own countries facilitate the models that have proven suc-
cessful in China; adapt these lessons from China appropri-
ately for their own context; and seek to uncover where 
other opportunities may lie within the unique characteris-
tics of their own environments.
6.1 REACHING THE LAST MILE
Large-scale, policy-driven initiatives, including improving financial infrastructure, expanding rural branch networks 
and access points, and digitalizing large-scale recurrent 
payment streams, can enable and drive substantial and 
meaningful progress toward reaching last-mile segments 
with basic transaction accounts and access points, but 
further efforts are needed to achieve sustainable and 
long-term financial inclusion.
As noted in previous chapters, one of China’s most prom-
inent and undeniable success stories has been the high 
levels of financial access achieved, both in terms of physi-
cal access to financial services and in terms of uptake of 
transaction accounts. As of 2014, account penetration in 
China stood at 79 percent, higher than most developing 
countries and even higher than the G-20 average of 76 
percent.
66 This high level of financial access to under -
served population segments can be attributed to a com-bination of various factors, in particular complementary 
and sustained government policies that together have 
enabled and driven significant increases in physical access 
and uptake of transaction accounts.6
  75
76  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
The Chinese government has invested substantially in 
expanding and improving China’s financial infrastructure, 
particularly the retail payment systems (further discussed 
in section 6.2). In addition, the People’s Bank of China 
(PBOC) has encouraged and facilitated the establishment 
of one of the widest point-of-sale (POS)–enabled interop-
erable agent networks in the world in absolute numbers, 
significantly increasing the number of physical access 
points for rural and underserved populations in villages 
across China. Legal reforms have allowed the establish-
ment of new-type rural financial service providers such as 
microcredit companies (MCCs) and village and township 
banks (VTBs), and banks have been encouraged to estab-
lish special sub-branches in rural areas. Preferential pru-
dential rules have been used to encourage lending by 
financial service providers to rural areas. Government 
transfers have also been consciously leveraged as a driver 
for financial inclusion.67 Social transfers for programs ben-
efiting rural and agricultural households (i.e., agricultural 
subsidies, rural pension insurance, rural medical insur -
ance, etc.) must typically be received via cards linked to free bank accounts. Such efforts to digitize social transfers 
from cash to payment cards have been deliberate and 
large scale in nature, with the policy objectives of incentiv-
izing account opening for providers and encouraging 
account ownership for all subsidy recipients. In 2016, 
more than two billion transfer payments (totaling RMB 
499 billion [US$75 billion]) were disbursed to recipients’ 
bank accounts and debit cards from rural pension insur -
ance and rural medical insurance schemes and subsidies for rural households.
68
The Chinese experience demonstrates that the cumu-
lative and synergistic effect of these various government 
policies can enable the growth of extensive physical 
branch networks and access points in rural and under -
served areas and incentivize and facilitate account open-ing on a large scale. A multipronged approach such as the 
one taken in China is clearly necessary to tackle such a 
fundamental issue as reaching the last mile. Chinese poli-
cies have successfully harnessed the power of the various 
roles government can play (e.g., via infrastructure, incen-
tives, regulation, direct intervention, and moral suasion) to 
increase financial inclusion via account ownership in rural 
and remote areas.
However, the Chinese experience also highlights cer -
tain intractable challenges common to policymakers 
across the world when trying to reach the so-called “last 
mile.” One key challenge relates to sustainability and 
commercial viability (also discussed in chapter 5). Whether the model of agent-based service points can become a 
more fully fledged, commercially viable operation is an 
open question. Similarly, many rural credit cooperatives 
(RCCs) are constrained by governance issues, while new-type rural financial service providers have not reached sig-nificant scale. It is also questionable whether commercial 
banks’ current efforts to operate in rural areas, including 
via special sub-branches, are commercially viable, and 
hence sustainable over the long term. Therefore, while 
impressive physical access has been achieved via poli-
cy-driven efforts, it is less clear how fully sustainable such 
results are and how far financial inclusion can evolve mov-
ing forward.
The Chinese experience suggests that achieving sus-
tainable, long-term levels of financial inclusion for the last 
mile requires a carefully strategic and nuanced approach, 
in addition to multipronged efforts that fully leverage vari-
ous government roles. In some ways, the last mile can be 
considered a heterogeneous group with different sets of needs and obstacles. What does reaching the last mile 
mean? Some underserved segments in remote and rural 
areas are commercially active, whether formally or infor -
mally, and have unmet needs for various financial products and services. They therefore need appropriately designed 
and tailored financial products and services, beyond sim-
ple physical access and basic transaction accounts, and 
can presumably be served sustainably via low-cost, inno-
vative methods. Achieving financial inclusion for such con-
sumers will require moving beyond account ownership 
and access points that provide transactional services to 
achieving similar results in meeting the needs for financial 
products such as credit and insurance. However, other 
segments of the last mile may be so remote and excluded 
that serving them may not be commercially viable without 
targeted government intervention, or they may have other 
basic livelihood needs that supersede the need for finan-cial products and services. Better understanding the 
nuances within the last mile and designing appropriate 
policy initiatives for these nuances will be important.
6.2  INVESTING IN FINANCIAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE
Efforts to expand and improve financial infrastructure—
particularly for credit and payments—can significantly 
improve access, usage, and quality of financial services 
by individuals and micro and small enterprises (MSEs).
While the products and services nontraditional financial 
service providers offer have garnered significant atten-
tion in China in recent years, the role of traditional finan-
cial infrastructure development in expanding access, 
usage, and quality of financial services in China cannot 
be understated. Financial infrastructure—the set of insti-
tutions that enable financial intermediation—covers 
credit infrastructure (including credit reporting, secured Global Lessons and Implications for Policymakers   77
transactions, and insolvency systems) and payment sys-
tems infrastructure.69,70  
Several developments have contributed to strengthen-
ing the scope and quality of China’s credit infrastructure, including a core legal framework and registry system for 
secured transactions that was established in the mid-
2000s, credit reporting regulation and guidelines issued 
since 2000, the 2006 Enterprise Bankruptcy Law, and the 
2007 Property Law (see section 4.4). Recent empirical 
studies have validated China’s investment in credit infra-
structure, finding a clear relationship between financial 
infrastructure and financial inclusion. In one 2010 study, 
researchers collaborated with a large domestic bank to 
study how the introduction of credit information sharing 
via a public credit registry system affects bank lending 
decisions. The researchers found that borrowers whose 
creditworthiness assessment included information from 
other institutions via the registry received higher levels of 
credit as compared with borrowers with information derived only from the lending bank itself.
71 
China has also made significant progress toward the 
development of a comprehensive and robust national payments system infrastructure. These efforts to improve 
the reach, efficiency, and safety of China’s national pay-
ments system have enabled improvements in interopera-
bility and competition and are also a key factor in the 
significant expansion and diversification of physical access 
points throughout China, including commercial bank 
branches, sub-branches, agents, new-type rural financial 
service provider branches (e.g., VTBs and MCCs), ATMs, 
and retail POS terminals. From the consumer perspective, 
the result is a wider range of available products (e.g., 
debit cards and digital payments) with increasingly diverse 
applications and a steady reduction in direct and indirect 
costs (e.g., cost of transportation) associated with the 
uptake and use of payment products, particularly noncash 
payment instruments. From the provider perspective, expanding the national payments system into rural areas 
has provided a more viable business case for supporting 
new business models and products to service such areas, 
including nonbank digital payment providers, online-to-
offline linkages, and adjacent financial products and ser -
vices built off of payment services. The underlying payment systems infrastructure has also enabled the 
large-scale shift of government-to-person (G2P) payments 
to electronic instruments, bringing millions of Chinese 
adults into the formal financial system. 
The development of information and communication 
technology (ICT) infrastructure has also helped improve 
access, usage, and quality of financial services in China. 
Specifically, the national ID system has reduced the costs 
of customer due diligence efforts and, with a national ID 
sufficient to open a basic savings account, has significantly reduced barriers to access for basic financial products for all adults. Relatively widespread Internet and mobile net-
works have allowed hundreds of millions of consumers to use Internet-based digital financial services. 
China’s experiences demonstrate that establishing a 
robust and comprehensive financial infrastructure ecosys-
tem is an effective and critical role of government in 
enabling financial inclusion. Indeed, China’s experience in 
this area was key to informing Principle 4 of the G-20 High 
Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion (see box 6.1). While efforts to intervene directly in financial markets 
can generate distortions and fiscal stress, investments in 
financial infrastructure that enable competition, innova-
tion, and overall financial sector efficiency provide wide-
spread positive benefits across providers and products 
and are arguably a more efficient, appropriate, and 
In 2016, the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI), under the presidency of PBOC, proposed digital financial inclusion as the 
key topic for the year. The GPFI subsequently established the Digital 
Financial Inclusion Technical Team comprising experts from nine 
international organizations to draft the G20 High-Level Principles for 
Digital Financial Inclusion (referred to hereafter as HLPs). In Septem-
ber 2016, G20 leaders at the Hangzhou Summit officially approved 
the HLPs, which serve as the first international high-level guidelines 
in the field of digital financial inclusion. The HLPs include 66 actions 
spanning eight principles to guide and advise national authorities 
and relevant stakeholders in the development of digital financial 
inclusion. The principles are as follows: 
1) Promote a digital approach to financial inclusion,
2) Balance innovation and risk to achieve digital financial inclusion,
3) Provide an enabling and proportionate legal and regulatory 
framework for digital financial inclusion,
4) Expand the digital financial services infrastructure ecosystem,
5) Establish responsible digital financial practices to protect con-
sumers,
6) Strengthen digital financial literacy and awareness,
7) Facilitate customer identification for digital financial services, and
8) Track digital financial inclusion progress.
A complete description of these principles and related actions are available at http://www.gpfi.org/publications/g20-high-level- 
principles-digital-financial-inclusion. BOX 6.1
The G20 High-Level Principles for Digital  
Financial Inclusion78  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
impactful use of government resources for supporting 
sustainable, long-term financial inclusion.
6.3 LEVERAGING ONLINE NETWORKS
Online, network-based business models (e.g., e-com-merce and social networks) can facilitate the design and 
delivery of innovative financial services by leveraging 
network effects, technology, economies of scale, big 
data, and cross-subsidization opportunities. 
Most financial service providers are established with the 
explicit objective of offering payments, savings, credit, or 
insurance products to individuals and/or firms. Yet as 
Internet-based companies enhance the breadth and 
depth of commercial and social networks, a new model 
has emerged that integrates financial service provision 
within existing online ecosystems. China’s path to digital 
financial inclusion exemplifies this model. Alibaba and 
Tencent—established as an e-commerce platform and 
social network platform, respectively—now both operate 
as major players in the financial services market in China.
72 
These online, network-based companies have several comparative advantages to other financial service provid-
ers, including: 
• Ability to access large, existing customer networks and 
existing customer relationships instantly; 
• Ability to leverage big data produced via commercial 
or social interactions to inform product design and 
delivery and reduce information asymmetries (e.g., for 
creditworthiness assessments); 
• Ability to realize low transaction costs and efficient delivery by leveraging existing digital infrastructure 
(e.g., cloud computing services and databases) and 
digital delivery channels; and
• Ability to take advantage of synergies between core commercial/social interactions and financial services 
(e.g., facilitation of commercial interactions and “gift-
ing” culture).
For example, Ant Financial’s suite of financial products—including Alipay, Yuebao, Ant Check Later, and MYbank—
arose from the Alibaba e-commerce platforms. Alibaba’s 
first foray into financial products was Alipay, developed to 
facilitate transactions between buyers and sellers on Tao-
bao. In essence, Alipay integrates a financial service into a 
commercial network, taking advantage of the conve-
nience (for the consumer) and economies of scale (for the 
provider and the consumer) of housing both services 
within the same platform. Yuebao, Ant Check Later, and 
MYbank similarly leverage the comparative advantage of 
having access to a huge supply of digital transaction data, user ratings, and revenue growth to better understand customers’ financial behaviors and needs, enabling Ant 
Financial to better manage risks and provide targeted 
products, and to access Alipay balances in the case of late 
payment or default for consumers within the Alipay eco-
system. Such advantages allow these fintech companies 
to provide their financial products at greater convenience 
and speed, at lower cost, and at a larger scale due to the 
aforementioned factors.
Tencent’s WeChat is China’s largest social networking 
platform with more than 800 million users. In 2013, 
WeChat users gained direct access to Tenpay, Tencent’s 
digital payment product, which allows users to send and 
receive payments, withdraw money to bank accounts, 
etc. The integration of a payments tool into a social 
media platform has proved to be a massively successful model that allows users to blend social and financial 
interactions, including sending “gifts” or remittances. 
For example, more than eight billion “red envelopes” 
were sent via Tenpay during the 2016 Spring Festival, up 
from 20 million in 2014.
73 
While these models have demonstrated the significant 
opportunity to offer complementary financial products and services to consumers within existing Internet-based 
commercial and social ecosystems, consumers outside 
such networks—often disproportionately the poor, rural, 
and elderly—may gain limited or no financial inclusion 
benefits from such models. Thus it is worth noting that the 
primary role of these particular business models may be to 
deepen levels of financial inclusion by providing addi-
tional and/or improved financial products and services to 
those with some existing degree of financial access, rather 
than broaden levels of financial inclusion by reaching last-
mile consumers. In addition, such complementary ser -
vices may not necessarily address all the unmet needs of consumers. The policy implication is that this model is not 
a silver bullet to achieve comprehensive financial inclusion 
for all and must be complemented with other business models and deliberate policy and regulatory efforts to 
reach last-mile consumer segments. 
6.4  ENABLING MARKET ENTRY AND 
INNOVATION
A “wait and see” regulatory approach can help foster  
initial development of new digital finance models, but 
must be accompanied by active monitoring that leads to 
the timely development of a regulatory framework that 
addresses the attendant risks of digital finance.
Most policymakers and regulators seek to achieve a bal-
ance between fostering innovation and financial inclusion 
and providing the necessary regulation and supervision to Global Lessons and Implications for Policymakers   79
ensure financial stability, financial integrity, and responsi-
ble market conduct by providers. In practice, this may 
mean permitting new providers, products, services, or 
business models to enter the market in the absence of a 
well-defined regulatory framework, thereby allowing inno-
vations to achieve scale and granting national authorities 
time to develop a regulatory approach that achieves these 
multiple policy objectives and reflects actual market 
dynamics and risks.
The Chinese experience demonstrates both the merits 
of this approach and the associated risks. Recent growth 
in China’s fintech industry has been driven by nontradi-
tional providers (e.g., e-commerce companies, social net-
work companies, crowd-sourcing platforms, Internet-only 
banks, and credit scoring services) that, largely operating 
in the absence of a specific and relevant regulatory frame-
work, were able to more easily enter the market with inno-
vative products and delivery models and, in some cases, achieve massive scale.
74 By contrast, traditional providers 
were somewhat more constrained by the parameters of 
existing regulatory frameworks and the incentive (or disin-
centive) structure of existing market dynamics. The out-
come of this “wait and see” approach—a large, dynamic, 
and competitive fintech industry—suggests that this 
approach can be beneficial in achieving the policy objec-
tive of enabling financial innovation, although it raises 
potential concerns and considerations for other policy-
makers considering a similar approach given noted inci-
dences of fraud and misconduct among certain players in 
the fintech industry. 
As a result, policymakers in China have now moved 
from the “wait and see” approach toward establishing a 
more comprehensive regulatory framework for new pro-
viders and products to ensure the long-term integrity and 
stability of the financial system and adequate protections 
for consumers. The Government of China’s 2015 Guide-lines on Promoting Sound Development of Internet 
Finance—coming after several fintech companies had 
already reached massive scale—represents a significant 
step in the development of a comprehensive regulatory 
framework for fintech and an important evolution past the 
piecemeal, “wait and see” approach taken up to that 
point.
75 The Guidelines specifically encourages the devel-
opment of existing and new types of digital financial ser -
vices, but emphasizes that these services should be limited to small-value transactions. It also encourages 
more partnerships between fintech companies and tradi-
tional financial service providers, as such innovative part-
nerships also pose significant opportunities to achieve 
greater financial inclusion by combining the power and 
efficiencies of fintech and digital finance with the existing 
operational and compliance structure, client relationships, 
and physical networks of traditional service providers. 
Importantly, the Guidelines clarifies the regulatory man-dates of different financial sector authorities and notes 
several areas where additional regulation is required, 
including related to reserve fund management, informa-
tion security, anti-money laundering, and disclosure and 
transparency.
76 Similarly, a special multiagency campaign 
was launched in April 2016 to address the risks of fintech 
and to promote the healthy and orderly development of 
fintech, with clear standards established.
Of course, the monitoring and management of risks 
that emerge with new providers, products, and technol-
ogy merit significant consideration. The “wait and see” 
approach taken with the peer-to-peer (P2P) industry, for 
example, was not without costs. It has been reported 
that at least one million investors have lost money 
through fraudulent P2P service providers in China. This 
experience serves as a useful reminder that the risks of 
digital finance (particularly related to financial security, 
fraud, and consumer protection) must be closely moni-
tored. The challenges of risk monitoring and manage-
ment are constant and remain a significant challenge for 
China, as discussed in chapter 5. 
Other countries seeking to achieve China’s level of 
success in fostering a thriving fintech industry that is con-ducive to greater financial inclusion may benefit from pur -
suing a more deliberate “test and learn” approach to nontraditional providers and products, as opposed to a 
“wait and see” approach. China’s experience suggests a 
possible segmentation into three phases: (1) active mon-
itoring of new, unregulated providers, including along 
dimensions of scale, stability risks, integrity risks, and 
consumer protection risks; (2) issuance of high-level prin-
ciples or risk warnings to guide market development; and 
(3) issuance of a specific regulatory framework, covering 
responsible authorities and licensing procedures, pru-
dential requirements, regulations for financial consumer 
protection, and supervisory powers, responsibilities, and 
functions. Key considerations will be the active monitor -
ing of risks and appropriate timing of the issuance of high-level principles and/or regulation, as moving to these stages should not be unduly delayed if risks are 
observed in the market. 
Financial sector authorities may also wish to consider a 
“regulatory sandbox” approach, which provides more 
structure than the “test and learn” approach while still 
providing the flexibility for innovation. The “regulatory 
sandbox” approach allows for the launch and testing of 
new technologies into a market under waived or modified 
regulations but with clear guidelines in place, including 
specific parameters on number of customers or the bal-
ance or value of products and services being tested and 
specialized monitoring and reporting requirements. The 
testing may continue for a certain period of time (e.g., six 
to 12 months), at which time financial sector authorities 
may develop rules based on assessed risks.
77 80  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
Regardless of approach, the specific regulatory frame-
work that ultimately develops should directly address risks 
identified with new innovations, while accounting for the 
heterogeneity of digital finance models. China’s experi-
ence demonstrates the value of a regulatory approach 
that promotes innovation, while also highlighting the 
need to actively monitor and promptly address risks. The 
ultimate aim is to create an environment that is fair and 
balanced for all stakeholders and proportional to the dis-
tinct stability, integrity, and consumer protection risks that 
fintech companies and digital finance pose.
6.5 INNOVATING WITH POLICY PILOTS
Pilots can be a useful tool for governments to test and 
scale policies and initiatives for financial inclusion, as 
long as the promotion of such pilot programs aligns 
with the principles of long-term fiscal and commercial 
sustainability.
As noted throughout this report, various Chinese govern-
ment authorities, including PBOC, CBRC, China Insurance 
Regulatory Commission (CIRC), Ministry of Finance (MoF), 
and local governments, have employed policy pilots—
government-initiated small-scale explorative pilot pro-
grams—to introduce new practices and models to 
advance financial inclusion. The Chinese experience is 
characterized by many policy pilot programs, initially 
shepherded by a set of provisional policies with stated 
objectives and regulatory parameters. As pilots were 
rolled out, the provisional policies were reviewed and 
adjusted, and where pilot programs were successful, the provisional measures were formalized as official policy 
and rolled out nationally. The 2005 MCC pilot program is 
one example. Drawing lessons from previous bank-based 
poverty alleviation and nongovernmental organization 
(NGO)–led microcredit programs, national authorities 
piloted a new institutional structure (MCCs) as a strategy 
to develop the microfinance market and increase compe-
tition in the financial sector, given the obstacles posed by 
the existing banking legal and regulatory framework. This 
model was later adapted and embedded into the national 
regulatory framework. The development and subsequent 
scale-up of agent networks for rural cash withdrawal ser -
vices and G2P digitization also followed the pilot approach, launching first in a few provinces and later 
being further adapted and implemented nationwide. 
The Chinese experience shows that policy pilots can 
offer unique opportunities for financial sector authorities to “learn by doing” and balance risk management with policy 
entrepreneurship. Further, policy pilots can be politically 
appealing. The small scale and the trial nature of policy 
pilots can lower perceived risks and further encourage experimentation and innovation at local levels, which are specifically needed for areas that experience significant 
market failures (such as more remote and rural areas). In 
many cases, the “pilot” status grants programs a certain 
degree of policy or regulatory expediency and flexibility. 
Therefore, policy pilots can be useful instruments to test 
remedies that address constraints in policy and regulatory frameworks.
However, the top-down approach to certain policy 
pilots that involve new business models (i.e., agent-based 
models) or institutional types (i.e., MCCs) also highlights 
the need for authorities to ensure that promoting such ini-
tiatives does not ignore the need for long-term commercial 
sustainability. Preferably, pilots should prove their potential 
for long-term viability before mass expansion. In this 
regard, authorities should have in mind an exit strategy for 
policy pilots and anticipate that further experimentation 
and adjustment may be needed in the post-pilot stage to 
enable long-term success. 
6.6 PROTECTING CONSUMERS
Ensuring that consumers are treated fairly and have 
access to transparently provided products and services 
and redress mechanisms is a critical policymaker function 
that must accompany increased financial inclusion and 
keep pace with both financial innovation and financial 
deepening.
Financial consumer protection is a critical complement to 
increased financial inclusion. Consumers often face imbal-
ances of power, information, and resources in comparison 
to financial service providers. Such imbalances are further 
exacerbated in the case of previously underserved or 
unserved customers entering the formal financial sector 
for the first time. Financial consumer protection frame-
works are intended to address these imbalances and pro-
tect consumers, ensuring that the benefits of financial 
inclusion are realized while also contributing to the 
broader safety and soundness of the financial system.
Since the global financial crisis, policymakers around 
the world have focused much greater attention on financial consumer protection, and China is no exception. In recent 
years, Chinese policymakers have taken important steps to 
lay the groundwork for a strengthened financial consumer 
protection framework. Regulations and directives have 
been issued covering key aspects of consumer protection, 
such as disclosure, business conduct, and dispute resolu-
tion, and financial consumer protection divisions have 
been established within various financial sector authorities.
The China experience illustrates the critical need for 
such efforts to continually evolve to keep pace with finan-
cial deepening and financial innovation. Gaps remain in Global Lessons and Implications for Policymakers   81
establishing a comprehensive framework for financial con-
sumer protection in China, including the absence of a 
financial sector–specific consumer protection law; the need 
to improve proactive supervisory activities, such as 
increased market monitoring and data analyses; the lack of 
strong enforcement measures; and the need for improved 
coordination across financial consumer protection supervi-
sors, particularly with respect to cross-product and cross-  
market issues. 
The potential vulnerabilities that arise from these gaps 
are magnified by the speed and scale with which everyday consumers are entering the formal financial sector in 
China and engaging with innovative new digital financial 
products and providers—all good things from a financial 
inclusion perspective, but accompanied by new or height-ened consumer protection risks. These risks are illustrated by the problems experienced with P2P lenders running 
away with investors’ funds, or everyday retail investors los-ing their savings in financial management products due to 
not fully understanding these products and/or having 
such products mis-sold to them. The Chinese experience 
serves as a useful reminder that existing frameworks must 
be fleshed out and strengthened to ensure that they prop-
erly cover the risks associated with digital finance, whether 
relating to digital delivery, data protection and privacy, 
limited digital financial capability from the consumer side, 
tailored disclosure requirements for innovative products 
and associated risks, or new types of providers or partner -
ship arrangements that may not fit neatly within existing regulatory ambits.
NOTES
 66.  Percent of adults (age 15+) reporting ownership of a transaction account, as indicated by Global Findex. See previous discussion 
in chapters 3 and 4 regarding other estimates of account ownership in China.
 67.  CPMI (2016) provides further description of the drivers and enablers of financial inclusion from a payments and transactions 
account perspective.
 68.  PBOC.
 69.  Key elements of a robust credit infrastructure include credit reporting systems, a secured transactions framework, and the 
insolvency regime. On the payments side, interbank systems for retail electronic fund transfers, a payment card processing platform, and a large-value interbank settlement system are critical.
 70.  China’s approach to expanding financial inclusion through investments in financial infrastructure broadly aligns with a major 
finding from the Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion (World Bank, 2014), which notes, “Policy 
recommendations to support a more financial diverse landscape encompass . . . strengthening financial and lending infrastructure, including commercial laws, bankruptcy laws, and contract enforcement.”
 71.  Cheng and Degryse (2010).
 72.  This model is related to but distinct from fintech companies, which are generally founded as start-ups with the objective of using 
technology to disrupt incumbent financial service providers. The model discussed here relates to the integration of financial 
service business lines into already established Internet-based social and commercial network companies.
 73.  “Over 8 billion “red envelopes” were sent over WeChat during Chinese New Year”, https://qz.com/613384/over-8-billion-red-  
envelopes-were-sent-over-wechat-during-chinese-new-year/. 
 74.  Much of the explicit regulatory actions relevant to digital finance prior to 2014 was directed at traditional providers of financial 
services, including the 2006 Rules on the Administration of Electronic Banking and Guidelines on E-banking Security Evaluation 
issued by the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC).
 75.  PBOC and nine other ministries and commissions (2015). 
 76.  For example, PBOC is responsible for the regulation and supervision of Internet payment services, while CBRC is responsible  
for the regulation and supervision of online lending services, and China Securities Regulatory Commission is responsible for 
regulating and supervising equity crowd-funding activities and online fund sales services.
 77.  Such an approach has been used in Malaysia, Singapore, and the United Kingdom, among others.REFERENCES
Analysys. 2016. “China’s Third-Party Payment in the Fourth Quarter of 2016.” Access at https://www.
analysys.cn/analysis/22/detail/1000702/.
Banerjee, A., E. Dufo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan. 2013. “The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a 
Randomized Evaluation.” CEPR Discussion Papers 9437. Center for Economic Policy.  Access at http://cepr.org/active/publications/discussion_papers/dp.php?dpno=9437.
Bruhn, M., and I. Love. 2014. “The Real Impact of Improved Access to Finance: Evidence from Mexico.”  
The Journal of Finance, 69(3): 1347–76.Burgess, R., and R. Pande. 2005. “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian Social Banking 
Experiment.” American Economic Review, 95(3): 780–95.
CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission). 2007 [No. 7] (Issued). Provisional Rules for Management of 
Rural Mutual Cooperatives. Beijing, China.
CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission). 2007. China Rural Banking Services Distribution Map. 
Beijing, China.
CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission) and PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2008 [No. 23].  
Guidelines on Pilots for Microcredit Companies. Beijing, China. CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission). 2015 [Regulation 3] (Issued). Implementation Rules for 
Administrative Licensing for Rural Small and Medium Financial Institutions. Beijing, China. 
CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission), Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Ministry of 
Public Security, and State Internet Information Office. 2016 [Regulation 1] (Issued). Interim Rules for the Administration of the Business Activities of Internet-Based Lending Information Intermediary Institutions. Beijing, China. 
CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission), General Office of. 2011 [No. 254]. Circular on Risks 
Associated with Peer-to-Peer Lending. Beijing, China. 
CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission), General Office of. 2014 [No. 222]. Guidelines on Promoting 
Village-Level Coverage of Basic Financial Services. Beijing, China. 
CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission), General Office of. 2015 [No. 8]. Guidelines on Financial 
Services for Micro and Small Enterprises in the year of 2015. Beijing, China. 
CFI (Center for Financial Inclusion at ACCION International). 2011. “Financial Inclusion: What’s the Vision?” 
Access at https://centerforfinancialinclusionblog.files.wordpress.com/2011/12/financial-inclusion-whats-  
the-vision.pdf. 
  83
84  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
CFI Website. Access at www.centerforfinancialinclusion.org.
Cheng, X., and H. Degryse. 2010. “Information Sharing and Credit Rationing: Evidence from the Introduc-
tion of a Public Credit Registry.” European Banking Center Discussion Paper 2010-075; CentER Discussion Paper Series No. 2010-345. Center for Economic Research, Tilburg University, Tilburg, the Netherlands.
China Internet Network Information Center. 2016. “Statistical Report on Internet Development in China.” 
Access at https://cnnic.com.cn/IDR/ReportDownloads/201611/P020161114573409551742.pdf.
CHFS (China Household Finance Survey). 2013. Access at http://www.chfsdata.org/chfs.html.CHFS (China Household Finance Survey). 2015. Access at http://www.chfsdata.org/chfs.html.CIRC (China Insurance Regulatory Commission). 2014. [No. 89] (Issued). Guidelines on Strengthening the 
Protection of Rights and Interests of Insurance Consumers. Beijing, China. 
CIRC (China Insurance Regulatory Commission). 2015. [No. 31] (Issued). Provisional Rules for the  
Administration of Agricultural Insurance Underwriting and Claims Settlement. Beijing, China.CIRC (China Insurance Regulatory Commission). 2015. [No. 69] (Issued). Provisional Rules for Supervision  
and Administration of Internet-Based Insurance. Beijing, China. CIRC (China Insurance Regulatory Commission), MOF (Ministry of Finance), and MOA (Ministry of  
Agriculture). 2015 [No. 25]. Circular on Further Improving the drafting of Terms and Conditions for  
Agricultural Insurance Products with Premium Subsidized by Central Government. Beijing, China. CPAD (State Council Leading Group Office of Poverty Alleviation and Development of China) and four other 
ministries. 2014 [No. 78]. Guidelines on the Innovation and Development of Microcredit for Poverty Alleviation. Beijing, China. 
CPMI (Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure) and World Bank Group. 2016. Payment Aspects of Financial Inclusion. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlement and World Bank Group. 
CSRC (China Securities Regulatory Commission), General Office of. 2015 [No. 44]. Circular on Conducting 
Special Supervision on Institutions Engaging in Equity Financing via Internet. Beijing, China.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., L. Klapper, D. Singer, and P . Van Oudheusden. 2015. “The Global Findex Database 
2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World.” Policy Research Working Paper 7255. Development Research Group, Financial and Private Sector Development Team. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
G-20 (Group of Twenty). 2016. High-Level Principles for Digital Financial Inclusion. Access at https://  
www.gpfi.org/sites/default/files/G20%20High%20Level%20Principles%20for%20Digital%20Financial  
%20Inclusion.pdf.Gallup World Poll, 2014. Access at www.gallup.com.GPFI (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion). 2011. “Global Standard-Setting Bodies and Financial 
Inclusion for the Poor: Toward Proportionate Standards and Guidance.” A white paper prepared by CGAP on behalf of the G-20’s Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion. GPFI/CGAP , Washington, D.C.
GPFI (Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion). 2016. “Global Standard-Setting Bodies and Financial 
Inclusion: The Evolving Landscape.” GPFI/CGAP , Washington, D.C.
IMF FAS (Financial Access Survey). 2016. Access at http://fas.imf.org. Kilara, T., and E. Rhyne. 2014. “Customer-Centricity for Financial Inclusion.” CGAP Brief (June 2014). CGAP , 
Washington, D.C.
Kumar, K. 2011. “Banks Have Some Good News…Are They Listening?” CGAP Blog. Access at http://  
www.cgap.org/blog/banks-have-some-good-news%E2%80%A6are-they-listening.Kuntchev, V., R. Ramalho, J. R. Meza, and J. S. Yang. 2012. “What Have We Learned from the Enterprise 
Surveys regarding Access to Finance by SMEs?” World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
McKay, C., and Y. E. Seltzer. 2013. “Designing Customer-Centric Branchless Banking Offerings.” CGAP Brief 
(December 2013). CGAP , Washington, D.C.
MOF (Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of China). 2016 [No.85] (Issued). The Administrative Rules 
for the Earmarked Funds for Financial Inclusion. Beijing, China. References   85
National Bureau of Statistics of the People’s Republic of China. 2016. China Statistical Yearbook. Beijing, 
China: China Statistics Press.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2004 [No. 250]. Guidelines on the Connection of Rural Credit Cooperatives 
to the Payment System. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2006 [No. 272]. Guidelines on Implementing Effective Payment and 
Settlement Activities in Rural Areas. Beijing, China. 
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2009 [No. 224]. Guidelines on Improving Payment Service Environment in 
Rural Areas. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2010 [Regulation 2]. Administrative Rules on Payment Services of Non-Fi-
nancial Institutions. Beijing, China. 
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2010 [No. 17]. Implementation Measures of the Administration Rules on 
Payment Services of Non-Financial Institutions. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2011 [No. 177]. Circular on Promoting Bankcard Withdrawal Services for 
Rural Residents. Beijing, China. 
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2014 [No. 235]. Guidelines on Comprehensively Promoting the Develop-
ment of Rural Payment Service Environment. Beijing, China. 
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2015 [No. 43] (Issued). Administrative Rules for Network Payment of 
Nonbank Payment Institutions. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2015 [No. 392]. Circular on Improving Services of Personal Bank Accounts 
and Strengthening Account Management. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2016 [No. 314] (Issued). Implementation Rules on the Protection of Rights 
and Interests of Financial Consumers. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China). 2017. Overall Developments of Payment Business in Rural Areas in 2016. 
Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China), CBRC (China Banking Regulatory Commission), CSRC (China Securities 
Regulatory Commission), and CIRC (China Insurance Regulatory Commission). 2010 [No. 198]. Guidelines on Comprehensively Advancing Innovations in Rural Financial Products and Services. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China), Financial Consumer Protection Bureau of. 2017. Analysis Report on 
Consumer Financial Literacy Questionnaire Survey. Shanghai, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China) and six other ministries and commissions. 2014 [No. 65]. Guidelines on 
Comprehensively Delivering Financial Services for Poverty Alleviation and Development. Beijing, China.
PBOC (People’s Bank of China) and nine other ministries and commissions. 2015 [No. 221]. Guidelines on 
Promoting Sound Development of Internet Finance. Beijing, China.
Sanford, C. 2013. “Do Agents Improve Financial Inclusion? Evidence from a National Survey in Brazil.” 
Bankable Frontier Associates, Cambridge, MA.
Securities Association of China (SAC). 2014 [No. 236]. Administrative Rules on Private Equity-based 
Crowd-Funding Financing (Trial) (draft for comments). Beijing, China.
Shrader, L., and E. Duflos. 2014. “China: A New Paradigm in Branchless Banking?” CGAP , Washington, D.C.Sparreboom, P ., and E. Duflos. 2012. “Financial Inclusion in the People’s Republic of China: An Analysis of 
Existing Research and Public Data.” A joint publication of CGAP and the Working Group on Inclusive Finance in China. China Papers on Inclusiveness No. 7 (August 2012). Washington, D.C.  
State Council (the State Council of the People’s Republic of China). 1996 [No. 33]. Decisions on the Reform 
of Rural Financial System. Beijing, China. 
State Council (the State Council of the People’s Republic of China). 2012. [Regulation 629] (Issued). 
Regulations on Agricultural Insurance. Beijing, China.
State Council (the State Council of the People’s Republic of China). 2014 [No. 29]. Guidelines on Speeding 
up the Development of Modern Insurance Service Industry. Beijing, China.  86  Toward Universal Financial Inclusion in China | Models, Challenges, and Global Lessons
State Council (the State Council of the People’s Republic of China). 2015 [No.74] (Issued). Plan for Advancing 
the Development of Financial Inclusion (2016–2020). Beijing, China.
State Council (State Council of the People’s Republic of China), General Office of. 1997 [No. 20]. Circular on Forwarding the PBOC’s Guidelines on Further Reform of the Administration Mechanism of Rural Credit Cooperatives. Beijing, China.
State Council (State Council of the People’s Republic of China), General Office of. 2015 [No. 81]. Guidelines 
on Strengthening the Protection of Rights and Interests of Financial Consumers. Beijing, China. 
State Council (State Council of the People’s Republic of China), General Office of. 2016 [No. 21] (Issued). 
Implementation Plan for the Special Campaign to Address Risks of Internet-Based Finance. Beijing, China.
Survey and Research Center for China Household Finance. 2015. Access at http://www.chfsdata.org/.Tsai, K. 2006. “Testimony before the US–China Economic and Security Review Commission on China’s 
Financial System.” Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD. Access at http:// www.uscc.gov/hear -
ings/2006hearings/written_testimonies/06_08_22_23wrts/06_08_22_23_tsai_kellee_statement.pdf.
World Bank. 2014. Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion. Washington, D.C.:  
World Bank.World Bank. 2016. GPSS (Global Payment Systems Survey). Access at http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
financialinclusion/brief/gpss.
World Bank. 2017a. “Enterprise Surveys.” Access at http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/.World Bank. 2017b. “World Development Indicators.” Access at http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.
aspx?source=World-Development-Indicators.
Zhang Rui, and others. 2015. “Survey and Analysis of Loans for Microcredit Companies—Based  
on Sampling Survey of Microcredit Companies Across China.” Economics and Finance, Issue 8. Zhang Xuechen, and others. 2010. “Rural Finance in Poverty-Stricken Areas in the People’s Republic of 
China—Balancing Government and Market.” Asian Development Bank, Mandaluyong City. Access at http://www.adb.org/sites/default/ les/pub/2010/ rural- nance-prc.pdf.