Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedUnleashing the Power of 
Digital on Farms in Russia – 
and Seeking Opportunities 
for Small Farms
David Nielson
Yuan-Ting Meng
Anna Buyvolova
Artavazd Hakobyan
Agriculture Global Practice
The World Bank Group© 2018 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NWWashington DC 20433Telephone: 202-473-1000Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff   of The World Bank with external contributions. The ﬁ  ndings, 
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reﬂ  ect the views of 
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemina-tion of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial pur-poses as long as full attribution to this work is given. Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org. 
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World 
Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org. 
Cover design: Fedorov A.Contents
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group iiiContents
Acknowledgments  .............................................................................................................................. .. v
Abbreviations  .............................................................................................................................. ........... vi
Introduction  .............................................................................................................................. ............... 1
Technology adoption and the transformation of agriculture ..................................................... 4
Organization of the report and typology of digital tools for agriculture  .................................. 7
PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems  ..................... 9
Practical examples of the use of digital technologies to activate agricultural knowledge 
and information systems .................................................................................................................... 11
Russian examples of agricultural knowledge and information systems  .......................................................... 11
Global examples of agricultural knowledge and information systems  .......................................................... 15
CASE STUDY: Digital tools and soil information systems ................................................................... 17
PART II: Digital tools stimulate agriculture market opportunities  ............................................... 24
Practical examples of the use of digital technologies to stimulate agriculture market opportunities ................................................................................................................. ...................... 25
Russian examples of digital solutions for market opportunities  ..................................................................... 25
Global examples of digital solutions for market opportunities  ...................................................................... 27
CASE STUDY: Interoperability and the IoT ecosystem ...................................................................... 33
Conclusions and areas for further work  .......................................................................................... 37
Annex: People and organizations consulted for the study  ....................................................... 39
References  .............................................................................................................................. ............... 40iv © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Boxes
Box 1. A note on farm structure in Russia ..................................................................................... ....... 2
Box 2. What is blockchain? .................................................................................................... ............ 26
Figures
Figure 1. ExactFarming online platform: Dashboard ...................................................................... 12
Figure 2. Global digital map of soil PH ....................................................................................... ....... 18
Figure 3. Detailed map from the CONEAT index  ............................................................................ 19Figure 4. Mobile application based on the EGRPR: Soil properties of the yield, 
calculated normative yield, and fertilizer application rates .......................................................... 22
Figure 5. Hello Tractor owner app ............................................................................................. ........ 28
Figure 6. Technology applications in the Umati Capital offering .................................................. 30Figure 7. Connected Farmer solution for dairy management ....................................................... 31Figure 8. A schematic of interoperability of an IoT system ............................................................. 34
Photo
Photo 1. Twiga Food farmers deliver produce to kiosks with help from IBM’s blockchain 
technology .................................................................................................................... ..................... 32
Tables
Table 1. Mapping typologies of digital tools on an agri-food value chain..................................... 8
Table 2. Key policy issues for IoT interoperability and the role of the public 
and private sectors ........................................................................................................... ................. 36Acknowledgments 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group vAcknowledgments 
This report was prepared by the World Bank’s 
Agriculture Global Practice team lead by Artavazd Hakobyan (Senior Agriculture Economist and team leader) and David Nielson (Lead Agriculture Economist, co-team leader and lead author). The team was comprised of Yuan-Ting Meng (Consultant and research analyst) and Anna Buyvolova (Consultant and soil scientist). The team beneﬁ  ted from interac-
tions with partners, who contributed by providing information and sharing their experiences on vari-ous topics of digital agriculture both in Russia and globally. Based on the ﬁ  ndings and results of this re-
port, the team organized a conference in Moscow to-gether with the Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation, the Internet Initiatives Development Fund, and the Russian Association of Internet of Things. The team greatly beneﬁ  ted from the pre-
sentations and discussions during the conference Unleashing the Power of Digital Technology: Big 
Business Opportunities for Small and Medium Farms, held in Moscow on May 15, 2018.
We would like to sincerely thank all partners and 
colleagues who helped us collect information and learn about their experience with digital agriculture in Russia and globally. Many people contributed to this work by sharing their experience and providing advice. We provide the list of people consulted in the Annex and sincerely thank them for their time. We also gratefully acknowledge the contribution of Dr. Yuri Hohlov, Chairman of the Board of the Institute of the Information Society, who kindly reviewed the ﬁ nal version of the report. All errors and omissions 
remain the responsibility of the team.
Last but not least, the team is very grateful to Irina 
Prusass for assistance throughout the process, and to Hope Steele for her excellent editorial support.vi © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Abbreviations
AI artiﬁ cial intelligence
API application programming interface
CEC cation exchange capacity
CGD Center for Global Development
DEM digital elevation model
DTM digital terrain model
EC European Commission
EGRRP Uniﬁ ed State Register of Soil Resources of Russia
ESDB European Soil Database
EU European Union
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FASIE Foundation for the Assistance to Small Innovative Enterprise
FMIS farm management information systems
GGCMs global gridded crop models
GIS geographic information system
GODAN Global Open Data for Agriculture and Nutrition
GPS Global Positioning System
HYV high-yielding variety
IBM International Business Machines Corporation
IIASA International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
IIDF Internet Initiative Development Fund
INSPIRE Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe
ICO initial coin off  ering
ICT information and communication technology
IoF2020 Internet of Food and Farm 2020
IoT Internet of Things
IS PGBD Information System Soil and Geographic Database
ISRIC International Soil Reference and Information Centre
ISSGDB Information System Soil and Geographic Database
IT information technology
NDVI normalized diff  erence vegetation index
NRCS Natural Resources Conservation Service
ODbL Open Database License
OEMs  original equipment manufacturers
OFIS Olam Farmer Information System
PPP public-private partnership
SMEs small and medium enterprises
SSURGO Soil Survey Geographic Database
STATSGO State Soil Geographic Database
UAV unmanned aerial vehicle
USDA United States Department of Agriculture
WFP World Food Programme
WRB World Reference Base for Soil Resources
WSS Web Soil Survey
WTO World Trade Organization
WUR Wageningen University ResearchIntroduction
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 1Introduction
Farming is changing—for some farms. Rapidly 
emerging technologies that capture, manage, com-municate, and use information in digital form are dramatically transforming the way that farming and agribusiness are done across the globe—especially for large commercial farms. Nowhere is this more true than in the Russian Federation (box 1), where many large agri-holding companies operate at the cutting edge of the application of digital technolo-gies. These large industrial farms, with sizable land and livestock holdings, possess the ﬁ  nancial re-
sources and the management know-how to own and leverage the most advanced technology. Some have sophisticated information technology (IT) staff   
to develop and manage digital approaches to many aspects of farm operations.
On some large farms in Russia today, links to satel-
lites control farm machinery and customize the ap-plication of inputs to speciﬁ  c areas in farmers’ ﬁ  elds. 
Hyperlocal weather information drives ﬁ  eld-level 
activity and marketing decisions. Information plat-forms allow farmers to plan and monitor the use of their farm equipment and to ﬁ  nd buyers and sellers 
for the products they use and produce. Pests and diseases can be identiﬁ  ed remotely (using digital 
imaging from drones and satellites) and responses can be mobilized rapidly. Soil monitors measure soil moisture to trigger irrigation and enable new cus-tomized approaches to water management. Mobile phones send actionable signals to farm equipment. Sophisticated management applications help to do farm planning. Production and harvest monitor-ing tools make it possible to control the quality of farm products. For these reasons, among others, the 
Internet is a critical tool in their farming toolbox.
However, many of Russia’s farms—especially small 
and medium farms—lack the connectivity and skill-sets needed to take advantage of such technolo-gies. Many of these small farms also lack the equip-ment and the know-how to take advantage of the transformational digital opportunities from which they might proﬁ  t. Yet the ever-expanding connectiv-
ity and availability of information and communication technology (ICT) and digital tools could make it pos-sible for transformational developments to happen on small, traditional, remote, and disadvantaged farms too.
The upside of technology adoption is evidenced 
in the domestic trajectory of yields and production. Between 1992 and 2016, the adoption in the early 1990s of new technologies such as new machines, as well as new seed varieties, allowed farms to grad-ually leverage big data, remote sensing, the Internet of Things (IoT), and artiﬁ  cial intelligence (AI). In the 
last two or three years, the State Statistics Service recorded wheat yield increases from an average of 1.9 tonnes per hectare in 1992 to 2.7 tonnes per hectare in 2016, as well as a nationwide increase in grain production of 1.5 times.
1 As of 2017, 28 of the 
85 regions in Russia were utilizing precision farming techniques (Collinson 2018; Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation 2018).
On the ﬂ  ip side, Russia has also witnessed the oppor-
tunity and production loss that comes from the low level of technology use. The loss is observed most signiﬁ  cantly in the 30 percent of total production 
1 Data are from the ROSSTAT Database.2 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
lost during harvest without proper machinery, and 
the production loss that results from an unsatisfac-tory storage environment (Collinson 2018; Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation 2018). In 2017 the country’s investment in ICT for agriculture industry remained the lowest in the world at 3.6 bil-lion rubles, an equivalence of 0.5 percent of total investment in ﬁ  xed assets according to Rosstat data.
The developments and tools mentioned above are 
transforming farming and agribusiness in Russia and across the world. They are raising productivity and driving increases in value added and incomes in farming—however, as suggested above, they also bring with them the possibility that smaller farms might be left behind. This does not have to be the 
case. But ensuring that small and poor and remote farms share in the beneﬁ  ts of digital advances may, 
at least in some dimensions, require proactive assis-tance from the public sector. The emergence of digi-tal tools and technologies is also making it possible for public programs and policies to be more effi   cient, 
relevant, evidence-based, tailored and targeted, transparent and monitorable, and generally more ef-fective than ever before in their support of agricul-ture. As a result, the public sector has the possibility of playing new roles and using new digitally enabled methodologies to support the agriculture sector—and it has new tools to work proactively with small farms to ensure that they are not left behind.Box 1. A note on farm structure in Russia
The structure of agricultural production by type of farm has changed substantially since the early years of the 
post-Soviet period. During the 1990s production in large agri-enterprises declined sharply as a result of out-dated technology and lack of investment. Production on predominantly noncommercial household plots was more stable during that period. As a result, in the period 1991–2002, the share of household plots in overall production increased from 40 percent to 65 percent. In the 2000s, however, growth in the agriculture sector was supported by production in both household plots and agri-enterprises. After 2010 there was a shift toward commercial production driven by investments, government programs, and increasing demand. Such growth of commercial production was predominantly led by agri-enterprises (former kolkhoz and sovkhoz enterprises and new corporate agribusinesses) and an emerging new class of family farms. The role of household plots in total agricultural production therefore started to decline. A share of households registered as family farmers, but oth-ers exited agricultural production because of an aging population, health issues, migration, and the refusal of younger generations to do manual work on their own household plots.
The agrarian structure in Russia today is based on three types of farms: (1) agri-enterprises—large industrial farms 
with extensive land and livestock holdings that collectively control roughly 80 percent of all agricultural land and produce roughly 45 percent of agricultural GDP; (2) emerging family farms—individual farms operated by family famers and limited hired labor that collectively control roughly 10 percent of all agricultural land and produce roughly 5 percent of agricultural GDP; and (3) household plots—small land plots adjacent to rural homes that col-lectively control roughly 10 percent of all agricultural land and produce roughly 50 percent of agricultural GDP. Although many agri-enterprises are nearly the same in area farmed, management, and technology as collective farms from Soviet times, since 2000 some have become much more modern in terms of their market orientation, in their approach to farm management, and in the technologies that they employ.
Source:  Authors, using Rosstat data.Introduction
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 3This technical note accompanied, and served as re-
source material, for a conference on digital agricul-ture that was held in Moscow on May 15, 2018. The note provides a survey of many ways in which ICT and digital tools are being used in Russia and glob-ally to transform agriculture. It examines instances in which there are public and private collaboration entry points for expanding the beneﬁ  ts of digital 
technologies to small and medium farms in Russia. As evidence shows, small and medium farms in Russia are underserved by government programs and underperform if generally compared with large farms (Hakobyan and others 2017). However, these farms have the potential to expand production, be more competitive, and enter niche and premium markets where large agro-holdings may not be competitive. The emergence of digital technologies for farms and agribusiness can be harnessed, with the help of the public sector, to help small and me-dium farms across Russia to do this, and to raise the incomes and livelihoods of farm families while im-proving the sustainability of natural resources. For example, digital technologies can be used to con-
nect smaller producers to markets at no or lower cost, thus boosting their opportunities to be includ-ed in value chains. This is important because small producers could have access to more income op-portunities, generate more jobs in rural areas, and improve the livelihoods of a considerable number of rural inhabitants.
This note provides an overview of the potential for 
digital agriculture in Russia. It surveys examples of the use of digital technologies on Russian farms to-day—a phenomenon that occurs for the most part in Russia’s very large agro-enterprises. It examines eff orts (often by the private sector) in other countries 
to help poorer and smaller farms adopt and take ad-vantage of digital technologies. Finally, it indicates areas of further follow-on work that will be needed to identify measures that could be considered to ex-pand the adoption of digital technologies in Russian agriculture—including to small farms and small agri-business enterprises.4 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Technology adoption and the 
transformation of agriculture
Technology adoption in agriculture, and the beneﬁ  ts 
of such adoption that accrue to farmers, are topics that have been extensively studied. Often focused on the adoption of several speciﬁ  c farm-level tech-
nologies—such as high-yielding variety (HYV) seeds, fertilizers, irrigation schemes, and so on—the litera-ture has developed explanations as to why farmers do (or do not) adopt technology. Factors that aff  ect 
technology adoption include farmers’ wealth and education level, their access to information, and the availability of technology (Feder, Just, and Zilberman 1982; Fuglie and Kascak 2001). More recently the adoption of digital technologies and the beneﬁ  ts 
that are consequently accruing to farmers are being investigated more vigorously.
The adoption of digital technologies in agriculture is 
uneven in scale and scope. Commercial, large-scale agriculture in the developed world, including large agri-enterprises in Russia, has been adopting and adapting digital technologies for some time now. Speciﬁ  cally, these include so-called precision tech-
nologies in agriculture. An accumulation of evidence indicates that precision technologies reduce pro-duction costs and improve yields, and that over time these technologies positively impact the bottom lines of farms and agri-enterprises (Schimmelpfennig 2016). Mounting evidence shows that such precision tech-nologies are beneﬁ  ting Russian agri-holdings, which 
increasingly adopt them as local content and software providers and equipment manufacturers expand the technologies to Russia (Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation 2018).
2 However, precision tech-
nologies are most eff  ective when they are already 
combined with modern agricultural technologies, such as HYV seeds, better fertilizer and pesticides, and effi   cient farm management. Therefore such preci-
sion technologies work best when the farms are large and sophisticated, have access to capital, and have a specialized labor force that can use the technology and apply it to the beneﬁ  t of the farm. Precision tech-
nologies are also complex, knowledge-intensive, and expensive to introduce. Small and medium farmers (such as individual farmers and household farmers in Russia) rarely, if ever, have access to or can utilize pre-cision technologies.
Perhaps this is why agriculture is behind other sec-
tors in adopting digital technologies. Despite all the technological advances registered by the agri-culture sector in the digital economy, the sector re-mains far behind others in adopting digital technolo-gies, as identiﬁ  ed by a recent study by McKinsey 
(Laczkowski and others 2018).
Experiences from several countries show that farm-
ers do not always use digital applications, but when they do use these applications they consistently beneﬁ  t from them. Such applications range from 
checking the weather on a mobile phone and mak-ing payments and transferring money through mo-bile applications to using sophisticated crop fore-casting and mapping tools. Although the literature on the adoption of mobile phone applications for agriculture is not as extensive as the literature on discrete agricultural technologies, there are several important takeaways from the current research:
2 See also (1) Точное животноводство: состояние и перспективы / Е. В. Труфляк. – Краснодар: КубГАУ, 2018. – 46 с.; 
(2) Точное земледелие: состояние и перспективы / Е. В. Труфляк, Н. Ю. Курченко, А. С. Креймер. – Краснодар : КубГАУ, 2018. – 27  с.; 
and (3) https://kubsau.ru/science/foresight/publications/.Technology adoption and the transformation of agriculture
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 5 /checkbldBeneﬁ  ts from mobile phone applications, but 
not their adoption rate, are positively correlat-ed with the wealth and education of farmers—that is, as is the case for discrete technology adoption (HYV seeds, for example), farmers with more years of schooling and more assets are likely to beneﬁ  t more from mobile phone 
applications (Cole and Fernando 2012).
 /checkbldDigital applications can reduce and eliminate 
temporal and spatial problems associated with discrete agricultural technology adoption. For example, access to mobile phone– based ad-visory services or information on agricultural technology is more continuous than agricul-tural advisory services, which in most instances is one-time and discrete. As a result, if a new seed variety is available, farmers who use mo-bile technologies to learn about the seed vari-ety are more likely to beneﬁ  t more than farmers 
who rely on the advice from traditional exten-sion agents (Aker 2011).
 /checkbldFarmers’ literacy levels are not associated with 
mobile technology adoption (Aker and Mbiti 2010); in other words, the research rejects the widely held assumption that farmers do not have enough skills to apply and beneﬁ  t from 
digital applications.
The question is whether and how digital technolo-
gies can transform agriculture in the way other dis-crete technologies have transformed the sector, for instance, during Green Revolution. It is unlikely that digital technologies alone would result in another Green Revolution. As a matter of fact, the next Green Revolution would be diffi   cult to achieve given the 
low level of public spending in agricultural research in the United States and Europe and the continuing lack of effi   ciencies in agricultural research systems 
of Russia, Brazil, China, and other countries.
What digital technologies can do, however, is aug-
ment the potential of existing agricultural technolo-gies by reducing input requirements, advancing farm management through improved precision of farming, better connecting farmers with markets, re-ducing information asymmetries, and making better inputs widely available.
In what way do digital technologies transform ag-
riculture? They ﬁ  rst disrupt labor requirements. 
Evidence shows that labor costs are reduced in large farms when digital precision technologies are being used. Because of their structure, food value chains have the capacity to absorb agricultural labor, and evidence shows that the quality of jobs increases when farmers use digital technology. For example, farmers who use digital means to connect to mar-kets transition from being just farmers to becoming famers-processors-packers-distributors-retailers.
Second, digital technologies increase the value of 
agricultural production. Improved access to infor-mation and better access to markets helps produce more customized products demanded by consum-ers, and therefore helps to generate and keep more value at farm level. Third, they reduce costs. The challenge is to promote their wide adoption and scaling up to broader categories of farmers, espe-cially those who would beneﬁ  t more from improved 
incomes.
According to the key takeaways from the digital ag-
riculture conference that took place in Moscow on May 15, 2018, in the current state of Russian agri-culture technology development the following phe-nomena require most attention:6 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
 /checkbldTechnology development in general has en-
abled a wide range of technology start-ups and established ﬁ  rms entering the digital ag-
riculture marketplace, from soil assessment services and farm data analytics to unmanned vehicles for automation. However, these solu-tions work mostly in siloes, prohibiting wider access by the majority of agriculture practitio-ners because of technical barriers and ﬁ  nan-
cial constraints, the results of incompatible standards between digital infrastructure or the lack thereof, and the non-commercialization of these technologies.
 /checkbldDemand in the digital agriculture space is nei-
ther well deﬁ  ned nor surveyed. ICT solution 
providers and technology companies have the backend infrastructure but lack the expertise to identify the gaps where digital technology can generate the most value addition. Currently, from a supply-chain perspective, digital tech-nology has been most developed and repli-cated toward one end of the spectrum, directly facing consumers with delivery of ready-made food. The application of technologies for input supply, machinery, and agronomical data mod-eling remains comparatively rare; only a few early start-ups have explored technology for agro-product transaction and export. An eco-
system approach to constructing an enabling environment to provide tailored applications requires all IT specialists, farmers, telecommu-nication-mobile operator providers, and the public sectors to contribute to the hardware, software, and content-speciﬁ  c application to 
maximize the beneﬁ  t digital technologies can 
bring to agriculture.
 /checkbldOpen data remain the main bottleneck for 
digital technology to proliferate in the sector. Speciﬁ  cally, data quality; data security; and the 
method used to collect, manage, and analyze require further progress and the building of the data science arsenal. Leveraging the regula-tory mechanism will be crucial to building and scaling up the use of digital technology in ag-riculture.
 /checkbldThe industry lacks qualiﬁ  ed IT specialists to 
take advantage of the availability of big data analytics: one out of every 1,000 employees is an IT specialist (Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation 2018). In addition, the cur-rent education system does not provide suffi   -
cient agribusiness and other relevant training, relegating the responsibility to industry alone.Organization of the report  and typology of digital tools  for agriculture
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 7Organization of the report 
and typology of digital tools for agriculture
The analyses and discussions of this report are 
based on a review of global and Russian tools, tech-nologies, and services for digital agriculture. Our team reviewed various reports and websites and interviewed ﬁ  rms, experts, farmers, and developers 
to identify technologies that are most common in agriculture globally and are most relevant and ap-plicable for Russian agriculture. Our objective was to identify those technologies and tools that either have potential for use by small and medium farmers or are already being used predominantly by small and medium farmers. In this report, we did not at-tempt to analyze implications of our ﬁ  ndings for pub-
lic policy, leaving that exercise for future work.
Digital tools and technologies help deal with infor-
mation asymmetries and make information more freely and speedily available to users. Because of the inherent public good properties of information, there are a variety of roles for the public sector in providing and regulating the use of digital tools in agriculture. In exploring how digital tools are used in agriculture, and in exploring the role for the pub-lic sector in this regard, it is useful to consider a typology of the functions that digital tools can pro-vide in the sector. Here we consider two broad cat-egories of the functions of digital tools in agricul-ture. The ﬁ  rst category is about functions related to more eff  ective agricultural knowledge and informa-
tion systems:
 /checkbldCapturing information from farms and agribusi-
ness
 /checkbldManaging information /checkbldMaking information available to farms and agri-
business
The second category is about functions that enable 
market access and provide market opportunities. It combines two typologies of technologies:
 /checkbldLinking market participants
 /checkbldFacilitating digital transactions
The ﬁ  ve elements of the typology introduced im-
mediately above represent ﬁ  ve basic functions that 
digital tools can facilitate in the agriculture and agri-business sectors (table 1). By improving the ways in which these functions operate (making them faster, more eff  ective, less expensive, more accessible, 
available to more people, more convenient, more user friendly, and so on), digital tools have the po-tential to improve the performance of the agricul-tural and agribusiness sectors. For example, by making hyperlocal information about soil moisture or crop diseases more easily available, digital tools can contribute virtually instantaneously to on-farm productivity.
For some farms and agribusinesses (particularly 
larger ﬁ  rms), using digital tools to facilitate the above 
functions is something that they have been able to do on their own. However, there are elements of public goods in the provision of the ﬁ  ve functions 
identiﬁ  ed above—especially for small farms. By ex-
amining each function—and by examining the roles and responsibilities and incentives of actors at each level of aggregation (that is, at the farm level, at the local government level, at the national govern-ment level, at the agribusiness level, and so on) for each function, it is possible to identify the role of the public sector. Identifying this role is particularly 8 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
useful because it applies to giving small and poorer 
farmers access to each of the functions in a more effi  cient manner than would be the case without 
public sector intervention. Careful examination and articulation of such roles is beyond the scope of the present report, but would be a valuable exercise in further work as an input into strategic planning for agricultural and rural development (in Russia and beyond).
How should this report be read? The two groups 
described above form the two main sections that follow. The two sections categorize typologies of digital tools and services for agriculture with a view to expanding the beneﬁ  ts of digital technologies 
to small and medium farmers. Within each part we probe each typology and present examples of typical technological solutions from Russia and around the world. In addition, each part contains a case study that describes a practical example of public policy intervention that can help expand the beneﬁ  t of digi-
tal technology in the agriculture sector, especially for small and medium farms. Part I presents a case study on digitizing soil information systems. Part II presents a case study on promoting the interoperability of IoT platforms and their beneﬁ  ts for agriculture. The re-
port concludes with a summary of proposed areas for future research and recommendations.
Table 1. Mapping typologies of digital tools on an agri-food value chain
Value Chain & Technology 
Typology Farm Production InputsLogistics/
TransportFinancial 
Services Processing Market
Agriculture Knowledge and 
Information System
Capturing information from 
farms and agribusinessAgroDroneGroup*                                                      
AgrivitaFarm*                                                      GeoScan*                                                      Panasonic Russia*                                                      RoboProb*                                                      R-Sept*                                                      Trimble*Olam n.a. n.a. AgroTerra*                                                      
Smart4Agro*n.a. 
Managing information aWhere                                                      
ExactFarming*n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 
Making information available 
to farms and agribusinessGamaya n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Farmerline
Market Access and Market 
Opportunities
Linking market participants Connected Farmer n.a. Hello Tractor                                                      
Twiga Foodn.a. n.a. Kaluga Agribusiness 
Development Agency*
Facilitating digital 
transactionsn.a. n.a. DigiFarm TakeWing*                                                      
Ta r ﬁ n                                                       Umati Capitaln.a. n.a. 
Note:  * Russian ﬁ  rms; n.a. = not applicable.PART I. Digital tools activate  agricultural knowledge and information systems
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 9PART I. Digital tools activate 
agricultural knowledge and information systems
Steady advances in agricultural knowledge have 
profound implications for agriculture and agribusi-ness. Advances in knowledge about crop and live-stock genetics can raise on-farm productivity and improve the quality of farm products. Advances in knowledge about how weather and soil characteris-tics aff  ect crops can also raise on-farm productivity 
and improve the quality of farm products. Advances in knowledge about mechanization can improve labor productivity on farms and in agribusinesses. Such advances in knowledge can be transformative for the agriculture sector.
But developing agricultural knowledge depends 
on the capture and use of information (data about on-farm trials, weather data, information about soil characteristics and quality, and so on). Furthermore, putting agricultural knowledge to use depends on being able to transmit information from knowledge sources to the level of the farm and agribusiness. Digital tools are making it possible to capture infor-mation at every level, to manage and analyze it to create knowledge, and to send knowledge-based information back to users at the farm and agribusi-ness level. This section discusses each of these steps and presents examples from Russia and from other parts of the world.
Capturing information from farms 
and agribusiness
Vastly more information about what is happening on 
farms and in agribusiness is available now than ever before—and this information is increasingly available in digital form on a more timely basis, at less cost, 
and in more easily usable form. One emerging source of information is remote sensing. Satellites are collecting ﬁ  eld-level information about crop 
cover, crop conditions, crop health, soil conditions, weather conditions, and crop yield estimations, and are making all of this information available to farmers as well as to agribusiness and to other industry ob-servers (including ministries of agriculture). Drones are capturing even more detailed information at the ﬁ eld level, including monitoring for and identifying 
crop diseases, monitoring soil moisture, and provid-ing images for use in establishing property boundar-ies and for many other uses.
Another emerging source of information about what 
is happening at the farm level falls under the catego-ry of the IoT. In many places, on-the-ground sensors continuously relay information to farmers about wa-ter usage, soil moisture, ﬁ  eld (or greenhouse) tem-
perature, and other important production variables. This allows rapid response to current conditions—adjusting irrigation pumping and turning on or off   wa-
ter and heaters in greenhouses, to name just a few. Strategically placed weather ground stations relay critical, detailed, and location-speciﬁ  c weather infor-
mation to weather information services. Sensors on farm machinery record the location of the machinery as well as operational and performance data.
These and other digital tools are making the ﬂ  ow of 
information and communication from farmers and their advisors to public program offi   cers simple and 
systematic—not only to farmers themselves, but also to public agencies. For farmers, such information enables better planning and decision-making, thus unlocking possibilities for improved productivity and proﬁ tability. For public agencies, these tools allow 
the collection of farm-level data for the purposes of 10 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
monitoring and evaluation with respect to the out-
comes of public programs; they also allow feedback by users and other stakeholders on the performance of public policies and programs.
Managing information
Digital tools are transforming the way that knowl-
edge and information about agriculture are man-aged at every level.
At the level of farms and agribusinesses, the vast 
increase in the availability of knowledge and in-formation, together with the ability to manage and utilize that knowledge and information, is an im-portant factor in substantial growth in productivity and proﬁ  tability. Digital farm management tools are 
making it possible for farmers themselves to use de-tailed information about production variables (such as weather, ﬁ  eld conditions, milk quality, feed con-
sumption by livestock, market prices, and so on) to formulate and evaluate production options and to make real-time and longer-term decisions to opti-mize proﬁ  t and productivity.
At the aggregate level (such as at ministries of agri-
culture), advances in digital tools are making it pos-sible for public programs, services, and policies in support of the agriculture sector to be more effi   cient, 
relevant, evidence-based, tailored and targeted, transparent and monitorable, and generally more ef-fective than ever before. One of the most basic agri-cultural information functions of the public sector lies in the area of agricultural statistics. Historically, public agricultural statistics systems in many countries have often been clumsy to use and not very reliable. A digital national agricultural statistics system (system-atically linked to the national statistics authority) can overcome earlier obstacles to ensure easy storage, 
updating, and retrieval of agricultural data; accept and systematically collect on-farm and market data from remote sensing, market transactions, and other digital data collection sources; facilitate the dissemi-nation, manipulation, and analysis of agricultural data; and facilitate access to farm-level and aggregate sec-toral information for the purposes of analysis.
Making information available to farms 
and agribusinesses
More than ever before, digital tools and services 
make it possible for relevant and detailed informa-tion and knowledge to be made available directly to farmers and to other stakeholders in the agriculture sector. Such digital services can be either “push” or “pull” in nature. On the one hand, such services can allow advisors to push information directly to farm-ers when experts recommend that farmers consider using it for their own crops and conditions—perhaps sending information to their phones or to other lo-cally available digital devices. A common example of this in Russia can be found on large agri-holdings. For these farming companies, detailed technical in-structions can be relayed from agri-holding head-quarters directly to staff   in ﬁ  elds. Similarly, precise 
information and instructions can be sent directly from satellites to farm workers and farm machinery in real time as they work with crops and livestock in ﬁ elds and barns—adapting seeding rates, fertiliza-
tion, feed mixes, and so forth on the go. This is preci-sion agriculture.
On the other hand, such digital information services 
can be pull in nature—allowing farmers to pull infor-mation they need, to get answers to questions they have, and to give feedback regarding what more they PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 11need to know. Farmers and their partners can get in-
stant access (in digital form) to information about mar-kets and prices, analysis of possible disease threats in their ﬁ  elds together with expert advice on how to 
deal with such problems, weather data and location-speciﬁ  c forecasts, and so on. This allows eff  ective 
communication between farm and agribusiness en-terprises—helping farmers to optimize the precision and effi   ciency of their practices and activities as well 
as helping them to mitigate risks.
Practical examples of the use of digital 
technologies to activate agricultural knowledge and information systems
Digital technologies are used for agricultural knowl-
edge and information systems in Russia and in the rest of the world. This section provides examples from each in turn.
Russian examples of agricultural knowledge 
and information systems
In Russia, domestic digital technology development 
in managing agriculture data and operations is still in a nascent stage. Technology serving agro-hold-ings to medium-size farms remains the main type of agri-tech in the market for a variety of reasons. Such technology ranges from advanced devices captur-ing real-time data through Global Positioning System (GPS) technology, satellites, and sensors for optimal farm operation management to unmanned vehicles for automation. For small and medium farms, the same goal of increased productivity with higher ef-
ﬁ ciency requires tailored approaches and may also 
require (at least initially) targeted public support. A number of homegrown innovations have witnessed early results serving the market, although they main-ly serve medium and large-scale farms (1,000 hect-ares and larger) rather than small farms. In this sec-tion, a number of examples are presented of digital tools that are currently being used on farms and by agribusinesses in Russia.
Farm management
A cloud-based farm data management platform, 
ExactFarming, collects and makes sense of farm operation data including pesticide usage, farm vehicle operation, and vegetation status through satellite images to inform farm decision-making (figure 1).
3 The platform also disseminates data in-
cluding weather and soil (ability to disseminate soil data is forthcoming) tailoring to speciﬁ  c account holder geographic conditions. Through partnership with MAP (a charitable organization that provides medicines and health supplies to people in need),
4 
as well as local weather ﬁ  eld stations, ExactFarming extracts weather data onto its software platform for multi-source data integration; and with Agrosignal,
5 
a Russian software company, ExactFarming moni-tors farm vehicle location, tasks, and performance, such as completion rate and speed, through GPS for economic planning.
With farm data captured, ExactFarming is able to 
pursue several initiatives to help facilitate client 
3 For further information about ExactFarming see https://www.exactfarming.com/en/.
4 Information about MAP can be found at https://www.map.org/.
5 Information about Agrosignal can be found at https://i3connect.com/company/agrosignal.12 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
business by working with agro-dealers to bridge 
gaps throughout the supply chains, and with ﬁ  nan-
cial institutions as well as agro-holding companies to extend credit to small and medium farms. The foundation for eff  ectively capitalizing on the data-in-
formed decision tools so that they become engines for economic growth is a shared understanding of the technology, its analytics, and its implications; equally important are the organizational support and leadership needed to adjust and restructure the cur-rent system to pilot and course correct.
Among the 5,000 accounts on the platform, the 
majority of the farmlands under management are above 1,000 hectares; around 30 percent of the ac-
counts manage farms of less than 1,000 hectares. ExactFarming states that the key to increasing tech-nology uptake among small and medium farms lies in the trust between users and the relevant technol-ogy in achieving the 
proclaimed goals, including better decision making 
and timely advice for improved productivity. Price is not the issue: the software fee is usually a neglect-able proportion of the overall farm expenses: 50 ru-bles per hectare per year compared to 12,000 to 20,000 rubles. To encourage technology adoption, ﬁ eld demonstration remains the most eff  ective and 
Figure 1. ExactFarming online platform: Dashboard
Source:  ExactFarming screenshot. PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 13convincing way to communicate its economic ben-
eﬁ t for the business.
The use of drones
Within the Russian agri-tech spectrum, the develop-
ment of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), commonly known as drones, for crop and soil quality monitor is comparatively mature. Several products and ser-vices have undergone pilots and are moving on to mass commercialization. AgroDroneGroup and GeoScan employ drones equipped with cameras to conduct aerial surveys.
6 These surveys are capable 
of obtaining, among other things, orthophotos (aerial photographs that have been geometrically modiﬁ  ed 
to present a uniform scale), data for normalized dif-ference vegetation index (NDVI) mapping, snap-shots of crop conditions and levels of germination, and information about water erosion.
As opposed to standard satellite images of 15–30 
meters per pixel resolution, GeoScan UAV provides images of 5 centimeters resolution, covering farm sizes from 30,000 hectares to 100,000 hectares. These images—turned into digital terrain models (DTM) and digital elevation models (DEM) through software data processing, analysis, and visualiza-tion—inform farms of the state of the land and the direction of soil cultivation, monitor diseases and yield, and model for ﬂ  oods.
AgroDroneGroup, a company that develops and 
manufactures UAV-based solutions, leverages hy-perspectral technology (which can provide detailed information on a leaf, for example, which is useful for 
identifying diseases) to obtain 10 times more data than NDVI can provide. With this technology, the company builds a database with which to make farm work recommendations by processing real-time data with a proprietary algorithm. Beyond the in-house database, AgroDroneGroup also recognizes the beneﬁ  ts of open data from other business enti-
ties to inform its analytics.
In order to widely disseminate drone services to 
farms, AgroDroneGroup is piloting its services under the sharing economy model to “uberize” drones for agriculture work on demand. The pilot drew thou-sands of interested drone pilots to be part of the try-out. Despite its initial success, the key for such ser-vice would require enhanced agriculture knowledge on the pilots’ end and an improved communication channel to best disseminate data in useful form in a timely manner. Currently the main channels of com-munication are mobile phone and e-mail.
Robotic soil testing and mapping
In an attempt to complement current soil test meth-
ods, RoboProb designs a robotic platform for auto-mated soil sampling to minimize human error and increase effi   ciency.
7 The platform is a self-propelled 
complex that can work as a stand-alone device or as a trailing unit on any transport vehicle.
The automation service of RoboProb soil sampling, 
labeling, and packaging is able to save farm labor re-quirements so it can decrease from a team of ﬁ  ve to 
6 Information about AgroDroneGroup is available at 
http://agrodronegroup.ru/ (in Russian); information about GeoScan can be found at https://www.geoscan.aero/en/about. 
7 Information about RoboProb can be found at https://www.roboprob.com/ (in Russian).14 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
a one-man team that will suffi   ce for up to 36 pieces 
of sampling in one attempt. The robotic complex le-verages ground-based methods to mitigate the as-sessment errors that exist between the device and the soil, to which remote sensing is highly prone. While positioning accuracy to up to 1 meter, the de-vice is able to move at a speed of up to 30 kilome-ters per hour.
Once the tasks are completed, the data extracted 
from the farm are compiled into an electronic soil map that details the fertilizer application of each plot.
The above examples demonstrate the promise of 
digital solutions development for Russian agriculture to closely manage farmland with an evidence-based approach. Financial support is crucial to spurring the growth of the agri-tech space founded on evidence-based research rather than trial and error, thereby reﬁ ning and proving product viability, market ﬁ  t, and 
value proposition to a wide range of clients.
Encouraging entrepreneurship and agri-tech 
start-ups
Support for the agri-tech landscape in Russia cur-
rently is concentrated at the federal level. Initiatives such as the Internet Initiative Development Fund (IIDF) and the Skolkovo Foundation and Skolkovo Venture, as well as state-owned nonproﬁ  ts includ-
ing the Foundation for the Assistance to Small Innovative Enterprise (FASIE), are building the tech-nology ecosystem to assist ideas turn into products and facilitate peer learning by providing a dedicated space for brainstorming and dialogue. On the rise are the interest and appetite of venture capital and private equity in guiding agri-tech start-ups to under-stand market needs and access funds.The shared characteristics of this support are 
brought together through incubator and accelera-tor programs, which convene mentors and industry experts to work with tech entrepreneurs on their products and business plans; through offi   ce and lab 
infrastructure, which facilitate business and product development; and through tax beneﬁ  ts and access-
ing a wide range sources of ﬁ  nance through show-
case events as well as business competition.
In examining the current landscape of Russian ag-
ri-tech development and its challenges, Managing Partner for Agri-Tech at Skolkovo Venture, Pavel Danilov, and CEO of AVG Capital Partners, Roman Troﬁ mov, point to the signiﬁ  cance of a clear grasp of 
market orientation and the ability of tech entrepre-neurs to identify their critical needs as well as their own niche in serving speciﬁ  c segments. Because 
of the dynamic technology adoption trajectory, the capacity required to develop appropriate technol-ogy, and the time necessary for such development, the market now sees a fragmentation of available services, leaving much of the opportunity for crop and high-value product uncaptured. Additionally, the ﬁ nancing system has not yet been able to support 
the overall development. The logical exit plan for a technology start-up—selling the technology to a big corporation—is not fully viable because the institu-tions are not ready to acquire.
With the majority of funding from the public sector 
going to subsidies, the limited proven sustainability and beneﬁ  ts for small farms lead the private sec-
tor to explore ways to channel ﬁ  nancial resources 
into an alternative public-private partnership (PPP). By scouting high-potential companies with fund managers of agriculture expertise, industry experts and business veterans within the fund network can provide strategic advice to the companies as well PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 15as assess their investment readiness. Liaising with 
diverse actors throughout the value chain on behalf of the agri-tech community, an alternative PPP has the potential to consolidate a broad array of fund-ing for companies at various stages of maturity or in-vestment readiness as the return objective and risk appetite vary. Funding from venture capital, private equity, public ﬁ  nance, and development ﬁ  nance will 
contribute to developing a solid tech ecosystem with ﬂ exible ﬁ  nancing options for businesses to achieve 
their objectives.
Global examples of agricultural knowledge 
and information systems
Internationally, the use of digital technology to cre-
ate and maintain agriculture information systems occurs primarily at the national or the supranational level of aggregation—and in some cases is champi-oned by the private sector. Technology deployment to obtain, extract, and manage agriculture informa-tion from and to farms is economically viable only on a large scale. The Internet of Food and Farm 2020 (IoF2020), a mega IoT pilot project in agriculture co-funded by the European Commission (EC), aims to convene key private, public, and not-for-proﬁ  t 
stakeholders throughout the value chain to validate technology choices: from timely and precise farm data through IoT for productivity enhancement and traceability, and from GPS and sensors for livestock movement monitoring, to machine learning technol-ogy for dairy quality assurance. Apart from the tech-nology, IoF2020 seeks to identify user needs and concerns, including system interoperability, data security, and localization; to structure optimal busi-ness models and processes; and to provide agri-tech entrepreneurs with relevant data and market entry support.Along with Wageningen University Research (WUR) 
in the Netherlands, the 70 partners of IoF2020 from 14 countries focus on ﬁ  ve work pillars: project man-
agement, trial management, IoT integration and ca-pabilities, business support, and ecosystem devel-opment; and on ﬁ  ve agriculture value chains: arable 
crops, dairy, fruits, vegetables, and meat. Notably, among the 38 private sector partners, 24 are small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The project em-phasizes actively involving end users, the farm-ers, to co-design and to provide feedback on user experience.
Launched in the ﬁ  rst and second quarters of 2017, 
IoF2020 has developed 19 cases to date with vari-ous areas of progress. Within-ﬁ  eld management zoning, an IoT deployment on potato farming, aims to develop detailed soil maps, input a variable rate application map service, and facilitate automation and machine communication. The setup probes ﬁ  eld soil moisture, soil organic matter, and min-eral composition to create a soil map from which the variation rate application map is developed through a geographic information system (GIS) platform. On the software front, the system can translate crop management tasks into machine tasks, allowing for automation by aligning machine interfaces. The pilot program seeks to reach higher yield and quality with lower production cost by im-proving farm management, serving small farms of 50 to 200 hectares.
Another application of IoT on farms is illustrated 
by utilizing precision crop management to monitor wheat crops’ real-time nutrition status through both ground and satellite images. With the data at hand, the project seeks to assist farms with water and ni-trogen application through digital task management and automation of the application process.16 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Another category of the use of IoT on farms has to 
do with establishing real-time communication be-tween farm machines. Machinery interoperability is achieved by standardizing and aligning protocols, vocabulary, and semantics. Such eff  orts will en-
able effi   cient data sharing among farm machines. 
By working with farm machine manufacturers and software companies, the project seeks to facilitate data transmission between ﬁ  eld machinery and farm 
management information systems (FMIS) both on- and offl   ine and through application programming 
interface (API) harmonization, thereby making real-time analysis of diverse data formats possible for precision farming.
Using big data and local data for crop 
management
An example of a private sector initiative to make 
detailed and local information available directly to farmers and agribusiness is the platform developed by a U.S.-based ﬁ  rm called aWhere.
8 aWhere oper-
ates in a global-scale agronomic modeling environ-ment with immense processing capacity that col-lects over 7 billion points of data every day to create unprecedented visibility and insight across the ag-ricultural soils. aWhere’s hyperlocal agricultural in-formation and insight support precision agriculture. Using proprietary blending and predictive modeling, aWhere provides ﬁ  eld-level observations and fore-
casts weather, growth stages, and pest and disease risk. aWhere’s information platform and tools off  er 
the possibility of transforming the way agricultural decisions are made by grounding them in data and analytical insight that have never existed before.Remote sensing imagery and crop 
management
The majority of worldwide examples of agriculture 
information technology deployment rely on the ef-fect of economics of scale, thereby starting with large-scale farms. Gamaya,
9 a Swiss agri-tech com-
pany employing drones equipped with hyperspec-tral cameras to collect farm images for precision farming, entered their ﬁ  rst market in Brazil. The hy-
perspectral technology is able to detect the state of the crops and also the rate of the crop develop-ment by measuring the light reﬂ  ected by the plants. 
Complemented by information gathered through other sources of data, including satellite and sen-sors, the data are then interpreted by Gamaya’s in-house software using machine learning and artiﬁ  cial 
intelligence (AI), providing detailed insights and ac-tion plans for farms through its cloud-based platform.
In addition to the ability to extract and act upon the 
data analytics derived, Gamaya plans to scale up the work to create a global crop database with crop- and region-speciﬁ  c intelligence. With the help of hyper-
spectral imaging technology, Gamaya started with soy and cane cultivation solutions to identify weed infestation for adequate herbicide applications and to detect nutrient levels at various crop stages, as well as to map soil erosion and estimate yield.
Exploring public support for investments 
in on-farm use of digital technologies
To adopt technologies as advanced as the hyper-
spectral imaging used by Gamaya, the upfront 
8 Further details about aWhere are available at http://www.awhere.com/. 
9 Further information about Gamaya can be found at https://gamaya.com/.PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 17investment required often proves prohibitive for 
small and even medium farms. The company is ex-ploring approaches to overcome such challenges with the model of ﬂ  ipping technology ownership: 
instead of owning the technology on the farm end, the public sector can bear the upfront cost of install-ment, reacting to and leveraging the data captured for program design, tailored extension, and advisory services delivery. The key is to make data available to relevant stakeholders beyond the ﬁ  nancial and 
technical constraints that often hinder small farms’ access to necessary information. Whether such an approach will be a game changer that proves viable depends on a collective eff  ort of the public and pri-
vate sectors and civil society to devise a mechanism that accounts for the overall technological capability, data security, and shared cost as well as revenue and technical assistance for end users to leverage the farm and market intelligence at their own command.
Private sector support for on-farm adoption of 
digital technologies
While it is appropriate for the public sector to sup-
port some aspects of the development and adoption of digital tools and approaches, for many applica-tions, the private sector also plays a role in support-ing adoption by farmers. Traditional private sector entities throughout the agriculture value chain also invest in bringing digital technology to small and medium farms. The global input company Olam em-ploys the in-house Olam Farmer Information System (OFIS) to obtain farm-gate level data, deliver train-ing modules, and record ﬁ  rst-mile business trans-
actions.
10 As of 2017 Q2, the system had registered 100,000 farmers in 21 countries across multiple 
continents.
OFIS helps the conglomerate manage smallholding 
clients around the world, and in return makes spe-ciﬁ c operation design and services back to the farm 
possible. With a mobile device, OFIS records GPS data for logistics, farm location, and input transac-tions; it also provides a revisable survey model to gather relevant farm data. Furthermore, the system performs decision-making tasks by analyzing sta-tistical data and locating key social infrastructure information and farmer proﬁ  les to inform user ac-
tions such as farm training design or business risk mitigation.
From the farm’s/cooperative’s perspective, the data 
captured by OFIS help inform the company so it can deliver tailored modules on extension services for improved agriculture practices. In addition, payment can now be processed online directly to farmers, thereby expanding their access to ﬁ  nancial services.
CASE STUDY: Digital tools and soil 
information systems
Over 150 years ago, Russian Professor Vasiliy 
Dokuchaev established agricultural experimental work through morphological and genetic soil sci-ence as a separate branch of knowledge. Russia introduced soil science to the world and became the ﬁ  rst country to start taking care of and restoring 
soil cover at the country level. Russia has a strong tradition of education and research in the area of soil science. However, after the 1990s, the number 
10 Further details about Olam are available at http://olamgroup.com/.18 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
of organizations collecting soil data decreased 
and soil science lost its importance. In this section we discuss international experience at collecting soil data; the current situation in collecting data in Russia and data availability; barriers to making data available (for example, national security, poor infra-structure, lack of a uniﬁ  ed approach); and the ben-
eﬁ ts to farmers of using digital tools while collecting 
soil data.
Information on the state of soils and soil cover is fun-
damental when taking decisions about combating desertiﬁ  cation, halting and reversing land degrada-
tion, and improving agricultural land quality. These all contribute to sustainable agriculture as well as to strengthening food security. Achieving these goals requires the availability of detailed and up-to-date environmental information, including soil informa-tion. Creation of digital soil databases and the devel-opment of digital soil mapping methods are actively being pursued in order to reduce the gap between 
the demand for soil data and their availability.
On a global level, the International Soil Reference 
and Information Centre (ISRIC) has created the SoilGrids soil information system (Hengl and others 2017). This system provides public access to global maps, with a resolution of 250 meters, of a number of indicators of soil properties, including organic car-bon, bulk density, cation exchange capacity (CEC), pH, soil texture fractions and coarse fragments, and depth of the parent material. The ISRIC also pro-vides access to the classes of the World Reference Base for Soil Resources (WRB). The SoilGrids system is constantly updated.
SoilGrids data can be uploaded under the Open 
Database License (ODbL). Access to SoilGrids maps is provided via a soil web-mapping portal at SoilGrids.org (ﬁ  gure 2); through a Web Coverage 
Figure 2. Global digital map of soil PH
Source: soilgrids.org, June 6, 2018.PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 19Service; and via the SoilInfo App (Hengl and others 
2017). Constant data updating and detailing helps to create more accurate global models—for example, global gridded crop models (GGCMs)—that facili-tate reliable assessments of the impact of climate change and land degradation on food production (Folberth and others 2016).
On a country level, in the United States, the collec-
tion, storage, management, and dissemination of in-formation on the soil cover survey are the responsi-bility of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), an agency of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). For various purposes, the NRCS has created soil-geographical databases, such as the Soil Survey Geographic Database (SSURGO) and the State Soil Geographic Database (STATSGO).The SSURGO standardized digital geographic data-
base contains information in the form of digital maps at scales from 1:63,360 to 1:12,000 and provides the most detailed level of the information. This database was developed mainly for planning and managing natural resources at local and regional levels: farms and ranches, settlements, and districts. It serves as a source for identifying eroded areas and develop-ing methods for erosion control, and for determining the potential for land use. The STATSGO database (at a scale of 1:250,000) provides less detailed in-formation, which is necessary to solve problems at the state level. The NRCS operates with more than 20,000 U.S. soil proﬁ  les.
11 
Another example of soil data use at the state level 
is the Department of Agriculture of Uruguay, which 
11 Raster data from SSURGO and STATSGO2 are accessible and can be downloaded via the Web Soil Survey (WSS) 
at https://websoilsurvey.sc.egov.usda.gov/App/HomePage.htm.Figure 3. Detailed map from the CONEAT index
Source:  The Ministry of Agriculture of Uruguay, available at http://web.renare.gub.uy/js/visores/coneat/..20 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
also provides public access to soil information. Soil 
types are classiﬁ  ed according to their productivity 
and measured by the index called CONEAT.12 The 
CONEAT index of a property also correlates with the price of the land and makes the market transparent: it is easy to compare properties. An online detailed map shows speciﬁ  c properties as types of soil in dif-
ferent colors (ﬁ  gure 3), the productivity index of each 
type of soil, and the average CONEAT index for the each land use pattern. 
In Europe, the main source of soil data is the European 
Soil Database (ESDB). It includes the territory of Belarus, Moldova, Russia, and Ukraine (Stolbovoy and others 2001).
13 In addition, soil information is in-
cluded in the Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe (INSPIRE) as one of 34 themes. INSPIRE has been a directive of the European Union (EU) since May 15, 2007. It obliges all EU members to create an infrastructure of spatial data on the Internet to facili-tate the standardized exchange of geographical in-formation between countries. Diff  erent types of spa-
tial data that are provided by diff  erent organizations 
are used simultaneously and combined into layers in diff erent user applications. It is believed that ensur-
ing the wide availability of such information will al-low many industries and government institutions to improve operating effi   ciency and reduce costs. The 
project implementation will end in 2019. The bene-ﬁ ts from effi   ciency gains alone are expected to be in 
the order of 1 billion Euros per year (INSPIRE 2003).
Comparing the situation in Europe with collecting 
soil information in Russia with given examples, it is evident that the national soil database of Russia is 
in its infancy. There is no clear content in Russia’s soil resource management policy (Shoba and others 2008). The result is a lack of a uniﬁ  ed approach and 
objective in soil inventory and the creation of soil-geographical databases: work is being undertaken by diff  erent teams with diff  erent methods.
It is important to note that in Soviet times such a 
state system existed. When that system was func-tioning, large-scale mapping of all agricultural lands of the country was carried out several times. Based on the large-scale maps, a series of medi-um-scale soil maps of the regions was created, as well as several soil maps for the whole country. Hard copies of soil maps are now part of the soil data center of the V.V. Dokuchaev Soil Science Institute, which contains more than 20,000 soil maps at a scale of 1:10,000 to 1:25,000 as well as about 70 medium-scale soil maps at the regional level. In addition, the archive contains soil maps of diff erent countries of the world where soil scien-
tists carried out soil surveys in Soviet times. These maps are being digitized and updated, as neces-sary, using satellite data and digital soil mapping technologies.
After 1990, the joint project of the Russian Academy 
of Science and the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) named the Land Resources of Russia was the ﬁ  rst experience after the Soviet period of creating a uniﬁ  ed digital data-base of soils at the country level (IIASA and RAS 2002).
12 For further information see http://web.renare.gub.uy/js/visores/coneat/.
13 See Столбовой В., Монтанерелла Л., Медведев В., Смеян И., Шишов Л., Унгурян В., Добровольский Г., Жамань М., Кинг Д., Рожков В ., 
Савин И. ИНТЕГРАЦИЯ ДАННЫХ О ПОЧВАХ РОССИИ, БЕЛОРУССИИ, МОЛДАВИИ И УКРАИНЫ В ПОЧВЕННУЮ ГЕОГРАФИЧЕСКУЮ БАЗУ ДАННЫХ ЕВРОПЕЙСКОГО СОЮЗА // Почвоведение. 2001. № 7. С. 773–790 (in Russian).PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 21The project Uniﬁ  ed State Register of Soil Resources 
of Russia (ЕГРПР - EGRPR) aims to perform a com-plete computer inventory of soils in Russia,
14 in-
cluding preparing technical documentation, de-termining soil-ecological zoning, and compiling a collection of representative soil proﬁ  les (Stolbovoy 
and Molchanov 2015). The Russian Uniﬁ  ed State 
Register of Soil Resources. Version 1.0 is a collective monograph of 768 pages, accepted and approved and used as an offi   cial document by the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Agriculture (Stolbovoy 2014). It describes a digital database based on the soil map of Russia made in 1987. The database is available on the website.
15 The regulations of the federal registra-
tion service indicate that the assessment of lands’ quality for taxation should be based on the EGRPR. The Ministry of Agriculture uses the EGRPR in the framework of Russia–World Trade Organization (WTO) agreement to estimate the effi   cient use of 
Russian land for agriculture.
Work on the creation and development of the 
Russian Information System Soil and Geographic Database (ISSGDB) has been performed since 2008 at the initiative of the Dokuchayev Society of Soil Science;
16 this database is based on the same soil 
map as the one used by the EGRPR.
The ISSGDB is a network of data centers that coordi-
nates its work and reﬂ  ects the availability of primary 
soil information, as well as its storage locations. The system does not provide free access to data.A data center is an organization with its own regional 
and subjective specialization; it collects and stores initial information in the format of international stan-dard ISO 28258.
At present, the network of data centers includes 
three agrochemical centers (out of the 110 operat-ing in Russia): the Belgorod Agrochemical Service Center (TSAS “Belgorodsky”), the Moscow Federal State Budgetary Institution State Agrochemical Service Center (FGBU GTSAS “Moskovsky”), and the Rostov Federal State Budgetary Institution State Agrochemical Service Center (FGBU GTSAS “Rostovsky”), as well as the Southern Federal University and the Faculty of Soil Science at Lomonosov Moscow State University, which also collect data on soil. The work is performed volun-tarily on the basis of an agreement for scientiﬁ  c co-operation. Poor infrastructure imposes limits on the project development: the information is collected on hard copy and is not digitized, the format of the data collected diff  ers, and Internet connectivity in 
institutions is limited.
This ISSGDB initiative may duplicate the eff  orts of 
Russia’s Ministry of Agriculture to collect and sum-marize soil data collected by Agrochemical Service Centers; this work is carried out by the Analytical Center of the Ministry of Agriculture. Partly the data are presented on the website of the atlas of agri-cultural lands, which is currently actively updated by the ministry.
17
14 The Uniﬁ  ed State Register of Soil Resources of Russia (Единый государственный реестр почвенных ресурсов России) is available 
at http://atlas.mcx.ru/materials/egrpr/content/intro.html.
15 See the Uniﬁ  ed State Register of Soil Resources of Russia (Единый государственный реестр почвенных ресурсов России) 
at http://atlas.mcx.ru/materials/egrpr/content/intro.html.
16 The Informational System Soil-Geographic Database of Russian Federation is available at https://en.soil-db.ru/.
17 Data are available at the Federal GIS Agricultural Lands Atlas http://atlas.mcx.ru/ (accessed June 6, 2018).22 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Derivative products can be created on the basis 
of the ISSGDB. One example is the subsystem for calculating the grain crop yield, functioning as part of the ISSGBD (ﬁ  gure 4). This is a web application 
for calculating the rated grain crop yield for the se-lected ﬁ  eld. The calculation is based on the actual 
data of soil and agrochemical observations stored in the ISSGBD and correction factors; it also takes into account the area-based coeffi   cients of agro-climato-
logical potential capacity.
18
In Russia, both public authorities and the pri-vate sector might be interested in creating a sin-gle soil-geographical database. The Ministry of Natural Resources and Ecology and the Ministry of Agriculture of Russia could use the data for plan-ning the sustainable use of soil resources; creating a cadastral passport for each land plot; creating a ba-sis for quality education and research practice; and providing a platform for the development of interna-tional relations and global projects in the spheres of food security, environmental quality, and so on (Rozhkov and others 2010).
The private sector is interested in using spatial soil 
data to create new products (web applications) by providing information tailored to a client’s require-ments. Companies engaged in precision agriculture and the production of machinery and fertilizers could be interested in using them as well.
The interpretation of offi   cial soil data is important 
in order to obtain speciﬁ  c results for land users; the data may be interpreted by government units or agencies as well as by the private sector. For example, agronomists and horticulturists can use data to plan an erosion control program or to plan 
an irrigation system for farms and select suitable crops; designers, architects, and urban planners may use data to design the area. Digitized and available soil information helps to transfer technol-ogies to diff  erent regions with similar soils, condi-
tions, or soil limits. The experience of soil manage-ment and lessons learned may spread from one location to another. This is important especially for 
18 Data are from the Russian Information System Soil and Geographic Database: Grain crop yield calculation, available 
at http://gis.soil.msu.ru/soil_db/mobile/assessment/ (accessed June 6, 2018).Figure 4. Mobile application based on the EGRPR: 
Soil properties of the yield, calculated normative yield, and fertilizer application rates
Source:  http://gis.soil.msu.ru/soil_db/assessment/ (in Russian only).PART I. Digital tools activate agricultural knowledge and information systems 
small farmers and will help them to get access to 
new practices.
Thus the establishment of data collection infrastruc-
ture in Russia—that is, a system including policy measures, institutional arrangements, technologies, data, and qualiﬁ  ed staff  —will facilitate information 
exchange between regions and help achieve nation-al and international objectives for both sustainable development and business development. This will become a signiﬁ  cant milestone in the development 
of the science founded in Russia.24 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
PART II: Digital tools stimulate 
agriculture market opportunities
Digital tools are important not only for helping farm-
ers to harness the power of technical knowledge and information, but also for allowing farmers and other agricultural actors to overcome traditional barriers (isolation, asymmetric information, and so on) to become much more eff  ective participants in 
both input and output markets. Two important di-mensions of this phenomenon have to do with (1) dramatically improving and expanding linkages be-tween market participants; and (2) facilitating the reliable and rapid transactions of ﬁ  nancial assets, even in remote and cashless locations. These two functions are discussed brieﬂ  y in turn in the para-graphs that follow.
Linking market participants
Digital tools are emerging that make it possible for 
farmers and other agricultural value chain partici-pants quickly and effi   ciently to identify and contact 
potential partners and clients, even in remote and distant locations, whom they might otherwise nev-er have known about. Such tools are substantially reducing transactions costs for farmers and other market participants. A popular example is farmers’ use of Internet applications to ﬁ  nd available service 
providers nearby with needed equipment for hire (tractors, harvesting equipment, tillage equipment, transport, and so on). This makes it possible for small farms, in particular, to take advantage of modern and capital-intensive farming techniques even if they do not have suffi   cient capital to purchase the needed 
equipment. Such tools are also making it possible for small farmers who want to sell their products, but who have only small quantities of product to sell, to 
ﬁ nd other farmers who also want to sell the same 
product. By selling their products together, such farmers are able to increase the scale of the sale and thus ﬁ  nd better prices and better transport options. 
Digital tools are also helping farmers to ﬁ  nd buyers 
for their products more easily (even if those buyers are distant) and helping them easily ﬁ  nd shops or 
outlets that have key inputs in stock. Such digital ap-plications are making markets deeper, more trans-parent, and more effi   cient—even in remote areas 
where isolation, thin markets, asymmetric informa-tion, and the absence of economies of scale in mar-ket transactions can be substantial obstacles to ﬂ  uid 
market dynamics for farm-related products.
Facilitating financial transactions
Digital tools helping to facilitate ﬁ  nancial transac-
tions are becoming ubiquitous even in rural and re-mote areas where liquidity and convenient access to ﬁ nancial assets has been problematic in the past. 
Digitally facilitated transactions can be faster and more transparent and can have greater accountabil-ity than was possible in the past. Farmers can access their own resources much more quickly and reliably and in some cases get easier access to credit. The emergence of tools such as blockchain have the potential to bring greater accountability to farmers’ transactions while at the same time providing the means through which to verify the origin and quality of farm produce—even for partners and consumers located thousands of miles away from the farm of or-igin. Such tools also enable policy instruments, such as input vouchers, that have been much more cum-bersome and subject to misuse in the past. eVouch-er tools and programs have become mechanisms through which to provide time-bound and limited PART II: Digital tools stimulate agriculture market opportunities 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 25support to targeted farmers for their purchases of 
farm inputs, including fertilizer and seed. By reduc-ing transaction costs and enhancing accountability underlying transactions, such digital tools are help-ing to expand the business of agriculture in rural areas.
Practical examples of the use of digital 
technologies to stimulate agriculture market opportunities
This section considers examples of digital tech-
nologies used to ﬁ  nd solutions that take advantage 
of agriculture market opportunities in Russia and around the globe.
Russian examples of digital solutions for market 
opportunities
Blockchain in agricultural value chainsThe application of blockchain in Russian agriculture 
remains in the technology pilot stage for bringing in agribusiness investment and meat product trace-ability. The technology company TakeWing provides the blockchain backend technology for its client,
19 
Agrivita, to issue an initial coin off  ering (ICO), an 
application of cryptocurrency.20 To issue an ICO, 
Agrivita creates a white paper detailing the project and system seeking investment. Interested inves-tors provide funds and in return receive the cryp-tocurrency in the amount stated in the white paper. The investors, however, do not gain ownership of 
the business. The purpose of the off  ering is to tap 
into the potential to streamline industry payment. Another example of an ICO in agriculture is issued by the Russian farmers’ cooperative LavkaLavka.
21 It 
should be noted, however, that the use of crypto-currency in the Russian Federation remains unregu-lated and, therefore, the projects do not have a legal basis.
In Tartastan, ITcoin is launched as the ﬁ  rst cryp-
tocurrency used for tracking beef cattle health as well as tracing the meat throughout the supply chain (Suberg 2017). Developed by Inﬁ  nans,
22 ITcoin 
seeks to boost the local meat processing industry by increasing trust through better product and data transparency.
Blockchain, on the other hand, is known for its ability 
to encrypt information and publicly share such infor-mation within the network (box 2). This feature has been utilized for smart contracts, listing details of transactions, and establishing payment and delivery timeframes to improve transparency for all parties involved. In central Russia, for example, Kolionovo Farm has leveraged blockchain for smart contracts to enhance business effi   ciency and reliance.
To date, the technology and its application still re-
quire both public and private sectors—particularly the ﬁ  nance institutions, technology specialists, and 
business owners—to enhance regulation and pro-vide support for the public to understand the risk and advantages of employing it.
19 Information about TakeWing is available at http://www.takewing.com.tw/.
20 Information about Agrivita can be found at https://agrivita.ru/.
21 Further information about LavkaLavka, the organic farm-to-table restaurant cooperative, can be found at http://restoran.lavkal avka.com/en/.
22 Further information about Inﬁ  nans is available at https://inﬁ  nans.info/ (in Russian).26 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Box 2: What is blockchain?
Blockchain is a secure, shared, distributed ledger technology that decentralizes any transaction process that 
transfers something valuable. In a blockchain network, if a participant—also known as a node or a peer—wants a transaction, it requests the transaction, which is broadcast to all other nodes connected to the network. The transaction is validated by all other participants in the network; once this has been done, the transaction is added as a “block” to the chain of transactions that is formed to date.
Blockchain is disrupting the way trust is formed and practiced, the indispensable element behind any form of 
transaction involving more than one party. Going back to the conventional deﬁ  nition, blockchain is considered 
disruptive because it essentially decentralizes the authority of trust and distributes and shares the responsibility of trust to everyone in the network. Because this trust is distributed, blockchain is believed to increase transpar-ency and enhance security because transactions are made only by consensus between involved participants and cannot be tampered with. The improved trust, in turn, enables businesses, government, and society to reduce transaction costs and lessen their dependence on intermediaries along any transaction process. To sum up, blockchain has four main characteristics. It is transparent, consensus-driven, immutable, and trustless (trust is not necessarily a requirement).a
The use of blockchain in agriculture can beneﬁ  t the global food system by improving the process in which food 
is produced, delivered, and sold.b In particular, blockchain is believed to have immense potential in three key areas of the agriculture industry: (1) provenance and transparency; (2) mobile payments, credits, and decreased transaction fees; and (3) supply chain transactions and ﬁ  nancing. For example, blockchain can address the is-
sues of food quality and safety because it improves traceability and transparency within agriculture value chains. The improved traceability and the immutability of data can also help verify the accuracy of food production, cer-tiﬁ cation, and food processing steps more easily and effi   ciently. Blockchain can also help reduce food loss and 
food waste costs since transactions can expedite and are less likely to be disputed in the process. Moreover, smart contracts—self-executing contracts run by a computer program that can be encoded to blockchain—en-able involved parties to transact without intermediaries, eventually lowering the ﬁ  nal price of the product for the 
end-consumers. The ability to skip middlemen in agricultural value chains could potentially create and improve access to ﬁ  nance in the developing worlds.
Challenges
Despite the opportunities that blockchain could potentially introduce, it is still too early to determine the vi-
ability and scalability of blockchain in agriculture and broader development sectors. The Center for Global Development (CGD) notes that privacy concerns for publicly shared data, operational and institutional resiliency, and governance are remaining hurdles to be addressed before applying blockchain to development challenges. Furthermore, as Agfunder points out, “connecting the technology to viable business models and compelling use cases” is the challenge for blockchain and for agri-tech at large. Last but not least, blockchain adoption in agriculture would also require a signiﬁ  cant level of technical understanding from farmers.
Going forward
Much hype surrounds the potential of blockchain in global development, including in farming and agriculture 
sectors. The technology not only disrupts business as usual but also requires a fundamental change in the way society works as well as the way we think. That said, it is worth continuing the discussion on blockchain’s implica-tions so we can harness the technology to solve the global food security challenges.PART II: Digital tools stimulate agriculture market opportunities 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 27Global examples of digital solutions for market 
opportunities
Worldwide small and medium farms and agribusi-
nesses have witnessed and experienced ﬁ  rst-hand the revolution that digital technology can bring to 
their doorsteps, facilitating access to market and ﬁ  -
nance. In emerging markets especially, local innova-tion has burgeoned in solving issues stemming from the lack of market information, market information Additional resources
Noteworthy Application Cases in Agriculture
 /checkbldThe World Food Programme (WFP) is applying blockchain for cash transfer schemes to support Syrian 
refugees.
 /checkbldRipe and Filament, a blockchain project, works to make secure transfer of crop and supply chain data.
 /checkbldSkuchain is leveraging its expertise in supply chain management to improve the traceability of the food sup-
ply chain by applying blockchain.
 /checkbldThe company Provenance helps improve the traceability of food and food origin across the supply chain.
 /checkbldInternational Business Machines Corporation (IBM) introduced a peer-to-peer network-based weather 
application.
 /checkbldThe Dutch Ministry of Economic Aff  airs, the University of Wageningen, and the TNO organization introduced 
their proof of concept on the blockchain application for the South African table grape supply chain.
Other resources 
 /checkbldSee Satoshi Nakamoto’s original white paper on bitcoin for technical details (Nakamoto, no date)
 /checkbldNews articles on blockchain and agriculture featured in this note:
 /square4Growing the Garden: How to Use Blockchain in Agriculture (Maslova 2017)
 /square4From Bitcoin to Agriculture: How Can Farmers Beneﬁ  t from Blockchain? (Weston and Nolet 2016)
 /square4Blockchain: Beyond Bitcoin to Agriculture (Gro 2018)
 /square4How Adoption of Blockchain Technology Will Disrupt Agriculture: Understanding the Implications of 
Blockchain Technology in Agriculture (Sanghera 2018)
 /checkbldBlockchain and Economic Development: Hype vs. Reality by Center for Global Development
 /checkbldCheck out Stanford University’s initiative to build the Master List of Blockchain Projects in International 
Development 
 /checkbldListening to Podcasts? Try Smart Kitchen Show’s Blockchain for Food at https://soundcloud.com/
smart-kitchen-show/blockchain-for-food
Source:  World Bank ICT for Agriculture Community of Practice.
a. World Bank Group Blockchain Lab 2.b. Weston and Nolet 2016.28 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
asymmetry, impediments to business development 
due to distance, and the challenges presented by long distances to ﬁ  nancial institutions and connec-
tivity to various existing platforms.
Linking farmers with suppliers of farm 
machinery services
Operating in Nigeria and Kenya and entering South 
Asia, including Bangladesh and India, Hello Tractor brings tractor services through its mobile platform to farms upon request (ﬁ  gure 5). With a model similar 
to that of Uber, Hello Tractor leverages the notion of the sharing economy to improve farm productiv-ity through tractor rental: instead of purchasing the machinery at a huge upfront investment, the service creates an opportunity for tractor owners to earn ad-ditional income when their ﬂ  eet is idle and for rent-
ers to free up part of their ﬁ  nancial resources by pur-
chasing tractor services on demand.
The issues facing smallholder farmers in access-
ing tractors are manifold. Besides the upfront investment, the quality of existing services is not uniform or guaran-teed because ﬂ  eet management is poor and distant farm locations make farms diffi   cult to reach. Trust is one 
other signiﬁ  cant element dictating the success or otherwise of such rental service. Hello Tractor there-fore equips compact tractors with a GPS monitoring device to keep track of the ﬂ  eet’s location and workload, giving insights into each tractor’s sta-tus and whether it is misused or in need of maintenance. At times when the network connectivity is down, the data will be stored locally and resumed when the 
network comes back.
Because of the relatively isolated areas where most 
smallholder farms are located, the platform esti-mates the demand for tractor services and distance to the ﬁ  eld to determine whether a request would 
trigger a task or booking to deploy the closest ve-hicle for work. These features help the community to maximize economic beneﬁ  t from each vehicle.
Working with both private and public sectors, Hello 
Tractor facilitates business and revitalizes existing services that were diffi   cult to scale. Working with the 
local government in Nigeria, the platform helps the agriculture agency to manage and deploy its trac-tor services to members of its constituency within the geographic boundary by delineating the area of coverage on the platform. With original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), the Hello Tractor products and services help OEM businesses entering frontier markets, thereby increasing supply and improving farmer access to machinery for improved productiv-ity at a lower cost.
Figure 5. Hello Tractor owner app
Source:  Hello Tractor, https://www.hellotractor.com/.PART II: Digital tools stimulate agriculture market opportunities 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 29With the wealth of data gathered through the devic-
es, Hello Tractor envisages capitalizing on the pos-sibility of generating other farm services for small communities in the future.
For small farms, the barrier to accessing timely and 
appropriate ﬁ  nancing is often a deal breaker or mak-
er in operation planning and business investment. Situations where smallholder farmers and suppliers receive late payments or transact under long pay-ment terms lead to unstable cash ﬂ  ow or insuffi   cient 
working capital. Farmers and suppliers struggle to keep the business going.
Linking farmers to financing in Kenya
Leveraging digital technology, the Kenyan ﬁ  nancial 
tech start-up Umati Capital provides small agribusi-ness players (suppliers) with up to 80 percent of the value of their receivable amount in cash, on behalf of trader, processor, or retailers (buyers).
23 This ﬁ  nanc-
ing method, also known as factoring and invoice dis-counting, is seldom extended to small agribusiness players because of its higher risk and because of the diffi   culty in assessing small players’ creditworthi-
ness. With the ever-ubiquitous mobile devices and its in-house software solution, Umati Capital is able to monitor and access debtors such as supermarket chains transaction data through a shared API, there-by assessing credit risk via alternative methods for lending decision making (ﬁ  gure 6). Instead of rating 
small agribusinesses or farms whose data may not be available or may be time-consuming to retrieve, the evaluation of debtor creditworthiness has prov-en to be more effi   cient.The digital solution also extends to the payment 
option. By partnering with Citi Bank, Umati Capital processes payments online, providing clients with quick access to funds. In 2015 Umati Capital had also partnered with Airtel Kenya to launch a bulk mo-bile money payment solution that had initially been developed for faster disbursals to Umati Capital clients but was later white labeled and off  ered to 
other clients by Airtel Kenya under the brand name Aida. Thanks to digital technology that enables data analytics with speed, the lending decision can be concluded within 24 hours upon receipt of relevant documents.
Linking farmers with financing in Turkey
In Turkey, a ﬁ  n-tech company called Tarﬁ  n provides 
ﬁ nance to small farms by working with input suppli-
ers under the assumption that ﬁ  nancing for input 
purchases will beneﬁ  t farms the most.
24 Through an 
online platform, Tarﬁ  n provides point-of-sale ﬁ  nanc-
ing to farms for the long-term goal of digitizing all segments throughout the transaction. To date, farm-ers are able to pick up inputs from a supplier in the vicinity once the lending decision is made; this seg-ment of the transaction does not involve any bank notes going in or out of pockets. Nevertheless, digital banking in Turkey is not fully ﬂ  edged. Paper 
documents such as promissory notes and physical visits to bank for repayment are required of farmers at a later stage in the process.
To further scale up and realize the digital ﬁ  nance 
objective, Tarﬁ  n stresses the importance of build-
ing a robust algorithm through alternative data to 
23 Further information about Umati Capital is available at https://umaticapital.com/.
24 Further information about Tarﬁ  n can be found at https://tarﬁ  n.com/.30 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
structure a credit assessment tool for farmers who 
do not have prior borrowing experiences. In addi-tion, developing its input supplier network and ﬁ  -
nancial institution partnership in the country will be the key to extending services to all corners of the country, and to convincing banks of the feasibility of leveraging alternative credit rating models and the bankability of small farms.
The use of smartphones to link farmers with 
agribusiness in East Africa
Digital technology has transformed the way farms 
and agribusinesses in emerging markets operate—particularly with the ever-decreasing cost of owning mobile devices. Already seemingly ubiquitous, it is anticipated that smart phones will have virtually uni-versal coverage, and at that point even the poorest and most remote farm families will have access to di-verse digital services and tools. Telecommunication companies and mobile network operators are the 
anchors that enable such leapfrogging to become reality. Designed speciﬁ  cally for the African market 
and supported by Vodacom’s Mezzanine software, Safaricom rolled out its Connected Farmer solution, a mobile-based platform that allows agribusinesses to communicate, manage, and process payment transactions with smallholder farmers (ﬁ  gure 7). 
DigiFarm is another platform that allows smallholder farmers to receive extension services, input sup-plies, and ﬁ  nancing through mobile devices.
A couple of key products on the Connected Farmer 
platforms include CF Seasonal, which links 150,000 macadamia farmers to Kenya Nut Company, with all transactions going through M-PESA (a leading East African mobile money option by Safaricom); Dairy Management solution, facilitating dairy cooperative member management, milk production, and de-livery, tracking which data are used to rate farmer creditworthiness for input purchasing at partner Figure 6. Technology applications in the Umati Capital off  ering
Source: Umati Capital.PART II: Digital tools stimulate agriculture market opportunities 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 31agro-dealers. The platform also supports a closed 
eVoucher delivery system to ensure that the subsi-dies go to the target beneﬁ  ciary. To date, the solu-
tions have been piloted in seven African countries including South Africa, Nigeria, and Ghana. In Kenya 167,000 farmers have registered on Connected Farmer and 660,000 have registered on DigiFarm to receive agriculture best practice advice and input credit.
Reviewing the early success of the solutions, 
Vodacom resorts to the full support received from Kenya’s Ministry of Agriculture in convening key stakeholders including agronomists, farm coop-eratives, agro-dealers, and ﬁ  nancial institutions to devise suitable local content and mechanisms; and 
from international organizations such as the African Development Bank in program design support and expert participation in communicating with member states.
Blockchain in agriculture
The advent of blockchain, one type of distributed 
ledger, brings the potential to revolutionize trace-ability and data transparency throughout the agricul-ture value chain. As a decentralized platform, data are encrypted and broadcast within the peer-to-peer network, enabling all parties to agree on the data Figure 7. Connected Farmer solution for dairy management
Source:  Connected Farmer.32 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
authenticity before adding the new block of data 
onto its existing structure. The append-only charac-teristic prohibits deletion of the earlier information, providing data security and integrity.
To date, the majority of the blockchain applications 
in agriculture are in the concept stage or early pilot phase, with the private sector as the main driver of the application (Galen and others 2018, p 12). A pre-dominant portion of agriculture blockchain initiatives is housed in the United States, Europe, or Australia; around 30 percent of their pilots are in Sub-Saharan Africa (Galen and others 2018, p 13).
In Australia, AgriDigital recently piloted blockchain 
technology in facilitating the national grain supply chain transparency, provenance, and matching title transfer of the grain asset to payment (AgriDigital and CBH Group 2017, p 2).
On the blockchain system, digital title was created 
and the grower holds the title until receiving pay-ment from buyer, after which the title is then trans-ferred, with quality and quantity of the commod-ity recorded in the system. In between, the system also handles auto-payment through cryptocurrency in parallel with standard banking methods. The exchange of digital currency and title can be pro-cessed at the rate of four transactions per second (AgriDigital and CBH Group 2017, p 3). The platform also tracks physical inventory routes, creating identi-ﬁ cation of the authenticity of organic oats, for exam-
ple, through the various data points captured along the way (AgriDigital and CBH Group 2017).
In 2017 International Business Machines Corporation 
(IBM) deployed and piloted a blockchain application for the food industry and agribusiness ﬁ  nancing in 
the United States and Africa respectively. Working with major retail stores such as Walmart, Nestlé, and 
Costco, the IBM blockchain system aims to boost food product traceability to mitigate recent food safety issues including contamination. The system will have the ability to help track and identify the source of contamination within the complex food supply chain for timely action.
At ﬁ rst sight, blockchain technology seems to be 
mainly serving the big conglomerates because of the advanced technology and the infrastructure in-vestment required. In April 2018, IBM Africa in Kenya unveiled the pilot result of its partnership with the local agriculture logistics start-up Twiga Food to ex-tend ﬁ  nancing for the small agribusinesses it serves. 
Twiga Food helps smallholder farmers deliver their product to the kiosks across the country (photo 1). With this technology, agribusinesses are able to receive microﬁ  nance loans for working capital use 
thanks to the transaction data stored on the mobile money platform that is the main ﬁ  nancing and trans-
action channel for the majority of the Kenyan popu-lation. On the IBM side, the blockchain platform as-sesses business creditworthiness through machine 
Photo 1. Twiga Food farmers deliver produce to 
kiosks with help from IBM’s blockchain technology
Source:  IBM.PART II: Digital tools stimulate agriculture market opportunities 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 33learning and an artiﬁ  cial intelligence algorithm that 
provides lending decisions.
With the immutable characteristics of blockchain, 
lending process transparency has increased, with additional beneﬁ  ts of fraud reduction. The whole 
process is executed through mobile devices.
Both pilots share an emphasis on how the end-user 
perceives such technology, considering user friend-liness, the potential beneﬁ  ts of such technology 
scaling up, and whether and to what extent it adds to overall proﬁ  tability. Going forward, from proof of 
concept to prototype, it is essential to adjust as the technology capacity evolves to deal with the ever-increasing amount of data. Commercialization of the technology will require deep customer understand-ing and an identiﬁ  cation of where the opportunities 
lie. Regulation and policies for blockchain technol-ogy likewise require attention to ensure compliance to existing ruling and authorities.
CASE STUDY: Interoperability 
and the IoT ecosystem
Powered by micro- and macro-level data, precision 
farming enhances farm productivity and effi   cien-
cy through the granular view of farm performance to inform adequate decisions and to task orders. Through sensors, GPS, and a wide range of hard-ware and software, the ﬁ  nal user-friendly advice in 
fact undergoes a stream of processes from data collection and data management to consolidation and analytics. As diverse as the scales and types of farms in the subcategories of agriculture, the various models and versions of machinery, equipment, and information systems adopted on a farm are diffi   cult 
to align.The key characteristics of an IoT system have to do 
with the ability of “things”—farm objects (as nodes in the overall system)—to communicate with one an-other and to work together to optimize the effi   ciency 
and eff  ectiveness of farm operations. Interoperability 
is thus central to maximizing IoT potential for agricul-ture application.
Probing into the enterprise of building an interoper-
able ecosystem for agriculture, the system is based on an IoT platform where data are collected from re-spective devices and then uploaded onto the plat-form; the platform stores, transmits, and enables data discovery for applications. The technology involved can be broken down to three layers: the device layer, the network layer, and the application layer (Verdouw, Wolfert, and Tekinerdogan 2016, p 5), thereby enlisting the collaboration of both public and private entities (ﬁ  gure 8).
Because of the vast scale the agriculture sector en-
compasses, the challenges involved in scaling up IoT applications among all its stakeholders cannot be overstated. The collective insights derived from information sourced from many individual farms will prove invaluable for further product and services design within the IoT system, thereby tailoring of-ferings to farms of all sizes and in all subclimatic regions.
The following key policy areas have been identiﬁ  ed 
to address challenges in interoperability that must be dealt with in order to unleash the full capability of digital agriculture through IoT.
 /checkbldFacilitate open data and ensure data security
Making data available to a wide array of audienc-
es, including software engineers, agronomists, and 34 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
data scientists, facilitates all types of analytics to in-
form farm operations as well as to design products and services tailored to speciﬁ  c end-users’ needs. 
Agronomic statistics housed under public authori-ties provide a fundamental basis for the aforemen-tioned actors as well as mobile network operators and telecommunication companies to structure new layers onto the IoT platform, thereby deepening ex-isting knowledge and enriching analysis for preci-sion farming.On the ﬂ  ip side of data openness, data security and 
privacy in an interconnected system arouse signiﬁ  -
cant concerns. Agricultural data of any level—such as household surveys, farm production records, and busi-ness intelligence records—entail sensitive and conﬁ  -
dential insights not only into individuals but also into broader geographic security or economic interests.
Legislation around the data-sharing mechanism’s 
guiding purpose of data access, intellectual property Figure 8. A schematic of interoperability of an IoT system
Source: AuthorsPART II: Digital tools stimulate agriculture market opportunities 
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 35rights, sustainable funding for system management, 
and licensing could shape a more favorable environ-ment that encourages a secured and cooperative practice.
 /checkbldStandardize data semantics and syntax
The advent of big data via a full spectrum of chan-
nels and devices prompts the standardization of semantics, data language, syntax, and data format, a priority to ensure interoperability. Eff  orts toward 
such standardization have been limited so far. In the agriculture sphere, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has es-tablished AGROVOC, a multilingual agricultural the-saurus that supports content management in agri-cultural information system.
25 The Global Open Data 
for Agriculture and Nutrition (GODAN) is another ini-tiative convening the public and private sectors as well as high-level policy support to streamline and enhance database quality as well as usability.
 /checkbldDevelop technology infrastructure to ensure 
suffi  cient bandwidth and storage
Processing a wealth of data within a limited time 
span requires solid performance on the infrastruc-ture front, where the IoT system operates. Stable broadband Internet and eff  ective coverage are the 
catalysts for not only timely but also accurate data sharing and computation. Because of the ever-in-creasing quantity of available spatial and temporal data, suffi   cient storage for the historical database 
will need to be in place for comprehensive analytics. /checkbldConduct market analysis on agriculture servic-
es and product demand
With the data and analytic models at hand, the 
question now is what the demands are in terms of services, products, and applications from farms of diverse scales and across multiple geographic lo-cations, crops, and climatic regions. A deep dive into the demand and supply of respective client segments will help shape business strategies, provide value position, and address the core pain points for end-users.
 /checkbldSupport technology research and develop-
ment
Continuous research on technology development 
to advance computing speed and strengthen the existing IoT platform capacity by consolidating and expanding application capacity will propel the eco-system to evolve and closely serve the industries. Investment in training for data scientists, technology specialists, and end-users and in rapid prototyping will speed up the IoT ecosystem evolution, thereby gaining deep customer insights to capture untapped development opportunities.
Table 2 summarizes the above discussion in matrix 
form. Although the majority of tasks in building an enabling IoT ecosystem require public and private partnerships, it is essential to consider also the po-litical system and power dynamics within the coun-try and to seek anchors and champions for speciﬁ  c 
policy agendas.
25 Further information about AGROVOC is available at http://aims.fao.org/vest-registry/vocabularies/agrovoc-multilingual-agricult ural-thesaurus.Unleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Table 2. Key policy issues for IoT interoperability and the role of the public and private sectors
IoT Interoperability: Russia Public Sector Private Sector Public-Private Partnership
1. Open data & security n.a. n.a. ★
2. Language standardization n.a. n.a. ★
3. Infrastructure ★★ ★
4. Market research & analysis ★★ ★
5. Research & development ★ n.a. ★
Note:  n.a. = not applicable.Conclusions and areas  for further work
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 37Conclusions and areas 
for further work
This report has explored many examples and di-
mensions of how digital tools and approaches can transform, and are transforming, farming and agri-business in Russia and around the world. It has also noted throughout that many digital tools have so far beneﬁ  tted mostly large farms, posing the danger 
that small farms will be left behind. Several areas of future work would be very valuable to begin to develop ways to avoid leaving small farms behind. These include, among others, the following:
 /checkbldWhat types of public sector interventions would 
be needed to unleash the power of digital in the form of activating agricultural information for smallholder farms in Russia? What types of interventions would be both justiﬁ  ed (as public 
goods) and feasible?
 /checkbldWhat types of public sector interventions would 
be needed to unleash the power of digital in the form of activating agriculture market oppor-tunities for smallholder farms in Russia? What types of interventions would be both justiﬁ  ed 
(as public goods) and feasible?
 /checkbldWhat ﬁ  nancing options could be explored to 
bring digital transformation to small farms?
 /checkbldWhat types of system and operating environ-
ment developments would facilitate a vast expansion in the use of the power of digital in farming (especially for small farms) and agri-business in Russia?
The foundation of digital transformation in agricul-
ture is anchored in IT infrastructure that is supremely reliable and that has minimal latency and a stable 
network connectivity to process big data without a time lapse. A majority of digital progress may be spearheaded by the private sector; the public sector, nevertheless, is the main enabler to extend the tech-nology nationwide. Public and private partnership is therefore ever more relevant as nations are ushered into the era of digital economy.
Focusing on broadening access to precise agricul-
tural data and market opportunities for smallholder farmers, the public sector—apart from providing ba-sic and critical infrastructure—can tap into its existing databases to inform agri-tech product design and enrich upcoming databases built by companies in the ecosystem. Additionally, security—as one of the top agenda items and main pillar for the digital para-digm to thrive—cannot be compromised. The public sector has the proper instruments and imperatives to regulate data dissemination, to prevent access by unauthorized entities, and to intervene when neces-sary. Only with a secured environment can trust be built in the newly established digital ecosystem.
To scale up digital technology utilization within the 
entire farming spectrum, and particularly the small-holder farming communities, four elements—cus-tomers, technology, competitors, and culture—are central to examining target segment contexts, issue severance, and solution relevance. These four ele-ments inform strategies to enlist partnership, mobi-lize ﬁ  nancial resources, and construct infrastructure 
where the existing environment is unsatisfactory.
The scaling strategy should prioritize assessing the 
local context and size of new markets: a landscape survey detailing the level of digitization throughout the value chain and end-users’ attitude toward the innovations can provide a customer portrait that is 38 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
helpful for ﬁ  ne-tuning product design. The state of ex-
isting infrastructure will shed light on the signiﬁ  cance 
of, for instance, a tractor deﬁ  cit, the satisfaction level 
toward the alternatives or the lack thereof, and wheth-er the technology-based innovation will be powered by a solid IT base. These quantitative and qualitative indicators can inform an implementation plan.
Scaling up innovation requires a sustainable eco-
system encompassing supports from key anchors in public, private, and nonproﬁ  t sectors at all levels 
to communicate to end-users the beneﬁ  ts, policies, 
and available ﬁ  nancing in facilitating opt-in. As is cus-
tomary in the agriculture industry, stakeholders are prone to be risk averse: a dedicated engagement-communication plan will be crucial to pre-empt user resistance and to address authorities’ misconcep-tions. Buy-in from the public sector is instrumental to de-risk new market entry by ﬁ  nancing pilots and 
subsidizing uptakes to encourage wider innovation dissemination. IT infrastructure supported by private sector partners will ensure uninterrupted connec-tivity and machine interoperability to maximize the dividends of digital agriculture innovation to improve standards of living through increased productivity, income, and available workforce.With the technology expertise and sectorwide 
determination in place, the question now is what constitutes optimal ﬁ  nancing options to bring this transformation to small farms. The prospective op-tions can come from the respective technology business models, which dictate stakeholder re-sponsibilities involving investment, procurement, economic structure, and ultimately the source of ﬁ  nance growing from the services available on the platform. Financing mechanisms that explore fund-seeking diverse returns such as private equity, venture capital, grants, or blended ﬁ  nance mixing development fund and private monies are other promising approaches subject to speciﬁ  c scenarios and negotiations.
To seize the economic beneﬁ  t of digital transfor-
mation in agriculture, Russia requires continuous technology research and development to build a global architecture that serves multiple industries simultaneously; to increase market maturity includ-ing user mindset, product pricing, and design; and to enhance public-private partnerships to devise a sustainable business model facilitating the expan-sion of digital technology use for the entire agricul-ture industry.Annex: People and organizations consulted for the study
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 39Annex: People and organizations consulted for the study
Entity Key Contact Title
Wageningen University and Research Kees Lokhorst Senior Researcher, Livestock ResearchKaluga Agribusiness Development Agency Stefan Perevalov Chief Executive Offi   cer
Skolkovo Fdn Roman Kulikov Head of the direction “Biotechnology in agriculture 
and industry”
Agrotech Fund Skolkovo Venture 
InvestmentsPavel Danilov Managing Partner
Gamaya Yosef Akhtman; Igor Ivanov Chief Executive Offi   cer; Chief Commercial Offi   cer
R-Sept Alexey Khakhunov Chief Executive Offi   cer
Agrivita farm Andrey Kasatskiy Chief Executive Offi   cer
Panasonic Russia German Gavrilov Head of business developmentEricsson Andrey Grishin Senior Business Development Offi   cer
Sergey Biryukov Account Manager
Trimble Dudkin Denis Yurievich Regional Manager for Agriculture, Russia and 
Belarus
AgTech Ventures Roman Troﬁ  mov Chief Executive Offi   cer
Institute of the Information Society - Russia Yuri Hohlov Chairman of the BoardExact Farming Egor Zaikin Director of DevelopmentSmart4agro Aleksander Tretyakov Head of Consulting Department HelloTractor Jehiel Oliver Chief Executive Offi   cer
CPS - AgroNTI Coordinator Viktor Kononov General DirectorRabobank Ruud Huirne Director Food & AgriTarﬁ  n Mehmet Memecan Chief Executive Offi   cer
Farmerline Worlali Senyo Director of Growth, Development and ResearchWageningen University and Research; IoF 
2020 - ECSjaak Wolfert Senior Scientist Data Science & Information 
Management in Agri-Food; Coordinator
AgroDronGroup Dmitry Rubin FounderAgroTerra Stanislav Shishov Innovation DirectorTakeWing Alexander Kasatskiy; Ivan Lavrentiev Lead Blockchain DeveloperVodafone David Rhodes Business Development ManagerDokuchaev Soil Science Institute Igor Savin Deputy Research DirectorLomonosov Moscow State University Oleg Golozubov ResearcherUnited States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA)Edwin Muñiz Assistant State Soil Scientist, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service40 © 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank GroupUnleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
References
AgriDigital and CBH Group. 2017. Pilot Report: Solving for Supply Chain Ineffi   ciencies and Risks with 
Blockchain in Agriculture. https://www.agridigital.io/blockchain#pilot-report.
Aker, Jenny C. 2011. “Dial ‘A’ for Agriculture: A Review of Information and Communication Technologies for 
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.” Agricultural Economics 42 (6): 631–47.
Aker, Jenny C. and Isaac M. Mbiti. 2010. “Mobile Phones and Economic Development in Africa.” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 24 (3): 207–32.
Cole, Shawn A. and A. Nilesh Fernando. 2012. “The Value of Advice: Evidence from Mobile Phone-Based 
Agricultural Extension.” Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 13–047, November 2012. http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:10007889.
Collinson, Shura. 2018. “How Digital Farming Could Boost Russia’s Competitive Advantage on Global 
Markets.” Skolkovo News, February 21. https://sk.ru/news/b/articles/archive/2018/02/21/how-digi-tal-farming-could-boost-russia_1920_s-competitive-advantage-on-global-markets.aspx. 
Feder, Gershon, Richard E. Just, and David Zilberman. 1982. “Adoption of Agricultural Innovation in 
Developing Countries: A Survey.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 33 (2): 255–98.
Folberth, Christian, Rastislav Skalsky, Elena Moltchanova, Juraj Balkovic, Ligia B. Azevedo, Michael 
Obersteiner, and Marijn van der Velde. 2016. “Uncertainty in Soil Data Can Outweigh Climate Impact Signals in Global Crop Yield Simulations.” Nature Communications. https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms11872.pdf.
Fuglie, Keith O. and Catherine A. Kascak. 2001. “Adoption and Diff  usion of Natural-Resource-Conserving 
Agricultural Technology.” Review of Agricultural Economics 23 (2): 386–403.
Galen, Doug, Nikki Brand, Lyndsey Boucherle, Rose Davis, Natalie Do, Ben El-Baz, Isadora Kimura, Kate 
Wharton, and Jay Lee. 2018. Blockchain for Social Impact: Moving Beyond the Hype. Center for Social Innovation, RippleWorks. https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/sites/gsb/ﬁ  les/publication-pdf/
study-blockchain-impact-moving-beyond-hype_0.pdf.
Gro. 2018. “Blockchain: Beyond Bitcoin to Agriculture.” Gro Intelligence, August 2. https://gro-intelligence.
com/insights/blockchain-in-agriculture.
Hakobyan, Artavazd, David J. Nielson, Claus Deblitz, Seema Bathla, Dmitriy Zemlyanski, Alina Pugacheva, 
Yelto Zimmer, Amit Saha, Torsten Hemme, Segey Lamanov, Dmitri Rylko, and Daniil Khotko. 2017. Russia: Policies for Agri-Food Sector Competitiveness and Investment (Russian). Washington, DC: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/457551512402319602/Russia-policies-for-agri-food-sector-competitiveness-and-investment.
Hengl, Tomislav, Jorge Mendes de Jesus, Gerard B. M. Heuvelink, Maria Ruiperez Gonzalez, Milan 
Kilibarda, Aleksandar Blagotić, Wei Shangguan, Marvin N. Wright, Xiaoyuan Geng, Bernhard Bauer-Marschallinger, Mario Antonio Guevara, Rodrigo Vargas, Robert A. MacMillan, Niels H. Batjes, Johan G. B. Leenaars, Eloi Ribeiro, Ichsani Wheeler, Stephan Mantel, and Bas Kempen. 2017. “SoilGrids250m: Global Gridded Soil Information Based on Machine Learning.” PLoS ONE References
© 2018 Agriculture Global Practice. The World Bank Group 4112.2 (2017): e0169748. PMC. Web. 27 Aug. 2018. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5313206/#pone.0169748.ref008 .
IIASA and RAS (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis and the Russian Academy of Science). 
2002. Land Resources of Russia: CD-ROM Guide. http://webarchive.iiasa.ac.at/Research/FOR/rus-sia_cd/guide.htm.
INSPIRE (Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe). 2003. “Contribution to the Extended Impact 
Assessment of INSPIRE.” http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/reports/fds_report.pdf.
Laczkowski Kevin, Padh Asutosh, Niranjana Rajagopal, and Paolo Sandrone. 2018. How OEMs Can Seize 
the High-Tech Future in Agriculture and Construction. McKinsey and Co. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/how-oems- can-seize-the-high-tech-future-
in-agriculture-and-construction.
Maslova, Ann. 2017. “Growing the Garden: How to Use Blockchain in Agriculture.” Cointelegraph, November 
2. https://cointelegraph.com/news/growing-the-garden-how-to-use-blockchain-in-agriculture.
Ministry of Agriculture of the Russian Federation. 2018. Kozubenko I. Presentation in Precision Agriculture 
Conference. Skolkovo Technopark, Moscow. February 20, 2018. http://sk.ru/events/3931.aspx. 
Nakamoto, Satoshi. No date. “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” https://bitcoin.org/bit-
coin.pdf. 
Rozhkov, V. A., E. N. Molchanov, V. S. Stolbovoy, I. O. Alyabina, V. M. Kolesnikova, and S. A. Shoba. 2010. 
“Soil-Geographic Database of Russia.” Eurasian Soil Science 43 (1):1–4.
Sanghera, Alekh. 2018. “How Adoption of Blockchain Technology Will Disrupt Agriculture: Understanding 
The Implications of Blockchain Technology In Agriculture.” Inc42, January 17. https://inc42.com/buzz/entrepreneurship-icreate-modi/
Schimmelpfennig, David. 2016. “Farm Proﬁ  ts and Adoption of Precision Agriculture.” Economic Research 
Report 249773. United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. https://ideas.repec.org/p/ags/uersrr/249773.html
Shoba, S. A., V. S. Stolbovoy, I. O. Alyabina, and E. N. Molchanov. 2008. “Soil-Geographic Database of 
Russia.” Eurasian Soil Science 41 (9): 907–913. 
Stolbovoy, V. S. Register of Russian Soil Resources. Priroda Rossii, accessed December 5, 2014. 
http://www.priroda.ru/reviews/detail.php?ID=10878.
Stolbovoy, V. S. and E. N. Molchanov. 2015. “Uniﬁ  ed State Register of Soil Resources of Russia as a Model of the 
Spatial Organization of Soil Cover.” Izvestiya Rossiiskoi Akademii Nauk. Seriya Matematicheskaya. 5: 135–143. http://naukarus.com/edinyy-gosudarstvennyy-reestr-pochvennyh-resursov-rossii-kak-model-prostranstvennoy-organizatsii-pochvennogo-pokrova (in Russian). 
Stolbovoy, V., L. Montanarella, N. Smeyan, and others. 2001. “Integration of Data on the Soils of Russia, 
Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine into the Soil Geographic Database of the European Community.” Eurasian Soil Science 34 (7): 687–703.
Suberg, William. 2017. “Russia Gets First Sanctioned Cryptocurrency: And It’s Tracking Beef.” Cointelegraph, 
July 6. https://cointelegraph.com/news/russia-gets-ﬁ  rst-sanctioned-cryptocurrency-and-its-tracking-beef.Unleashing the Power of Digital on Farms in Russia – and Seeking Opportunities for Small Farms 
Verdouw, Cor, Sjaak Wolfert, and Bedir Tekinerdogan. 2016. “Internet of Things in Agriculture.” CAB Reviews 
11 (35): 1–12.
Weston, Emma and Sarah Nolet. 2016. “From Bitcoin to Agriculture: How Can Farmers Beneﬁ  t from 
Blockchain?” AgFunder News, August 29. https://agfundernews.com/from-bitcoin-to-agriculture-how-can-farmers-beneﬁ  t-from-blockchain6380.html.