WHAT WORKS  
FOR DIGITAL 
FINANCIAL 
SERVICES IN 
AGRICULTURAL 
DEVELOPMENT? ii
GLOSSARY
CFA  Connected Farmer Alliance
CGAP Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
DFS Digital Financial Services
DIV Development Innovation Ventures
FSP Financial Service Provider
GFSS Global Food Security Strategy
IFC International Finance Corporation
MFI Microfinance Institution
M-PESA a mobile-based money transfer service in Kenya
IBLI Index-Based Livestock Insurance  
POS Point of Sale
R&D Research and Development
RCT Randomized Control Trial
USAID United States Agency for International Development
USSD Unstructured Supplementary Service Data
Author: Howard Miller; May, 2019ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This document was written by Howard Miller. Critical review input and comments were provided by  
Ellen Galdava (FHI 360), Nicole Bridge (USAID), Kwasi Donkor (USAID), Katie Hauser (USAID), and the  
Digital Finance team at USAID. 1Digital financial services (DFS) for agricultural development is a dynamic but relatively young field. While there 
is plenty of innovation and investment in promising models, the connections to poverty reduction and food 
security are mostly hypothesized, not proven. We have yet to see significant, robust, causative evidence that links 
the digitization of financial activities to reduced hunger, higher incomes, greater resilience, or reduced poverty 
for smallholder farmers. This case study aims to synthesize what we know has worked and highlight the greatest 
potential for DFS to impact agricultural outcomes and improved farmer livelihoods.
Existing evidence emphasizes the role of technology to reduce the transaction costs, overcome information 
asymmetries, and improve the product targeting for financial service providers to serve farmers. Where there is 
some evidence of impact, it tends to focus on more commercialized farmers in tight value chains. The poorest 
farmers have yet to access many of the benefits associated with digital finance.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The evidence of impact varies by product...
The greatest opportunity for DFS in agriculture is likely 
to be around improved savings  products that allow 
for consumption smoothing and wealth management. 
Commitment savings appear to be particularly useful for 
accumulating useful lump sums for investment.Digital payments and transactions  are a key 
enabler for a broader DFS ecosystem. There is 
emerging evidence for the effectiveness of digital 
cash transfers to rural populations, though we have 
yet to see significant movements away from cash, or 
benefits from value chain payment digitization.
Digitized insurance products for farmers appear 
to have long term potential, particularly in building 
resilience against weather shocks and in unlocking credit 
to farmers. However, demand remains very low at 
actuarially fair prices. While some emerging models leverage technology 
to deliver credit to farmers, these remain at a very 
nascent stage. Those that have succeeded tend to be 
closely linked to other value-added services, such as 
information and market linkages.Digital Development for Feed the Future — a collaboration between USAID’s Global Development Lab and Bureau for 
Food Security — is focused on integrating a suite of coordinated digital tools and technologies into Feed the Future activities 
to accelerate agriculture-led economic growth and improved nutrition. Feed the Future is the U.S. Government’s global 
hunger and food security initiative.
This case study is part of a series highlighting the integration of digital technologies into agricultural programs. Over the past 
10 years, and particularly over the past five, the use of mobile phones and Internet-based, digital tools in farming activities 
has risen dramatically. This is largely due to the widespread adoption of mobile phones in developing and emerging markets, 
coupled with the spread of 3G and 4G connectivity. What has emerged is a broad set of digitally based applications that 
have driven greater financial inclusion, more precision in agriculture, better data collection and analysis, and more effective 
information dissemination. Agricultural organizations and programs are increasingly embracing these tools to advance their 
goals. Each of the first six case studies highlights specific organizations and their approaches to adoption of digital tools,
including ways that these tools affect organizational culture, operations and programming. This case study takes a slightly 
different approach, gathering existing evidence of the role of technology to reduce the transaction costs, overcome information 
assymetrics, and improve the product targeting for financial service providers to serve farmers.2
To improve the effectiveness of DFS for agriculture interventions, a coalition of 
governments, donors, NGOs, and the private sector need to work together to build 
the ecosystem.
Strategic recommendations
DFS for agriculture needs strategic, 
long term investments in market 
building. The challenges are complex 
and require strong partnerships. 
Donors have a crucial role in 
subsidizing risk and innovationProcess recommendations
More emphasis is needed 
on customer segmentation 
and service design. There are 
opportunities for digitization 
along the customer journey, 
but these need to be better 
understood.Product recommendations
Emphasizing digital savings 
products and developing use 
cases for digital payments should 
be a priority. Products need to 
link more closely to farmers 
activities and aspirations.There are several factors that are common among more successful implementations 
of DFS for agriculture projects.
Complexity factors Design factorsOperational 
factorsGrowth factors
• Multi-faceted solutions
• Awareness of  
downside risks  
 
 • Responding to 
seasonal incomes/
outflows
• Leveraging  
behavioral insights• Empowering (not 
replacing) field staff
• Careful change 
management
• Digitizing beyond 
customer interface• Not scaling too fast
• Leveraging donor 
capital for innovation  
 
 3SECTION 1:  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 BACKGROUND
Hunger and poverty reduction are two critical, 
complex, and interrelated challenges at the heart of the 
international development agenda. The development 
of the agricultural sector is central to the challenge of 
how families, communities, and countries in some of 
the world’s poorest regions can grow out of poverty, 
reduce food insecurity, build resilience, and ultimately 
achieve self-reliance. While agriculture provides the 
primary source of income for most of the world’s poor, 
agricultural development supports an inclusive model 
of economic growth.
The factors hindering agricultural development are 
many and complex. One of the most acute and well-
established constraints is limited access to the financial 
services. Financial services can enable improved 
outcomes for the rural poor in several ways, including:
Increased productivity:  Farmers, particularly 
those with smaller plots, are often constrained by an 
inability to invest in modern inputs. T o make one-off 
investments, a farmer needs a lump sum of money 
available at the right time to make the necessary 
purchases. Financial services can help make this lump 
sum available, providing an opportunity for farmers to 
escape a cycle of low investment, low returns, and  
low income. Higher incomes and diversified livelihoods: 
Given the precarious nature of agricultural livelihoods, 
concentration of investments in one crop can be 
dangerous. Financial services can open up channels to 
alternative and higher incomes through investment in 
higher value crops, value addition through processing 
or standards and certifications, or the ability to take 
advantage of new markets.
Greater resilience : For those living in poverty or 
slightly above poverty level, the impact of a shock 
(such as a drought or a sudden health emergency) 
can be catastrophic. Financial services can provide 
the opportunities to smooth consumption and build 
resilience by insuring against risk, accumulating financial 
buffers, and opening channels for emergency funds 
when most needed.
The digital revolution provides an unprecedented 
opportunity to overcome some of the major 
challenges that restrict the rural poor from accessing 
and effectively using financial services. The challenges 
are numerous and interrelated—some relate to 
characteristics of rural populations, some to the 
nature of agricultural activities, some to information 
asymmetries, and others to the cost of operating 
in rural environments. The USAID Digital Financial 
Services (DFS) for Agriculture Guide  summarizes some 
of the roadblocks faced by smallholder farmers in 
accessing financial services, and suggests solutions that 
can be enabled by DFS.4
ROADBLOCKSOLUTION ENABLED BY 
DIGITAL FINANCIAL  SERVICES
Limited ability to manage post-harvest loss and 
speculate for higher prices for harvests Access to storage facilities with  
inventory-based credit 
Smallholder farmers cannot save for long-term 
investments Savings products and services 
Appropriate credit products don’t exist for 
smallholder farmers Lower transaction costs to lend to smallholder 
farmers, making credit more available 
Cost of buying quality and quantity inputs is 
prohibitive and riskyIncreased purchasing power, reduced risk, decreased 
transaction costs 
Smallholder farmers not competitive in 
commercial supply chains Digitizing payments throughout the value chain 
translate to lower costs for buyers (and farmers) 
and increase price transparency 
Managing and mitigating weather risks to crops Weather-indexed microinsurance, purchase of 
weather risk-mitigating farm equipment (i.e., drip 
irrigation, climate resilient seeds)
Women disempowered in decision-making in 
agriculture Improved access to markets and better control  
of fundsTable 1: Summary of Digital Agriculture Interventions51.2 FOCUS 
The purpose of this case study is to synthesize and 
highlight the latest evidence of what has worked in 
achieving impact for digital finance implementations in 
agricultural development, in particular for smallholder 
farming households in poor countries. 
The easiest way to think of digital financial services in 
this context is as the digitization of the relationship 
between the customer and the financial service 
provider (FSP)—usually via a mobile phone (as with 
M-PESA ), a computer, or a point-of-sale (POS) device. 
However, while the customer is making and receiving 
funds via mobile, there may be a significant, cash- and 
paper-heavy infrastructure behind it. Conversely, a 
rural microfinance institution (MFI) that is distributing 
loans to a farmer in cash could have a significant 
technology-driven data analytics platform that helped 
decide whether to make that loan. The ways that digital 
technology has changed—and continues to change—
financial services for rural populations is not simple.
For the purposes of this case study, we assess 
the evidence of effectiveness in financial inclusion 
programming for rural populations where there is at 
least some digital component. This component may 
be small, or within a much larger traditional, non-DFS 
project or program.1.3 APPROACH 
Despite the progress that has been made in extending 
the digital finance frontier into rural areas, we have yet 
to see wide scale adoptions of digital financial solutions 
among agricultural populations. Therefore, this case 
study aims to identify the latest evidence of what 
has been shown to be effective in providing financial 
services to smallholder farmers, and then assess how 
digital finance can be leveraged to further develop and 
scale these models. 
The case study takes a global view of the evidence 
concerning DFS and agricultural finance but wherever 
possible, focuses on Global Food Security Strategy 
target countries under Feed the Future (Bangladesh, 
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Kenya, Mali, 
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal and Uganda). It is not a 
compendium of all development programs, trials, DFS 
products, and their purported impact, but rather a 
synthesis of the available evidence. 
Section 2 considers the state of the evidence around 
the impact of savings, credit, insurance, and transactional 
products for smallholder farmers, focusing on academic 
studies and statistically-robust project evaluations. 
Section 3 considers more programmatic evidence on 
the factors behind successful interventions. Section 
4 focuses on digital connectivity and the changing 
nature of digital in rural finance, in particular the role of 
smartphones. Section 5 provides recommendations for 
donor programming.6
This section summarizes the latest available evidence, 
by product type, on the effectiveness of financial 
services in improving outcomes for smallholder 
farmers. While the emphasis is on financial services 
delivered through digital channels and enabled by digital 
processes, the digital element is often peripheral to the 
primary intervention. This section highlights where we 
are seeing impact, and the next section will focus on 
what we know from more digitally-focused programs 
about how DFS can be used as a lever to support 
these impact channels. 
2.1 EVIDENCE BY PRODUCT TYPE
Payments and transactions
There is good evidence from Kenya1 that mobile 
money has had positive impact on the livelihoods 
of the rural poor. It is estimated that M-PESA has 
significantly increased per capita incomes and lifted 
two percent of Kenyan households out of poverty. 
This impact is most pronounced for women, who 
have in many cases been enabled to move out of 
agriculture and into business. While the impact of DFS 
is not necessarily through agriculture, the impact on 
rural livelihoods and poverty reduction is significant. 
Further evidence from banana farmers in Kenya2 
suggests that the positive impact of mobile money on 
rural households is through the remittance channel. 
For smallholder farmers receiving remittances from 
1 Suri, Tavneet & Jack, William. (2016). The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money. Science. 354. 1288-1292. 10.1126/science.aah5309.
2 Kikulwe EM, Fischer E, Qaim M (2014). “Mobile Money, Smallholder Farmers, and Household Welfare in Kenya”. PLoS ONE 9(10): e109804. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0109804.
3 Suri T, Jack W, Stoker TM (2012). “Documenting the birth of a financial economy.”friends and family, the digital inflows not only directly 
raise incomes but also lead to greater investment 
in agricultural inputs and higher profits. Receivers of 
digital remittances were also shown to reduce risk and 
liquidity constraints, supporting an earlier study3 that 
found that mobile money remittances tended to act as 
a form of insurance by reducing the impact of negative 
economic shocks.SECTION 2:  
THE STATE OF THE EVIDENCE 
ON IMPACT 
What do we mean by “impact”?
In line with the U.S. Government Global  
Food Security Strategy (GFSS) results 
framework, the overarching goal of sustainably 
reducing global hunger, malnutrition, and poverty 
is sub-divided into three interrelated and 
interdependent objectives:
•  Objective 1. Inclusive and sustainable 
agricultural-led economic growth
•  Objective 2. Strengthened resilience among 
people and systems
•  Objective 3. A well-nourished population, 
especially among women and children
This is the framework used in this study to assess 
whether digital financial services in agriculture 
interventions are achieving impact.7Digital cash transfers have been demonstrated to 
be a cost-saving mechanism for large-scale transfers, 
particularly to sparsely-distributed rural populations. In 
Niger,4 mobile phone-based cash transfers significantly 
reduced costs for recipients in obtaining the cash 
transfer, and the agency’s variable implementation 
costs of. Households receiving mobile transfers (who 
relied on agriculture as their primary income source) 
had increased dietary diversity and their children had 
higher daily nutritional intake. This was partly due to 
time savings (mobile transfer recipients spent less 
time traveling and waiting for their transfer) as well 
as increased intra-household bargaining power for 
women. 
There is little evidence to date on the value of digitizing 
value chain payments, though this is often held up as a 
high potential intervention for DFS in agriculture. The 
Connected Farmer Alliance (CFA)—a public-private 
partnership between Feed the Future, Vodafone, 
and TechnoServe to digitize the flow of money and 
information along the nut value chain in Kenya—found 
4 Jenny C. Aker, Rachid Boumnijel, Amanda McClelland and Niall Tierney (2014). “Payment Mechanisms and Anti-Poverty Programs: Evidence from a Mobile Money 
Cash Transfer Experiment in Niger.
5 Amani M’Bale, Rashmi Pillai, and Nathan Were (2018). “Digitizing Agricultural Payments Lessons from Uganda’s Coffee Value Chain.”
6 Lasse Brune, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg and Dean Yang (2016). “Facilitating Savings for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.”that digitization of payments resulted in savings of 
$45,614 per year driven primarily by the removal of 
cash withdrawal charges and no longer needing to 
cover the insurance premium covering cash in transit. 
Other similar projects, such as one to digitize payments 
in Uganda’s coffee value chain,5 demonstrate the 
various difficulties in operationalizing such a system.
Savings
Evidence from a randomized control trial (RCT) with 
tobacco farmers in Malawi6 found that farmers who 
had their harvest incomes paid electronically into 
bank accounts were more likely to save money in 
the months preceding the next planting season and 
increased their usage of agricultural inputs in that 
season. Increased inputs led to increased agricultural 
output, higher farm-related sales, and higher profits for 
the farmer, and household expenditures were 10.8 
percent higher than in the control group. Encouragingly, 
usage of the bank accounts continued one year after 
the trial, implying that the farmers found some value 
in the savings mechanism. This is consistent with an 
John O’Bryan/USAID8
earlier study in Western Kenya7 that found that farmers 
were willing to make forward investments in fertilizer 
at harvest time as a means of saving to invest in next 
season’s crop.
In a study of fertilizer uptake among farmers in 
Mozambique,88  researchers found that the offer of 
a mobile (non-digital) savings account incentivized 
farmers to save money rather than invest in fertilizer  
in subsequent seasons. A treatment group with access 
to fertilizer subsidies alone continued to invest in 
fertilizer in later planting cycles; a group with access to 
a savings product, however, preferred to accumulate 
savings as a buffer stock—a form of self-insurance. 
Those using the savings accounts were found to 
demonstrate improvements in well-being, in the  
form of higher consumption levels. 
MyAgro, a USAID grantee, has developed a successful 
mobile layaway solution that allows smallholder 
farmers in Mali and Senegal to incrementally save 
money via their mobile phones for investment in farm 
inputs. Though no robust impact evidence yet exists, 
MyAgro has reached 34,000 customers and claims to 
have increased yields by 50–100 percent and annual 
net farmer incomes by $145. 
Insurance
Although there have been several pilots and high-
profile initiatives to support index insurance products 
for smallholder farmers, the impact of such approaches 
remains unclear. A systematic review of the literature9 
found that “some positive effects of index-insurance 
7 Esther Duflo, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2011). “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.”
8 Carter et al. (2016). “Savings, Subsidies, and Technology Adoption: Field Experimental Evidence from Mozambique.”
9 Marr, Ana, Winkel, Anne, van Asseldonk, Marcel, Lensink, Robert and Bulte, Erwin (2016). “Adoption and impact of index-insurance and credit for smallholder 
farmers in developing countries: A systematic review.” Agricultural Finance Review, 76 (1). pp. 94-118. ISSN 0002-1466.
10 Dean Karlan Robert Osei Isaac Osei-Akoto Christopher Udry (2014). “Agricultural decisions after relaxing credit and risk constraints.”
11 Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak and Mark Rosenzweig (2014). Risk, Insurance and Wages in General Equilibrium.
12 Cole, Shawn, Xavier Gine, Jeremy T obacman, Petia T opalova, Robert M. T ownsend, and James Vickery. 2013. “Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence 
from India.”
13 J-PAL, CEGA, and ATAI Policy Bulletin. 2016. “Make it Rain.” Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab, Center for Effective Global Action, and 
Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative.have been established, yet a number of adverse net 
income effects results have been reported too.”
Evidence from a rainfall-based index insurance 
program in Northern Ghana10 found that the presence 
of the insurance policy induced farmers to invest 
more in fertilizer usage, land cultivation and total 
farming expenditures, and to select riskier activities. 
The intervention was found to improve some aspects 
of household welfare (such as ability to absorb shocks, 
measured by the number of meals missed); there 
was no significant impact on an aggregate measure of 
household welfare.
A large scale agricultural insurance intervention in 
India11  demonstrated the heterogeneity of impact 
between cultivators and agricultural wage laborers. 
The presence of a rain-indexed insurance policy 
incentivized farmers to invest in higher-yielding, riskier 
production methods; however, the intervention 
excluded farm workers and was shown to destabilize 
their employment opportunities. Further evidence 
from India12 showed that rainfall insurance could help 
farmers to manage risk and shift production away from 
subsistence crops towards cash crops that are more 
sensitive to rainfall; however, the insurance products 
needed to be significantly subsidized (or free) to 
generate much demand. While discounts and financial 
literacy interventions can increase uptake of insurance, 
demand continues to be very low when policies are 
sold at actuarially fair prices.13 9Credit
A randomized control trial of One Acre Fund’s (1AF) 
work in Western Kenya has provided good evidence 
of the impact of their digitally-enabled “market bundle” 
approach. Rather than merely providing a loan, One 
Acre Fund provides a package of seed, fertilizer, and 
training—all on credit to farmers of maize and beans. 
The study found a 34 percent increase in maize yields, 
and approximately 20 percent increases in profits on 
both crops. 
Further evidence from Nigeria, Malawi, Tanzania and 
Uganda14 found that the link from formal credit to 
agricultural investment may be less straightforward 
than previously thought. The researchers found that 
very few farmers use credit to finance inputs and were 
more likely to use loans to fund non-farm enterprises 
(and consumption) and use the cash generated from 
these enterprises to finance farm inputs. Though 
this result says little about credit constraints, it does 
indicate that demand may be greater for earned cash 
rather than more digital credit to finance inputs.
Credit is not just important to allow investment in 
inputs. A study in Zambia15 found that the provision 
of seasonal credit during the lean season (the period 
between harvests when farmers often resort to 
reducing food consumption, informal borrowing, and 
short-term work on other farms) could increase 
agricultural output and farmer wellbeing. These loans 
were typically smaller than input loans, and the impact 
was greatest on the poorest farmers in the sample. 
Though the loan products were in the form of cash or 
food, the researchers predicted that the use of mobile 
money or other alternative delivery channels could 
increase the cost-effectiveness of implementation.
14 Adjognon SG, Liverpool-Tasie LSO, Reardon TA. “Agricultural input credit in Sub-Saharan Africa: Telling myth from facts.” Food Policy . 2017;67:93-105.
15 Günther Fink, B. Kelsey Jack, and Felix Masiye (2018). “Seasonal Liquidity, Rural Labor Markets and Agricultural Production” Working Paper, April 2018.
16 Dean Karlan Robert Osei Isaac Osei-Akoto Christopher Udry (2014). “Agricultural decisions after relaxing credit and risk constraints.”
17 Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, and Richard Hornbeck. 2014. “Bundling Health Insurance and Microfinance in India: There Cannot Be Adverse Selection If There 
Is No Demand.”Hybrids and bundled products
The standard framework for understanding the supply 
of financial services based on payments, credit, savings, 
and insurance can in some cases fail to represent the 
spectrum of financial services for farmers. A more 
demand-centric approach based on the various 
problems that farmers face, paired with financial 
services that offer a solution, opens possibilities for 
combinations of some of these services.
While much of the effort in the agricultural finance 
space is around increasing the supply of credit to 
farmers, there is some evidence that the agricultural 
credit providers are constrained by capital constraints 
as well as by risk. In other words, if lenders knew 
that crops were insured, they may be more willing 
to lend. There is some evidence from Ghana16 that 
mitigating risk for smallholder farmers (via rainfall index 
insurance), even without an infusion of capital, can lead 
to an increase in investment. Conversely, there is also 
evidence that the bundling of (health) insurance with 
microcredit for rural customers can decrease  demand 
for loans as customers are disincentivized by the 
additional cost of the premium.17
2.2 EVIDENCE BY TYPE OF FARMER
The effectiveness of DFS for agriculture interventions 
varies considerably due to differences in context, value 
chain, geography and the demographics of target 
populations. Smallholder families across the world 
have diverse characteristics and the outcomes that 
they can derive from DFS will vary considerably. T o 
help frame the segments of agricultural households, 
CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, part of 
the World Bank) have developed a segmentation of 10
smallholder households18 based on what they grow and 
how they produce it; what they consume at home and 
what they sell in the market; and how those markets 
are organized. 
The evidence suggests that for most commercial 
smallholder farmers (producing in tight value chains 
and with good links to markets), a range of specialized 
DFS offerings that link to agricultural investment could 
add value. Evidence from Mali19 suggests that wealthier 
farmers with more land, who spend more on inputs, 
and enjoy higher output and profits with a higher 
marginal return on investment in their crops are more 
likely to access credit than low marginal-return farmers. 
Clients of Opportunity International farming tobacco in 
Malawi20 —another tight value chain—were shown to 
derive benefits from a commitment savings product to 
save for investment in next season’s harvest.
18 CGAP Segmentation of Smallholder Households.
19 Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry (2015). “Self-Selection into Credit Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali.”
20 Lasse Brune, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg and Dean Yang (2016). “Facilitating Savings for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.”For poorer farmers, working in subsistence agriculture 
or in looser value chains, the priority tends to be for 
DFS products that help smooth consumption, feed 
their households through the lean season, and build 
resilience. Though it might be expected that demand 
for insurance would be highest among the most 
vulnerable, the evidence suggests that the upfront 
premium remains a significant barrier for low income 
smallholder households, and therefore other products 
(e.g., savings and remittances) are used to provide a 
safety net.
The purpose of this section is to place a practical lens 
on the implementation of DFS programs: given what 
we know about how DFS can support agricultural 
development and rural livelihoods, how can the how 
the public, private, and development sectors support 
the successful implementation of DFS for agriculture 
programs? There are several factors that can make 
Table 2
SEGMENT OF 
SMALLHOLDERSCHARACTERISTICSROLE OF DIGITAL 
FINANCIAL SERVICES
Non-commercial smallholdersLandless, or up to 1 hectare
Staple crops
Production consumed by 
household
Little market engagementConsumption smoothing
Commitment savings
Remittances 
Group loans
Commercial smallholders in 
loose value chains1-2 hectares
Staples and some cash crops
Some production consumed by 
household 
Reliable surplus of staples sold 
informallyCommitment savings
Passbook savings
Regular payments
Input credit
Group loans
Commercial smallholders in tight 
value chainsAt least 2 hectares
Cash crops
Sold through contract farming
Reliable surplus of staples, some 
consumed by householdInput credit
Asset financing
Harvest-linked savings
Value chain payments
Crop insurance
Source: CGAP Segmentation of Smallholder Households and author11or break a good program, many of which cannot be 
predicted ex ante. In this section, we break these 
up into four broad categories: complexity, design, 
operations, and innovation. 
3.1 COMPLEXITY FACTORS
Complex challenges need multi-faceted 
solutions
Getting DFS to work for agriculture is extremely 
difficult. There are several obstacles, only some of 
which might be solvable by technological innovation. 
Often there is a complex mesh of political, physical, 
geographical, economic, and sociological issues that 
could hinder an implementation, each of which require 
their own approach. 
The thinking around this issue has developed since the 
early days of microfinance, when the general approach 
would focus on the provision of credit, with no other 
services included in its work with groups of borrowers. 
The evolution of the financial inclusion sector has since 
been characterized by the development of a more 
holistic approach to financial health, which considers 
a broader array of financial and non-financial services 
as solutions to the challenges faced by marginalized 
populations. 
There is scant evidence of DFS for agriculture 
interventions working in isolation. The relative 
21  GFSS Supplemental Technical Guide T owards Digitally Enabled Global Agriculture and Food Systems.  
22  Feed the Future “Global Food Security Strategy Technical Guidance Finance: Unlocking Capital Flows” www.feedthefuture.gov.success of models such as One Acre Fund and the 
Graduation Approach demonstrates the importance 
of programmatic activities that address the range of 
problems faced by smallholder farmers, across space 
and across time. Several DFS interventions have 
failed because they have not paid sufficient attention 
to the value-added services that farmers require to 
properly leverage the financial service. A farmer may be 
reluctant to take up a loan if she is not confident she 
has access to high quality inputs and a stable market to 
sell her crops after harvesting. 
The best practice for DFS interventions in agriculture 
supports the bundling of DFS products with critical 
agricultural services at multiple points in the value 
chain to help farmers access the right inputs when they 
need them.21 The GFSS guidance on financial services22 
now argues that the best practice is to intentionally 
structure financial interventions as part of a larger 
program, and to use financial aspects to amplify impact.  SECTION 3:  
COMMON FACTORS BEHIND SUCCESS 
OR FAILURE OF DFS FOR AGRICULTURE 
INTERVENTIONS12
DFS isn’t necessarily all upside
The theory of change for digital financial services 
assumes that, through a range of impact pathways, 
digitization will positively impact people’s livelihoods. 
Like any innovation however, implementers need to 
be cautious of the risk associated with replacing an 
analog system for a digital one. Particularly in rural 
contexts, where financial services have traditionally 
been informal, group-based, and underpinned by local 
social capital, there is evidence that the impact of DFS 
could in fact be disruptive and negative. An RCT in 
the Philippines23 found that, for customers of a rural 
bank, conversion to mobile banking led to a 20 percent 
decrease in the average daily balance and frequency of 
deposits over a two-year period, driven by weakened 
group cohesion and sensitivity to transaction fees. 
Further evidence from South Africa24 suggests that the 
introduction of formal digital financial services could 
erode opportunities for informal income generation.
23  T omoko Harigaya (2016). “Effects of Digitization on Financial Behaviors: Experimental Evidence from the Philippines.” 
24  Hull, E., & James, D. (2012). “Introduction: Popular Economies in South Africa”  Africa, 82(1), 1-19. 
25  Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry (2015). “Self-Selection into Credit Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali.” 3.2 DESIGN FACTORS
Financial services for farmers need to 
account for seasonal distribution of incomes 
and outflows
Farmers typically receive their incomes in small chunks 
throughout the year when they sell their harvested 
crops. Their liquidity varies greatly, based on where they 
are in the agricultural cycle. Traditional microfinance 
models, which are characterized by regular (usually 
weekly) repayments, have tended to fail when mapped 
to the irregular income patterns of farmers. There is 
good evidence that tailoring the repayment schedule 
to the income flows of the farmer can improve farmer 
outcomes. In Mali, it was found that agricultural lending 
tailored to the farmers’ seasonal cash flow may be an 
effective way to increase investments in agriculture and 
improve yields and profits.
Evidence from Soro Yiriwaso, a microfinance institution 
in Southern Mali,25 has shown that the use of balloon 
Afandi Djauhari/NetHope13repayments (also called bullet repayments) in which 
the principal is paid in full at the end of the loan term 
(ideally after the farmer has been able to maximize 
the sale value of her crop) can increase the farmer’s 
investments in cultivation (particularly fertilizer, 
insecticides and herbicides) as well as agricultural 
outputs (though no statistically significant increase in 
profits). Similarly, a study of maize farmers in Uganda26 
found that farmers were more likely to take on credit 
to purchase modern inputs when loan repayment 
could be deferred until after harvest. 
It is not only credit products that can benefit from 
restructuring to fit into the farmer’s agriculture-driven 
liquidity cycle. A study of contract farmers in Kenya27 
found that delaying the payment of insurance premium 
until post-harvest (effectively providing credit to cover 
the cost of the policy until a time of greater liquidity) 
increased uptake from 5 percent to 72 percent, with a 
more pronounced effect for poorer farmers. In general, 
any services provided to farmers, whether financial or 
other value-added services, need to respond to the 
specific needs at varying points in the agricultural cycle, 
as shown in the diagram below.
26  Matsumoto, T., Yamano, T., & Sserunkuuma, D. (2013). “Technology adoption in agriculture: evidence from experimental intervention in maize production in 
Uganda”.
27  Lorenzo Casaburi and Jack Wills (2017). “Time vs. State in Insurance: Experimental Evidence from Contract Farming in Kenya.”
28  Institute for Smallholder Finance (2016). “Financial Inclusion Fit to Size: Customizing Digital Credit for Smallholder Farmers in Tanzania.”Agricultural DFS needs to invest in 
understanding customer behavior 
Because of the nature of rural populations and 
agricultural activities, it is not enough for FSPs 
to transplant models and products that have 
gained traction in urban environments. Successful 
implementations tend to design services from the 
ground up, based on a thorough understanding of the 
needs, behaviors, and incentives of rural customers. 
For example, loan officers or field agents and 
customers often need to travel long distances via poor 
infrastructure to reach each other. This can be costly 
for both parties. Anecdotal evidence from Tanzania28 
suggests that the cost of traveling to the nearest 
agent to access a loan effectively reduces the size of 
the loan before the farmer can spend the money on 
agricultural inputs. As a result, farmers who accessed 
digital loans typically used them to purchase airtime 
credit, small household items, or medicines, rather than 
agricultural purposes. This insight was only gathered 
after a thorough journey mapping exercise to identify 
constraints to DFS adoption.
Table 3
DECIDING SEEDING PLANTING GROWINGHARVESTING 
AND STORINGSELLING
Digital 
financial 
servicesMoney- 
managementWorking 
capital, input 
financingInvestment 
in fertilizer, 
machinery, 
laborSavings and 
insurance for 
resilienceInvestment 
in machinery, 
labor, storageDigital 
payments, 
commitment 
savings
Value 
added 
servicesMarket 
prices, yield 
info, disease 
infoBest farming 
practicesIrrigation, 
machinery, 
fertilizerCrop 
management 
info, pest 
managementStorage 
linkages, 
market infoMarket 
linkages, 
prices
Source: Adapted from Nathan Associates (2015) “The intersection of agricultural and financial markets”14
If DFS interventions are to succeed in agriculture, 
development practitioners and private companies 
working in the agriculture space need a firm 
understanding of the context and behaviors of rural 
populations. For example, the common practice 
of investing in livestock even when real return on 
investment is negative implies a demand for illiquid 
savings products.29 The challenge for DFS providers is 
how to match and improve upon the specific benefits 
that are provided by the current non-digital solution.
Musoni, with help from USAID, has invested heavily in 
understanding the cashflows of farmers to design for 
them.30 Working with Grameen Foundation, Musoni 
went through an intensive, human-centered design-
based research process to better understand the 
unique seasonal financial needs of Kenya’s agricultural 
households. The design phase included focus groups 
and interviews with both current Musoni customers 
and other Kenyan farmers who were not customers 
of Musoni or any other institution. The result was 
Kilimo Booster, a loan product with flexible terms and a 
customizable grace period based on a farmer’s seasonal 
cash flow.  
3.3 OPERATIONAL FACTORS
DFS needs to make field force more 
productive, not replace it
Multi-country evidence across a range of projects 
has demonstrated the importance of effective human 
touch points. An on-the-ground field force, i.e., loan 
officers, mobile money agents or other field officers, 
are usually the de facto interface between a farmer 
29  Anagol, Santosh and Etang, Alvin and Karlan, Dean S. (2014). “Continued Existence of Cows Disproves Central Tenets of Capitalism?” Yale University Economic 
Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 1031.
30  Feed the Future case study:  Musoni Kenya and Kilimo Booster.
31  CGAP (2018). “Using Satellite Data to Scale Smallholder Agricultural Insurance.”
32  Feed the Future case study:  Musoni Kenya and Kilimo Booster.
33  Feed the Future case study:  One Acre Fund’s integration of digital tools in Kenya.or rural household and a financial institution. Even for 
a product that is notionally digital, it is likely that an 
agent or officer (who may or may not be an employee 
of the FSP) will be responsible for some or all of the 
FSP’s interactions with the farmer, including marketing 
or raising awareness, filling out applications, verifying 
identity, handling deposits and withdrawals, helping 
customers understand how to use products, and 
ongoing account servicing and problem solving. The 
agent may also serve the role of extension officer, 
providing agricultural advice and market information. 
The human touch point is particularly important where 
general trust in the financial sector is low.31
DFS interventions need to make field force more 
productive. Musoni32 is a good example of this. By 
digitizing the customer enrollment and cashflow 
analysis process, their loan officers now only need to 
ask what crop the farmer is growing and on how much 
land, and the cash flow model automatically calculates 
the expected yield and market price for that crop, 
based on localized data. One Acre Fund33 found that 
by providing their field officers with a package including 
a Samsung tablet pre-loaded with a survey and basic 
data, a solar charging station, and some training, the 
field officers enrolled an average of eight percent more 
clients. The approach of Digital Green, a provider of 
digitized extension services, has been to build their 
services on top of existing people-based extension 
systems, with the goal of amplifying the field staff’s 
effectiveness.15Importance of change management
If the job of field officers is likely to be significantly 
changed by the advent of digital financial services, then 
due consideration needs to be given to the change 
management around this. In Kenya,34 the Connected 
Farmer Alliance (CFA) implemented an ambitious 
program to digitize the flow of money and information 
along the nut value chain but found the field staff 
resistant to change and lacking motivation, due to 
poor communication and lack of attention to change 
management. In their attempt to digitize agricultural 
payments in Uganda,35 CGAP found that over-
estimates of incentives and lack of attention to change 
management resulted in staff preferring to disburse 
payments in cash rather than digital.
Change management in DFS interventions can easily 
overlooked amid the excitement of an innovative new 
product. However, many projects have failed due to 
lack of attention to the details of how change happens. 
The Alternative Delivery Channels and Technology 
Handbook36 produced by the IFC (International 
Finance Corporation) provides a good summary of the 
five critical components of change management.
34  TechnoServe (2016). “Connected Farmer Alliance: Assessing the impact of a commercial mobile agriculture (mAgri) solution.”
35  Amani M’Bale, Rashmi Pillai, and Nathan Were (2018). “Digitizing Agricultural Payments” CGAP Working Paper.
36  IFC Handbook available at https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25980.Digitization goes beyond customer interface
The institutional processes behind providing financial 
services to a rural customer can take a long time 
to implement. Digitization is most commonly talked 
about in the context of product delivery (e.g., the 
mobile phone facilitating money transfers), but it is 
also relevant for aspects such as marketing, customer 
origination, product design, data management and 
collection/payout. T o realize the full benefits of 
digitization, it is important to eliminate any remaining 
analog processes that may cause bottlenecks. 
A common anecdotal learning from DFS 
implementations in agriculture is that the end-to-end 
flow of data needs to be digitized. A sophisticated 
analytics platform is redundant if data collection 
during loan origination still requires a paper, pen and 
clipboard. Lack of digitized data flows often limits 
innovative new data-driven models. Figure 1. Five critical components of change management
1 2 3 4 5
Involve 
department heads 
from the beginning 
to enhance buy in 
and avoid internal 
resistanceOutline viability 
through a robust 
financial model 
and sound 
business planUpdate policies 
and procedures 
expeditiously to 
reflect the changeOrganize staff 
training and clearly 
define roles to 
avoid confusion 
and unnecessary 
duplication of 
effortsProvide staff 
incentives for 
adoption and 
sustained usage
Source: IFC Alternative Delivery Channels and Technology Handbook163.4 INNOVATION AND GROWTH 
FACTORS
DFS interventions in agriculture need time to 
scale
The expectation of most technology-driven innovations 
is that they hope to follow a sharp growth trajectory. 
This is hard to achieve in the context of poor, rural 
economies. Technologies tend to scale quickly among 
connected populations facing similar problems, while 
agricultural populations are generally characterized by 
low connectivity and heterogeneous needs. 
Even when DFS innovations for agriculture show early 
promise, those that reach scale tend to do so relatively 
slowly. MyAgro started operations in 2011 with a trial 
with 240 farmers. It has taken five years, and over $6 
million37 to reach 30,000 farmers. Over 80 percent of 
this money has been philanthropic (the remainder being 
earned revenues). While there are plans to reduce the 
37  Data extracted from MyAgro website and annual/quarterly reports.dependence on grant money, the importance of subsidy 
in building a successful business model is evident. The 
economics of smallholder finance do not initially make 
commercial sense, so intelligent use of subsidy will 
continue to be an important criterion for success.
Philanthropic money provides space for 
experimentation, iteration, failure, and learning. This is 
particularly true in the insurance sector, where there is 
scant evidence that smallholder farmers are willing to 
pay actuarially fair prices for insurance policies. There is 
justification here for donor subsidy to build the market 
and prime demand. But almost ten years since the first 
promising results from Kilimo Salama and Index Based 
Livestock Insurance (IBLI) in Kenya, we are still waiting 
for the first commercially-viable index insurance product 
for smallholder farmers.17Current state of connectivity
Digital connectivity is a critical component of any 
successful implementation of DFS in agriculture. 
Financially excluded farmers tend to live in rural areas 
where mobile network and data connectivity tend to be 
unreliable or non-existent.
Of the GFSS target countries, only in Kenya have more 
than half of the rural population used a mobile phone 
or the internet to access a financial account.38 In most 
countries, more than 90 percent of the rural population 
have never used a digital medium to access a financial 
account. 
This is an indication of the challenges around rural 
connectivity that can hinder the growth of DFS in 
agriculture. For a digital currency to be more useful than 
38  Global Findex data.cash, rural customers need to have faith in the utility of 
the service whenever they need it. The value of a digital 
account decreases if there is no network signal when 
they want to make a transaction. 
There is evidence that the situation around rural 
connectivity is improving. In the three years between 
the 2014 and 2017 Global Findex panels, the 
proportion of the rural population who made or 
received digital payments in the past year increased in all 
GFSS target countries bar Nigeria. The data suggest that 
on average across the twelve countries, an additional 
four percent of the rural population was being brought 
into the mobile payments ecosystem every year . The 
growth was particularly pronounced in West Africa 
(apart from Nigeria) and Bangladesh.SECTION 4:  
THE ROLE OF CONNECTIVITY
EthiopiaGhana KenyaMaliNigerNigeria Senegal Uganda
BangladeshNepal
Guatemala Honduras80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0Percentage of adult rural population who have used a mobile 
phone or the internet to access a financial account
EthiopiaGhana KenyaMaliNigerNigeria Senegal Uganda
BangladeshNepal
Guatemala Honduras90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0Percentage of adult rural population who have made or 
received digital payments in the past year2014
2017Figure 2
Source: Global Findex 201718
The fact remains however, that in countries like Ethiopia, 
Niger and Nepal, more than 80 percent of the rural 
population are not using even basic digital payments. 
And when it comes to agricultural payments, the 
situation is even more stark. The penetration of DFS in 
agricultural value chains remains very low. Of the GFSS 
target countries, only in Kenya and Uganda have more 
than 10 percent of the population received payments 
for agricultural products through a mobile phone.39 The 
average of the remaining countries is two percent.
Looking forward
There is some optimism that growing smartphone 
penetration and increased rural connectivity in 
emerging markets will be the game changer for digital 
financial services and agriculture. The offerings provided 
by a smartphone and an internet connection can be 
orders of magnitude greater than a simple USSD-based 
offering on a feature phone. 
When M-PESA launched in Kenya in 2007, mobile 
39  Global Findex data
40  International Telecommunication Union, World Telecommunication/ICT Development Report and database.
41  GSMA 2018 retrieved from: https://www.gsmaintelligence.com/  
42  We Are Social “Digital in Southeast Asia in 2017” report, downloaded from https://wearesocial.com.phone penetration was at 30 percent, and by 2009, 
when the service really took off, there were already 
48 mobile connections for every 100 Kenyans.40 In 
contrast, we are not yet seeing a significant impact 
of smartphones on financial inclusion.  Smartphone 
penetration in Kenya is 38.8 percent and in Nigeria it is 
35 percent (with significant urban bias)41 and we have 
not yet reached the inflection point at which the next 
generation of smartphone-based DFS models are able 
to achieve rapid growth, let alone for farmers. 
Elsewhere, in the same way that many developing 
countries leapfrogged landline connectivity by going 
straight to mobile, countries like Burma seem to 
be leapfrogging feature phones to go directly to 
smartphones. Recent estimates suggest that 55 percent 
of Myanmar’s 50 million mobile connections have 
access to broadband,42 opening up possibilities for more 
sophisticated engagement between farmer and FSPs.
As smartphone penetration grows and access becomes 
less of a constraint, challenges around design and EthiopiaGhana KenyaMaliNigerNigeria Senegal Uganda
BangladeshNepal
Guatemala Honduras80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0Percentage of adult rural population who have used a mobile 
phone or the internet to access a financial account
EthiopiaGhana KenyaMaliNigerNigeria Senegal Uganda
BangladeshNepal
Guatemala Honduras90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0Percentage of adult rural population who have made or 
received digital payments in the past year2014
2017Figure 3
Source: Global Findex 2014 and 201719delivery will emerge. The user interface (UI) for rural 
farmers will differ from the interface for wealthier and 
urban customers. Providers will need to design and 
build for customers with a range of local languages 
and dialects, and varying levels of financial and general 
literacy, and for phones with limited connectivity and 
storage space. At the same time, continued usage of 
smartphones in rural areas will lead to the development 
of data streams and digital profiles that, when combined 
with data on local agronomic conditions, could help 
FSPs overcome some of the challenges around 
information asymmetries in financing farmers.
Brooke Patterson/USAID20The following recommendations are based on a 
thorough review of academic and programmatic 
documentation around what has worked to achieve 
impact for smallholder farmers in the implementation 
of DFS programs, as well as anecdotal evidence 
from experts in the field. It is not a comprehensive 
list of recommendations, but rather an indication of 
where USAID may look to increase the impact of 
programming in this space.
5.1 STRATEGIC RECOMMENDATIONS
DFS for agriculture will require long term, 
market building investments.
T o build models with greater impact over time, more 
investments will need to be made in the market 
infrastructure and enabling environment for DFS. As 
stated in the Principles for Digital Development , the 
sustainability of programs, platforms, and digital tools 
is essential to maintain user and stakeholder support, 
as well as to maximize long-term impact. Information 
asymmetries and transaction costs in agricultural finance 
are significant, and there are no quick fixes.
Subsidize risk and innovations. 
A key role of donor funding is to provide the risk capital 
for innovation. The capital provided by development 
money fills an important funding gap for testing new 
products or business models that can motivate service 
providers to help drive consumers’ adoption of digital 
43  https://www.usaid.gov/documents/15396/checklist-fostering-private-sector-investment-digital-finance.payments. There is a lot of innovation happening on 
the supply side and even if only a small percentage 
of projects get past proof of concept, they may 
substantially push out the innovation frontier. USAID’s 
Development Innovation Ventures (DIV) provides an 
excellent platform to fund greater innovation in this 
space.
Form strategic partnerships for solving 
complex problems. 
High quality relationships with aligned incentives are a 
critical success factor for successful implementation of 
DFS in agriculture. Evidence indicates that, to achieve 
impact in this difficult environment, stakeholders will 
need to work together. In selecting partners, USAID’s 
Fintech Partnerships Checklist43 provides a valuable 
framework for forging effective partnerships. 
5.2 PROCESS-RELATED 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Segmentation and customer-focused design 
are critical.
The global smallholder population is so diverse that 
there will be no one-size-fits-all solutions. Building on 
the CGAP segmentation framework to identify the 
key attributes of target populations and then designing 
specifically for their needs is a good way to start. The 
role of the donor in this case should be to support the 
early stages of R&D, customer profiling, and initial design. SECTION 5:  
RECOMMENDATIONS21Digitization of the customer interface is only 
part of the solution. 
T o understand why poor farmers do not use digital 
services when they are available (and even subsidized), 
we need to understand whether the constraints are 
on the demand side (e.g., customers are too poor or 
lack the financial literacy to use the services) or the 
supply side (e.g., products are poorly designed for the 
needs of farmers and rural households). In most cases, 
there are likely factors on both sides of the market.44 
Digitization can reduce transaction costs, but to reach 
its full potential, it needs to solve many more issues in 
the customer journey. This includes reducing information 
asymmetries and enabling FSPs to develop profiles of 
smallholders’ needs, incentives, and ability or willingness 
to pay for financial services.
5.3 PRODUCT-RELATED 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Pay more attention to savings. 
The evidence around commitment savings (particularly 
from Malawi and Tanzania) suggests that farmers will 
44  Pascaline Dupas, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal (2018) “Banking the Unbanked? Evidence from Three Countries.” save some of their illiquid income if they are provided 
with access to well-designed savings products. Savings 
can also act as an effective on-ramp to broader financial 
services as they provide a relatively simple way for 
farmers to regularly engage with and trust a financial 
institution, and they provide the financial institution with 
some data on a farmer’s cashflows and ability to make 
regular deposits.
Make savings and insurance relevant to 
farmers’ goals. 
Farmers value saving money. However, savings 
accounts often become de facto “insurance.” When an 
emergency occurs, such as a death in the family or a 
medical condition, farmers make huge financial sacrifices. 
They withdraw from—or liquidate—their savings to 
cover these significant expenses. This is particularly true 
for poorer farmers with weaker connections to value 
chains. Tying savings usage directly to farmers’ aspirations 
(e.g., buying inputs or paying for children’s education) 
may provide more compelling reasons for farmers to 
engage with and adopt DFS.
ADVANCE II22
BIBILIOGRAPHY
Adjognon SG, Liverpool-Tasie LSO, Reardon TA. 
“Agricultural input credit in Sub-Saharan Africa: 
Telling myth from facts.” Food Policy. 2017;67:93-
105.
Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak and Mark Rosenzweig 
(2014), Risk, Insurance and Wages in General 
Equilibrium.
Amani M’Bale, Rashmi Pillai, and Nathan Were 
(2018). “Digitizing Agricultural Payments Lessons 
from Uganda’s Coffee Value Chain.”
Anagol, Santosh and Etang, Alvin and Karlan, Dean 
S. (2014). “Continued Existence of Cows Disproves 
Central Tenets of Capitalism?” Yale University 
Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 
1031.
Anagol, Santosh and Etang, Alvin and Karlan, Dean 
S., Continued Existence of Cows Disproves Central 
Tenets of Capitalism? (January 2014). Yale University 
Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 
1031; Yale Economics Department Working Paper 
No. 122. 
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., & Hornbeck, R. (2014). 
Bundling Health Insurance and Microfinance in India: 
There Cannot be Adverse Selection if There is No 
Demand. The American Economic Review, 104(5), 
291–297. http://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.5.291
Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and 
Christopher Udry (2015). “Self-Selection into Credit 
Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali.”
Lori Beaman, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, 
and Christopher Udry, 2014. “Self-Selection into 
Credit Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali - Working Paper 377,” Working Papers 377, Center 
for Global Development.
Carter, M.R., R. Laajaj and D. Yang (2016). “Savings, 
Subsidies, and Technology Adoption: Field 
Experimental Evidence from Mozambique.”
Emilio Hernandez, Rose Goslinga & Victor Wang 
(2018). “Using Satellite Data to Scale Smallholder 
Agricultural Insurance.” CGAP .
Cole, Shawn, Xavier Giné, Jeremy T obacman, Petia 
T opalova, Robert T ownsend, and James Vickery. 2013. 
“Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence 
from India.” American Economic Journal: Applied 
Economics, 5 (1): 104-35.
Dean Karlan & Robert Osei & Isaac Osei-Akoto 
& Christopher Udry, 2014. “ Agricultural Decisions 
after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints, ” The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University 
Press, vol. 129(2), pages 597-652.
Kremer, Michael, Esther Duflo, and Jon Robinson. 
2011. “ Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory 
and Experimental Evidence from Kenya .” American 
Economic Review 101 (6 (October 2011): 2350-90.
Günther Fink & B. Kelsey Jack & Felix Masiye, 
2018. “ Seasonal Liquidity, Rural Labor Markets and 
Agricultural Production ,” NBER Working Papers  
24564, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 
Hull, E., & James, D. (2012) “Introduction: Popular 
Economies in South Africa”  Africa, 82(1), 1-19.
Institute for Smallholder Finance (2016). “Financial 
Inclusion Fit to Size: Customizing Digital Credit for 
Smallholder Farmers in Tanzania.”23International Finance Corporation (IFC) Alternative 
Delivery Channels and Technology Handbook.
Christen, Robert Peck, and Jamie Anderson. 2013. 
“Segmentation of Smallholder Households: Meeting 
the Range of Financial Needs in Agricultural 
Families.” Focus Note 85. Washington, D.C.: CGAP , 
April.
Jenny C. Aker, Rachid Boumnijel, Amanda McClelland 
and Niall Tierney (2014). “Payment Mechanisms 
and Anti-Poverty Programs: Evidence from a 
Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment in Niger” 
Economic Development and Cultural Change 65, 
no. 1 (October 2016): 1-37.
J-PAL, CEGA, and ATAI Policy Bulletin. 2016. “Make 
it Rain.” Cambridge, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty 
Action Lab, Center for Effective Global Action, and 
Agricultural Technology Adoption Initiative.
Kikulwe EM, Fischer E, Qaim M (2014) “Mobile 
Money, Smallholder Farmers, and Household 
Welfare in Kenya”. PLoS ONE 9(10): e109804.
Lasse Brune, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and 
Dean Yang, “Facilitating Savings for Agriculture: Field 
Experimental Evidence from Malawi,” Economic 
Development and Cultural Change 64, no. 2 
(January 2016): 187-220. 
Casaburi, Lorenzo, and Jack Willis. “Time vs. State 
in Insurance: Experimental Evidence from Contract 
Farming in Kenya.” American Economic Review 
(Forthcoming).
Marr, Ana, Winkel, Anne, van Asseldonk, Marcel, 
Lensink, Robert and Bulte, Erwin (2016) “Adoption 
and impact of index-insurane and credit for 
smallholder farmers in developing countries: A systematic review.” Agricultural Finance Review, 76 
(1). pp. 94-118. ISSN 0002-1466
Matsumoto, T., Yamano, T., & Sserunkuuma, D. (2013). 
“Technology adoption in agriculture: evidence from 
experimental intervention in maize production in 
Uganda”
Nathan Associates (2015) “The intersection of 
agricultural and financial markets.”
Suri, Tavneet & Jack, William. (2016). The long-run 
poverty and gender impacts of mobile money. 
Science. 354. 1288-1292.
Suri T, Jack W, Stoker TM (2012) “Documenting the 
birth of a financial economy.”
TechnoServe (2016) “Connected Farmer Alliance: 
Assessing the impact of a commercial mobile 
agriculture (mAgri) solution.”
T omoko Harigaya (2016). “Effects of Digitization on 
Financial Behaviors: Experimental Evidence from the 
Philippines.”
Feed the Future “Global Food Security Strategy 
Technical Guidance Finance: Unlocking Capital 
Flows”
Global Food Security Strategy Supplemental 
Technical Guide T owards Digitally Enabled Global 
Agriculture and Food Systems.
Feed the Future case study: Musoni Kenya and 
Kilimo Booster.
Feed the Future: One Acre Fund’s integration of 
digital tools in Kenya.
We Are Social “Digital in Southeast Asia in 2017.”