‘Upliftment ’, friends and finance:
everyday exchange repertoires
and mobile money transfer
in Kenya *
SUSAN JOHNSON
Centre for Development Studies, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath BA AY, UK
Email: s.z.johnson@bath.ac.uk
and
FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
African Studies Centre, Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands
ABSTRACT
The rapid and massive adoption of mobile money transfer (MMT) services in
East Africa, particularly in Kenya, stands in stark contrast to historically lowuse of formal ﬁnancial systems on the continent. Its ‘fertile grounds ’therefore
require in-depth analysis to understand the implications for African ﬁnancial
systems. This paper argues for the need to examine the underlying conceptualenvironment that enables low income and poor people ’s MMT adoption. It
innovatively combines anthropological with ethnolinguistic analytical approachesto distinguish two repertoires around resource exchange. First, is a relationalﬁnancial repertoire where relationships are developed and consolidated to
create support and ‘upliftment ’. A contrasting resource-focused repertoire is
more like that of the formal ﬁnancial sector. Identifying the conceptual features
of relationality, the study offers a new perspective on the adoption and use of
* The authors are grateful to the Financial Sector Deepening Trust, Kenya for funding this
research. We are particularly indebted to those people and organisations who willingly contrib-
uted their experience and insights. We also thankfully acknowledge comments on previousdrafts from James Copestake, Jason Hart, Amrik Heyer and Sibel Kusimba.J. of Modern African Studies ,,( ), pp. – © Cambridge University Press 
doi:. /S X
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsMMT in Africa and highlights the potential for disjunctures with policy efforts to
increase ﬁnancial inclusion.
Mobile money transfer (MMT)services were introduced in Kenya in
 , and by   % of Kenyan adults had registered (FSD Kenya
& Central Bank of Kenya  ). Its origins lie in airtime being used to
transfer value (Maurer  ), and an aid-subsidised initiative by
Vodafone to use mobile phones to expand ﬁnancial services which ini-
tially focused on loan repayments to a micro ﬁnance agency (Hughes
& Lonie  ). Observing its use for a wide range of purposes and espe-
cially for sending remittances, Vodafone employed the marketing hook
of‘Send Money Home ’. An initial surge of adoption arose from the
speciﬁc circumstances of Kenya ’s post-election violence –which created
need to move money due to blockages and displacement –and a belief
that MMT was less susceptible to political manipulation (Morawczynski ; Heyer & Mas  ). The service was soon provided in other
parts of East Africa where adoption rates are now among the highest:
% in Uganda, % in Tanzania (World Bank  ). Global Findex
Data
shows that of the countries globally with a % or higher
adoption rate are in Africa and mobile money adoption across sub-
Saharan Africa is now some % of the adult population (Demirgüç-
Kunt et al.  ).
Explanations for this rapid adoption have focused on the low levels of
formal account ownership; the substantial lowering of transaction costs;
and increased ease, convenience and reliability which the service offers(Morawczynski  ; Heyer & Mas  ), including for women for
whom the gender gap in adoption is only .%–lower than for
formal services.
The economic potential of mobile money has been
identi ﬁed as its ability to offer a basic bank account for keeping funds;
the potential to share risk among social networks as well as the
beneﬁts of privacy as others are less likely to know when remittances
have been received (Aker & Mbiti  ).
MMT has transformed the ease and ef ﬁciency of informal interper-
sonal ﬁnancial transactions to such an extent that its use extends far
beyond the ‘send money home ’entry point to now incorporate the
vast, varied and complex array of gifts and ‘assistance ’for weddings,
births and deaths, transfers for school fees, medical expenses, invest-
ments, businesses, loans and much more (Johnson  ). The main evi-
dence of impact is from Kenya, where MMT has been shown to increase
the number and frequency of remittances received and the distance SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsover which these travel (Jack et al. ). Analysis of impact suggests that
those with access are able to deal with livelihood risks more effectivelyand to smooth their consumption through receipt of such transfers
(Morawczynski  ; Jack & Suri  ). Increases in household
incomes arising from greater frequency and value of remittances havealso been found in Uganda (Munyegera & Matsumoto  ). For small-
holder farmers in Kenya the alleviation of risk and liquidity constraints
has led to increased application of farm inputs, increases in marketedproduce and greater pro ﬁtability (Kikulwe et al.  ). Evidence sug-
gests that MMT has raised % of households out of poverty over a
period of six years through job diversi ﬁcation and improved incomes
(Suri & Jack  ). Moreover, this result was skewed towards female-
headed households –who were switching jobs into business or retail –
and to the bottom half of the income distribution. On the other hand,
male-headed households experienced negative consumption growth.As a result, the policy to give poor and low income individuals access
toﬁnancial services as a means to enhance growth and reduce poverty
now sees digital services as the basis for this ﬁnancial inclusion (World
Bank  ; GPFI  ).
Where MMT has ‘failed to ignite ’, for example in Nigeria and South
Africa,
supply side regulatory barriers have been implicated (Evans &
Pirchio  :) with two factors identi ﬁed as critical for success:
ﬁrst, the Central Bank takes a light touch regulatory approach so that
mobile operators are not faced with requirements such as the need
for banking licences; second, the system is led by mobile network opera-tors rather than banks who have very different modes of engaging with
customers (Evans & Pirchio  ).
However, beyond these in ﬂuences, the development of services is a
result of a number of contextual social and economic factors –in par-
ticular the nature of the social and technological infrastructures that
underpin peer-to-peer exchanges which are its central use case (Rea &Nelms  ). Ethnographic studies have identi ﬁed key factors that
combine differently between countries, such as population mobility,
the social context of inclusion and belonging, and the levels of trust –
arising from the social and historical institutional contexts of the stateand its citizens with respect to banking, money and ﬁnance. These along-
side the technological and regulatory aspects of MMT help explain
varied adoption patterns between Cameroon, DRC, Senegal andZambia (de Bruijn & Butter  ), Somaliland (Iazzolino  ) and
more widely (Rea & Nelms  ). Indeed, with respect to the deep his-
torical context of money and ﬁnance, Guyer (  :) has explained ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termshistorically low levels of institutionalisation and use of formal services in
West Africa as arising from colonial engagement with monetary systemswhich were ‘built up deliberately to be other ’with their governance
lacking the ‘systematic and invariant ’features of those in Europe, result-
ing in their instability and the ongoing reliance on informality and amultiplicity of practices. Shipton ’s( ) anthropological account
from Western Kenya of ‘misunderstandings ’between local Luo cultures
of credit and those promoted by foreign donors similarly points to dis-junctures which, he argues, arise from the differing expectations and
meanings that they involve. Paradoxically, in view of the unprecedented
situation that a formal ﬁnancial service, MMT, seems to be overcoming
such socio-cultural disjunctures in Kenya, it is necessary to explore theculture component in the culture- ﬁnance-technology dynamics in
much greater depth in a bid to chart inclusive ﬁnancial systems in
Africa. This paper therefore investigates MMT ’s more profound layers
of cultural resonance.
The socio-cultural dynamics of mobile money adoption
Kusimba ’s anthropological analysis of MMT in family and social net-
works among the Bukusu of Western Kenya shows MMT ’s embedded-
ness within circuits of value among siblings, cousins and mothers, and
its use for a wide range of purposes and for the expression of affective
ties. This leads her to argue that MMT is an ‘ampli ﬁer of enduring prac-
tices around reciprocity, obligation, belonging and exclusion ’(Kusimba
et al. , :; ). Both of her studies strongly resonate with
Shipton ’s focus on cultural norms and values as key to understanding
Luo practices of interpersonal resource exchange, demonstrating that
a culturally de ﬁned relationality of ﬁnance is its critical feature
(Shipton  ).
Maurer, on the other hand, presents the emerging mobile money pay-
ments space as not just the product of these ‘on the ground ’practices
but of ‘new socialities (that) are remaking money ’(Maurer  :).
Using actor-network theory, Maurer draws on his engagement with themobile money industry, to consider how mobile money is being
created and formatted by a range of actors and the networked relations
between them. He explains how airtime is at one moment a commodity,at another a technologically mediated relationship as talk or text, and at
another an alternative currency means of exchange or store of value
such that ‘it can continuously pass into and out of each of these SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsmoments –it is unstable and reversible ’(Maurer  :). He argues
that the ‘payments space ’is being actively con ﬁgured by technological
and human actors in a way that is neither a solely ‘top down affair (eman-
ating from corporate and donor agencies) or a bottom up affair (eman-
ating from people ’s practices ‘on the ground ’)’but rather that this
distinction –along with analytical separations of producer and con-
sumer, and person and commodity –are confounded and ‘relationality
itself plays a signi ﬁcant role in the creation of this new social space ’
(Maurer  :). Maurer ’s analysis suggests a mode of relationality
that overcomes the disjunctures identi ﬁed by Guyer and which has the
potential to usher African monetary and ﬁnancial systems into a new
phase of development, while apparently thriving on a fundamentallevel of open-endedness and indeterminacy of their operation.
This concern with relationality appears to be central to a deeper
understanding of the socio-cultural dynamics of MMT adoption whichhave been identi ﬁed as affecting variation in adoption rates across the
continent. It offers a route to exploring the ways in which this latest
wave of technological change may be provoking forms of market engage-ment which challenge the disjunctures of previous ﬁnancial sector devel-
opment and, in turn, fuel the aspirations and efforts of global
policymakers for ﬁnancial inclusion.
Exploring relationality through repertoires and cultural values
This paper takes as its starting point the ﬁnancial practices of everyday
resource exchange which MMT appears to amplify, and investigates
their less conscious –conceptual –‘fertile ground ’(Heyer & Mas  )
as providing the enabling environment for MMT adoption. In doing so,
it highlights the role of more enduring elements of ﬁnancial practices,
such as cultural values. This contrasts with Maurer ’ss t a r t i n gp o i n to f
the mobile money sector itself and Kusimba ’s focus on the social net-
works involved, instead building on the contributions of Guyer and
Shipton by examining the implicit socio-cultural concepts that peoplerelate to when they engage in everyday practices of resource exchange.
We use the concept of repertoires developed by Guyer (  ) which
captures the way that patterns of transactional behaviour are embedded
in various social domains and ﬂexibly combined into transaction resolu-
tions. However, while she suggests these repertoires can belong to less
conscious levels of cognition so enabling a sense of normality and con-
tinuity to be maintained in the face of new circumstances, she says ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termslittle about how these can be explored. We therefore complement the
concept of repertoires with the concept of cultural values , which are char-
acteristically enduring and normative (and therefore normal) among
members of the same ethnic group. Drawn from applied ethnolinguis-
tics, the concept enables the exploration of central cultural valuesthrough analysis of everyday language use. Combining these disciplinary
approaches offers a sound theoretical perspective on both continuity
and change in interpersonal ﬁnancial practices.
Speci ﬁcally, we
explore predominant domains of resource exchange in three ethnic
groups through a narrative analysis, and additionally for one through
the lens of everyday language use. Together this reveals what meaningsand values people consciously and unconsciously attribute to resourceexchanges and how relationality is de ﬁned through them.
We argue that there are two divergent repertoires: one is relationship-
focused; the other resource-focused. The identi ﬁcation of the resource-
focused repertoire provides a counterfoil to the relationship-focused rep-
ertoire, enabling us to more fully grasp the set of valuations that people
implicitly make when prioritising the relational repertoire. Indeed,weﬁnd that even the resource-focused transactions of the formal
sector are understood within this relational repertoire when they suf ﬁ-
ciently conform to its characteristics. We conclude that discontinuitiesbetween local and institutionally mediated forms of ﬁnance continue
to be present. This also indicates potential boundaries to adoption of
MMT across socio-cultural contexts. It suggests that where ﬁnancial
repertoires have stronger relational dynamics, they are likely to offermore ‘fertile grounds ’(Heyer & Mas  ) for adoption, while also sug-
gesting that attempts to con ﬁgure the ﬁnancial services space that are not
strongly resonant with these repertoires and which seek to more speci ﬁ-
cally delineate the transactions involved are likely to continue to face
more limited uptake. We recognise, however, that this approach opens
up further dimensions of MMT adoption that may be exploredthrough this socio-cognitive lens, such as the identity associated with
the mobile network operator (Safaricom) through both its institutional
history, branding and marketing; the acceptance of mobile phone tech-nology as communicative devices and of ‘virtual ’money conversions.
THEORISING AND RESEARCHING EVERYDAY REPERTOIRES
Focusing on everyday language use as a window on informal interper-
sonal resource exchange takes us into inter-disciplinary ground. SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsShipton ’s( ) formidable anthropological study of Luo (Kenya)
practices of resource exchange excellently demonstrates that culturalnorms and values are key to understanding Luo practices of interper-
sonal resource exchange. However, his study is not geared to explaining
the socio-cognitive
conditions enabling the widespread adoption of
new modes of ﬁnancial interaction among low-income people and
their innovative use of them. To be able to do so, this analysis takes
recourse to the two concepts introduced above: repertoire and cultural
values (Guyer  ; Peeters  ). Together they enable us to highlight
socio-cultural cognition as an open-ended, ﬂexible set of propositions
that is relatively stable over time. Moreover, they enable us to draw anew form of interpersonal ﬁnancial exchange such as MMT into the
same analytical ambit as the informal interpersonal resource exchange
forms under study here.
First, we draw on Guyer ’s anthropological analysis of monetary and
other resource transactions within Africa, in which she describes the
analytical problem as ‘profound, because key dynamics originate at
the interface ’where transactions take place and conventional, systemic
approaches fail to grasp these realities (Guyer  :). Her study of
transactions in western Africa proposes a forceful anthropological alter-
native, which aims to capture the multiplicity of, and changes in, Africantransactional realities. Ethnographic ﬁeldwork and (historical) accounts
of transaction practices are used to grasp the dynamic landscape of
transactional forms with repertoire as a central theoretical concept.
Guyer argues that ‘[r]epertoires consist of partially inconsistent
ﬁnancial transaction forms that are ideologically maintained but differ-
entially highlighted in practice ’(Guyer  :). Paraphrasing this,
repertoire can be perceived as an on-going archive of formats of behaviour
with components drawn from various social domains that are more or
less explicitly attributed validity, and which over time, combine into
multiple viable forms of transaction resolutions. Thus, changes in therepertoire can be, for instance, manifestations of foregrounding and
backgrounding of possible transaction forms, but they can equally
be re-combinations of behavioural formats or ‘opportunistic ’(i.e.
induced by the momentary socio-economic constellation) linking ofhitherto unlinked behavioural components into a new format.
Despite the enormous potential for change (and adaptation), a
changed repertoire does not normally induce a sense of alienationamong those familiar with the earlier repertoire. To the contrary,
Guyer argues, the changed repertoire ‘fall[s] within a certain normality ’
(Guyer: ). One important explanation lies in the phrase ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms‘ideologically maintained ’in Guyer ’sd eﬁnition of repertoire . It suggests
that cultural ideological elements remain part and parcel of thechanged repertoire and continue to lend it persuasiveness and a sense
of normality (i.e. according to widely accepted norms of behaviour in
the speci ﬁc community). Suggesting that they belong with the less con-
scious levels of cognition of ﬁnancial repertoires, Guyer does not elabor-
ate how they can be explored. In this area the second theoretical pillar –
the concept of cultural value drawn from applied ethnolinguistics –
therefore makes an important contribution.
Cultural values in the context of applied ethnolinguistics speci ﬁcally
highlight language use as a window on the less conscious levels ofsocio-cultural cognition as ‘…values that underpin the beliefs, convic-
tions, attitudes, and communicative habits generally associated with …
[a] languaculture ’(Peeters  :). In other words, cultural values
are widespread in a speci ﬁc community and operate from a deeper
level of cognition, which is less susceptible to change. Functioning as
cultural models or ideals, they lend persuasiveness to ideas and prac-
tices in a community that implicitly refers to them. However, cultural
values are not static: ‘Values have some stability about them, but they
may change in relative importance depending on changing circum-
stances. They are not cold cognitions but are linked to the affectivesystem. People feel happy when their important values are ful ﬁlled;
angry when these values are frustrated ’(Feather  in Peeters
 :).
Feather ’s description of cultural values ties in with Guyer ’s description
ofrepertoires when he argues the changing relevance of cultural values
over time and place. Implicit in the argument, however, is the relative
stability of cultural values, which can account for the sense of ‘normality ’
despite changes in the repertoire. Moreover, attributing to cultural values
a non-rational affective component that contributes to their enduring
meaningfulness, Feather positions cultural values in the more profound
layers of cognition.
Hence the major contributions of the concepts of repertoire and cultural
values to the analysis are fourfold. They offer a sound theoretical per-
spective on both continuity and change in interpersonal ﬁnancial prac-
tices. They leave room for a multiplicity of institutionalised ﬁnancial
forms while highlighting the contribution of conceptual and behav-
ioural elements from different social domains to a repertoire ’s resili-
ence. They enable different levels of cognition in the repertoire to be
distinguished and they recognise that cultural values or ideologies underpin
the continuity of ﬁnancial repertoires. SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsResearch methodology and data analysis
The analysis is based on two distinct data sets collected in  . The ﬁrst
study used in-depth interviews to investigate the nature, purpose and
relationships within which interpersonal resource transactions –
whether via MMT or not –are carried out, along with the valuations
attributed to these transactions. This opens a potentially vast terrain of
transactions extending from dependence on family members for daily
survival to occasional interactions with strangers; and from those thatare more clearly symbolic to more commercial and instrumental ones.
The focus was on how resource exchange –not just ﬁnancial exchange –
was important and meaningful in the context of a variety of relation-
ships, while capturing a variety of types of giving/lending
and receiv-
ing/borrowing. Interviews in Swahili asked respondents about the
support that they had found ‘signiﬁcant or important ’to them in the
last year, although some responded with older examples. The term usai-
diziwas used, which means ‘help ’or‘support ’and refers to assistance
received from others in the broadest sense. This was then probed forthe relationships involved and the history of interaction and supportexchanged with that person. In this context, signi ﬁcant and important
did not necessarily mean the scale of support, but could also refer to
that which was most meaningful.
Research sites were three towns and their environs, representing
ethnic diversity and terciles of Kenya ’s district poverty rankings (Kenya
National Bureau of Statistics  ). Mathira (top tercile) on the
slopes of Mt Kenya, is ethnically Kikuyu; Nyamira (second tercile) is eth-
nically Gusii; and Kitui (bottom tercile) is ethnically Kamba. Town-based
livelihoods involved business as well as employment, while rural on-farmlivelihoods, including tea and coffee production in Mathira andNyamira, were supported by a range of off-farm income generation activ-
ities as well as temporary and more permanent migration. A total of 
interviews were undertaken with individuals in households purpose-
fully chosen from respondents to a random survey two years earlier and
reﬂecting a variety of household poverty levels and ﬁnancial service use.
The earlier study (Johnson  ) highlighted the extensive role of inter-
personal resource exchange and, along with related research (Zollmann
 ), describes the context and provides in-depth analysis of the variety
ofﬁnancial practices and service use, including banks and informal
groups. The interviews were recorded, transcribed, then coded and ana-
lysed using an inductive and interpretive approach. This was combined
with analysis to highlight the narrative elements that individual ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsrespondents bring in to describe their experiences and hence a layer of
signiﬁcation which includes the non-rational –e.g. the normative, affect-
ive and less conscious valuations.
The second study focuses speci ﬁcally on language and ethnographic
data. It explores the meanings of words and phrases as well as non-verbal signs in the everyday domain of informal interpersonal resource
exchanges among the Kamba of Kitui, to draw out cultural values
underpinning these practices (Wierzbicka  ; Astbury & Leeuw
 ;P e e t e r s  ). Due to the study being time consuming, it was
necessary to restrict it to one geographic area but with people in all
three sites speaking a Bantu language, lexical similarities seem likely.Kitui area was chosen out of the three sites of the ﬁrst study for its
social characteristics: poverty, food insecurity and (rurally) minimal
access to services. These were expected to be conducive to a particularly
variegated network of informal interpersonal exchanges and lessaffected by terminologies introduced by the presence of formal
ﬁnancial institutions.
First, a list of Kamba words in the everyday domain of ‘borrowing ’/
‘lending ’and ‘saving ’
was produced using a Kamba dictionary
(Mu ̃tı ̃sya & Ndu ̃nda ) and complemented and adapted by infor-
mants. Sixty informants varying in age, gender and economic statuscontributed explanations of the words and indicated when, whereand how the word is used as well as the valuations attributed to
it (e.g. degree of importance, negative or positive associations; emo-
tional echoes). Three assistants translated English questions intoKamba and informants ’responses back into English. Since some
words appeared to be more relevant in the domains of ‘borrowing ’/
‘lending ’and ‘saving ’than others, a shortlist of the most salient
words and their meanings –plus a description of their use and attribu-
ted valuations –resulted. Ethnographic data involved interviews
eliciting informants ’personal histories in the Kamba domains of ‘bor-
rowing ’/‘lending ’and ‘saving ’, complemented by observations of
‘resource exchange ’, role-plays, informal discussions and observations
ofﬁnancial group meetings which were also transcribed and translated.
Back translation into Kamba was used to elicit relevant socio-culturalinformation that was lost in translation. Video recordings were made
of all ﬁeldwork activities, thus enabling an analysis of non-verbal in add-
ition to verbal communications. Finally, participation in the everydaylives of three different households enabled observation of local prac-
tices of ‘lending ’/‘borrowing ’and ‘saving ’and the values and norms
of behaviour embedded in them. SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsFINDINGS OF THE STUDY :DOMAINS OF INFORMAL
I N T E R P E R S O N A LR E S O U R C EE X C H A N G EA N DT H E I R
REPRESENTATIONS IN THE KAMBA VOCABULARY
Analysis revealed that ﬁnancial and resource support given for different
purposes frequently had distinct patterns of expectation regarding thenature of the transaction, and how some of these converged with par-
ticular sets of social relationships. Five domains of exchange can be dis-
tinguished across the three research contexts; each domain is re ﬂected
on with the Kamba vocabulary of resource exchange to highlight per-
taining values and norms.
Everyday resource exchange
Frequent exchanges among neighbours involved food, essential house-hold items and small amounts of money –most often between women
and including between in-laws as a result of patrilocal residence patterns.These everyday exchanges occurred in the more food secure areas as
well as in the particularly food insecure area of Kitui. Due to physical
proximity, this domain is one in which MMT is rarely used.
To express a request for this type of resource exchange –with the
implicit agreement that the borrowed item or its equivalent is returned –
a Kamba person from Kitui will say ‘Ngovethye ’(lend me) (from the verb
ku ̃kovethya (lend), which is derived from the verb ku ̃kova (borrow)).
These verbs generally refer to ‘borrowing ’/‘lending ’without interest in
relationships of neighbours, in-laws, (business) friends and shopkeepers.However, the lack of interest does not imply a non-committal arrange-ment. Either there is a tacit shared understanding based on earlier bor-
rowing experiences, or an explicitly expressed agreement. Although a
willingness to help starts, and may guide, the resource exchange inter-action on the part of the lender, the agreement –which puts the resource
at the centre of the interaction –deﬁnes the interaction as resource
focused. Socio-emotive valuations are not entailed in Kamba understand-ings of a ku ̃kova (borrow)/ ku ̃kovethya (lend) arrangement, although in
practice it may give rise to different emotions in lender and/or borrower.
Resource exchange with expression of need
The second exchange domain involves expression of need. For example,food was requested in the hungry season to feed young children, and
respondents reported that they gave some even where they only had a ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termskilo of maize themselves. Where hunger led to requests for money from
more distantly located relatives to be sent via MMT and with an offer torepay, there were instances where this repayment was strongly rejected.
However, such support from relatives was not taken for granted and
appreciation was frequently expressed when it was received, so con ﬁ-
rming the relationship.
Kamba vocabulary data shows that this type of exchange is perceived
to be a different conceptual category from that above. Here the relation-ship-focused verbs ku ̃voya (pray,ask for ) and ku ̃tetheesya (assist) are used.
The person generally introduces the request by saying: ‘Ni thina ’(I have
a problem) –used in the case of a not so intimate relationship –or
‘Nenge ’(imperative, give) –in the case of friends or relatives. Kamba
people indicated this as their most common resource exchange practice.
The verbs seem to indicate that there is no expectation of a return of
the item or its equivalent. The reality is that ku ̃voya and ku ̃tetheesya
(‘ask for and assist ’) create an ambiguous situation regarding the expect-
ation of return. In any case, it is never a ‘pure ’gift, rather it is part of a
wider system of exchanges, in which the ‘entrustment ’of resources pro-
duces an obligation on the part of the receiver.
With this indetermin-
acy, it seems likely that the accompanying repertoire includes values
that are more widely distributed in Kamba society. One such value is‘upliftment ’(mu ̃kı ̃lye). Indeed, uplifting and being uplifted materially
or immaterially –for instance in case of illness, shortage of money or
food, or emotional hardship –are an integral part of the understanding
of being human among the Kamba.
Both the noun mu ̃kı ̃lye(the uplift-
ing) and the verb ku ̃kı ̃lya(take across, lift up) seem to resonate with trad-
itional Christian and African images of support (cf. the biblical good
Samaritan; the African stronger person taking a weaker person on hisback). Indeed, informants explained the term mu ̃kı ̃liyeby lifting their
arms as if they were raising something in the air. They argued that the
one who is being lifted has the experience of lack of burden andhence of ‘lightness ’or‘happiness ’. Moreover, this value was found to
be related to other Kamba social values such as interdependence,
belonging and concerted action which add persuasiveness to ‘uplift-
ment ’. This comes out particularly clearly in the context of Kamba infor-
malﬁnancial groups discussed below.
With the indeterminacy of the ‘ask for and assist ’arrangement, adher-
ence to the above values enables two people to maintain their good (i.e.inspired by these values) relations. These will be strengthened or wea-
kened depending on the evolving interaction. While the situation
enables the expression of additional moral or affective qualities, such SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsas closeness, generosity and obligation, it may equally put the relation-
ship under strain if the norms of behaviour that go with these valuesare breached by one or the other ’s actions.
Resource exchange for education
A third domain is support for children ’s educational expenses which is
frequently received from siblings or cousins (of the parent).This
ranged from one-off gifts to ongoing support throughout the child ’s edu-
cation, especially where children have lost parents. The reasons given for
school fees and related assistance encompassed: need relative to parents ’
ability to afford it, the academic potential of the child, and the potentialfor the child to support the giver or others in the future. Notably when a
young person is earning and does not have the burden of school fees,
rather than saving for their own future, the norm is to support the edu-cation of the children of a sibling –frequently through MMT when the
older sibling has migrated. Considered from an economic perspective,
the potential returns are likely to be much greater than saving in abank account –especially if that child secures a good job and is then
able to reciprocate support or connections in future.
However, reciprocation was not necessarily expected to be to the same
person. Support of nephews, nieces or other children with school feeswas explained as ‘they will help us or somebody else ’in future
(Z. , Int.). This response again underlines the characteristic lack
of speci ﬁcity of the reciprocity involved. Whether the support will be reci-
procated depends on how the child succeeds in education and in devel-
oping their livelihood. Nevertheless, respondents who had helped
relatives with school fees in the past, reported that they were now ableto appeal to those they had helped for support for their own children ’s
education. A woman in Nyamira had supported her nephews who now
had good jobs in Nairobi –one a doctor. Needing support for her own
son both for school fees and transport, she received it from them via
MMT, arguing ‘now is the time to …get the bene ﬁt’(C. , Int.).
Indeed, such a reciprocal dimension of assisting was even used tojustify support given to parents by grown-up children, with them referringto the past educational support they had received.
Supporting a child with school fees would be quali ﬁed as an act of
ku ̃tetheesya (assist) in the Kamba language. While entrustment and obliga-
tion are implicit associations, the verb does not evoke a sense of reci-
procity. If a Kamba person wants to highlight this aspect of a future
beneﬁt, she uses the verb ku ̃suvia , which means ‘care for ’,‘keep safe ’ ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsand in a resource context expresses ‘saving ’. Apart from ‘keeping safe ’
being understood as an essential element of ‘saving ’, the verb ku ̃suvia typ-
ically includes a sense of future bene ﬁt. However, it has implicit reference
to value maintenance rather than value increase. One informant said that
she was very much aware that she had to ku ̃suvia her son. This meant that
she ensured she fed him well so that he would stay healthy and strong,
and that she raised school fees for him to complete his secondary educa-
tion. This would bene ﬁt her in the end, she argued, because he would be
able to get a job that would pay him enough to also care for her.
Resource exchange in case of emergency
In a fourth domain involving cases of emergency –particularly health –
patterns of support were less clear: there were cases where immediate
family did not respond to needs for medical expenses and a moredistant friend did, with an opportunity to respond referred to as an
opportunity to con ﬁrm the strength of a relationship. The rationale
for assisting can recognise an understanding of idiosyncratic shocks:‘you know problems are for everyone, today it ’s you, tomorrow it ’s
me’(R. , Int.). On the other hand, support was sometimes lent
rather than given, even among close family members. In such casesthe pressing circumstances can lead to a lack of clarity over the natureof the support as the terms on which it is given may not be explicitly dis-
cussed. But if it is agreed as borrowing, then the return date is recog-
nised as needing to respond to the circumstances of the borrower.
This type of situation Kitui Kamba would refer to as one of ku ̃voya/
ku ̃tetheesya (‘ask for and assist ’). In practice, they manifest themselves
asku ̃kova/ku ̃kovethya (‘borrow and lend ’) situations, which Kamba infor-
mants attributed to the growing lack of solidarity between well-off and
not so well-off relatives. Yet, even if the arrangement is understood in
terms of ‘ask for and assist ’, rural informants were hesitant to consider
these types of need as falling within the interpersonal domain. In
cases of prolonged illness and death where the ﬁnancial commitment
generally exceeds the household potential, they consider one or morecollectives –such as a community, clan or ﬁnancial group –as the
general response mechanisms in the form of organised fundraising
events ( harambee ), door-to-door collections and/or allocation of funds
by clan or ﬁnancial groups. The appropriate Kamba term in this
context would be ku ̃mbanya (put together; ‘save’), which generally
refers to members of a group putting (e.g. money, food, ideas) together
for a speci ﬁc purpose. SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsResource exchange as business capital
Theﬁnal domain is where business people –mostly men –appeared to
develop lending relationships with their siblings, cousins and friends
who were also in business. For some, these transactions are so frequentthat they do not even arrange when funds will be returned, trustingthat the person will pay when she or he gets paid, usually in the space
of days or weeks and using MMT when people are mobile. Even
though funds are usually given interest-free, it is more likely that ‘some-
thing on top ’will be given because of the value increase obtained from
the business purpose to which they are put. This extra was explained as
‘giving back thanks ’, meaning expressing appreciation (in the emotive
sense
). The ‘something on top ’may depend on the scale of the gain
and the gratitude of the borrower and is not necessarily small relative
to the amount lent. One woman returned a kanga and lesoworth
about twice the value of borrowed pigeon pea seedlings which had pro-
duced a very good harvest.
While the Kitui Kamba would qualify these interpersonal exchanges
for business as a ku ̃kova/ku ̃kovethya (borrow/lend) arrangement, entail-
ing a distinct expectation of return of the equivalent, they can refer
to‘something on top ’in two different ways. The two words are u ̃syao
(produce, interest) and vaita (proﬁt, interest); the ﬁrst word more
common in rural and informal contexts and the second in urban and
formal ones.
U ̃syaois embedded in general human experiences of production and
derived from the verb ku ̃syaa, of which the ﬁrst meaning is ‘to give birth ’
(Mu ̃tı ̃sya & Ndu ̃nda ). This ‘giving birth ’applies to an array of pro-
ducts, such as the children of a nuclear family, the chicks of a chicken,the fruits of a mango tree. The verb ku ̃syaa can equally be used in a
ﬁnancial context, referring to any increase of money on top of what is
there. This implies that u ̃syaodoes not need to refer to a ﬁxed interest
rate, but rather an addition of money on top of what has been borrowed.By contrast, the term vaita (Kiswahili faida (proﬁt)) highlights economic
value and is restricted to use in the ﬁnancial domain.
CONSOLIDATING FRIENDSHIP T HROUGH FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This section expands on the dominant mode of relationship-focused
exchanges with a narrative analysis of instances from the three research
sites which illustrate the relational dynamics at work: fundamentally the
exchange of ﬁnancial support served in every case to develop and ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsconsolidate relationships. Respondents did not distinguish exchanges
which used MMT from cash exchanges in the way they discussedthem, simply seeing it as a means to effect the exchange where distance
is involved.
Friends and siblings were the most frequently mentioned relationships
in which signi ﬁcant or important support had been given or received.
Cases of signi ﬁcant support were reported from immediate family such
as spouses, parents and children but the emphasis of reporting on sib-lings and friends suggested that it is particularly meaningful when it
comes from them, because it is less taken for granted. Sibling relation-
ships are often much more varied than those with parents or children,not least because siblings are frequently numerous and geographicallyscattered. Moreover, these relationships are particularly useful for diver-
sifying sources of support and giving access to a wider resource base; they
can also help to manage idiosyncratic risks and shocks.
The open-ended giving and receiving of resources with friends was
often explained as being something that was not reckoned, even
though it could involve quite signi ﬁcant amounts relative to income.
For example, a young man in Mathira had received Kshs , (US$
) from a friend –which was not to be refunded –to complete the
amount he needed to buy a motorbike. He later paid fees ofKshs, plus transport and other costs for the friend to attend
college (over MMT if necessary), stating that:
Now when he came to a point of need I also did it. Not looking whether
he will give it back or not …no I don ’t even think of it. [Laughing] I
have remembered it because you have asked me! …he has eaten a lot of
my money, I have also eaten a lot of his money. That is just giving eachother . …We help each other. (N.  , Int.)
While there was evidence of an expectation that support will be given
and received from siblings –for both men and women this mainly
meant brothers –again it was not taken for granted:
He came here to my place and heard me telling my child, who was to go to
school ‘the money that I have cannot be enough for you ’. Then he told me
that he would go and sell his cow and add me the money so that my childcan go to school. Just as a joke like that, he went, sold it and broughtme the money. It was very shocking to me, ,you are given for free?
(P. , Int.)
The receipt of support from a brother led to him being described as a
friend. On the other hand, support from friends led to the comparison
with a brother, a friend being someone with whom you ‘share more than SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termseven a brother ’(D. , Int.). This indicates that siblings cannot be
relied on for support and that when they do give, they demonstratetheir position as a friend. Similarly, in Nyamira where moneylending
was much more common, a respondent described the friend who had
offered him funds without interest as a ‘real friend ’(H. , Int.).
The affective (i.e. emotional) aspect of material support was
expressed even more overtly by women who described their happiness
at being remembered, for instance by way of a gift received via moneytransfer, as ‘I felt that I am loved ’(E. , Int.). The intimacy of assist-
ing or being assisted was explained through a language of adoption: a
neighbour who lent to help a daughter to go for police recruitment‘took the daughter as hers ’(C.W.  , Int.); a woman who wanted to
visit a child in school was assisted because ‘it was like us having the
problem ’(H.M.  , Int.).
However, developing such relationships is not easy or straightforward;
it involves taking risks in trusting others to abide by a mutual agreement
and the possibility of disappointment when understandings are not
shared. A respondent who had lent a friend funds for which a returndate had been agreed, was disappointed when the agreement was not
kept: ‘if it is requesting without paying back, it ’s ok because you will
forget but if it ’s lending, it might not work as it can kill our relationship
…It’s like a promise that is not ful ﬁlled. Even the heart to give help dies ’
(J . , Int.).
Alternatively, initial disappointment might then adapt the relation-
ship to the obligation that has been generated. A respondent had guar-anteed a friend ’s loan from a bank. The friend ’s charcoal store had been
broken into, the charcoal stolen and since he could not pay the loan, he
ran away. Being chased by the bank, the respondent and his friends paidand then went looking for him. The respondent reported:
We don ’t see any wrong because he sells us charcoal [at a discount] and we
are happy that he is coming up. He brought a whole lorry of charcoal. I
thought that he would pay us during the time tea farmers were paid
bonus but he hasn ’t. Anyway, we have not asked him and we saw that …
it is better if …you know, when a problem comes is when you go and tell
him ‘I have a problem now ’. (D.B.  , Int.)
It was also evident that developing friendships within which ﬁnancial
resources are exchanged can be a very deliberate strategy. Forexample, a young carpenter in his thirties (Nyamira) explained how
he had borrowed Kshs ,each from his mother and his sister (who
verbally abused him in the process) to lend to a friend who needed ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsKshs,to rent land. He had done this because he had himself had
to borrow Kshs ,from a moneylender and pay Kshs ,in inter-
est when he urgently needed funds to buy land. He hoped that this
friend would assist him in future when he is in need. This instrumental
approach to developing the friendship was more evident among youngmen, and would seem to underline the dif ﬁculty they have in accessing
other sources of ﬁnance from formal institutions or informal groups.
However, the motive of receiving future support was not usually instru-
mental and the affective dimension of the relationship remained more
important. Indeed, the motivation of reciprocal support was overtly
rejected in one instance: speaking of receiving contributions via MMTto a church fundraising that she was organising, a woman reportedthat ‘You don ’t help because you ’ve been helped and you don ’t ask
for help because you helped …I am happy I just asked them and they
gave me ’(H.M.  , Int.).
Nevertheless, given that MMT is now everywhere, it is not surprising
that requests for support proliferate and can lead to friction. One
respondent explained that if you say that you do not have time tosend, people may conclude that you do not want to assist, compared
to before when it was harder to do so, but noted that:
We can ’t say that it is a problem that fails us because if we look at the other
side, it helps us because we receive and people love to receive but to send orgive, you see it is very dif ﬁcult. It makes the sender feel like the recipient is
disturbing him or her very much. (M.  , Int.)
But some indicate that there is a choice and the situation has to be
assessed on its merits:
Even if you are asked, you send it willingly, you are not forced (laughing) …
it is not a must that you should have to send …you send because you have
analysed the problem and you know he deserves to be helped. I don ’t think
MPesa was brought to make the life of other people to be hard because ofsending, you just send willingly. (H.  , Int.)
On the other hand, a young man took a dim view of his sister who called
him frequently –knowing he has work –and asking him to send her a few
hundred shillings: ‘I just send her the money to avoid complications. She
knows I have but I can ’t be able to give the reason why I can ’t send, I
have a phone and she knows I have the money. ’And of such requests
from others, he says that you ﬁrst‘judge the person ’as to whether
they are telling you something that is ‘not serious ’and you can
decline the offer by delaying and saying you do not have the money
now but will send it in a few days (N.  , Int.). SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsCOLLECTIVE VALUES AND NORMS IN FINANCIAL GROUPS
Forty-one per cent of Kenyan adults use informal ﬁnancial groups.
Among the Kitui Kamba, analysis shows that they are similarly guided by
a set of norms and values that belong with the relational repertoire, thusresonating with wider research on their social dimensions (Krijtenburg ). While offering varied ﬁnancial facilities, most include a ‘saving ’
component in the form of a merry-go-round,
some additionally have a
‘borrowing ’component with interest, which is shared out as dividends.
Groups are highly valued when they deliver money reliably and repeatedly
and are seen as helping with ‘something serious ’(young woman, farmer,
Nyamira). Although the borrowing component is framed by a resource-focused repertoire, with a strict agreement on return and interest, the rela-
tional repertoire ideally guides resource management.
The Kamba ﬁnancial groups (pl. ikundi ) we studied were women ’s
groups with names that highlighted concerted action for (future) well-
being: such as ‘Mosa Women Vision Group ’(which had two male
members), Wikwatyo Wanoliwa (Hope for the Widows) and Kanini
Kaseo (Small Good –referring to the few, but good women who are in
the group, as well as the little, but good money the members are
getting). Members indicate that ‘saving ’in a group context is much
more effective than individually because of the inherent social dimen-sions; they generally agree that they look after each other ( ku ̃suvia
(care for, keep safe)) and boost the well-being of members individually
and as a group ( ku ̃kı ̃lya(take across, lift up)). In this description the
recurrence of Kamba verbs mentioned in the context of interpersonal
resource exchange –ku ̃suvia and ku ̃kı ̃lya–is illustrative of the concep-
tual continuity with the Kamba interpersonal exchange repertoire.The centrality of the value of ‘upliftment ’in the kı ̃kundi (ﬁnancial
group) context is further underlined in the Kamba term for a merry-
go-round, which is mukilye (literally, the uplifting). In ikundi (pl.
ﬁnancial groups) this ‘lifting up ’may involve additional group activities,
for instance, visiting each other and/or doing a collection for a speci ﬁc
member in dire need (as in the emergency cases above). The import-
ance attributed to ku ̃kı
̃lyainkı ̃kundi relations comes out too in the
names that members give their groups, for instance, Ngone kwaku ,
nguk ı ̃lye(Let me see your home and I will lift you) and Mb ı ̃kye Ngw ı ̃kye
(Throw me, I throw you). What the names additionally suggest is that‘upliftment ’is closely associated with other values such as belonging –
the home as a symbol of belonging –interdependence and reciprocity –
it takes two to boost each other ’s well-being. ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsRELATIONSHIPS WITH FORMAL FINANCIAL SERVICE PROVIDERS
As indicated above, Shipton (  ) identi ﬁed‘misunderstandings ’
between Luo cultures of credit and those promoted by foreign donors
based on formal sector modalities of exchange and the expectationsand meanings regarding on-time repayment and interest that theseinvolve. Formal retail lending is dif ﬁcult to access and national data
suggest that only some % of the adult population access bank lending
compared with % who have bank accounts (FSD Kenya & Central
Bank of Kenya  ). Moreover, the social dimensions of these debt
relations have been identi ﬁed as tending towards hierarchy rather than
the equality that is evident in informal groups (Johnson  ).
Weﬁnd that a resource-focused repertoire is present which captures
greater emphasis on repayment and is particularly identi ﬁed with the
use of funds for business. It might be expected therefore that in relation-ships with banks, this repertoire is dominant.
Very few of our respondents had borrowed from banks and successful
receipt and management of multiple loans is even rarer given that strictterms and conditions are often hard to manage and con ﬂict with the
vicissitudes of livelihoods. Successful repeat borrowers spoke in quite
dramatic terms about the importance of this support and compared
the bank to other close relatives who might assist them. One man whohad taken repeated salary-based loans explained:
The bank has brought me a long way. It is even more than the way brothers
could have helped me. The bank has brought me from far till now. It is thebank that helped me move to this place where I am now [a house he hadrecently built]. No one would have done the same. (P.M.  , Int.)
Similar to the above discussion of how brothers become ‘friends ’when
they provided support, the bank ’s loans brought forth a relational
analogy with affective overtones. A businesswoman presented bank
lending in an even more intimate and emotive metaphor:
It is my mother! …They help me. You know somebody ’s mother …if you
breast feed that is your mother …So, even if I am oppressed, in interest, it
helps me because I know there is no other place where somebody can giveme that money. (C.W.M.  , Int.)
This demonstrates how repeated loans are highly valued for the develop-
ment that these resources have enabled in both respondents ’lives –and
even where there is seen to be a dimension of ‘oppression ’due to the
terms of that lending involving interest (the resource-focused versionof‘something on top ’). SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsIn addition, the Kamba used the word loani (loan) which indicates a
close af ﬁnity with western banking concepts of ‘borrowing ’and
‘lending ’in contrast to the everyday terms for ‘borrowing ’discussed
above, and hence it lacks the implicit socio-cultural norms and values
of that domain. This conceptual foreignness therefore presents a consid-erable barrier for ordinary Kamba people, which may prevent them
from building a relationship with a bank. Conversely, it is not surprising
that when people overcome this barrier and manage to build up a goodrelationship with the bank, this is described by way of a more everyday
experience of a supportive relationship.
THE CONCEPTUAL GAP BETWEEN EVERYDAY AND FORMAL
FINANCIAL REPERTOIRES
The analysis of domains of everyday ‘giving ’/‘lending ’and ‘receiving ’/
‘borrowing ’has revealed that the repertoire of ‘ask for and assist ’is
much more used than that of ‘borrow and lend ’, emphasising the rela-
tionship between the borrower and lender instead of the resourcesinvolved. In the following, the particular behavioural and conceptual
expectations that this relationship includes –and those of everyday
resource exchange more generally –are brie ﬂy reiterated and then
reﬂected upon from the perspective of formal ﬁnancial services.
The exchange of resources in ‘ask for and assist ’relationships is
underpinned by values of reciprocity –with little speci ﬁcity to person
and time –and a dimension of ‘upliftment ’with entailed values of inter-
dependence and belonging. When support is received these relation-
ships are consolidated and deepened. In particular, relationships with
siblings and friends are consolidated and developed through theexchange of resources and the affective dimension predominates.
Giving out resources is nevertheless risky and the relationship may
result in disappointment if values are not shared and conduct breachesthe assumptions made. The domain in which the resources are to be
used is also important to how the exchange is understood. Resources
given in the context of everyday exchange, expression of need, educa-tional support, emergency or business capital, involve different sets ofunderlying expectations and assumptions regarding the nature and
timing of the return and hence its relational implications.
When value increases as a result of lending, it is predominantly viewed
as the produce of a process which is an ‘addition ’or‘on top of ’that has
implicit understandings of a natural (re)productive process whose dis-
tinctive features are uncertainty and variability. Value increase is not ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsexpected in ‘ask and assist ’relationships –especially where the funds are
given in the context of education, health or other emergencies.
The repertoires of resource exchange identi ﬁed here clearly contrast
with those involved in formal ﬁnancial sector activities. However, the
ways in which two respondents talked about their experience of ‘uplift-
ment ’through multiple bank loans con ﬁrms that they bring the same
expectations to this sector as in their everyday context. Hence this sug-
gests that when low-income people approach the formal sector, theydo so with their own language, concepts and values. On the other
hand, formal ﬁnancial providers approach transactions with low-
income people using values and assumptions which are compatiblewith international ﬁnance and therefore likely to be at odds with these
values. With very limited access to borrowing, keeping savings in
ﬁnancial institutions is a one-way exchange (deposit and withdrawal)
that does not resonate with the nature of friendship and mutually sup-portive and reciprocal relationships nor with everyday practices, in
which borrowing and ‘saving ’are frequently in conjunction. Since the
above examples of formal providers are the exception rather than therule, and the terms and conditions of formal lending are strict and
difﬁcult to manage, this starts to explain why providers ’actions often
result in disappointment and disillusion.
CONCLUSION
This paper has investigated repertoires and values that underlie everyday
practices of resource exchange to show how it operates as the wider
salient socio-cognitive and behavioural framework of interpersonalﬁnancial transactions which mobile money transfer facilitates by enab-
ling exchange over distance. Narrative and semantic analysis has iden-
tiﬁed two distinctive transactional repertoires. The centrality of the
relational ﬁnancial repertoire where relationships are developed and
consolidated to create ‘upliftment ’which endures over time, is given
added emphasis through evidence of its presence in ﬁnancial groups
and experiences of banks that conform to these features. The identi ﬁca-
tion of this relational repertoire as well as a culturally de ﬁned resource-
focused repertoire, suggests the potential for a double disjuncture
between these informal practices and their formal sector resource-focused counterpart.
The conceptual divergence between informal and formal ﬁnancial
practices has been demonstrated with a combination of disciplinary SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsapproaches focusing on everyday language use. This new lens was able to
innovatively highlight the deeper levels of socio-cognition and thuspresent results that not only contribute to explaining the massive and
rapid MMT adoption and use –providing additional conceptual
support for Kusimba ’s and Maurer ’sﬁndings on the pivotal role of rela-
tionships –but actually go beyond this to expand our understanding of
everyday ﬁnancial concepts and their divergence from formal concepts.
At the same time the approach offers a means for further cross-culturalexploration in countries such as Uganda, Tanzania and Somalia where
MMT is booming, and additionally raising the question of whether
and how repertoires of everyday resource exchange are –or are not –
utilised in contexts where adoption is slower, such as West Africa.
Finally, it offers a potential focus for further analysis of the way pay-
ments and ﬁnancial inclusion are being con ﬁgured from ‘above ’and
‘below ’: it raises the question as to how these repertoires meet and
inﬂuence each other over time and whether the disjunctures of past
monetary and ﬁnancial sector development in Africa identi ﬁed by
Guyer and Shipton are in fact being overcome. Guyer ’s concept of
repertoires points to their open-endedness and ﬂexibility which is also
evident from our analysis. Maurer ’s identi ﬁcation of the instability and
reversibility of the early forms of airtime use which he sees as archetypalalso offers these features. Our ﬁndings then pose a question as to
whether the open-endedness of this con ﬁguration from ‘above ’and
‘below ’will remain in ways that lead to the creative tackling of past dis-
continuities and offer a substantive break with past patterns of unstableinstitutional engagement, so resulting in a fundamental restructuring of
African ﬁnancial practices and service markets. Or alternatively, whether
this current con ﬁguration is a moment of serendipitous convergence of
open-ended repertoires, which will again diverge in the search by mobile
companies and the ﬁnancial sector to stabilise and regularise their
repertoires, provoking new clashes in valuation and consequent misun-derstandings which will continue to be major obstacles in developing
routes to ﬁnancial inclusion.
NOTES
. We use the term mobile money transfer to refer to services where money is moved between
users through the use of text messaging on (basic) mobile phones. Cash is deposited into andtaken out of the system using a network of agents. Mobile money can also involve the use of these
services or mobile phone apps to link to banks, but these services are much less developed and
not the focus here. The most popular service in Kenya is Safaricom ’s M-Pesa service –M for
mobile and Pesa as the Swahili term for money. ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms. See http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/global ﬁndex
.https://nextbillion.net/beyond-send-money-home-the-complex-gender-dynamics-behind-
mobile-money-usage/ Accessed .. .
. South Africa also has an already well developed formal system with relatively high levels of
access.
. Indeed, it is possible that MMT is itself having an impact on repertoires. However given that
their nature is that they are slow to change, we take them as the foundation for exploring relation-
ality. Future studies may examine how MMT is affecting them.
. Socio-cognitive refers to understandings that are widely shared among the members of a com-
munity or society. ‘Understanding ’differs from ‘knowledge ’being an emergent phenomenon which
derives from different knowledge structures (e.g. cultural, physical, affective).
. Linguistically, the Kamba term for ‘give me ’applies to both give and lend, see Krijtenburg
( ).
. Single quotes around words indicate that there is no exact equivalent for the term in the
Kamba vocabulary.
. Shipton (  ) uses the concept of ‘ﬁduciary culture ’to refer to this phenomenon.
. For interpersonal instances of ‘upliftment ’see Krijtenburg (  ).
. See also Shipton (  ).
. Note that in English ‘appreciation ’is also used to connote value increase in the context of
assets.
. Both are wraps worn by women; kanga is the cheaper, heavier and less decorated piece of cloth.
. There is a wide literature on informal ﬁnancial groups in Kenya, their prevalence, forms and
functioning, and their extremely dynamic nature. See for example Nelson (  ) and Kimuyu
( ). MMT has also facilitated their formation and operations by making it easier for groups to
interact over distance.
. In a merry-go-round, members make a ﬁxed contribution during a weekly/monthly meeting
and each member in turn is given the entire collection.
REFERENCES
Aker, J.C. & I.M. Mbiti.  .‘Mobile phones and economic development in Africa ’,Journal of
Economic Perspectives ,:–.
Astbury, B. & F.L. Leeuw.  .‘Unpacking black boxes: mechanisms and theory building in evalu-
ation ’,American Journal of Evaluation ,:–.
de Bruijn, M. & I. Butter.  .‘An ethnographic study on mobile money attitudes, perceptions and
usages in Cameroon, Congo DRC, Senegal and Zambia: ﬁnal ethnographic narrative report ’.
<http://www.ascleiden.nl/news/just-out-ethnographic-study-mobile-money-attitudes-perceptions-
and-usages-cameroon-congo-drc >
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., L. Klapper, D. Singer, S. Ansar & J. Hess.  .The Global Findex Database  :
measuring ﬁnancial inclusion and the Fintech revolution . Washington, DC: World Bank.
Evans, D.S. & A. Pirchio.  .‘An empirical examination of why mobile money schemes ignite in
some developing countries but ﬂounder in most ’,Review of Network Economics ,:–.
Feather, N.T.  .‘Values, deservingness, and attitudes toward high achievers: research in tall
poppies ’, in C. Seligman, J.M. Olson & M.P. Zanna, eds. The Psychology of Values: the Ontario sympo-
sium Volume . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, –.
FSD Kenya & Central Bank of Kenya.  .FinAccess Household Survey on Financial Inclusion . Nairobi:
FSD Kenya and Central Bank of Kenya.
GPFI.  .‘Ghigh-level principles for digital ﬁnancial inclusion ’.http://www.gp ﬁ.org/news/
new-g -high-level-principles-digital- ﬁnancial-inclusion .
Guyer, J.I.  .Marginal Gains: monetary transactions in Atlantic Africa . Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Heyer, A. & I. Mas.  .‘Fertile grounds for mobile money: towards a framework for analysing enab-
ling environments ’,Enterprise Development and Micro ﬁnance ,:–.
Hughes, N. & S. Lonie.  .‘M-PESA: mobile money for the “unbanked ”: turning cellphones into
-hour tellers in Kenya ’,Innovations Winter/Spring: –.
Iazzolino, G.  .‘Following Mobile Money in Somaliland ’. Rift Valley Institute Research Paper
.http://riftvalley.net/publication/following-mobile-money-somaliland#.WrI xZcuBzk SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsJack, W. & T. Suri.  .‘Risk sharing and transactions costs: evidence from Kenya's mobile money
revolution ’,American Economic Review ,:–.
Jack, W., A. Ray & T. Suri.  .‘Transaction networks: evidence from mobile money in Kenya ’,
American Economic Review ,:–.
Johnson, S.  .‘Competing visions of ﬁnancial inclusion in Kenya: the rift revealed by mobile
money transfer ’,Canadian Journal of Development Studies / Revue canadienne d ’études du
développement ,:–.
Kenya National Bureau of Statistics.  .Basic Report on Well-Being in Kenya: based on Kenya Integrated
Household Budget Survey,  /. Nairobi: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics.
Kikulwe, E.M., E. Fischer & M. Qaim.  .‘Mobile money, smallholder farmers, and household
welfare in Kenya ’,PLoS ONE ,:e .
Kimuyu, P.  .‘Rotating savings and credit associations in rural East Africa ’,World Development ,
: –.
Krijtenburg, F.  .‘The sociality of debt: a case study of Kamba (Kenya) conceptualisations of bor-
rowing and lending ’, in A. Mooney & E. Sifaki, eds. The Language of Money and Debt: a multidiscip-
linary approach . London: Springer International.
Kusimba, S.B., Y. Yang & N.V. Chawla.  .‘Family networks of mobile money in Kenya ’,Information
Technologies and International Development ,:–.
Kusimba, S., Y. Yang & N. Chawla.  .‘Hearthholds of mobile money in western Kenya ’,Economic
Anthropology ,:–.
Maurer, B.  .‘Mobile money: communication, consumption and change in the payments space ’,
Journal of Development Studies ,:–.
Morawczynski, O.  .‘Exploring the usage and impact of “transformational ”mobile ﬁnancial ser-
vices: the case of M-PESA in Kenya ’,Journal of Eastern African Studies ,:–.
Munyegera, G.K. & T. Matsumoto.  .‘Mobile money, remittances, and household welfare: panel
evidence from rural Uganda ’,World Development :–.
Mu ̃tı ̃sya, R.M. & S. Ndu ̃nda.  .Kı ̃kamba-English Dictionary . Nairobi: Roma Publishers.
Nelson, N.  .‘The Kiambu Group: a successful women ’s ROSCA in Mathare Valley, Nairobi
( to )’, in S. Ardener & S. Burman, eds. Money-Go-Rounds: the importance of rotating
savings and credit associations for women . Oxford: Berg.
Peeters, B.  .‘Language and cultural values: towards an applied ethnolinguistics for the foreign
language classroom ’, in B. Peeters, K. Mullan & C. Béal, eds. Cross-culturally Speaking, Speaking Cross-
culturally . Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, –.
Rea, S.C. & T.C. Nelms.  .‘Mobile money: the ﬁrst decade ’. Institute for Money, Technology and
Financial Inclusion Working Paper  -.https://www.imt ﬁ.uci.edu/
Shipton, P.  .The Nature of Entrustment: intimacy, exchange and the sacred in Africa . New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Shipton, P.  .Credit Between Cultures: farmers, ﬁnanciers and misunderstanding in Africa . New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Suri, T. & W. Jack.  .‘The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money ’,Science ,
 : –.
Wierzbicka, A.  .Understanding Cultures through Their Key Words: English, Russian, Polish, German
and Japanese . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
World Bank.  .Information and Communications for Development  : maximizing mobile .
Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank.  .Global Findex . Washington, DC: World Bank.
Zollmann, J.  .Kenya Financial Diaries: shilingi kwa shilingi –theﬁnancial lives of the poor . Nairobi:
FSD Kenya.
Interviews
C., woman tea farmer, Nyamira, .. .
C.W., woman, coffee farmer, Mathira, ...
C.W.M., woman, retail shop owner, Mathira, .. .
D., man, restaurant owner, Nyamira, .. .
D.B., man, restaurant owner, Nyamira, .. .
E., woman, casual labourer, Mathira, .. . ‘UPLIFTMENT ’,FRIENDS AND FINANCE
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core termsH., man, motorbike taxi driver, Nyamira, ...
H.M., woman, casual tea picker, Mathira, .. .
J., man, shoe seller, Nyamira, .. .
M., man, evangelist, Mathira, .. .
N., young man, electrician, Mathira, .. .
P., man, farmer, Kitui, .. .
P.M., man, driver, Mathira, .. .
R., young man, barber, Nyamira .. .
Z., woman, tailor, Nyamira, .. . SUSAN JOHNSON AND FROUKJE KRIJTENBURG
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022278X18000435Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . York University Libraries , on 12 Dec 2018 at 17:55:26 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms