A framework to understand women’s  
mobile-related safety concerns
in low- and middle-income countriesConnected Women
Copyright © 2018 GSM AssociationA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 2 | 
This publication is the output of a project funded by UK aid, 
Department for International Development (DFID), for the benefit of developing countries. The views expressed are not necessarily those of DFID.The GSMA’s Connected Women programme works with mobile operators and their partners to address the barriers to women accessing and using mobile internet and mobile money services. Connected Women aims to reduce the gender gap in mobile internet and mobile money services and unlock significant commercial opportunities for the mobile industry and socio-economic benefits for women.
For more information, please visit the GSMA Connected 
Women website at www.gsma.com/connectedwomen
Follow the GSMA Connected Women Programme on 
Twitter: @GSMAM4DAbout the GSMAThe GSMA represents the interests of mobile operators worldwide, uniting nearly 800 operators with more than 250 companies in the broader mobile ecosystem, including handset and device makers, software companies, equipment providers and Internet companies, as well as organisations in adjacent industry sectors. The GSMA also produces industry-leading events such as Mobile World Congress, Mobile World Congress Shanghai and the Mobile 360 Series conferences. 
For more information, please visit the GSMA corporate 
website at www.gsma.com 
Follow the GSMA on Twitter: @GSMA
Authors (GSMA Connected Women): 
Helen Croxson – Market Insights Director Amber Wilson – Mobile for Development Project Manager
Contributors:  
David Fiennes – Context ConsultingElisa Minischetti – EMS Digital
Published March 2018A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 3
Acknowledgements
The GSMA would like to thank the following individuals and organisations for their input to this project: 
Sara Baker and Erica Smith, Association for Progressive Communications / TakeBackTheTech; Sara Chamberlain,
BBC Media Action; Hera Hussain, Chayn; Irushine Wedage, Dialog Axiata;
Rajat Kumar, Digital Empowerment Foundation India; Shmyla Khan, Digital Rights Foundation / Hamara Internet;
Katherine Van Wyk (and Nora Bergin and Alex Fulcher), Every1Mobile;
Antigone Davis, Karuna Nain and Julie De Bailliencourt, Facebook; Amalia Toledo Hernández, Fundación Karisma;
Kaiser Jahangir, Grameenphone; Noora Flinkman, HarassMap;
Nitin Goel, Chetna Sundaram and Varun Soni, Intex Technologies;
Nandini Chami and Amrita Vasudevan, IT for Change; Mohit Bhargava, Mahindra Comviva;
Noora Ibrahim Zahir, Ooredoo Maldives; Santiago Diaz Valdez, Opratel; Moustafa Hafez, Orange Egypt;
Kader 'Zahraoui, Orange Group; Bishakha Datta, Point of View; Rakshit Tandon;
Dr Allison Gillwald, Chenai Chair, Research ICT Africa;
Elsa D’Silva, SafeCity; Rupande Mehta, SAR Foundation / Red Elephant Foundation;
Liza Garcia and Christina Lopez, The Foundation for Media Alternatives; James Chege, Usalama Technologies;
Zainab Hussain Siddiqui, Telenor Group; Nami Zarringhalam, Kim Fai Kok and Manan Shah, Truecaller;
Kathleen McGowan, USAID; Laura Turkington, Susie Foxton and Ruth Ruppen, Vodafone Group;
Janani Kandaswamy, Vodafone India; Brenda Ngcaba, Vodacom South Africa;
and Ingrid Brudvig, World Wide Web Foundation.
Context Consulting
We are an evidence-based consultancy. We combine 
the strategic, commercial rigour of a management 
consultancy with the innovative, empathetic skills of 
researchers to unearth genuine insight and provide 
clear recommendations for clients. Our work helps 
leading global businesses become truly customer-
centric in all the markets they serve. We specialise in 
technology and telecommunications, financial services, 
and B2B marketing consultancy.
For more information, please visit  
www.context-consulting.co.uk 
Context Consulting was the GSMA’s fieldwork partner 
for this study.
A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 4 | CONTENTS
Introduction 5
Key findings 8
Objectives and approach 10
Considerations for the analysis 11
Framing the problem: mobile-related safety concerns 12
Tackling women’s mobile-related safety concerns will have wider socio-economic benefits  14
Categorising mobile-related safety concerns 15
Regional and socio-cultural contexts have a significant influence 17
Initiatives addressing mobile-related safety concerns 19
Profiling types of initiative that address safety concerns 22
Case studies: Egypt 28
Case studies: India 31
Recommendations for stakeholders to tackle mobile-related safety concerns 35
Appendix            39   | 5
IntroductionA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 6 | 
Introduction
Mobile has the capacity to transform lives. It can empower women, make them more connected and provide 
access to information, services and life-enhancing opportunities like health information, financial services and 
employment opportunities, often for the first time. Mobile is also the main access point to the internet for most 
of the world’s population, especially in low- and middle-income countries. However, while mobile connectivity 
is spreading quickly, it is not spreading equally. Women are being left behind as various, interconnected barriers 
keep them from accessing and using mobile at the same rate as men. This unequal access to mobile technology 
threatens to exacerbate the inequalities women already experience. 
At the same time, there is a paradoxical relationship between mobile technology and women’s safety. A 2015 
GSMA Connected Women survey found that 68% to 94% of female respondents in 11 low- and middle-income 
countries reported feeling safer with a mobile phone or that they would feel safer if they owned one.1 Among 
other things, a mobile can provide a way for a woman to contact help if she is in trouble and reassurance when 
she is out and about. However, research has consistently shown that safety concerns related to mobile are an 
important barrier to mobile ownership and use, with women perceiving safety as an issue more commonly than 
men.2
Mobiles (and the internet) have become conduits for threats that have always existed (e.g. bullying) as well as 
new ones (e.g. online identity theft). Mobile-related safety concerns are wide ranging and include unsolicited 
harassing phone calls and text messages, cyberbullying,3 online harassment, mobile theft and feeling unsafe or 
uncomfortable when purchasing or topping up devices. 
1  GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries”, https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.pdf
2  Ibid.; GSMA Connected Women, 2018, “The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2018”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/connected-
women/the-mobile-gender-gap-report-2018 ; Truecaller, 2018, “Truecaller Insights reveals: Women report more unwanted calls than men”, https://
blog.truecaller.com/2018/03/08/truecaller-insights-reveals-women-report-more-unwanted-calls-than-men/ ; For example, according to World Wide 
Web Foundation Women’s Rights Online 2015 data, 28% of women in Jakarta claim to have experienced threats or direct personal bullying (including 
harassment or stalking) when using a mobile phone in the last two years compared to 19% of men. In Kampala, 45% of women report experiencing threats 
or direct personal bullying (including harassment or stalking) in the last two years when using the internet compared to 8% of men (“Women’s Rights 
Online: Translating Access into Empowerment”, https://webfoundation.org/research/womens-rights-online-2015/#fulldataset ).
3  “Cyberbullying” is defined as bullying that takes place over digital devices like cell phones, computers and tablets. Cyberbullying can occur through 
SMS, text and apps, or online in social media, forums or gaming where people can view, participate in and share content. Cyberbullying includes sending, 
posting or sharing negative, harmful, false or mean content about someone else, causing embarrassment or humiliation.
A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 7
Safety concerns, and a general perception that mobile or internet access and use pose threats, should not however 
be used as an excuse for denying women access.4 Rather, their ability to empower women should be emphasised,5 
including the ways in which mobile ownership and access to services can enhance women’s personal safety.
This report explores women’s mobile-related safety concerns, building on previous research by the GSMA and 
other organisations.6 It draws on o ver 30 stakeholder interviews, desk research and primary research in India 
and Egypt to provide a framework to understand mobile-related safety concerns, an overview of initiatives 
(i.e. products, services, policies, or marketing or distribution approaches) that tackle this issue and actionable 
recommendations for stakeholders (government specific initiatives, in particular those concerning policy and legal 
frameworks, were not included in this review). Although this report focuses on low- and middle-income countries, 
we recognise that mobile-related safety concerns are a global issue.
Tackling women’s mobile-related safety concerns will have wider socio-economic benefits, both in terms of 
helping to accelerate digital and financial inclusion for women and creating a significant commercial opportunity 
for the mobile industry. The GSMA estimates that if mobile operators in low- and middle-income countries could 
close the gender gap in mobile ownership and mobile internet use today (as a result of addressing safety concerns 
along with other barriers such as cost and digital literacy), this would generate an estimated incremental revenue 
of $15 billion over the coming year.7 
4  Broadband Commission Working Group on the Digital Gender Divide, 2017, “Recommendations for action: bridging the gender gap in Internet and 
broadband access and use”, http://broadbandcommission.org/Documents/publications/WorkingGroupDigitalGenderDivide-report2017.pdf .
5 Ibid.
6  Ibid.; Broadband Commission for Digital Development Working Group on Broadband and Gender, “Cyber violence against women and girls”, http://www.
unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2015/cyber_violence_gender%20report.pdf?v=1&d=20150924T154259 ; 
ODI, 2015, “Do digital information and communications technologies increase the voice and influence of women and girls?”, https://www.odi.org/sites/
odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/9622.pdf ; Association for Progressive Communication, “Women’s rights, gender and internet 
governance”, https://www.genderit.org/sites/default/upload/issue_womenrights_digital.pdf ; Digital Rights Foundation, “Cyber harassment helpline: six 
month report December 2016-May 2017”, https://digitalrightsfoundation.pk/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Cyber-Harassment-Helpline-Six-Month-Report.
pdf; Internet Governance Forum, “Overcoming barriers to enable women’s meaningful internet access”, http://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/index.
php?q=filedepot_download/3406/437 ; World Wide Web Foundation, 2015, “Women’s Rights Online: Translating Access into Empowerment”, https://
webfoundation.org/research/womens-rights-online-2015/#fulldataset ; GSMA Connected Women and LIRNEasia, “Mobile phones, internet and gender in 
Myanmar”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/GSMA_Myanmar_Gender_Web_Singles.pdf .
7  The $15 billion estimate assumes that the gender gap in mobile ownership and mobile internet use would be closed during 2018, and represents the 
subsequent 12-month incremental revenue opportunity.A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 8 | 
Key Findings
1
2Women’s mobile-related safety concerns can be 
categorised into three types: ‘physical world’, 
‘voice and SMS’ and ‘online’:
There are six types of initiative that aim to address 
women’s physical world, voice/SMS and online 
safety concerns: •  Physical world: Threats experienced in the physical world as a result 
of owning or using a mobile (e.g. phone theft).
•  Voice and SMS: Threats experienced via voice calls or SMS.
• Online: Threats experienced via mobile internet.
• Anonymous top-up; 
• Female-friendly distribution models;
• Call and message blocking; 
• Web filtering and online security;
• Online service provider security settings;
• Educational.
The research also identified four types of initiative that address general safety 
concerns that are not directly related to mobile ownership and use (e.g. assault)—
emergency call services, harassment mapping, panic button apps and wearables—
although these are not the main focus of this study. None of the initiative types 
include government policies and legal frameworks which seek to address women's 
safety concerns as these were considered out of scope for this analysis. A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 9
3
4Mobile-related safety concerns reduce mobile 
access and use for women, and lead to revenue 
loss for the industry, in four main ways:
Stakeholders can address mobile-related safety 
concerns by:8•  Reduced customer acquisition: Fewer women start using mobile 
due to safety and harassment concerns. 
•  Reduced average revenue per user (ARPU): Women limit or stop 
using mobile, particularly mobile internet.
•  Increased churn: Women change their phone number/SIM  
(and potentially mobile provider) to avoid harassment and other 
threats. 
•  Reduced handset and data revenue: Women may avoid higher-
end devices or smartphones due to fear of theft or online mobile-
related safety concerns.
•  Understanding the scale, impact and drivers of mobile-related safety 
concerns in their own contexts;
•  Designing, launching and/or supporting effective initiatives to tackle 
mobile-related safety concerns. To make the initiatives effective, the 
private sector should consider establishing a business case for them, 
designing them for women with lower literacy and digital literacy, 
ensuring they are well supported with marketing and incentivising 
and training agents to promote them;
•  Raising awareness of women’s mobile-related safety concerns and 
the urgent need to address them;
•  Promoting the positive role mobile can play in making women feel 
safer;
•  Helping women feel safer when using mobiles and mobile internet by 
raising their awareness of safety-related initiatives, improving their 
digital skills and building their digital resilience;9
•  Strengthening measures to protect women against internet-related 
abuse and harassment.
8  This is a summary of recommendations for all stakeholders.  At the end of the report recommendations have been provided for mobile operators and 
private sector organisations and for policymakers; however, many recommendations are also likely to be relevant for other types of stakeholders, such as 
other mobile industry players and NGOs .
9 'Digital resilience' refers to building a person’s ability to respond confidently to challenges faced online, enabling them to become smart internet users.Objectives and 
approachA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 11This study set out to:
1. Define and categorise safety concerns related to mobile ownership and use; 
2. Investigate how mobile-related safety concerns affect women’s behaviour; 
3. Identify and investigate initiatives that focus on safety concerns and provide a framework to 
understand how they address them; 
4. Profile mobile-related initiatives from private sector organisations and NGOs that address safety 
concerns in two markets, including their impact on female end users; and
5. Provide recommendations for how the mobile industry and other stakeholders can address this 
barrier for women.
The focus of this report is the safety concerns arising from owning or using a mobile phone that can create a 
barrier to mobile ownership and use. Initiatives that use mobiles to alleviate women’s safety concerns, that are not 
directly related to owning or using a mobile phone (e.g. physical assault), are less of a focus.
As mentioned in the Introduction, this report builds on previous research by the GSMA and other organisations. 
Telephone interviews with over 30 stakeholders from a range of organisations, as well as secondary research, were 
conducted to gather insights into women’s mobile-related safety concerns and the initiatives that address them.10 
The primary qualitative research was conducted in India and Egypt and focused on four initiatives. Fieldwork 
consisted of 24 in-depth user interviews (12 per country, six per initiative, conducted by a local female moderator 
in the users’ native language), multiple contextual interviews with local influencers (e.g. teachers, local business 
owners) and meetings with representatives of the local initiative.
10 Over 30 telephone interviews were conducted with mobile network operators (MNOs), app developers, NGOs, academics and public sector stakeholders.Objectives and Approach
Several factors influenced the scope of the research:
• Absence of an agreed definition of mobile-related safety concerns
• The challenge of researching safety and harassment issues 
 » Approaches need to be very sensitive to socio-cultural, economic and political contexts, as 
well as differences within countries (e.g. rural versus urban, regional, cultural, religious). What 
is considered harassment in one society may be viewed as acceptable behaviour in another, 
making it challenging to collect and compare data across markets. Compounding this issue is 
the very personal nature of many safety concerns, which can result in underreporting.
• Limited research and data 
 » The lack of a shared definition and the various socio-cultural understandings of what 
constitutes mobile-related safety concerns (including harassment) likely contribute to the 
limited amount of available data on the issue, particularly comparable data between countries. Considerations for the analysisA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 12 | 
Framing the problem:  
Mobile-related safety concernsA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 13
Mobile-related safety concerns can limit women’s use of mobiles or prevent them from owning a mobile 
phone altogether. Women in low-and middle-income countries are 10% less likely than men to own a mobile 
phone and 26% less likely to use mobile internet.11 Safety and security concerns related to owning or using a mobile 
have contributed to this gap as they tend to be felt more acutely by women. It is worth noting that not only actual 
experiences, but also the threat of potential negative experiences, can drive consumer behaviour.
Mobile-related safety concerns can limit phone ownership. For example, across 19 low- and middle-income 
countries, 4% to 65% of women who do not own a mobile phone claimed that “I am concerned that I would be 
contacted by strangers”, was one of the main reasons stopping them from owning a mobile (versus 3% to 49%  
of men).12
Mobile-related safety concerns can limit phone use. For example, safety concerns pose a significant barrier to 
women accessing mobile internet, and since most people in low- and middle-income countries access the internet 
via their mobile, this can curtail all internet access. The Broadband Commission Working Group on the Digital 
Gender Divide report acknowledges that “fears concerning safety and harassment are significant barriers that 
inhibit some women from benefitting from or even wanting to access the Internet”.14
11  Based on those aged 18+. GSMA Connected Women, 2018, “The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2018”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/
programmes/connected-women/the-mobile-gender-gap-report-2018 . 
12 Ibid. 
13  GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries”, https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.pdf .
14  Broadband Commission, 2017, “Working Group on the Digital Gender Divide Recommendations for action: bridging the gender gap in Internet and 
broadband access and use, http://broadbandcommission.org/Documents/publications/WorkingGroupDigitalGenderDivide-report2017.pdf .Framing the problem: 
Mobile-related safety concerns
“Call harassment constitutes a key barrier to women using and owning mobile phones.  I 
know of a 16-year-old girl who received harassing calls and asked her uncle for help. He then 
reported the issue to the girl’s mother, who then confiscated her mobile.” - NGO, India
“Our research revealed that many women are afraid of the impacts their usage of social 
networks would have on their ‘offline’ relationships. For example, their husband getting angry 
at them.” - NGO, Sub-Saharan Africa-focused“We women are more afraid of getting mugged because of a cell phone. We don’t want to 
walk around with an expensive phone, because we are afraid someone will rob us.”  
- Female mobile user, urban, Colombia13A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 14 |  
A recent GSMA study16 in South Asia found that ‘Potential Adopters’ and ‘New Users’ of mobile internet17 tend to 
see the internet as a ‘double-edged sword’. While it was recognised that the internet is a source of information, 
entertainment and empowerment, there is also a fear of the negative side of the web, such as fears of being 
exposed to certain content, risks to personal safety, online bullying and harassment, photo/information theft and 
the perception that inappropriate online relationships can damage reputations. Together with social norms, this 
fear of the negative side of the web can be a barrier to mobile access for women, either through self-policing or 
gatekeepers (male relatives or other family members) who restrict access.18  
Addressing women’s mobile-related safety concerns should help to reduce the gender gap in mobile access 
and use, driving digital and financial inclusion for women, connecting women to life-enhancing services and 
supporting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).19 
Helping women feel safer when using a mobile is also a commercial opportunity for mobile operators.  
Both the experience and fear of safety and harassment limits mobile operator revenue through reduced customer 
acquisition (fewer women start using mobile due to safety and harassment concerns), reduced ARPU (women 
limit or stop mobile use, particularly mobile internet), increased churn (women change their mobile phone 
number/SIM and potentially their phone provider to avoid harassment and other threats), and reduced handset 
15  GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries”, https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.pdf .
16  GSMA, 2017, “Triggering mobile internet use among men and women in South Asia”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/
uploads/2017/11/GSMA-Triggering-Mobile-Internet-Use_Web.pdf .
17  Ibid. ‘Potential Adopters’ are defined as someone who is a phone owner (with regular use); literate; belongs to a lower to middle class; aware of the 
internet and does not reject it; between 25 and 35 years; and has 3G coverage. ‘New Users’ are Potential Adopters who have been using mobile internet at 
least weekly for three to 12 months.
18 Ibid.
19 In particular, SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls .Tackling women’s mobile-related safety concerns will have wider 
socio-economic benefits“Some women are restricted as to what content they can access. For example, educational 
content is OK while entertainment isn’t. Facebook can be highly controlled  
by male household members.” - NGO, India 
“Sometimes women do ask to buy internet, but I won’t allow it. I tell them, ‘Call the network 
helpline, don’t come here’.” - Male, top-up and cigarette kiosk retailer, urban, Pakistan16“After my sister created a Facebook account, a lot of men started calling her... She cried. And 
her husband hit her.” - Female, Potential Adopter, urban, Sri Lanka16“I am not even allowed to put my own picture on WhatsApp as some people can save that 
image.” - Female, rural, Jordan15A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 15
and data revenue (women may avoid higher-end devices or smartphones due to fear of theft or online mobile-
related safety concerns). Initiatives to address mobile-related safety concerns have the potential to not only help 
mitigate lost revenue, but also attract new female customers as women (and their gatekeepers) are reassured and 
brand perception is enhanced.
Closing the gender gap in mobile ownership and mobile internet use presents a significant commercial 
opportunity for mobile operators. This will require a concerted effort from all stakeholders and a holistic 
approach which tackles all barriers to access and use, including safety concerns. In 2018, the GSMA calculated 
that if mobile operators in low- and middle-income countries could close the gender gap in mobile ownership and 
mobile internet use today, this would generate an estimated incremental revenue of $15 billion over the coming 
year.20 
As with many communication technologies, mobile phones can be a medium for safety threats that have always 
existed (e.g. stalking) and, especially with mobile internet, a conduit for new ones (e.g. misuse of personal photos 
online). Based on the analysis in this study, safety concerns arising from owning or using a mobile phone have 
been grouped into three categories: physical world, voice and SMS, and online (Figure 1).Categorising mobile-related safety concerns
20  GSMA Connected Women, 2018, “The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2018”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/connected-
women/the-mobile-gender-gap-report-2018 . The $15 billion estimate assumes that the gender gap in mobile ownership and mobile internet use would 
be closed during 2018, and represents the subsequent 12-month incremental revenue opportunity.
15 | Framing the problem: mobile-related safety concerns “Last year we partnered with one of our peers to raise awareness of call harassment. We issued 
joint press releases and appealed to people not to give out their personal phone numbers to 
everyone. It was a large-scale campaign conducted through mainstream media, social media 
and SMS. The campaign was positioned as part of our CSR strategy but there is a commercial 
argument there; if people do not feel safe when using [a] mobile device, they will not use it as 
much.” - Mobile operator, Maldives“Women often rely on men to add credit as they don’t want, or are not allowed, to go to 
mobile kiosks. This often means zero credit balances persist for longer than necessary so there 
is a revenue upside for operators [to tackling safety concerns].” – Technology provider, globalA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 16 | 
Figure 1
Categorisation of mobile-related safety concernsCategorisation of mobile-related safety concerns
Threats experienced in the 
physical world as a result of 
owning or using a mobile:
• Risk of phone theft
•  Harassment when visiting points 
of sale and subsequent misuse 
of women’s mobile numbers 
after they share them to top up 
•  Societal disapproval or 
harassment as a result of using 
mobile in public (e.g. on street 
or public transport)
•  Domestic violence triggered 
by using mobiles at home (e.g. 
associated with costs, being 
seen as not fulfilling household 
duties, having ‘inappropriate’ 
contact with men) Physical world
Threats experienced via voice 
calls and SMS:
•  Unwanted calls or messages 
(e.g. resulting from women's 
mobile numbers being misused 
by agents or customers at 
points of sale, after the women 
share their mobile number to 
top up)
•  Sexually harassing calls or 
messages
• Threatening calls or messages
• Scam calls and messages
•  Unwanted and harassing 
marketing calls and messagesVoice and SMS
Threats experienced via mobile 
internet:
•  Online/social media harassment 
or bullying
•  Online stalking or use  
of spyware
•  Misuse of personal data  
or images
• Identify theft
• Fraud
• Online scams / viruses
•  Exposure to content deemed 
explicit or inappropriateOnline
•  Leaving mobile phone at home 
or avoiding using it in public to 
prevent theft/harassment
•  Not wanting/being allowed a 
higher-end handset in case of theft 
•  Not wanting/being allowed to 
visit points of sale and having 
no credit while waiting for a 
male relative to top up
•  Not using mobile phones at 
home or hiding them to avoid 
domestic violence
•  Stopping use of device or no longer 
being allowed to use mobile 
Women miss out on the benefits mobile can bring: 
• Less able to contact family/friends
•  Less access to online information and services (e.g. 
health information, job search, financial services)
•  Less opportunity to use mobile for economic benefit 
(e.g. contacting clients, learning new skills for work, 
promoting goods and services)Revenue loss for the mobile industry:
•  Reduced customer acquisition: fewer women start to 
use mobile
•  Reduced ARPU: women limit or stop their use of 
mobile/mobile internet
•  Increased churn: women change phone number/SIM 
to avoid harassment and other threats  
•  Reduced handset and data revenue: women avoid 
smartphones due to fear of theft or online mobile-
related safety concerns•  Turning off mobile for periods of 
time to avoid harassment
•  Ignoring unknown numbers due 
to fear of harassment
•  Changing phone number/SIM to 
stop harassing messages or calls
•  Stopping use of device or no 
longer being allowed to use 
mobile•  Not wanting/being allowed to 
use mobile internet
•  Not wanting a smartphone or 
not using smartphone features 
to their full extent
•  Self-policing of internet use (or 
being monitored), resulting in 
limited usage 
•  Not using social media or data 
due to fear of harassment or 
other online safety concerns
Socio-economic impactPotential impact on behaviour
Note: It is often the fear of these threats rather than an actual experience that drives consumer behaviour.  
   Framing the problem: mobile-related safety concerns  | 16A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 17
17 | Framing the problem: mobile-related safety concerns Mobile-related safety concerns vary between and within regions. For example, a recent GSMA study found that, 
of the 23 low- and middle-income countries surveyed, safety concerns were frequently cited among the top three 
barriers to mobile ownership and mobile internet use in the Latin American region. These safety concerns were 
felt more acutely by women. In Mexico, for instance, 40% of women who do not own a mobile reported concerns 
over strangers contacting them as a key barrier to ownership, compared to 24% of men. This concern about being 
contacted by strangers is also a barrier to mobile internet uptake. For example, 47% of female mobile owners in 
Chile who do not use mobile internet cite it as one of the main barriers to mobile internet adoption versus 23% of 
male mobile owners who don’t use mobile internet (see Figure 2 for a range of example countries where women 
cite this as a main barrier more than men).21Regional and socio-cultural contexts have a significant influence
21  Ibid. Base: adults aged 18+ who have used a mobile phone in the past three months but have never used mobile internet, despite being aware of mobile 
internet (excludes mobile users who are not aware of mobile internet).
22  GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries”, https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.pdf .“Phone theft is a big problem in Latin America. Anyone who has a higher-end device will avoid 
using it in public. Some people I know carry two phones so if they’re involved in a mugging 
they can hand over the basic phone.” - Mobile operator, Latin America
“My friend accepted a friend request and started to receive messages, bad content and sexual 
images. She told her brother and he scolded her. That did not help so now she is not allowed 
to use social media and shares her phone with her brother.”  - Female (aged 33), India“I wouldn’t spend so much on a cell phone, it’s too dangerous if you step out on the street and 
use it, you have to hide and you can’t call.” - Female mobile user, urban, Colombia22A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 18 | 
   Framing the problem: mobile-related safety concerns | 18Safety concerns are likely to vary within countries, for example, between rural and urban areas, different 
demographic groups (higher/lower socio-economic class, age and education level) and different socio-cultural 
contexts, such as religion.23 
Social norms, particularly in countries and societies with more traditional, patriarchal gender roles, also 
influence how mobile-related safety concerns affect women’s mobile access and use. For example, in South 
Asia fears of the ‘negative side of the internet’ (e.g. fraud, misuse of personal images and exposure to explicit 
images) were found to contribute to women’s internet access being policed or denied by gatekeepers (typically 
male).24 A 2015 GSMA study found that in some countries, notably Egypt, India and Jordan, it was reported as 
common for young women (but not young men), particularly in more rural areas, to have their mobile access 
and use monitored and controlled by their families, who want to protect them from harassment and control their 
communication with men outside the immediate family.25 
When responding to mobile-related safety concerns, it is important that the mobile industry and other stakeholders understand 
the types of harassment women face and the social, political and economic context in which the threat is experienced.Figure 2
Women usually cite concerns about ‘strangers contacting me’ as a 
greater barrier to mobile internet adoption than men
47%50%
43%
15%37%
13% 13%
9%10%23%20%36%
7%4%10%9%7%
2%
Chile Colombia Nicaragua India Pakistan Philippines Algeria Kenya TanzaniaWomen
Men
Source: GSMA Intelligence Consumer Survey, 2017, a range of example countries where women felt this barrier more acutely than men.  Please note, due to 
cultural norms different countries will agree more or less strongly to attitudinal statements in research.
Base: adults ages 18+ who have used a mobile phone in the last three months but have never used mobile internet, despite being aware of mobile internet 
(excludes mobile users who are not aware of mobile internet).
Percentages indicate the proportion of respondents who answered, 'This is one of the main reasons for stopping me' to the question, 'Please indicate to what 
extent, if at all, this stops you from using the internet on a mobile phone: I am concerned that I would be contacted by strangers'.
n= from 52 to 108 for women and n= 53 to 128 for men.% of mobile users who have not used mobile internet who claim that ‘strangers contacting me’ is a main barrier:
23  For example, data suggests that urban women in Bangladesh who do not own a mobile phone are more likely to cite safety risk, contact by strangers 
and information security as barriers to mobile ownership than their rural female counterparts. (GSMA Connected Women, 2018, “The Mobile Gender 
Gap Report 2018”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/connected-women/the-mobile-gender-gap-report-2018 ); The World 
Web Foundation Women’s Rights Online 2015 data also identifies social and demographic differences, for example, in Cairo, 32% of employed men 
and women reported experiencing threats or direct personal bullying in the last two years when using a mobile phone/internet compared to 49% of 
housewives/househusbands and 46% of students. (“Women’s Rights Online: Translating Access into Empowerment”, https://webfoundation.org/
research/womens-rights-online-2015/#fulldataset ).
24  GSMA, 2017, “Triggering mobile internet use among men and women in South Asia”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/
uploads/2017/11/GSMA-Triggering-Mobile-Internet-Use_Web.pdf .
25  GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries”, https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.pdf .  “Cyberstalking and monitoring of devices is also a big problem. Many male family members 
expect women to share their passwords with them. This is especially the case in rural areas 
where men still often think women want to mainly use phones to get in touch with men.”  
- NGO, Pakistan   | 19
Initiatives addressing  
mobile-related safety concerns A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 20 |  
This study identified over 60 initiatives from the private sector and NGOs aimed at 
tackling mobile-related or general safety concerns. These were then reviewed and 
categorised into 10 different types based on how they address these threats, for 
example, through education or call blocking. Figure 3 maps these initiatives according 
to the safety concern they address, from those relating to mobile ownership and use 
(including physical world, voice and SMS, and online safety concerns) to more general, 
non-mobile-related safety concerns that mobile can also help to address. A full list of 
these initiatives can be found in the Appendix.  Initiatives addressing mobile-related  
safety concerns
26 Some of these services may not have been developed purely to tackle safety concerns. For example, they may have been created primarily to provide 24/7 access to 
credit, but they do also happen to help provide anonymity as well.1 Anonymous top-up: mobile top-up services that do not require users to 
disclose their mobile numbers26  
2Female-friendly distribution models: providers ensure that points of 
sale (POS) are more approachable for women, for example, by employing 
female agents 
3 Call and message blocking services
4 Web filtering and online security services
5 Online service provider security settings and policies
6 Educational initiatives 
7Emergency call services: including emergency credit (allowing calls after 
credit has run out) and helplines
8Panic button apps
9 Harassment mapping: platforms that enable users to report and map 
harassment and other safety issues
10Wearables: wearable technology/gadgets that allow users to send alerts 
if they need helpA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 21
Figure 3
Framework for understanding how initiatives address mobile-related 
safety concerns
Addressing the underlying causes of safety concerns 
The initiatives identified and researched in this study (with the exception of certain educational initiatives)27 
focused primarily on addressing how women can prevent mobile-related safety issues or what to do once they 
have experienced them, rather than addressing the underlying causes. The mobile industry and other stakeholders 
need to consider how they can help address the root causes of these issues, such as the motivations of the 
perpetrators or environmental factors that contribute to the problem. For example, the 3-2-1 voice and text-based 
information service in Madagascar includes information on women’s rights (e.g. the importance of equal decision 
making in the household), and there is some evidence of positive social impacts for both male and female users of 
the service (e.g. no longer being victims of domestic abuse).28 
27  Realising they were only alleviating the symptoms of harassment and not addressing the source of the issue, Hamara Internet began holding face-to-face 
education sessions with men, explaining what constituted harassment and the possible legal repercussions of online harassment. Facebook partners 
with international organisations and local NGOs to provide offline education (tailored to the market) that covers a range of topics, including what is 
acceptable online behaviour (e.g. respecting the privacy of content/photos that are sent to them).
28  Provided by HNI and branded and marketed by Airtel Madagascar: https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/HNI-
case-study-final-1.pdf .Type of safety 
concernSafety concerns arising from mobile ownership and useGeneral safety 
concerns
CategoryNot mobile-related
Example: harassment 
in public (e.g. on 
street or public 
transport),  
assault, theft
Emergency call 
services: emergency 
credit and helplinesAnonymous top-up services: SMS-based, 
scratch cards, ATM top-up, online top-up, 
e-vouchers, mobile money top-up services, 
top-up machines
Female-friendly 
distribution models: 
female agents, 
female-focused 
retail storesCall and message 
blocking services: 
network-level 
services, device-
level servicesWeb filtering 
services and  
online security
Online service 
provider security 
settings and 
policiesHarassment  
mapping
       Panic button apps
Wearables
Educational initiatives: face-to-face initiatives, digital initiatives Examples of 
the safety 
concern  
Types of 
initiative that 
address safety 
concernsExample:  
harassment at 
points of sale or 
as a result of using 
phone in publicExample: 
harassment on 
social media, 
misuse of personal 
data or imagesExample: 
unwanted calls  
or messagesPhysical 
 worldOnlineVoice and  
SMS
1
2
63 5 8
9
107 4A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 22 |  
Table 1
Types of initiative and examples that address safety concerns
INITIATIVE TYPE DESCRIPTION EXAMPLES
 
 
 
 
Anonymous 
top-upSMS Recharge services that allow 
users to top-up mobile credit 
in-store without disclosing their 
mobile number. Normally they 
work by the customer being 
sent a one-time password 
(OTP) usually delivered by SMS. 
This service can potentially be 
provided by mobile operators 
at a low additional cost, as it 
is sometimes included in their 
underlying technology platform 
(e.g. via Mahindra Comviva).Dialog Axiata Sri Lanka, Secret 
Code
Grameenphone Bangladesh, 
Private Recharge
Idea Cellular India, Private 
Recharge
Orange Egypt, Private Recharge 
Vodafone India, Private Recharge
Vodafone India, Sakhi Pack
Scratch 
cardsScratch cards (available to buy 
at retail outlets and typically 
easy to use even with low 
digital skills or literacy levels) 
allow users to top-up their 
mobile phones via SMS without 
disclosing their phone number.Offered by the majority of mobile operators 
in low- and middle-income countries.
ATM Topping up via an existing 
network of ATMs as a result 
of collaboration between 
mobile operators and banking 
institutions. The customer is 
usually required to have an 
account with the bank operating 
the ATM.Grameenphone Bangladesh
Safaricom Kenya, M-Pesa
Online Online top-up services via 
account management systems 
or mobile apps that offer 
customers the ability to 
recharge their phone using 
PayPal, PayTM or debit/credit 
card via an app or account 
management system. This 
method requires a certain level 
of digital skills, but with the rise 
of connectivity and smartphone 
adoption, it could provide a 
cost-effective, instant, 24/7 top-
up option.Commonly offered by mobile operators.Profiling types of initiative that address safety concerns
1A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 23
INITIATIVE TYPE DESCRIPTION EXAMPLES
 
 
 
 
Anonymous 
top-upe-Voucher e-Vouchers are receipts printed with 
a unique voucher number. They 
are usually issued by cashiers at 
supermarkets or local grocery stores, 
allowing users to top-up mobile credit 
without disclosing their phone number. 
The vouchers can be redeemed in store 
or at a later date.Offered by mobile operators in 
combination with retailers in low- 
and middle-income countries.
Mobile 
moneyTop-up via mobile money can also 
offer a degree of anonymity. Once 
mobile money users have credit in their 
account they can use this to top-up 
their mobile phone without having to 
go via an agent. To get the credit on 
the phone, however, they either need 
to be sent this money by another 
mobile money user or they will have to 
‘cash in’ via an agent, which requires 
disclosure of their mobile number.Multiple mobile operators in low- 
and middle-income countries.
Top-up 
machinesTop-up machines, often located 
outside stores and available 24/7, allow 
users to top-up their mobile phones 
by typing in their phone number. 
Payments can be made using cash, 
debit card or mobile money service.Boonterm, Thailand
Tigo Bolivia and Tigo 
Tanzania, Tigo Matic
True, Thailand and 
Myanmar
 
 
 
Female-
friendly 
distribution 
modelsFemale 
agents Using female agents as they can be 
more approachable and viewed as less 
likely to harass women customers.29 
It can include employing women as 
agents (either roving or fixed), placing 
female-friendly POS in locations 
commonly frequented by women 
(such as markets) and working with 
independent POS to encourage them 
to be more female-friendly. Telenor India, Project 
Sampark
Vodafone India, Sakhi 
Pack
Female-
focused 
retail 
storesRetail stores that adopt female-friendly 
customer service can be solely staffed 
by women or have at least one female 
staff member to interact with female 
customers. This approach needs to 
consider the wider context, however, 
not just the in-store environment (e.g. 
ensuring the store is located in an area 
women feel safe visiting).Airtel India, female-only 
stores
Telenor India, female-
only stores
Vodafone India, Angel 
Stores
21
29  This is especially pertinent in areas where social norms restrict women’s interactions outside the family home and with males who are not family 
members, or where points of sale are often male-dominated spaces that are unwelcoming to women.A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 24 | 
INITIATIVE TYPE DESCRIPTION EXAMPLES
 
 
 
 
Call and 
message 
blocking 
servicesAt the 
network 
levelNetwork level call-blocking  
(where the mobile network provide 
blocks a caller) is a potentially 
easy-to-scale and cost-effective 
approach that allows users to 
quickly block numbers of unwanted 
callers/contacts.Airtel Kenya, Call blocker
GloNigeria, Call barring
Orange Tunisia, Call blocker
At the 
device 
levelMobile applications that allow users 
to see who’s calling and block 
unwanted calls/messages. Call 
blockers enable users to identify 
numbers and provide a range of 
call management options (e.g. call 
divert) and the ability to block 
incoming calls/messages. End users 
are usually charged a relatively 
small amount for these services, but 
there are also free applications that 
can be downloaded.CallApp, Caller ID and call 
blocker
True Software Scandinavia 
AB, truecaller
 
 
 
 
Web filtering 
and online 
security 
servicesWeb filtering services allow 
users to block certain content 
categories (e.g. pornography, 
violence, racism) or websites at 
the network or device level. Some 
also block unsafe files and protect 
against viruses. Typically offered 
by operators, they range from 
default free-of-charge services 
to add-on services available at a 
relatively small additional cost. 
These web- or network-filtering 
services can address concerns 
around exposure to inappropriate/
taboo content, but promotion and 
use must be considered carefully 
to avoid undue censorship.Robi Axiata Bangladesh, 
Safenet
Vodafone Group, SecureNet
43A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 25
 
 
 
 
Online service 
provider 
security 
settings and 
policiesProactive measures from online 
service providers to counter 
harassment, improve security and 
reassure users. These can include 
settings that allow content to be 
shared only with known contacts, 
profile photo protection, processes 
to block and report inappropriate 
content and behaviour and 
employing machine learning to 
detect and remove abusive  
speech online.Google, Alphabet – 
Perspective
Facebook policies and 
privacy/blocking settings30 
30  For example, Facebook has specific policies for women’s safety, anti-human trafficking and against nudity. It also offers tools that allow users to protect 
their privacy and control who can see their profile, to block and report inappropriate behaviour, and for suicide prevention. In December 2017, Facebook 
announced new tools to prevent harassment on Facebook and in Messenger as “part of our ongoing efforts to build a safe community”. See https://www.
facebook.com/help/325807937506242/ , https://heimdalsecurity.com/blog/facebook-security-privacy-guide/  and Facebook’s Profile Picture Guard to 
prevent misuse of profile pictures: http://indianexpress.com/article/technology/social/facebooks-profile-picture-guard-for-india-heres-what-it-does-
and-how-to-use-4718126/ . 
 
 
 
Educational 
initiativesFace-to-
faceWorkshops to inform women (and 
sometimes men) of risks, including 
mobile- and internet-related risks, 
how to stay safe and build digital 
resilience. Topics can include how 
to protect devices (e.g. choosing 
secure passwords), how to stay 
safe online (e.g. privacy settings, 
awareness of implications of 
sharing data/photos) and how to 
respond to concerns (e.g. how to 
block harassers). They may also 
address safety/harassment more 
generally (e.g. what constitutes 
harassment, respecting rights of 
others, gender equality). Facebook (in partnership 
with local NGOs and 
international organisations)
Digital Rights Foundation, 
Hamara Internet in Pakistan
HarassMap Egypt
SafeCity India
Digital Same as above, but delivered via 
digital/online tools, platforms or 
mobile apps. Delivered digitally, 
they may have greater possibility 
for scale than face-to-face 
workshops and could be more  
cost-effective. However as 
delivered digitally these initiatives 
normally require participants to 
have internet access and at least 
basic digital skills.Digital Rights Foundation, 
cyber harassment helpline
Every1Mobile, My Mozilla 
Club
Digital Rights Foundation, 
Hamara Internet in Pakistan  
Telefonica, Dialogando
65A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 26 |  
 
 
 
WearablesWearables/gadgets that allow users 
to call for help in times of danger or 
emergency. They can include panic 
buttons to send an alert to friends, 
family or emergency services.Securella, wearable with  
panic button
10 
 
 
 
Harassment 
mappingPlatforms that allow users to report 
and map experiences and locations 
of harassment. This allows quick 
reporting of safety issues in public 
spaces, mapping of harassment 
‘hotspots’ and raises awareness of 
the prevalence of harassment.HarassMap in Egypt
SafeCity in India, mapping 
tool
SafetiPin, mapping/
tracking tool
9 
 
 
 
Emergency call 
servicesEmergency 
creditAllows users to make a limited 
number of calls after their SIM credit 
has run out. For some initiatives, the 
credit is provided free of charge, 
but for others it is ‘borrowed’ credit 
that is typically repaid when next 
topping up.Ooredee Maldives 
Emergency Credit
Vodafone India, Sakhi 
Pack
Vodacom Tanzania, Nipige 
Tafu
Helplines Emergency helplines that women 
can call for support, advice and 
guidance on gender-based violence.Argentina Free 144 calls as part of GSMA’s 
We Care campaign
Vodacom Foundation in 
South Africa, National 
Gender-Based Violence  
Call Centre
 
 
 
 
Panic button 
appsPanic button apps that allow users 
to send a notification, sometimes 
with their current GPS location, 
to pre-defined contacts and/or 
emergency services in a dangerous 
or uncomfortable situation.ASAS Tech Solutions 
India, One Touch 
Response Panic Button
Hollie Guard App
Usalama Technology 
Kenya, Usalama  
panic button
Vodafone Turkey, Red 
Light Panic Button App
7
8A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS
A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 28 |  
Case Studies: EGYPT
Egypt country context
Research from a number of organisations suggests that many 
Egyptian women have been subject to some form of violence and/
or harassment.31 For example, 51% of women in Cairo claimed that 
they had experienced threats or direct personal bullying (including 
harassment or stalking) when using a mobile phone and/or the 
internet in the last two years versus 21% of men.32 In 2014, sexual 
harassment, including verbal, physical, behavioural, phone and online 
harassment, was criminalised. Nevertheless, episodes of harassment 
against women are reportedly pervasive. Our research highlighted 
that voice and SMS harassment, as well as online harassment, are 
significant concerns for women.
31  Sources: UN Women, 2013, “Study on Ways and Methods to Eliminate Sexual Harassment in Egypt”; http://www.dgvn.de/fileadmin/user_upload/
DOKUMENTE/English_Documents/Sexual-Harassment-Study-Egypt-Final-EN.pdf ; Al Jazeera, 2015, “Infographic: Violence Against Women in Egypt” 
https://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/interactive/2015/01/infographic-violence-women-egypt-150126150958383.html ; 
Amnesty International, 2015, “‘Circles of hell’: Domestic, Public and State Violence Against Women in Egypt”, https://www.amnestyusa.org/reports/
circles-of-hell-domestic-public-and-state-violence-against-women-in-egypt/ ; UNFPA, 2016, “The Economic Cost of Gender Based Violence Survey Egypt 
2015”, http://egypt.unfpa.org/publications/economic-cost-gender-based-violence-survey-egypt-2015 ; GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Bridging the 
gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income countries”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programmes/connected-
women/bridging-gender-gap .
32  World Wide Web Foundation, 2015, “Women’s Rights Online: Translating Access into Empowerment”, https://webfoundation.org/research/womens-
rights-online-2015/#fulldataset .
“You may face harassment through words, looks, phones, and touching. There are many 
different types of harassment. It is very common. You do not feel safe. Any girl only wants a 
good living, safety, and to be satisfied.”- Female (aged 30), Egypt
“Some of my friends have stopped using their phones. Every woman has patience but there 
is a limit. Some women cannot bear constant phone calls from strangers. Actually, all of us 
feel really confused. It is possible to just use your phone for calling, and to stop using social 
media.” - Female (aged 25), Egypt
“Internet harassment is another big problem in Cairo. These men can do many different things: 
he can blackmail the girl with her pictures and send her explicit pictures.”  
- Female (aged 29), EgyptA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 29
Orange Egypt Private Recharge: 
Our research identified that a perceived key driver of voice and 
SMS harassment is when women recharge their mobile phones at 
points of sale and either the reseller or a bystander overhears a 
customer’s number, which is often required to add credit to their 
account.
In 2016, Orange Egypt launched its Private Recharge service, 
which enables customers to top-up anonymously in-store 
through a unique and reusable 11-digit code. This eliminates the 
need to disclose a phone number when topping up and reduces the 
risk of an unknown party getting access to the number.   
Orange Egypt anticipates that the service will deliver:
• Positive impact on customer acquisition, particularly for women
• Increased top-up frequency and reduction in periods of  
‘zero balance’
• Increased call, SMS and data usage
• Potential for cost savings as scratch card use is reduced
Sara’s story
Sara is a 22-year-old female. She avoids sharing her number as much as possible as she has previously 
experienced harassing calls, including from her local mobile agent.
Sara started typing her phone number directly into 
the agent’s system or asking the shop assistant to 
give her the top-up code so that she could enter 
it herself, but she still experienced problems. Sara 
looked online for a way to stop this and found out 
about the Private Recharge feature from Orange.Mobile phones can also be seen as a tool to improve women’s safety, a way to keep in touch, let people know that 
they are safe and to deter harassment on the street.
“It’s great, I no longer have to 
give my phone number out when 
recharging my phone. I’ve even 
recommended it to my cousin.”A4.pdf   1   8/8/16   11:34 AMCASE STUDY 1
“I recharge my phone every three to four days at a local mobile outlet and I used to give my 
phone number to the shop assistant so he could add credit to my phone; the shop assistant 
used to call me repeatedly.”
“I tell women to always be talking on the phone in public places. It’s a distraction and might 
put people off harassing them.” - Female community influencer, Egypt“Many of my students, especially females, call their parents when they leave school to let them 
know they’re about to catch a bus or travel home. They call again when they’re off the bus. It’s 
safer this way.” - Male teacher, EgyptA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 30 |  
HarassMap Egypt
HarassMap is an Egyptian NGO that delivers both  
face-to-face training sessions about harassment, as  
well as an online harassment mapping tool that  
provides valuable information on the magnitude of  
sexual harassment. 
The training is provided by volunteers at schools, 
universities and private companies, and aims to 
educate participants (both male and female) on what 
constitutes harassment and how to react to it and 
prevent it. Many of the workshops and other activities 
encourage women and men to intervene and/or speak 
up when they see sexual harassment happening or 
even just hear people talking about it in a way that 
normalises it.
The online mapping tool allows victims to tag an 
incident online with the location, type of harassment 
and the date, via desktop or mobile. It also includes 
an option for users to report incidents of people 
intervening to stop the harassment and support the 
harassed person, to help track and encourage positive 
action. Data is uploaded to an online map, which can 
also log reports. 
Shaken by the incident, she looked online for  
help, and found HarassMap. She then attended a 
three-day session on identifying and combating 
sexual, physical and mobile-based harassment.  
She found the training very useful and now 
volunteers at HarassMap.Nour’s story
Nour is a 25-year-old female student who experienced sexual harassment in Egypt. 
“One really valuable element of the 
course was how they encouraged 
us to think about what we posted 
online, and things like how to 
manage who sees different images 
on Facebook.”CASE STUDY 2
“I was leaving school when someone walked beside me and took his penis out. I insulted him 
but no one did anything. I was shocked. After this situation, I used to be afraid of going down 
to the street. It is uncomfortable to live like this.”A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 31
Case Studies: INDIA
India country context
In India, many women report regularly experiencing harassing 
phone calls and messages. A recent study by Truecaller Insights 
found that one out of three women (36%) in India cite receiving 
sexual and inappropriate calls or SMS. Of those, 78% claimed to 
receive harassing calls with inappropriate and sexual content at 
least once a week, and 82% claimed to receive unsolicited videos 
and pictures with inappropriate and sexual content at least once a 
week.33 With the increasing penetration of internet-enabled phones, 
this harassment is also moving online.
Despite the widespread harassment, owning a mobile phone can 
also help women feel safer.
Mobile agents are often very 
‘male’ spaces in India. They can be 
intimidating for women to visit, and 
there is a risk of female customers’ 
mobile numbers being recorded 
and misused either by the retailer 
or a bystander.34 This can make 
some women avoid recharging their 
mobile phones as they do not want to 
publicly disclose their mobile number. 
Gatekeepers can also prevent women 
from visiting retailers for these reasons, 
and, as a result, men typically purchase 
airtime/data for their wives and other 
female family members.35Mobile agents in India tend to be male-dominated spaces.
33  Truecaller, 2018, “Truecaller insights reveals: 1 out of 3 women in India receives sexual & offensive calls or SMS’”, https://blog.truecaller.com/2018/03/07/
truecaller-insights-reveals-1-out-of-3-women-in-india-receives-sexual-offensive-calls-or-sms/ . 
34  Hindustan Times, 2017, https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/girls-mobile-numbers-up-for-sale-in-uttar-pradesh-price-rs-50-to-rs-500/story-
5lYPcav12h7rnW6A6UDLLI.html . 
35  In many circumstances, gatekeepers (often male relatives but can also be community influencers) play an important role in women’s access to and 
experience of mobile in India. Previous GSMA research found that only 61% of female SIM owners in India had bought credit on their own in the last 
four weeks compared to 89% of men. GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Bridging the gender gap: Mobile access and usage in low- and middle-income 
countries”, N= 434 and men: N= 174 https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Connected-Women-Gender-Gap.
pdf; GSMA, 2017, “Triggering mobile internet use among men and women in South Asia”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/
uploads/2017/11/GSMA-Triggering-Mobile-Internet-Use_Web.pdf .“When I’m going home late at night after exams, then I’ll feel a bit scared. I just call my parents 
and stay on the phone the whole time so they know where I am.”  
- Female (aged 19), IndiaA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 32 | 
36   Hindustan Times, 2017, https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/girls-mobile-numbers-up-for-sale-in-uttar-pradesh-price-rs-50-to-rs-500/story-
5lYPcav12h7rnW6A6UDLLI.html .“On Facebook we get ‘hi’, ‘hello’ messages and then we will ask them how they got our 
number and why are they bothering us by sending the messages. They will ask for our 
number again and again and even after blocking them, they will send us the friend request 
with a different ID and that is a very big problem. They are not using any wrong words but 
they are continuously poking us by sending the messages by asking the number and all. They 
are asking our details which we don’t like.” - Female (aged 19), India
“Till now I have changed numbers 5 times. Whenever unknown people have this number 
then I want to change the number on the spot. If I don’t want to talk to them and if they 
become serious and want to be your boyfriend it’s better to change your number. Whenever 
increasingly people have your number they get excited and make mischief so it’s better to 
change the number then they don’t make calls to you.” - Female (aged 33), India“Mobile numbers of unsuspecting girls are being sold from recharge outlets across Uttar 
Pradesh for prices based on their looks and are being used by men to harass them over the 
phone, police say.”- NGO, South AsiaA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 33
37  GSMA Connected Women, 2015, “Kenya and the rise of the call blocking app”, https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/
connectedwomen/kenya-and-the-rise-of-the-call-blocking-app . 
38  “Truecaller in 2017”, https://blog.truecaller.com/2017/01/18/truecaller-in-2017/ ; Truecaller, 2018, “Introducing Truecaller 8 for Android with 
SMScapabilities and a brand new look!”, https://support.truecaller.com/hc/en-us/articles/115002193709-Introducing-Truecaller-8-for-Android-with-
SMScapabilities-and-a-brand-new-look- . 
39  The Hindu, 2017, “Truecaller announces partnerships in India”, http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/truecaller-announces-partnerships-in-india/
article17709213.ece . Truecaller in India
The fact that harassment via mobile is a serious and
pervasive issue is supported by the rise in popularity of
call blocking apps and services over the last few years, 
as well as apps aimed at increasing one’s personal 
safety.37
Truecaller is a call blocking app available primarily for
smartphones. It allows users to identify inbound phone
numbers, block unwanted calls or hidden numbers and
see when friends also using the app are available.  
It was recently updated to extend these features 
to SMS; for example, it can automatically identify 
unknown SMS. By January 2017, Truecaller had 
reached 250 million users worldwide.38
Over 50% of Truecaller’s total user base is in India, 
where over 2.5 billion calls were blocked through the 
app in a 12-month period. In 2017, Truecaller and Bharti 
Airtel in India partnered to bring the Truecaller Caller 
ID function to the operator’s feature phones, even 
those without a data connection.39
Truecaller has invested in ensuring its user experience
is intuitive, even for those with low digital literacy, and
has made it available in multiple local languages. It has
also benefited from negotiating pre-installing the app 
on some handsets; in some instances, the app is co-
branded with the device manufacturer.
Pavati’s story
Pavati is a 20-year-old student living in New Delhi. She values her smartphone
as a tool that increases her safety—when she goes out, she regularly shares her
location with her friends via WhatsApp and whenever she feels uncomfortable
she calls her friends or her family. She often receives sexually harassing calls,
which has led her to change her SIM regularly. Since she installed Truecaller, this
is no longer an issue, as she can now block harassing calls.CASE STUDY 3
“When someone knocks at your door you have the choice of seeing who it is before
you open it. When someone sends you an email you can see their name before you
open it. We want to give our consumers the same choice when they receive a call. Every
consumer has the right to know who’s calling them.” - TruecallerA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 34 |  “Sakhi Pack is better than the
other SIMs I’ve had. The way you
can recharge is good—nobody gets
to know my number. That’s the
best part.”Vodafone India Sakhi Pack: 
In 2017, Vodafone India launched ‘Sakhi’, a special pack aimed at ensuring
the safety of women mobile users.
Sakhi facilitates a ‘private recharge’ service that enables female
customers to top-up anonymously in-store. Women are able to top-up
using a one-time password (OTP) code, without sharing their mobile
number. They also receive 10 minutes of free local emergency calls per
month, and 90 days of free SMS-based beauty and health information.
Vodafone has also looked at the distribution of Sakhi Pack aiming to
target women in female friendly environments, for example, selling it at
temporary kiosks in local female-friendly markets, at women’s college
campuses, etc.
Vodafone India’s primary commercial objective is to increase acquisition
of female customers and, ultimately, enable these customers to start 
using mobile internet.
By December 2017, the Sakhi pack had been sold to over 123,000
women of whom Vodafone estimates that over 70% of these customers
are rural women.
Kalinda’s story
Kalinda is 19 years old and lives with her husband in India. She has had a phone 
for more than four years. Her father bought it for her so that she could call him 
and she shares it with her sister. While she never experienced harassing calls, she 
knows about them and her brother checks her phone regularly as he is concerned 
about the issue. Kalinda found out about Sakhi Pack from a friend, told her brother 
and he went and bought the SIM for her. She likes the private recharge feature of 
Sakhi Pack, as her brother is no longer
needed to go to the shop with her when she  
tops up her phone and since she has had it she  
has never had a zero balance.CASE STUDY 4
“Without Truecaller, incidences of
stalking would be higher as you’d
have to answer every number. 
- Pavati“I received a call this morning, a man was talking in very rough language, asking
for my details. I asked him who he was, then I ended the call. He then called again
so I blocked it on the Truecaller app.” - Pavati   | 35
Recommendations for stakeholders to tackle  
mobile-related safety concernsA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 36 |  
Mobile-related safety concerns are one of many
barriers standing in the way of women owning or
using a mobile phone or mobile internet, and gaining
equal access to the transformational services that
mobile technology can offer. These safety concerns
are unlikely to be resolved on their own, and as
mobile internet use increases, they may become even
more of an issue, potentially exacerbating the mobile 
internet usage gender gap. A concerted effort by the 
mobile industry and other stakeholders is needed 
to address women’s mobile-related safety concerns 
effectively, build women’s digital resilience and ensure mobile technology is a platform for enhancing 
women’s safety. The following section draws on 
the primary research, stakeholder interviews and 
secondary research to provide recommendations for 
stakeholders to address women’s mobile-related safety 
concerns. Recommendations have been provided for
mobile operators and private sector organisations
launching initiatives to combat mobile-related safety
concerns, and for policymakers 40; however, many
recommendations are also likely to be relevant for
other types of stakeholders, such as other mobile
industry players and NGOs.Recommendations for stakeholders to  
tackle mobile-related safety concerns
Understand the scale, impact and drivers of mobile-related safety 
concerns in your market
•  Invest in research to understand the local mobile-related safety concerns that are barriers to mobile 
uptake and use in your market.41
•  Understand the context and social norms and how they impact uptake and use when rolling out a 
product or service. For example, investigate the importance and influence of gatekeepers and how to 
engage them.
•  Liaise with and learn from other organisations that tackle similar problems for different segments, 
sharing lessons and building knowledge and solutions. For example, the international internet safety 
community and online child protection organisations.
Design and launch effective initiatives to tackle mobile-related safety concerns in
your market.
For example, consider the initiatives highlighted in Table 1 as well as the following suggestions:
•  Establish the business case for the initiative upfront, including the relevant costs and direct or indirect 
sources of revenue, and track these over time to ensure commercial success. Consider strategies to 
reach scale cost-effectively, for example, through partnerships with NGOs or app developers.Mobile operators and other private sector providers
40  The secondary research included reviewing recommendations from other reports. For example, the recommendations for policymakers included in 
this report draw heavily from the Broadband Commission Working Group on the Digital Gender Divide’s 2017 report, “Working Group on the Digital 
Gender Divide Recommendations for Action: Bridging the Gender Gap in Internet and Broadband Access and Use”, http://broadbandcommission.org/
Documents/publications/WorkingGroupDigitalGenderDivide-report2017.pdf .
41  This could include speaking to call centre staff and agents to understand what safety concerns customers are reporting.A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 37
•  Consider women’s safety concerns at all stages of the customer journey. For example, distribution 
strategies should consider broader ‘physical world’ safety concerns, such as ensuring points of sale are 
female-friendly and located in safe areas.
•  Design initiatives and content to be usable for those with low literacy and digital literacy.42 For 
example, consider offering IVR43 alternatives and take the needs of low literacy/digital literacy users into 
account when designing online security settings. 
• Provide safety-related products and services in local languages to help ensure greater uptake and use.
•  Ensure initiatives do not exclude users with lower-end handsets or in areas of low connectivity, as 
these users are more likely to be women. For example, consider designing call blocking services that 
work on feature and basic phones and creating content that can also be accessed offline.
•  Consider offering services for free to drive indirect revenue (e.g. free download of third-party 
callblocking apps to reduce churn caused by harassing calls).
•  Consider pre-installing safety-related applications/services on handsets (e.g. call-blocking apps).
•  Pilot initiatives prior to full launch to help refine the approach, user experience, marketing messages 
and consumer engagement tactics.
•  Invest in marketing to drive awareness and understanding of safety-related initiatives. A number 
of initiatives that were reviewed suffered from insufficient marketing efforts, resulting in low awareness and 
poor understanding of the service. Use channels that women already use and trust (e.g. radio versus television 
versus word of mouth), and tailor content to reach those with lower literacy and digital literacy skills.
•  Incentivise mobile agents to promote/sell the safety-related product or service, educating women on 
how to use it and the benefits to themselves and their families.
•  Train agents (both male and female) to help women feel safer using mobiles and to build their digital 
resilience. For example, train them to educate female customers about setting up privacy features and 
how to block unwanted calls and SMS. Also consider establishing policies and procedures that deter 
agents from knowingly misusing the numbers of female customers.
•  Consider recruiting female agents, as female customers will likely find them more approachable and 
they are also less likely to disclose a female customer’s number to male strangers. Consider hiring female 
agents both in shops/distribution points and as roving agents in settings where women are less mobile or 
where social norms prevent women from interacting with male strangers.
•  Raise awareness across your organisation of the need to address women’s mobile-related safety 
concerns and the positive impact that tackling them can have on customer retention, acquisition  
and usage.
•  Ensure call centre staff understand and can respond effectively to women’s mobile-related safety 
concerns. For example, train them to advise women on security settings and call blocking services and/ 
or consider launching a dedicated women’s customer service number served by specially trained staff.
•  Consider creating and promoting content and initiatives that address the root cause of safety issues, 
i.e. the motivations of perpetrators of harassment and structural issues that have created these safety 
issues and allowed them to persist.
42  This is particularly important when targeting women, who are more likely to have lower literacy levels and fewer digital skills. Many of the initiatives 
reviewed appeared not to take customers digital literacy levels into account, which appeared to have an impact on uptake and use.
43 Interactive Voice Response (IVR) is technology that allows computers to interact with people via voice and use of a keypad.A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS 38 |  
•  Support and conduct research on the threats, as well as cultural and social  
norms, that prevent women from accessing and using the internet in different  
social and cultural contexts.
•  Increase awareness of the threats that prevent women from accessing and using the internet and 
how they can be addressed through awareness campaigns, digital literacy programmes and in formal 
education programmes/curriculum.
•  Include mobile and digital skills in school curricula, including primary schools, to ensure girls  
are reached.
•  Invest in and/or encourage the development of applications and services that make it safer for 
women to access and use the internet, addressing issues of harassment, abuse and violence, while 
ensuring that other fundamental freedoms and rights are upheld.
•  Strengthen measures to protect women against internet-related abuse and harassment, including 
through legal and policy frameworks that recognise digital harassment and fraud, and through 
measures that help address issues and promote access to justice.
•  Make it easy and safe for women to report online abuse (and ensure that such reports are responded 
to quickly and effectively).Promote the positive role mobile can play in making women feel safer
•  Create and/or partner with third parties to design mobile products and services that use mobile 
as a tool for personal safety (e.g. emergency alerts, helplines, educational platforms, harassment 
mapping).
•  Invest in marketing to promote mobile services such as these.
Policymakers44
44  The below recommendations for policymakers draw heavily from the Broadband Commission Working Group on the Digital Gender Divide’s 2017 report. 
Broadband Commission, 2017, “Working Group on the Digital Gender Divide Recommendations for Action: Bridging the Gender Gap in Internet and 
Broadband Access and Use”, http://broadbandcommission.org/Documents/publications/WorkingGroupDigitalGenderDivide-report2017.pdf .A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS   | 39
AppendixA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS    | 41 40 |  
CATEGORY
INITIATIVES LOCATIONPhysical 
worldVoice and 
SMSOnlineGeneral 
safety 
concerns
Vodafone India: Sakhi Pack IN ● ● ● ●
Grameenphone: Alternative distribution channels BD ● ● ●
Orange Egypt: Private Recharge EG ● ● ●
Grameenphone: Private Recharge BD ● ● ●
Idea Cellular: Private recharge IN ● ● ●
Safaricom: M-Pesa KE ● ● ●
Dialog Axiata: Secret code LK ● ● ●
Dialog Axiata: Scratch cards LK ● ● ●
Asiacell: Almas line IQ ●
Orange Tunisia: Call blocker TN ●
True Software Scandanavia AB: Truecaller GLOBAL ●
Vodafone India: Angel stores IN ● ● ●
Telenor India: Project Sampark IN ● ●
APC: Safety toolkit GLOBAL ● ●
Telefonica Group: Dialogando LatAm ●
Every1Mobile: My Mozilla Club KE and ZA ●
Foundation for Media Alternatives: AksyonVAW PH ●
Point of View: Digital Security Workshops IN ● ● ●
HarassMap: Educational training & harassment mapping EG ● ●
SafeCity: Outreach programme IN ● ● ●
Grameenphone: Safe Internet BD ●
Vodafone Group: SecureNet EU ●
Airtel Kenya: Call blocker KE ●
GloNigeria: Call barring NG ●
Call App: Caller ID and call blocker GLOBAL ●Initiatives that address mobile-related safety concerns
Via stakeholder calls and desk research, a wide range of mobile-related safety initiatives were identified. The focus 
was on those in low- and middle- income countries, however, some from the developed world were also reviewed as 
examples of what can be done.
TYPE
Anonymous 
Top-up 
servicesFemale 
friendly 
distribution 
modelsCall and 
messaging 
blockingWeb 
filtering 
and online 
securityOnline 
service 
provider 
security 
settingsEducational
initiativesEmergency 
call 
servicesHarrassment 
mappingPanic 
button 
appsWearables
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●AppendixA FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS A FRAMEWORK TO UNDERSTAND WOMEN’S MOBILE-RELATED SAFETY CONCERNS    | 43 42 | 
CATEGORY
INITIATIVES LOCATIONPhysical 
worldVoice and 
SMSOnlineGeneral 
safety 
concerns
Moov: Weena proposition TG and BJ ● ● ●
Airtel Kenya: Female-only stores KE ● ● ●
Chayn: Online safety guide PK ●
Daisy mobile app AU ● ● ●
Digital Rights Foundation: Cyber Harassment Helpline PK ● ●
Not Your Baby: Mobile app CA ●
Vodafone Group: #BeStrong Initiative GLOBAL ●
Telenor Group: Safe internet web filter for children GLOBAL ●
Robi Banglaesh, Safenet BD ●
Digital Rights Foundation, Hamara Internet Pakistan PK ●
Facebook, policies and privacy/blocking settings GLOBAL ●
Barclays UK: Top-up services at ATMs UK
True top-up machines TH and MM ● ●
Boonterm Thailand TH ● ●
Airtel India: Female-only stores IN ● ●
Telenor India: Female-only stores IN ● ●
Google - Alphabet - Perspective online harassment detection GLOBAL ●
ASAS Tech Solutions: One Touch Response panic button IN ●
Assédio Zero: Mapping tool BR ●
Breakthrough India IN ●
Circle of 6 GLOBAL ●
Fight Back: Panic button app IN ●
Hollaback!: Campaign GLOBAL ●
Sekron BR ●
Vodafone Turkey: Red Light Panic Button TR ●
Vodafone Group: TecSOS GLOBAL ●
SafetiPin GLOBAL ●
Securella MA ●
Argentina 144 Calls AR ●
Hollie Guard app GLOBAL ●
Airtel Madagascar, 3-2-1 information service MG ●
Vodacom Foundation: GBV Call Centre ZA ●
Usalama: Panic button app KE ●
National Domestic Violence Helpline UK UK ●
Vodacom Tanzania, Nipige Tafu TZ ●
Ooredoo Emergency credit MV ●TYPE
Anonymous
top-up 
servicesFemale 
friendly 
distribution 
modelsCall and 
messaging 
blockingWeb 
filtering 
and online 
securityOnline 
service 
provider 
security 
settingsEducational
initiativesEmergency 
call
servicesHarrassment 
mappingPanic 
button 
appsWearables
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●GSMA HEAD OFFICE
Floor 2
The Walbrook Building
25 Walbrook
London EC4N 8AF
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)20 7356 0600
Fax: +44 (0)20 7356 0601To download the full report please visit 
the GSMA website at www.gsma.com