A lifeline to learning
Leveraging technology to support
education for refugees
UNESCO Education Sector
Education is UNESCO’s top priority because  
it is a basic human right and the foundation 
on which to build peace and drive sustainable development. UNESCO is the United Nations’ specialized agency for education and the Education Sector provides global and regional leadership in education, strengthens national education systems and responds to contemporary global challenges through 
education with a special focus on gender 
equality and Africa.The Global Education 2030 Agenda
UNESCO, as the United Nations’ specialized  
agency for education, is entrusted to lead and coordinate the Education 2030 Agenda, which is part of a global movement to eradicate poverty through 17 Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. Education, essential to achieve all of these goals, has its own dedicated Goal 4, which aims to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. ” 
The Education 2030 Framework for Action provides 
guidance for the implementation of this ambitious goal and commitments.
Published in 2018 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization  
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP , France
© UNESCO 2018
ISBN 978-92-3-100262-5
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (http://
www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).
The present license applies exclusively to the text content of the publication. For the use of any material not clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, 
prior permission shall be requested from: publication.copyright@unesco.org or UNESCO Publishing, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP France.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any coun-try, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or 
bounda-ries. 
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the 
Organization.
Cover and inside artwork: © Edel Rodriguez
Designed by Aurélia MazoyerPrinted by UNESCOPrinted in FranceA lifeline to learning
Leveraging technology to support  
education for refugeesAcknowledgements
This publication presents the results of a collaborative study 
undertaken by subject matter experts and UNESCO specialists.
Fengchun Miao, Chief of the ICT in Education Unit at UNESCO 
Headquarters, conceptualized the study and the analytical framework for the report. He also coordinated the drafting and production of the report and served as the principal editor.
UNESCO Associate Project Officers Michela Pagano and 
Mark West supported the substantive editing and redrafting process.
David Atchoarena, Director for Education Policies and Lifelong 
Learning Systems at UNESCO, provided overall guidance and direction.
The desk review and interviews were conducted by Christoph 
Pimmer, a scholar at the University of Applied Sciences and 
Arts of Northwestern Switzerland (FHNW). He contributed the early draft of the report with support from Urs Gröhbiel, a colleague at FHNW, and Ronda Zelezny-Green, a digital learning expert and honorary research associate affiliated with 
Royal Holloway, University of London.
We acknowledge with gratitude those specialists who 
provided review and feedback to sharpen the report: Shafika Isaacs, an ICT in education advisor to the Ministry of Education 
in South Africa, Sanjaya Mishra from the Commonwealth of Learning, Jackie Strecker from UNHCR and Tarek Chehidi from 
GESCI.
The report draws on contributions from UNESCO Programme 
Specialists Jaco du Toit, Eddie Dutton and Jonghwi Park based on their field experiences in Nairobi, Amman and Bangkok, 
respectively. We also thank Huhua Fan, Lindsay Young, 
Chrystelle de Coligny and Camille Lailheugue for making valuable comments.
We owe special thanks to Edel Rodriguez for producing the 
artwork featured on the cover and inside the publication.
Our acknowledgement is also extended to Rebecca Kraut for 
copyediting and proofreading the text.
This report would not have been possible without the 
information contributed by the many individuals who were 
interviewed and the invaluable efforts of practitioners 
leveraging mobile technology to provide educational opportunities for refugees and other displaced people. It is the hope of UNESCO that this publication will enhance the 
knowledge base that can lead to evidence-based policies and 
concerted practices needed for the sustained provision of education for refugees.Table of contents
3Table of contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  5
INTR
ODUCTION AND BACKGROUND  1
0
Magnitude of current refugee and displacement movements  10
T
he role of education as a strategic response to displacement
 10
T
he relevance of mobile technology
 11
S
cope, structure and analytical approach
 12
Or
ganizing framework of the report: Refugees’ educational challenges
 13
A not
e about prior reviews
 14
MOBILE LEARNING TO ADDRESS INDIVIDUAL CHALLENGES  1 8
Lack of language and literacy skills in host countries  18
T
rauma and identity struggles
 24
Disor
ientation in new environments
 27
Ex
clusion and isolation
 31
MOBILE LEARNING TO ADDRESS EDUCATION SYSTEM CHALLENGES  3 8
Teachers unprepared for education for refugees  38
S
carcity of appropriate learning and teaching resources
 43
Undocumen
ted and uncertified educational progression
 45
MOBILE LEARNING TO ADDRESS CHALLENGES RELATED TO 
SPECIFIC LEVELS AND TYPES OF EDUCATION  5
2
Limited access to quality primary and secondary education  52
Obstacles t
o vocational training and the labour market
 59
R
estricted access to higher education
 64
LESSONS LEARNED AND CONCLUSIONS  7 2
Leveraging existing technology resources to deliver quick-response mobile learning while ensuring physical and cyber security  72
Ensur
ing inclusion and gender equality in mobile learning projects for refugees
 73
P
romoting blended learning for quality provision of education
 73
Empo
wering teachers to play pivotal roles in facilitating mobile learning and coaching refugees
 74
O
vercoming barriers to practising learner-centred pedagogy
 74
C
ultivating skills for jobs, self-fulfilment and entrepreneurship
 74
Shif
ting from a technocentric approach to need-centric and resource restructuring models
 75
M
ajor challenges and the way ahead
 77
REFERENCES 80
APPENDIX
94
Search strategies  94
I
nclusion criteria
 94
I
nterviews
95
Question guide
 96
List of in
terviewees
 97
List of pr
ojects and initiatives
 98
List of apps and pla
tforms
 98
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 99Executive summary
5Executive summary
1 It is worth noting that there are other education-related challenges such as infrastructure and connectivity. However, in this report the focus is on 
the primary challenges emerging from collected data. Background, scope and goals
The issue of provision of education and related services for 
refugees is complex and multifaceted. With a record number of 65 million individuals who were forcibly displaced worldwide 
in 2016, the magnitude of the refugee and displacement crises 
is unprecedented (UNHCR, 2017). Particularly alarming is that 
children make up more than half of the 22.5 million refugees, i.e. 
those individuals who fled their countries to seek protection 
elsewhere. The repercussions in the field of education can be 
quite severe. Immediate, strategic and sustainable educational responses are required to ensure that refugees and displaced populations have access to equitable and inclusive quality 
education and lifelong learning opportunities.
The increased access that refugees have to digital mobile 
technologies suggests that leveraging these tools more frequently and in a systematic manner could be a source of 
support for education delivery, administration and support 
services in refugee contexts. In fact, the number of refugee projects and initiatives that involve the use of mobile technologies is growing. This report analyses current experiences, lessons learned and emerging practices in mobile solutions in the field of education for refugees, with a view towards assessing 
opportunities and challenges and informing the way forward.
Different, continuously emerging definitions of mobile learning 
exist. In this report, mobile learning is defined broadly as education that involves the use of mobile devices to enable 
learning any time and anywhere, with a particular focus on 
mobility and its unique affordances rather than on technology per se. It includes questions about how mobile devices can support not only learning but also broad educational goals 
such as effective education administration and information 
management (Vosloo, 2012, p. 10). A comprehensive 
interpretation of what constitutes mobile learning includes 
learning across formal, non-formal and informal settings, and in camps and urban areas. Also, it encapsulates notions of situated 
and participatory learning, both online and offline, and with a 
wide range of mobile media while learners are stationary or on the move.
The report focuses on persons who have been forced to leave 
their country to escape war, persecution or natural disaster and 
who experience learning during a variety of phases ranging from dislocation and journey to arrival and integration in new, 
provisional, protracted or more durable host country settings. However, after initial searches returned only a limited number 
of papers and projects, some of the arguments have been 
additionally bolstered with a selective number of studies and 
reports on groups with characteristics similar to refugees, i.e. people displaced by emergencies and/or fleeing socio-economic hardships.
Approach and structure
To comprehensively capture the potential of mobile technology in education for refugees, the research integrated different methodological approaches including systematic searches of academic databases, selective web searches and semi-structured interviews with experts, practitioners and refugees involved in mobile learning projects and initiatives.
In this report, the analysis of mobile learning projects and practices 
is structured alongside ten education-related challenges,
1 grouped 
into three main categories:
●●Individual: Challenges that can negatively impact refugees’ 
learning and teaching opportunities, as well as their lives beyond the learning environment. These include the lack of language and literacy skills; the disorientation that might be caused en route and during the integration process in new environments; trauma and identity struggles; and exclusion and isolation.
●●Education system: Challenges that transcend individual education levels and domains and stem from issues in the education system more broadly. These include the unpreparedness of teachers to meet the demands of working with refugees; the lack of openly available, appropriate and adequate learning and teaching resources; and the lack of documentation and certification mechanisms for displaced populations.
●●Educational levels: Challenges that pertain to the different levels and types of education, including limited access to good-quality primary and secondary education; obstacles to vocational training and labour market participation; and restricted higher education access.A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees6Findings: Mobile learning to 
address refugees’ education and learning challenges
Addressing individual challenges
This report shows that mobile solutions play a key role in 
refugees’ informal learning. Underpinning the definition of 
informal learning as ‘learning that occurs in daily life, in the 
family, in the workplace, in communities and through interests 
and activities of individuals’ (UNESCO Institute for Lifelong 
Learning, 2012), these practices of refugees’ informal learning include information gathering and problem-solving in new 
environments during and after flight, and the development 
and maintenance of social networks across multiple contexts. Such networks help address isolation and hold significant learning potential from participatory and connectivist 
viewpoints (Siemens, 2005). However, there is no evidence 
demonstrating that the sole utilization of mobile media 
results in better integration of refugees into the mainstream 
cultures of their new host countries.
Although low language and literacy skills can be the most 
pervasive and potentially damaging barrier to educational 
participation for a refugee learner, to date there is little 
evidence that documents the efficacy of specific learning 
and literacy apps in refugee settings. Mobile-enhanced conversational and situated learning scenarios deserve further 
analysis, as some examples in the report indicate.
The use of mobile technology can be a strong complement 
to intensive face-to-face engagement when refugees are 
experiencing severe trauma and mental health difficulties. 
Some findings in the report indicate that mobile learning 
applications and programmes can support refugees’ 
knowledge acquisition while enhancing their psychological well-being. Moreover, mobile digital storytelling is helping 
refugees with their identity (re)development processes. 
While these findings are promising, further research is required to build the evidence base in this area.
Addressing education system challenges
To date, there are few projects and formal studies on mobile teacher training in refugee contexts, despite the fact 
that there is a great need for teachers and educators who 
are prepared to respond to the unique needs of refugees 
across all levels of education. Emerging project findings are 
beginning to illustrate how mobile micro-content and mobile messaging can be used to facilitate ongoing support and help 
teachers improve their teaching practice.
The scarcity of instructional resources that teachers and 
learners can use in the classroom and beyond is also a common issue in crises situations. Although some digital content for refugees is available in the form of open educational resources (OER), it is often scattered and 
unaligned with the education systems in which it is used. 
Furthermore, quality control processes for new OER and evaluation mechanisms for existing OER are often absent. This makes it difficult for teachers in refugee contexts to identify, evaluate and reuse OER. Finally, there is an unmet demand for 
relevant digital content in languages other than English.
The findings also indicate that digital technologies that 
capture and analyse education data can play an essential role in improving basic operational, planning and controlling functions in education systems in refugee and crisis settings. 
However, current technological (and political) structures 
infrequently document, certify or acknowledge refugees’ prior educational achievements or current progress. Another barrier that requires attention is represented by refugees’ disrupted educational trajectories as they move 
across different areas.
Addressing challenges related 
to educational levels
The value of mobile learning to enhance refugee children’s 
opportunities in primary and secondary education remains underexplored. This is because most projects have 
not reached scale, nor has their impact been rigorously 
evaluated. Very few evaluations point to the potential of mobile applications to support skills development in specific subject areas, such as mathematics, or to enhance refugees’ connected and lifelong learning. Despite the relevance of cultivating refugees’ job-related and vocational skills, 
few of the identified projects use mobile media to support 
vocational training.
Mirroring a broader trend, the use of massive open online 
courses (MOOCs) has also started to flourish in refugee higher education settings. However, the analysis shows that the success of digital learning courses in refugee higher 
education contexts has little to do with magnitude, openness 
or exclusively online delivery. Instead, digital higher education courses tend to be most valuable if they are connected with blended learning approaches that provide additional online and offline learning and support structures, and if they are 
integrated into a broader curriculum that leads to certification 
and degrees.Executive summary
7Lessons learned and perspectives
This report identifies a diverse range of mobile learning 
projects and practices. Projects and studies were found across all continents, with interventions designed for early 
childhood to higher education; low and high income settings; 
formal, non-formal and informal learning; urban and rural environments; and situations before, during and after refugees flee their homes. While the diversity of contexts makes it difficult to generalize findings, there are insights that transcend individual settings and, if localized, can provide 
guidance for future implementation of mobile learning 
initiatives.
One of the key observations is that successful projects often 
integrate different forms of online and offline learning 
into wider blended learning designs. These incorporate mentoring and peer support mechanisms and draw on learner-centred pedagogies. To facilitate the transformation towards learner-centred instruction, teachers of refugees 
typically require specific training and ongoing support. This 
goes beyond the acquisition of technical skills and calls for a transformation of their perception of teaching and learning altogether. Additionally, refugee learners tend to be 
overwhelmed by constructivist and peer learning approaches 
and more at ease with teacher-centred pedagogical methods. Thus it is necessary to delineate clear pathways for learning progression in a manner that enhances their ability to engage 
in self-directed learning over time.
Another pattern to emerge is the integration of mobile social 
media and mobile instant messaging spaces in educational designs, although how to obtain big data from instant messaging apps remains a problem. These simple platforms, 
which are increasingly available to refugees across a wide 
range of settings, can connect spatially distributed resources, learners and educators. Moreover, mobile social media can 
help promote refugee participation in digital education 
courses by reaching learners who have previously been excluded from such opportunities.
In addition to enhancing formal education designs, refugees 
would benefit from systematic approaches that strengthen their capacity to leverage mobile technology across non-formal and informal learning settings. This is particularly relevant because refugees’ capacities to leverage informal mobile learning opportunities are not equally distributed, 
and this imbalance might further disadvantage some of the most vulnerable groups and cohorts. Digital literacy 
skills for refugees go beyond the mastery of technology and need to include skills related to creating secure and private communication spaces, an issue that is particularly 
relevant to the many refugees who fear reprisals and 
surveillance. To this end, programme designers need to consider safeguarding mechanisms for education apps and 
other digital tools targeting refugees. In addition to digital 
literacy skills, approaches that help refugees cultivate digital competencies, including coding, warrant further systematic 
exploration. These skill sets are beneficial not only because 
they open up refugees’ chances to enter local and global labour markets, but also, as some examples in this report have shown, because they enable refugees to drive the 
development of mobile learning solutions for themselves and 
their peers.
Conclusion and outlook
As mobile technologies and media play an increasingly central role in refugees’ lives, further research is necessary to document the opportunities, shortcomings and impact 
of the use of mobile learning solutions in the context of 
education for refugees. The insights identified in this report must be bolstered by research that examines pedagogical impact while critically assessing the cost-effectiveness of 
mobile learning interventions for refugees, especially as more 
initiatives move to scale up from pilot or proof of concept phases.
As technocentric designs are unlikely to benefit refugees 
in equitable and inclusive ways, there is a need to establish broader ‘ecological’ approaches that account for diverse 
technological, sociocultural, political and financial aspects 
of education contexts involving refugees. These approaches, which require collaboration and strong connections between existing resources and actors, can perhaps be time-consuming and resource-intensive. However, the ultimate 
goal of providing equitable and inclusive quality education 
and lifelong opportunities to refugees is better achieved 
when stakeholders work in concert on the basis of the unique 
needs of the persons they serve.Introduction
and background 10
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesIntroduction and background
The number and assortment of displaced people worldwide 
is unprecedented. In recent years, the heightened magnitude 
of the crisis has fuelled the demand to harness digital technology to improve learning and teaching in refugee and displacement contexts. Efforts have been made to leverage mobile learning to counteract the negative repercussions of 
displacement on education access and attainment, as well as 
to build foundations for peace, stability and future prosperity. This report will consider existing evidence, scrutinize 
ongoing projects and initiatives, and reflect on emerging 
practices, with the goal of helping people working with refugees leverage mobile solutions to ensure inclusive and equitable access to quality education and lifelong learning 
opportunities.
Magnitude of current refugee 
and displacement movements
The record number of 65 million individuals who were forcibly 
displaced worldwide in 2016 due to persecution, conflict, 
violence or human rights violations is the highest since the 
end of the Second World War (UNHCR, 2017). Of this number, 22.5 million persons were refugees who fled their country to seek protection elsewhere.
Although Germany, the United States and Sweden receive 
the most applications for asylum, developing countries in 
Asia and Africa carry the heaviest burden, currently hosting 86 per cent of the world’s refugees under the UNHCR’s mandate. Turkey, Pakistan and Lebanon top the list of host 
countries, with 2.5 million, 1.6 million and 1.1 million refugees 
respectively. The increase in the number of refugees in urban areas is also a current trend, as six out of ten refugees presently reside in urban settings (UNHCR, 2016b, p. 53).
The magnitude of the current refugee 
crises is unprecedented. Particularly 
alarming is the rising number of displaced 
children, who represent about half of the 
refugee population.
The number of children on the move is steadily rising. About 28 million of the 50 million children who have been forcibly 
displaced or have migrated across national borders were 
escaping violence and insecurity, and more than 11 million fall in the category of child refugees and asylum seekers. This makes nearly one in every two hundred children in 
the world a refugee (UNICEF, 2016). An increasing share of 
refugee children are detached from their parents: the number 
of unaccompanied or separated children who have applied for asylum worldwide has reached a new record of 98,400 (UNHCR, 2016b).
The average duration refugees are in exile is 
about twenty years.
The long timespan that refugees spend in exile can have devastating consequences and is certainly cause for alarm. Protracted refugee situations – settings in which refugees 
continue to be in exile for five years or more after their 
initial displacement – have been rising steadily in the past decades. The average duration of major refugee situations has increased from nine years in 1993 to seventeen years in 2003 
(UNHCR, 2004) and twenty-six years in 2015, while the average 
duration that refugees spend in exile is about twenty years (UNHCR, 2016b, p. 20). This time span, which is longer than an entire formal education cycle and can cover large parts of a person’s working life, clearly underlines the shortsightedness 
of all provisional solutions or quick fixes. This reflection is 
further reinforced by the acknowledgement that the global refugee movements will not die out in the near future. To the contrary, predictions indicate that the number and extent of the crises are likely to increase, with climate change being one key catalyst. Although current estimates have limitations and 
should be viewed with caution (Gemenne, 2011), the more 
robust approaches estimate that around 200 million people risk becoming climate refugees by 2050 (Biermann and Boas, 2010, p. 72; Gemenne, 2011).
Future developments, particularly climate 
change, are expected to dramatically increase 
refugee and migration movements.
The role of education as a strategic 
response to displacement
To ensure that refugees have access to equitable and inclusive 
quality education and lifelong learning opportunities, long-term approaches to education delivery in contexts with displaced populations are clearly needed. Strategies need 
to transcend the predominantly provisional measures and 11Introduction and background
confined spans of current initiatives. In addition to traditional 
humanitarian support focusing on refugees’ physical needs, it is increasingly important to incorporate the integral social and community development of refugees and other displaced people, as well as to address their aspirations, ideas and dreams through education, irrespective of their context. Education is not only one of the highest priorities of refugee communities (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 6) but also one of the 
most important factors that can help them realize a brighter 
future and integrate in hosting societies. In the short term, 
education can bring stability to disrupted lives; address the psychosocial needs of children, youth and entire communities; 
and help refugees in developing much-needed language 
and literacy skills. Education has also been positioned as one of the primary drivers to realize the Education 2030 Agenda for sustainable development. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4 aims to ‘ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all’ by the year 2030. This encompasses refugees, who are among the most disadvantaged groups when it comes to access to quality education. Given the millions of displaced people of all ages and the fact that half of all out-of-school children live in conflict-affected countries (UNESCO, 2013), it is imperative that education provision forms a central part of the solution to the current crisis.
Natural disasters, pandemics and conflicts, and the 
resulting internal and cross-border displacement, can leave entire generations traumatized, uneducated and unprepared to contribute to the social and economic recovery of their country or region. Crisis is a major 
barrier to access to education, stalling and in some cases 
reversing progress towards the Education for All (EFA) goals in the last decade. Education in emergency contexts is immediately protective, providing lifesaving knowledge and skills and psychosocial support to those affected by crisis. Education also equips children, youth and adults for a sustainable future, with the skills to prevent disaster, conflict and disease.
UNESCO: Education 2030: Incheon Declaration and Framework for Action
In the long term, education can trigger social and economic 
improvements and produce leaders who will guide their communities out of stagnation and hopelessness towards prosperity, stability and peace. Educational responses in host 
environments should ensure that forcibly displaced children 
and youth are included in national education systems and 
provided with accelerated and flexible education options that 
meet their highly unique educational needs. This includes not 
only primary settings but also the flexible delivery of skills-
based post-primary education. Educational spaces that put refugee populations in contact with learners from mainstream 
cultures also serve as a key vehicle for integration in the 
host countries. Finally, host environments need to ensure an 
adequate supply of trained and motivated teachers, including 
provisions for regular payment, acquisition of specific qualifications and opportunities to advance in their careers 
(UNESCO and UNHCR, 2016).
However, addressing the demands presented by the refugee 
and displacement crises can be overwhelming for education 
systems worldwide. The majority of displaced people reside in developing countries, which have limited resources even 
for their own citizens (UNHCR, 2016b ). The lack of specific 
educational planning to integrate new and unexpected arrivals 
may also exacerbate pre-existing issues with the provision of 
primary and secondary education. Also, even when planning takes place, the available funding is often scarce. Worldwide, 
the education sector receives only a small share of the overall 
humanitarian aid budget. For instance, in 2013 this portion was 
equal to 2 per cent (UNESCO, 2015a , p. 275).
The relevance of mobile technology
To understand the relevance of mobile learning solutions in 
the context of refugee settings, there is a need to examine 
whether such an approach makes sense given the resources available to displaced people. Today, about 86 per cent of 
the world’s refugees reside in developing countries, and 71 
per cent of refugee households own a mobile phone. While 
39 per cent of households have internet-enabled phones, 
the remaining 61 per cent cannot benefit from applications developed for smartphones. The vast majority (93 per cent) 
live in places covered by a 2G mobile network, and 62 per cent 
are in reach of 3G mobile networks (UNHCR, 2016a, p. 12). 
However, the numbers vary considerably, with far lower levels 
of ownership and connectivity in rural settings.
Figure 1. Phone ownership among refugees
29%
Households 
without a phone
32%
Households with a basic phone39%
Households 
with an internet 
capable phone
Source: Adapted from UNHCR, 2016a, p. 13.12
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesDigital literacy rates of refugees vary across geographical areas. 
While Syrian refugees are seen as the most tech-savvy population of migrants in history (Rutkin, 2016), refugees in other areas are much less digitally literate. In addition, the availability of multifunctional smartphones does not automatically imply their 
comprehensive use. In fact, Syrian refugees tend to prioritize 
basic communication features, such as Facebook, WhatsApp or 
other messaging apps (Mason and Buchmann, 2016).
Figure 2. Connectivity of refugee households
93%
Refugee 
households 
living in areas 
covered at least 
by 2G mobile 
networks62%
Refugee 
households living 
in areas covered 
by 3G mobile 
networks
Source: Adapted from UNHCR, 2016a, p. 12.
Despite the urban versus rural disparities in mobile phone 
ownership and network access, mobile media remain relevant to refugees because they help connect displaced people with loved ones and friends at home, on the journey to be resettled, and once they reach their host countries. This 
demand to (re)establish connections with others is reflected 
in the creative ways in which displaced communities are appropriating technology, for example by building generators to convert USAID-donated cooking oil into electricity to charge their mobile phones so that they can be contacted and can contact others (Hughes, 2014). The relevance of mobile solutions is also operationalized by refugees who spend up to a third of their disposable income to stay connected (UNHCR, 2016a, p. 8), prioritizing this over spending on clothing, health 
care and education (UNHCR, 2016a, p. 15).
Among refugees, connectivity is often 
perceived as a basic need alongside education, 
clothing and health care.
The underlying assumption to be scrutinized in this report 
is that mobile-based solutions can be used in a context-responsive manner to address specific educational challenges and enhance learning opportunities in line with SDG 4 education targets.
The strategic role of education in crisis and 
displacement settings, and the increasing 
relevance and availability of mobile media, 
lays the groundwork for a more systematic use 
of mobile learning.Systematic use of information and communication 
technology (ICT) for educational purposes in refugee contexts 
is still a relatively nascent and emerging field of practice 
and research. While prior reviews and landscape studies 
highlight the potential value of ICTs in crisis settings, they 
also reveal the lack of scientific evidence (Burde et al., 2015; Dahya, 2016). If mobile learning is to be considered a viable, 
effective and efficient way to help education systems cope 
with the challenges of the displacement crises, it is necessary to understand the challenges to be addressed, examine 
the evidence on whether mobile learning could make 
contributions, and draw on best practices and lessons learned.
Scope, structure and 
analytical approach
The report examines mobile learning projects and studies that 
reflect UNESCO’s definition of mobile learning. Mobile learning 
can be defined as education that involves the use of mobile devices to enable learning any time and anywhere, with a particular focus on mobility and its unique affordances rather 
than on technology per se. It includes questions about how 
mobile devices can support not only learning but also broad 
educational goals such as effective education administration 
and information management (Vosloo, 2012, p. 10).
To cover the full potential of mobile learning, this report 
includes formal and informal learning settings and 
perspectives that range from cognitive to participatory 
learning viewpoints. This explains, for instance, why the analysis includes practices in which refugees use mobile 
solutions to organize work and strengthen their social and 
labour market participation.
Cognizant of the variety of refugee contexts, this report delves 
into the use of mobile learning in different phases ranging from dislocation and journey to arrival and integration in new, 
provisional, protracted or more durable host country settings. 
It also includes projects and studies from both refugee camps and urban areas as well as high, middle and low income 
contexts.
To understand current experiences and emerging evidence, 
the search strategy integrated different methodological approaches, including systematic searches in academic 
databases, selective web searches and interviews. While 
research and analytical work started in August 2016, 
participation in UNESCO’s Mobile Learning Week in March 
2017 allowed the authors to gather further insights and evidence to support and corroborate the emerging findings.
Peer-reviewed journal articles and conference contributions 
from scientific databases are used to provide rigorous 
evidence. Systematic and selective searches were carried out 13Introduction and background
in the academic databases Web of Science, PsycINFO, ERIC and 
Google Scholar. To do justice to the interdisciplinary nature of the topic, the Ovid search interface was used to search articles from diverse databases including PsycINFO (4 million 
bibliographic records centred on psychology and behavioural 
and social sciences), MEDLINE(R) (23 million biomedicine 
and life science citations) and ERIC (1.5 million educational 
literature records). The Web of Science Core Collection was 
used to access contributions from 18,000 high-impact journals. In addition, Google Scholar was searched using selective search approaches, because this database is estimated to cover 100 million out of 114 million English-language scholarly documents (Khabsa and Giles, 2014). For pragmatic reasons, the search focused on English articles. The main searches were 
carried out between August and October 2016.
Additional standard web searches were performed to capture 
online reports and relevant and innovative approaches to 
education for refugees not yet reviewed and documented in the form of research papers, including reports published by United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Insights and lessons learned were collected from project websites, blogs, practitioner journals and other sources of value. In total, forty-nine journal papers, twelve conference articles and forty-six reports were used in the present report, which features fifty-two projects and 
thirty-five digital apps and platforms. For a comprehensive 
description of the search and analytical strategies, please see the appendix.
To gain novel insights from the many burgeoning initiatives 
not yet documented and to include the experience of experts in the field, twenty-four semi-structured interviews were carried out, based on a pre-structured question guide. To be considered for an interview, subjects needed to belong to at least one of the following categories: (a) academic 
expert with a publishing record that matches the scope of 
the report; (b) specialist with a practice-based track record (either with extensive experience, i.e. overseeing and working in several projects and initiatives; or intensive experience, i.e. an in-depth involvement in one of the projects examined in this report); or (c) refugee who has created, worked with or learned with mobile learning solutions. The dynamic development of the field and the limited time frame made 
it impossible to interview all experts in the field. In part, the 
recruitment was based on chain sampling (Patton, 1990) and 
was opportunity-driven; for example, interviews were carried 
out with experts who were available during Mobile Learning 
Week 2017. The insights gained from the interviews were included in the report to enrich the descriptions of some projects with no online information or to support the general conclusion.
In addition, the findings from some of the interviews were 
used to develop case studies that characterize refugees’ 
perspectives, including their challenges and experiences with mobile learning projects and initiatives. The case studies seek 
to foster an understanding about a particular situation and 
help readers grasp the specificity of refugees’ education and 
learning contexts. They were selected with a view towards covering a broad range of learning environments including formal and non-formal learning settings, diverse geographical 
areas, and both urban and encampment contexts. 
Furthermore, the projects underlying these case studies had a significant number of users with scaling-up efforts already underway.
The central part of this report (Chapters 2, 3 and 4) organizes 
the descriptions of mobile learning projects and practices alongside ten key challenges in the context of education for refugees (see Section 1.5). The challenges, which have 
been identified in the literature and through interviews, are 
organized in a pragmatic way to synthesize findings on the potential of individual mobile learning projects and informal 
learning practices. Each section in the report focuses on one 
challenge and describes its educational implications. After assumptions and expectations for the project outcomes are contrasted with findings from the actual evidence base, the section ends with a reflection on the findings and a discussion of emerging mobile learning practices in this area that are 
relevant to understanding future developments.
The concluding chapter outlines lessons learned and 
perspectives gained from this review, with the aim of informing future mobile learning initiatives in refugee 
settings. It also highlights areas and needs that have not yet 
been covered but are, in view of refugees’ needs, worthy of future exploration.
Organizing framework of the report: 
Refugees’ educational challenges
Refugees represent a group of particularly diverse and 
disadvantaged learners. They are confronted with a plethora 
of challenges at all educational levels and in diverse 
circumstances. These challenges begin once refugees escape from their place of origin and continue with their experience living for protracted periods in provisional camp situations or 
resettlement contexts. Although this report cannot do justice 
to every challenge, it focuses on the most common and prevalent issues that can potentially be addressed by mobile learning. In total, ten key challenges, grouped into three 
different categories, have been identified and selected for this 
report (see Figure 3). Further, while it does not constitute one of the ten challenges used as an organizing framework for this report, the technology barrier constitutes an overarching 
limitation of mobile learning projects and initiatives, in terms 
of availability and maintenance of appropriate devices as well as connectivity.14
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesFigure 3. Overview of key education-related challenges in refugee contexts
INDIVIDUAL  
CHALLENGESLack of language and 
literacy skills in host 
countries Trauma and identity 
strugglesDisorientation in new 
environmentsExclusion and 
isolationEDUCATION SYSTEM CHALLENGESScarcity of appropriate learning 
and teaching resourcesTeachers unprepared for 
education for refugeesUndocumented and uncertified 
educational progression
CHALLENGES RELATED TO EDUCATIONAL LEVELSLimited access to quality primary and secondary education
Obstacles to vocational training and the labour market
Restricted access to higher education
Source: Authors.
The chapter titled 'Mobile learning to address individual 
challenges' describes individual challenges that negatively impact not only refugees’ teaching and learning opportunities, but also their lives beyond the educational sphere. These include a lack of language and literacy skills in 
host countries; trauma and identity struggles; disorientation 
in new environments; and exclusion and isolation.
The chapter titled 'Mobile learning to address education 
system challenges' focuses on three challenges that education systems, especially those of host countries, face in providing refugees with educational opportunities. These are the unpreparedness of teachers to meet the demands of working with refugees; the lack of openly available, appropriate and adequate learning and teaching resources; and the lack of 
documentation, credit recognition, transfer and certification 
policies and regulations for displaced populations, which can 
cause severe discontinuity in refugees’ educational trajectories 
and also inhibit the management and planning of entire 
education systems.
The chapter titled 'Mobile learning to address challenges 
related to specific levels and types of education' discusses challenges across education levels, including limited access 
to good-quality primary and secondary education; obstacles 
to vocational training and labour market participation; and restricted access to demand-driven higher education that is applicable across borders.A note about prior reviews
This report draws on and incorporates the findings of prior reviews. In contrast to some general reviews and reports on mobile technology (GSMA, 2017; UNHCR, 2016a), this report puts the education and learning of refugee populations in the foreground. Perhaps the most significant feature 
differentiating this report from prior work examining the use 
of digital technology for learning and education in refugee contexts (Dahya, 2016; World Bank, 2016), is the report’s analysis, which is grounded in refugees’ specific education-related challenges.
The scope of the report also includes informal learning 
opportunities and information access on the move, during interim or protracted conflict situations, and during the process of integration into new social, cultural and 
professional settings. The acculturation process has only 
been briefly touched upon in prior reviews, and its inclusion and discussion here represents a unique contribution to the current body of knowledge. Finally, from a topical viewpoint, this work has been able to include analyses of recent trends and developments in education technology that allow refugees to learn in situations marked by geographical mobility.Mobile learning
to address individual 
challenges 18
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesMobile learning to address individual challenges
During flight, encampment and resettlement, refugees are 
confronted with a number of individual challenges that can 
negatively impact their learning and teaching opportunities, as well as their lives beyond the learning environment. These challenges can include:
●●Lack of language and literacy skills in host countries
●●Trauma and identity struggles
●●Disorientation in new environments
●●Exclusion and isolation
Lack of language and literacy 
skills in host countries
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
‘καλωσόρισμα. Hoşgeldiniz. Herzlich willkommen. Bienvenue. 
Welcome. ’ One of the most immediate challenges experienced by refugees is a lack of the language skills required in host settings. Due to their high degree of geographical mobility, many refugees are exposed to a multitude of languages in 
and outside of education settings. However, they have limited 
chances to obtain academic mastery in any of them (Dryden-Peterson, 2015b , p. 1). Language skills, or a lack thereof, can also 
have an impact on the other challenges refugees face, including exclusion, disorientation, identity struggles and educational performance, as the following sections will demonstrate.
A lack of language and literacy inhibits 
refugees’ chances to participate in formal 
education in host countries.
School environments play an important role in facilitating language learning. However, language and literacy barriers are deemed to be one of the main obstacles preventing refugees from accessing and attending school, especially outside camp settings.
Studies highlight how refugee students with interrupted 
schooling often lack strong literacy in their mother tongue and struggle to cope with the language of the host country’s education system (Brown et al., 2006; Miller, 2009). As Dryden-
Peterson (2015a) notes, refugee ‘children cannot learn if they 
do not know the language’ . Even if they attend classroom lectures, children still struggle to follow and understand 
teachers’ instructions and explanations. For example, while Syrian refugee children in Lebanon are eligible to attend public schools, it is hard for them to follow lessons taught in English or French (UNHCR Innovation, 2016, p. 10). African refugees in Canadian high school settings say that teachers proceed too fast for them to understand. Additionally, self-consciousness about grammar mistakes or their accent inhibits their active participation in classrooms (Kanu, 2008, pp. 923–24). Finally, textbooks written in foreign languages, in particular science textbooks or texts using academic and subject-specific language, can be hard to understand (Kanu, 2008, p. 924; Miller, 2009). Bilingual dictionaries present only a limited solution, as refugees can be illiterate in their native language, and dictionaries in tribal languages are often not available (Miller, 2009, p. 583). In higher education settings, the requirement for advanced levels of written and spoken language competencies, mostly in English, hinders refugees’ educational chances (Gladwell et al., 2016a, pp. 12–13).
Language barriers dramatically restrict 
refugees’ opportunities to participate in new 
host cultures.
Beyond formal education, refugees who have difficulty speaking the local language struggle to interact with people in their host setting and to express their most basic needs. Being able to speak the local language of the host setting is clearly pivotal to integration (Ager and Strang, 2008, p. 182). For example, refugees from diverse backgrounds in South Africa indicate that they hesitate to initiate conversations with their neighbours due to lack of confidence in their language skills (Bacishoga and Johnston, 2013). Low language skills can also result in difficulties 
accessing a wide range of services including medical, legal, 
education, government and transport services (Ngan, Lifanova, 
Rahman et al., 2016, p. 2; Watkins et al., 2012, p. 136). Typically, refugees have limited access to language instruction (Brunarska 
and Weinar, 2013; Valenta and Berg, 2010). When they do get 
access to language classes in their host countries, they might 
encounter multiple obstacles, such as lack of child care while they 
attend classes, low or no income to pay course fees, placement 
in a relatively rural or isolated area of the host country with few 
chances to practise the language, and the acculturative stress of 
simultaneously learning to navigate the society into which they 
have moved (Benseman, 2012). In essence, lacking language and 
literacy skills constitutes a cross-cutting key obstacle for refugees 
of all ages, which impacts success not only in school but also in 
other spheres of their daily lives.19Mobile learning to address individual challenges
Assumptions and evidence base
Mobile-assisted language learning apps are widely promoted 
as key tools for language learning. To this end, it is assumed that they hold significant promise to support refugees in their language and literacy skills development.
Yet the assumption that mobile learning could be the key 
vehicle for refugees’ language learning and literacy skills 
development cannot be confirmed given the current 
quantitative and qualitative evidence base identified in this 
report. As the next sections show, no rigorous evaluations 
have been found to support the claim that mobile 
language learning apps can effectively support refugees’ foreign language acquisition. Additionally, many apps that incorporate behaviourist language learning approaches 
are of questionable quality and often can be unsuitable for 
refugees who have limited literacy skills. While these findings 
do not dismiss the role that mobile learning can play in supporting refugees’ language and literacy development, they raise questions related to the quality of the apps and the pedagogically sound use of mobile technologies. The assumption is that high-quality apps can assist refugees with language learning if they are integrated into an overall approach made up of formal courses and informal conversational practice or if they serve as additional learning materials.
Although pedagogically rich literacy apps for refugee children 
are presently in development and use, their impact has not yet been demonstrated. Another open question concerns the opportunity costs involved, as investigations from non-refugee contexts have found that mobile literacy designs are 
not necessarily more cost-effective than approaches that do 
not make use of ICTs.
Finally, automated mobile translation services are being 
used by refugees and can be effective as an initial language support mechanism, but their application is tied to the availability of devices with advanced features and good internet connectivity, which automatically excludes a significant number of refugees in low-resource contexts.
Current practices and projects 
The following sections explore how mobile solutions can provide support for refugees’ language and literacy challenges in three main areas: literacy development, foreign language learning and translations.
Literacy developmentThe EduApp4Syria competition is a major initiative that 
seeks to facilitate the development of literacy skills, with a 
focus on displaced Syrian children (Norad, n.d.). Following 
the deliberations of an international jury, the finalists of the EduApp4Syria competition were announced: Feed the 
Monster, Antura wa al Huruf (Antura and the Letters) and SIMA; the first two, Feed the Monster and Antura and the Letters, were eventually selected as the winners. These three 
apps incorporate game-based learning principles and are 
aimed at Syrian refugee children with no or limited prior 
literacy skills. Each of the apps has protagonists with whom 
the users can identify. Antura and the Letters makes use 
of a pet and ‘living letters’ (represented in the game as wild 
creatures) that an old shepherd and his dog are watching over (All Children Reading, n.d.a; Neumann, n.d.). In Feed the Monster, players need to help friendly monsters evolve and prosper by solving short learning exercises (All Children Reading, n.d.b). In SIMA, learners support and accompany the title character, a courageous Syrian girl who embarks on a challenging journey that incorporates Syrian culture, myth and folklore (Kukua, 2016). These apps have in common their gamification approaches, considerations of socio-emotional 
issues and narratives that are closely aligned with refugee 
children’s cultural backgrounds. The games can be used on smartphones, leveraging the high access rates of Syrian refugees to these devices and the popularity of gaming apps. Although the apps have yet to be rolled out and evaluated in the field, they were subjected to intense expert evaluation and pilot tests involving Syrian refugee children. According 
to the designers and evaluators, one of the key principles 
of success rests on the tight integration of playing and 
learning. Learning should not take place in separate spaces or 
sequences of the game but should be directly interlaced with the playing activities of the game (Bisignani, 2017). By playing, children should be immersed in the game without realizing that they are actually learning (Guardiola, 2017).
The provision of mobile and digital readers can help 
refugees further develop and practise their literacy skills, 
while countering the lack of reading materials available to 
them. To this end, the international NGO Worldreader, in partnership with UNHCR Innovation, facilitated the delivery of 30,000 books through e-reader devices, which were provided to 2,300 learners in Tanzanian refugee camps (Kwauk and Robinson, 2016). The digital libraries made possible through this intervention included titles from both local and international authors as well as textbooks and storybooks. During this pilot project, teachers are being trained to 
integrate e-reader usage into their lessons, and the refugee 
community are learning how to access the Worldreader library by using mobile phones already in their possession. To date, there has mostly been self-reported anecdotal evidence about the benefits of refugees using e-readers to learn in this context (UNHCR Innovation, n.d.f).
A large randomized controlled trial in non-refugee contexts 
in Kenya indicated that a non-digital reading intervention 
enhanced by the provision of mobile reading resources via 
e-readers resulted in significantly higher reading abilities 20
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesamong the beneficiary students. While the enhancement 
that included the provision of e-readers to students (through tutors equipped with tablets) was more costly than the solely non-digital intervention received by the control group, significant gains were achieved through the approach (Piper et al., 2016).
Foreign language learning
As refugees settle in new environments, the acquisition of 
basic skills, if not fluency, in the host country language is a recurrent necessity that can be supported by the use of language learning apps.
One example is Duolingo, which identifies itself as the 
world’s most popular language learning application. The 
app is available for free, and the creators of Duolingo 
crowdsource some of the language learning content by 
inviting volunteers who teach or speak one of the twenty-seven offered languages, including Greek, Turkish, Italian, 
German, English and French. Duolingo facilitates language 
instruction primarily through gamification and a diverse 
array of language learning activities such as multiple choice exercises and direct translation opportunities. Moreover, the platform gives users immediate feedback and encourages course completion by tracking users’ language learning activities and testing their language learning development, eventually awarding digital badges for notable achievements. 
As the Syrian civil war led many refugees to flee to Europe, 
particularly to Germany, Duolingo began offering German language lessons for Arabic speakers, on the assumption that language proficiency could help them seek better opportunities (Ma, 2015). Today the app offers language learning courses for refugees from Arabic-speaking countries in English, French and Swedish as well (Duolingo, n.d.b). The evidence base on the language learning impact of Duolingo for refugees is yet to be established. A study on the efficacy of Duolingo for English speakers who used the platform to learn Spanish suggested that there were likely some benefits that could be derived by a student population who already had 
high levels of educational attainment (Vesselinov and Grego, 
2012).
According to current systematic analyses, many of the existing 
language learning apps teach vocabulary in isolated rather than contextualized ways and have limited correction and adaption mechanisms (Heil et al., 2016). Even apps with higher levels of feedback and adaptability do not reach much beyond gamified drill-and-practice approaches (Schmidt, 2016, 2017). Similar patterns are found for apps that are 
geared towards refugees, as demonstrated by an analysis 
of Arabic language learning apps for refugees in Germany. 
However, these apps were deemed useful as vocabulary 
trainers, and many also help to train reading and listening 
skills (Stiftung Warentest, 2016).Most language learning apps available 
to refugees support individual language 
practice and memorization. However, they 
would not be able to fully replace in-person 
language courses, where learners have more 
opportunities to engage in conversational 
learning activities.
An additional way to promote individual refugees’ language 
acquisition is through apps that combine language learning 
with other informational or educational services for the purpose of integration and acculturation. For example, 
through the release of an app called Ankommen, which 
means ‘arrive’ in German, the German Federal Office for Migration and Refugees aims to support refugees’ German language acquisition and provide information about life in 
Germany (Ankommen, n.d.). In an evaluation, the app was 
highly rated especially because the language learning is 
geared towards refugees’ day-to-day needs and demands, 
particularly in the first weeks after their arrival. Interactive exercises help people learn how to spell words, understand 
numbers and provide information about their professional 
background (Stiftung Warentest, 2016).
Some projects target refugee integration through language 
learning promotion, leveraging the capacities of mobile 
devices to support contextual, multimodal and conversational 
forms of learning, and to bridge learning in and outside 
the classroom. The MoLeNET programme in the United 
Kingdom has realized learning designs in which refugees and 
immigrants document interesting artefacts in museums and 
upload and discuss them on a blog. Learners use their phones to engage in speaking activities with peers and teachers, to create personal visual prompts such as images and videos 
to aid vocabulary learning and writing, and to debrief and 
discuss the documented experience in the classroom (Savill-
Smith et al., 2012). The designers of the app MOIN, which is in 
the pilot phase, seek to link German language acquisition with opportunities for refugees to chat with local people and learn more about the host country culture (Ngan, Lifanova, Jarke et 
al., 2016, p. 523).
Translation services
Refugees make use of mobile translation tools in their 
communications during flight and their initial integration into 
new settings (Kutscher and Kreß, 2016, p. 202). Gillespie et al. (2016) found that refugees use their mobile phones to access 
online translation services such as Google Translate. This on-
demand translation app allows users to instantly translate typed texts. While not always completely accurate in the case of complex language transactions, the translations provided 
can be useful to facilitate simple information requests, 
such as the locations of specific places in town or where 21Mobile learning to address individual challenges
to recharge mobile phones. For example, in one refugee 
integration programme in Canada, a combination of tablets, mobile phones and Google Translate has been used when interpreters are unavailable to help facilitate communication during initial registration of Syrian refugees (CBC News, 2016). 
Google Translate is also being used in medical settings in 
Canada, where questions or expressions are not only typed in and translated but also pronounced acoustically at the bedside on mobile devices (Pimmer et al., 2013).
In addition to automated translation tools, specific apps and 
mobile services directly link refugees with live translators. Some of them are developed by refugees themselves, who know exactly what sort of specific needs could be addressed. One example is Tarjemly Live, a simple iOS and Android app created by Syrian refugee Moujahed Akil with the goal of allowing refugees to instantly access live translation support in three languages: Turkish, Arabic and English. Tarjemly Live 
is simple and requires few digital literacy skills to make use 
of the translation and interpreting services that are offered twenty-four hours a day via voice or text. (See case study for more details.)
Mobile reading investments do not necessarily 
improve literacy outcomes significantly more 
than base non-digital reading investments.
Finally, Nowall (a reference to ‘no wall’ , or no language barriers) is a tool being developed by a Sudanese refugee living in France, Adam Sakhr, in partnership with Techfugees France. The tool integrates a mechanism to provide refugees with interpretation and translation services from volunteers via 
Short Message Service (SMS). The decision to focus on SMS-
based services was made because many refugees struggle to access smartphones. Even when refugees have access to such devices, they may not have the technical know-how to use them in ways that can support the completion of activities requiring French language proficiency.
Reflections and emerging practice
One of the key findings of this chapter is that most language learning apps are behaviourist in nature. In other words, learning with these apps is realized through reinforcement of knowledge. Learners are primarily passive, responding to learning content and tasks. That said, behaviourist 
approaches with high levels of interactivity can serve as 
valuable language learning aids – for studying vocabulary, for instance – if they are combined with other forms of formal and informal language learning and practice opportunities. For this purpose and as some examples have shown, the conversational and contextual learning capacities offered by mobile technology can be harnessed. This is particularly relevant because communicative practice is a key asset for refugees and immigrants as they immerse themselves in 
a new language and a new society. Well-designed mobile 
language learning activities do not separate but rather connect refugees with mainstream cultures, helping them learn in authentic contexts.
Literacy issues form a key challenge that needs to be 
addressed more systematically. First, the current programmes that seek to facilitate literacy development tend to focus on children, whereas language learning apps for adults are less common. Additionally, mobile solutions are often not designed in a way that favours their use by refugees with weak or non-existent literacy skills, for example by drawing on image- and sound-based navigation (Stiftung 
Warentest, 2016). Another literacy-related need that has 
not been addressed is refugee learners’ lack of access to comprehensible textbook content, combined with teachers’ difficulties explaining this content to them. The analysis of the challenges related to these two points reveals that refugee students struggle to understand academic concepts, 
especially in the sciences. Simple explanations in the host 
language are usually the only way to help learners with low literacy skills in their mother tongue (Miller, 2009, p. 584). One possible approach to overcoming these difficulties is to digitize openly licensed materials for key science concepts and other subjects and embed them in digital textbooks. Finally, the cost-effectiveness of mobile literacy programmes needs to be examined in much more detail, especially in comparison with other non-digital approaches.
Web and mobile-based machine translation services are of 
value to refugees who own smartphones and can reliably access the internet. As devices and connectivity increasingly become available, refugees in low-resource contexts are likely to benefit from access to these tools in the not-too-distant future. However, the effect of these services on refugees’ language competencies also needs to be evaluated critically in the future. The improvements in language recognition software and in neural machine translation services 
represent interesting recent developments. These emerging 
technologies have the potential to improve the quality of translation services via deep learning techniques, and could be of great value to refugees during the various phases of their journeys and resettlements.22
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees
An entrepreneur’s perspective
Moujahed Akil is a Syrian refugee and tech entrepreneur. After his escape 
from the civil war, he founded a company in Turkey and is now using his technical and entrepreneurial skills to develop digital and mobile solutions 
addressing the needs of other refugees.
Before the Syrian civil war, Moujahed Akil was a computer 
information science student and an IT freelancer living with his family in Aleppo. The war forced him to flee to Turkey, which proved to be difficult at the beginning:
‘Not knowing the language was very hard 
because I could not even discuss the most basic 
things needed to start a new life in Turkey. For 
example, I went to the government building 
and there was no way to communicate. We 
used our hands and feet. ’
In these situations, the mobile phone was invaluable. Moujahed used Google Translate to understand relevant information and forms he had previously photographed. His freelancing and coding skills helped him to find a job, and 
soon he started to work again as an IT freelancer. Working 
with Turkish friends and colleagues helped him learn the new 
language quickly.
Not long after fleeing Syria, Moujahed started his own 
business, Namaa Solutions, together with a friend. The 
start-up, which aims to address the needs of Syrian 
refugees in Turkey, has grown quickly and now has twenty-five employees. The idea for the company’s first app, 
Gherbtna (which means ‘our expatriation’ in Arabic), was 
sparked because Moujahed was frequently consulted by 
less knowledgeable Syrian friends and colleagues about 
resettlement issues in Turkey. Over time, more than 1,500 text and video entries were developed for the app, covering 
a wide range of topics including legal and administrative © Namaa Solutions23Mobile learning to address individual challenges
issues, job and skills development opportunities, banking, 
medical information and education. According to Moujahed, education is the most important category on the app.
‘Many Syrian people are students who wish to 
continue their studies in Turkish schools and 
universities, and this is why education is the 
most relevant category on the Gherbtna app. ’
The app provides information about schools and universities in which Syrian refugees can continue their studies, and lists the requirements and certifications needed to enrol. The second most popular category for Gherbtna app users is information about the laws and rules to be followed during the integration process. After these two categories, the most 
popular app element is the ‘My story’ feature, which is a 
platform where personal stories about Syrian refugees and their daily lives can be shared. For example, one of the stories illustrates the process of registering at a university as a female refugee student.
Besides the app, Gherbtna comprises a website and a 
Facebook page. The latter has a particularly important 
function, as Moujahed explains:
‘The Facebook page is a very strong 
complementary component to the mobile app, 
and it allows us to directly interact with our 
users. ’
The establishment and maintenance of the portal does not 
come without difficulties, as Moujahed explains:
‘One of the key challenges is the lack of 
funding and of a sustainable business model. ’
The app relies primarily on the efforts of volunteers. Current revenue streams are generated via Google’s AdSense and a section labelled ‘Company guide’ , where Syrian companies in 
Turkey can list themselves and advertise their products. When asked to name the key success factor for Gherbtna, Moujahed states just one word:
‘Needs. Addressing needs is the key success 
factor. Syrian refugees in Turkey want this 
information, and they can’t find it in their own 
language, so this is where our app comes in. ’
The idea for his second mobile app arose through another 
needs-based situation. As Moujahed worked in a Turkish 
company as a programmer, he learned the language quickly 
and was often consulted by his friends to help him with translation.
‘Many of my friends used to call me frequently: 
“Please can you translate, I’m in a bank, I’m 
in furniture store” , etcetera’ , he recalls. ‘So, 
we started to develop the app Tarjemly Live, 
which means “translate for me” in Arabic. ’
The Tarjemly Live app connects Syrians with translators and interpreters, who are often Syrian refugees themselves with more advanced Turkish language skills. In this way, Namaa Solutions is generating jobs for other Syrian refugees in Turkey, and for Turkish people with Arabic language skills. The translation and interpreting work is done either through calls or texts. Online usage statistics show that 77 freelance interpreters translated more than 37,000 words for 17,000 
minutes during the first year of operation.
Moujahed’s innovative spirit has not waned. New projects 
planned include a learning management system and 
interactive learning content for Syrian refugees. Another 
project is buy4impact.com, a trading platform that helps 
Syrians to sell hand-crafted products to an international market.24
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesTrauma and identity struggles
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
Challenges related to the overall psychosocial well-being 
of refugees are quite complex and individually nuanced. 
As many studies confirm, refugees have reduced levels of 
well-being and a high prevalence of mental distress due to 
past and ongoing trauma (Bradby et al., 2015, p. 6; Porter 
and Haslam, 2005). Groups that are particularly affected and 
whose needs often remain unmet are women, older people 
(Porter and Haslam, 2005) and unaccompanied minors 
(Bradby et al., 2015). Furthermore, a needs assessment 
conducted in the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan in 2015 
noted that males between the ages of 12 and 17 are among 
the most vulnerable groups, because of the need to support their families, whereas donors often choose to focus their 
interventions on females (Education Sector Working Group, 
2014). In addition to experiencing mental health problems 
from traumatic experiences, refugees are further affected 
by identity struggles, which are common in persons who are uprooted and detached from their social and cultural 
home environments and who need to reconstruct and 
renegotiate identity and belonging in their new host 
countries (Colic-Peisker and Walker, 2003; Valentine et al., 
2009; Warriner, 2007).
Psychosocial well-being can be related to learning and 
education in two ways. First, there is evidence that refugees’ 
experience of war and conflict directly and negatively impacts 
their education and academic performance. For example, a high prevalence of academic problems and behavioral 
difficulties has been identified in war-affected refugee 
children (Betancourt et al., 2012), and refugees’ emotional 
problems have been associated with learning difficulties 
and lower levels of academic achievement (Rousseau et al., 
1996). Second, participation in school and specific education 
interventions can improve psychosocial well-being. While this relationship has been broadly researched in the USA, little is 
known from humanitarian contexts (Burde et al., 2015, p. 57).
Post-traumatic stress and depression are very 
common in refugee populations and tend to 
affect their educational success.
The factors that contribute to poor mental health are 
multifaceted. They include traumatic incidents that trigger 
flight, such as violence experienced during a war; disruption 
and separation of families; or a long and dangerous trek; as 
well as living conditions in camps (Hannides et al., 2016, p. 36). 
Children are particularly affected, as a study in the Islahiye 
camp in Turkey found: 79 per cent had experienced death in the family, 60 per cent had witnessed someone being 
physically hurt and 30 per cent were directly affected by 
physical violence. This resulted in 45 per cent of children 
showing symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder and 44 per cent exhibiting indicators of depression (Sirin and Rogers-
Sirin, 2015, p. 1). A similar pattern was also observed in adult 
refugee populations: in Tanzanian camps, a prevalence of 
mental health problems was found in around 50 per cent of 
Rwandan refugees (de Jong et al., 2000).
Identity struggles present more subtle yet profound 
challenges because they affect the very nature and sense of 
one’s self. Being forced to move away from friends, family, 
community and country often means the loss of refugees’ most fundamental anchoring points for their identity and 
sense of belonging.
Identity struggles and acculturation stress are 
subtle but very profound challenges affecting 
uprooted refugees who need to reconstruct 
identity and belonging.
Although refugees do not stop identifying with the countries 
they left, they cannot claim the latter to be the guardian of 
their national identity (Waters and LeBlanc, 2005, p. 144). 
In addition to grappling with shifting identification with their original nation and culture, refugees also struggle 
with the effort to adjust to a new cultural setting. Although 
acculturation, as a process of assimilation and integration, 
is often seen as a goal, it is associated with mental health 
problems, unhealthy behaviours, health disparities, depression, suicidal ideation, eating disorders and other 
mental and physical health disorders (Bacigalupe and Cámara, 
2012, p. 1429). Although it is important for refugee children to gain a sense of belonging from schools, it has been argued 
that educational environments in host settings tend to 
present exclusive national and cultural identities, such as in history classes (Dryden-Peterson, 2015a). In camps setting as 
well, the educational design can restrict identity construction 
processes, such as through the prioritization of basic literacy and numeracy skills over history, science, religion, music and 
art (Waters and LeBlanc, 2005, pp. 137–38).
Assumptions and evidence base
Although addressing trauma and identity struggles is not at 
the core of many mobile learning and refugee projects, the 
way that digital technologies are designed and used reveals 
underlying and more explicit assumptions about the potential impact of these technologies on refugees’ well-being and 
mental health.
Clearly, the use of digital technology and mobile solutions 
cannot fully replace intensive and specialized face-to-face 25Mobile learning to address individual challenges
care in severe trauma cases in crisis and refugee contexts. 
However, a few mobile approaches have been tied to the enhancement of refugees’ well-being, either as an outcome 
alongside other explicit learning outcomes, or as the primary 
objective. Reflecting the first scenario, significantly positive psychological effects were associated with the deployment of a mobile mathematics learning project in a social learning 
setting, measured through a quantitative design. In an 
example of the second scenario, a qualitative investigation 
indicated positive effects resulting from the use of digital 
media and other tools in specific workshops and activities 
within a safe environment. However, the evidence found in 
these two domains is thin and requires further investigation. A third approach, which has not been evaluated yet, is the 
integration of psychosocial principles directly in the technical 
and didactic design of mobile learning apps.
With regard to identity (re)construction, there is some 
qualitative evidence that proposes storytelling as a valuable 
tool. However, this body of knowledge also needs to be 
corroborated with further research studies.
The following sections will show the extent to which mobile 
learning solutions can contribute to improving refugees’ 
well-being, especially with regard to post-traumatic stress, 
and how they can support the processes of identity (re)construction.
Current practices and projects
Addressing well-being and post-traumatic stress
Several mobile learning programmes consider and measure 
psychosocial well-being, and some have been identified as 
having a positive impact in crisis contexts. Some gains have been reported from the implementation of mobile learning projects in non-formal learning settings. The evaluation of the project E-learning Sudan (see also section 4.1.3.2), in 
which out-of-school children played a mathematics game for 
a period of six months, found significantly increased levels of children’s self-esteem, but no improvements in self-efficacy, 
motivation and future orientation. As a result of participation 
in the project, children developed a better image about themselves, either through their mathematical gains or through other factors associated with the pilot, such as the 
social aspects of learning together, visits to the community 
by others or the use of ICT. Both self-esteem and self-efficacy were found to have a significant positive effect on learning outcomes (Stubbé, van der Klauw et al., 2016, p. 3).
Explicit measures for psychosocial healing in education and 
community centres of affected refugee populations can also be enhanced by mobile technologies. For example, a report compiled using qualitative methods found that strengthening 
resilience and control of post-traumatic disorders was 
considered one of the main outcomes of Ideas Boxes, portable and customizable multimedia centres with multiple 
digital/mobile and non-digital educational and information 
resources. The provision of a safe and recreational space 
within the insecure situations of Burundian refugee camps 
alone was deemed an added value. In addition, facilitated 
activities such as writing workshops and the use of creative 
tools for multimedia productions were found to support 
traumatized refugees by acknowledging the trauma and translating it into images to help rebuild a positive self-image (Lachal, 2015).
Some learning apps anchor psychosocial elements directly 
in their design. This has been explicitly required for the apps 
developed in the context of the EduApp4Syria competition 
(Norad, n.d.; Wang, 2017). The apps are not conceived as a treatment for mental illness but are rather intended to be a 
means to enhance well-being among the players. According to the evaluators, this can be achieved through apps with high 
levels of adaptability. The tasks have to be adaptively aligned with the increasing skills of the learners to facilitate the experience of success and enhance players’ self-esteem. While 
players have to be challenged and motivated to help develop 
their resilience, they should not be overburdened, in order to avoid any experience of failure and frustration. Balancing 
between these poles is a general game design principle, but 
it can be deemed particularly relevant in refugee contexts 
with vulnerable users. Another aspect of these games is that 
the players are tasked with caring for figures and characters (Bisignani, 2017). For example, in Antura and the Letters 
players need to care for the pet dog (All Children Reading, 
n.d.a; Neumann, n.d.), while in SIMA they need to interact 
with and care for game characters from different cultural 
backgrounds or characters living with a disability (Bisignani, 2017).
Mobile learning programmes can incorporate 
and facilitate social and emotional learning 
– and mobile technology can also serve as a 
means to track refugees’ psychosocial status – 
but very little is known to date.
Digital and mobile solutions have been used more systematically and explicitly to track psychosocial states. A 
study with 900 combatants and veterans in conflict-ridden 
Burundi has piloted a novel way of deploying mobile technology to assist the assessment of mental health, as 
a prerequisite for prevention and intervention measures. 
A tablet-based survey guided paramedics in carrying out 
semi-structured clinical interviews to assess trauma-related 
syndromes in need of treatment. The findings not only identified a prevalence of serious traumatic stressors but also 
underpinned the feasibility of mobile assessments of clinical 
symptoms in mental health assessment and screenings (Crombach et al., 2013).26
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesStimulating identity development processes
Refugees who are detached from their social and cultural 
homeland lose the most profound anchoring points of their 
identities. In the framework of acculturation processes in 
new environments, many struggle with the question of who 
they are and where they belong. Naturally, such profound 
issues cannot be resolved by any mobile technology quick 
fixes. However, digital and mobile storytelling has been quite 
helpful for refugees as a means to promote reflection on 
identity and sense of belonging.
Digital storytelling embraces the use of technology to create 
multimodal stories individually and collectively with text, photographs, sound and/or video. The following projects 
show that storytelling is used in diverse settings, ranging from 
camp environments to resettlement and integration contexts.
In camps hosting Palestinian refugees in the West Bank and 
East Jerusalem, a digital storytelling project was carried out with marginalized youth. The Voices Beyond Walls 
programme featured a series of ten-day workshops in which groups of twenty to twenty-five youth between the 
ages of 10 and 16 were guided in the production of short 
video clips by volunteer teams made up of Palestinian and 
international educators, activists and media specialists. They integrated original stories, drama, poetry, photography, 
music and digital video, expressing their own perspectives on Palestinian history, culture and everyday camp life, as well as 
their dreams and aspirations. A qualitative evaluation found that the creative engagement triggered shared satisfaction 
and identity, as well as recognition among peers, family and the community, especially for young women and younger, 
disaffected participants. However, successful implementation must address an array of challenges such as developing 
training and support measures for the facilitators, balancing 
the collaboration of diverse age groups, and dealing carefully 
with often hidden psychological trauma (Sawhney, 2009).
Digital storytelling can foster creativity and 
participatory/collaborative cultures, and 
can help refugees explore and express their 
identities.
The research project CHICAM emphasized the meaning of digital media production for personal expression and identity 
(re)creation among excluded European refugee and migrant 
children from across the world. Through media clubs in 
several European countries, children between 12 and 14 years of age were facilitated in a wide range of media production 
activities addressing topics such as friendship, school, home 
and belonging. The activities included the production of 
fiction, plays portraying peer-relations, real-life stories in 
documentary format, performances where children acted in 
front of the camera demonstrating movements and gestures, photo collage videos to conceptualize their past, and hand-
drawn animated movies. This allowed children to rework 
refugee experiences that are difficult to express through other means. Results of this ethnographic study indicate that, 
although technology was an obstacle and children sought 
spaces with no structured education at the beginning, they 
became increasingly interested in expressing themselves 
openly. The productions allowed the children to not only address potential sources of tension between their culture of 
origin and their host setting, but also express views on future 
lives and define enabling conditions in playful ways (de Leeuw 
and Rydin, 2007).
While the projects cited above rely on relatively advanced 
technological equipment, noteworthy results have also been achieved using a simple, mobile social media-based storytelling approach that was implemented through a series 
of workshops with young, second-generation immigrants 
at risk of social exclusion in Italy (Ranieri and Bruni, 2013). 
The creation process required each participant to write a 
text message with a piece of a story on a shared mobile phone, publish it to Facebook and hand the phone to the 
next participant. The staggered, real-time writing process 
aimed at stimulating attention, creating narrative coherence and minimizing resistance to writing. Creating activities that 
did not adopt traditional learning methodologies allowed 
participants to stay motivated and engaged. In the next 
step, the mobile phone was used to videorecord one of 
the co-created stories, simulating the work of an authentic movie production. Some participants showed initial anxiety over showcasing photos or videos on their profiles, as if it 
was a threat to their online reputation. However, over time 
all participants became more comfortable with their self-
images. This qualitative action research concluded that mobile 
storytelling is a favourable means of fostering creativity, a participatory and collaborative culture and, importantly, the 
exploration and expression of identities for marginalized 
groups, ‘turning silence into play and discovery’ (Ranieri and Bruni, 2013, p. 233). However, this method is certainly no 
panacea, as the stories, which were marked by laconicism and 
misspellings, accentuate linguistic shortcomings and have the 
potential to reinforce pre-existing divisions (Ranieri and Bruni, 
2013).
Reflections and emerging practice
The preceding section has identified different approaches that show some potential to enhance refugees’ well-being. Despite its relevance to refugee learners, the design of mobile 
applications and programmes to support mental health and 
trauma therapy pertains to the domain of health and arguably 
goes beyond classic education domains. Nevertheless, the 
potential of mobile learning apps and programmes to support not only knowledge and skills acquisition but also enhance 
refugees’ psychological well-being, has broad relevance for all 27Mobile learning to address individual challenges
educators working with refugees. However, the scarce body 
of evidence that associates mobile learning with refugees’ well-being needs to be corroborated by further analyses. 
The research community also needs to better understand 
how mobile learning can help improve well-being – that is, by identifying specific measures and design principles that cause psychological impact, so that these can be replicated 
and considered in the development of refugee learning apps 
more consistently. Another gap that needs to be addressed 
is knowledge about the potential impact of mobile learning 
on adults’ well-being, because most of the projects identified target children and youth.
The potential of digital storytelling to support refugee 
children’s need for personal expression and identity (re)
creation has been confirmed by a limited number of qualitative, ethnographic research studies. The findings also connect to the conclusions of a broader review on digital storytelling in mental health (De Vecchi et al., 2016). 
This review emphasizes that despite the dearth of studies 
available to date, the importance of digital storytelling to enable learning, as well as promote mutual understanding 
and empathy towards lived experiences across a range of 
areas in mental health care, cannot be underestimated. Digital storytelling techniques may be particularly relevant in refugee and other low-resource contexts because they can be carried 
out on basic devices, reducing technical access barriers.
A recurring topic is the importance of differentiating 
storytelling activities from the typically narrow structures of academic activities, allowing for informal and exploratory learning activities and spaces. However, this does not 
mean neglecting the role of guidance and facilitation, 
which are key to success. In this sense, harnessing the potential of storytelling requires thorough preparation and 
comprehensive support, and the intensity of engagement has 
been described as exhausting. A relevant ethical issue is how to carefully balance the tension between the facilitation of 
personal expression and the protection of confidentiality and 
non-exploitation of vulnerable target groups (De Vecchi et al., 2016).
Disorientation in new environments
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
Refugees need to adjust to new and changing environments, 
especially before or during transition and upon arrival. As 
Moser-Mercer (2015, p. 2) explains, people in fragile contexts such as refugee camps ‘must contend with highly flexible practices and chaos in order to cobble together a viable way 
of being’ . These conditions trigger constant informal learning and problem-solving and create a demand for updated and 
situation-specific information.
The deficit of reliable and timely information 
before and during the journey puts refugees at 
great and unnecessary risk.
During crises and in escape situations there is a scarcity of trustworthy and timely information, which refugees need to navigate through insecure and unstable environments marked by high levels of misinformation. For example, a key challenge voiced by refugees from Syria, Afghanistan and Iraq during their journey to Europe was confirming whether 
certain border crossings were open or closed (Hannides et al., 
2016, p. 5).
Individuals often resort to unreliable social network channels 
before, during and after their journey, and can thereby be 
exposed to the risk of being exploited by smugglers and other criminals (Gillespie et al., 2016, pp. 5–6). Access to credible information sources is especially critical for women and children, who are particularly vulnerable in regard to health and safety (Gillespie et al., 2016, p. 11). During the journey, 
access to reliable information can make the difference 
between life and death, such as in boat situations (Gillespie et al., 2016, pp. 11–12).
In provisional camp environments and during asylum and 
immigration processes, refugees must orient themselves in completely new environments. Also in these settings, refugees are concerned about the credibility of information 
they receive, as emerged from a study in the Zaatari refugee 
camp in Jordan (Wall et al., 2017). The period following the arrival in a new environment, and especially the first weeks, is particularly challenging for refugees. For example, a lack of clarity about rights, status and administrative processes caused frustration and distress in Greek camp settings 
(Hannides et al., 2016, p. 17). In the USA, refugees were 
reported to face the most significant obstacles immediately after their arrival in the country. Complications arose from simple tasks because of the fundamental differences in systems and infrastructure between home and host settings (Baranoff et al., 2015, p. 9). Difficulties in understanding the 
rules governing interactions with host institutions and the 
routines for accomplishing tasks, as well as their limited language skills, can all make problem-solving harder for refugees (Walker et al., 2015, p. 332). In the literature, the 
refugees’ need to acquire broader cultural knowledge of 
national and local procedures, customs and facilities is consistently emphasized (Ager and Strang, 2008, p. 182). This need can include a largely unmet demand for the provision of systematic information regarding housing, shelter, clothing, 
regulations, administrative (asylum) processes, health issues 
and transportation systems. For example, Syrian and Iraqi 
refugees in France emphasize their need to access information 28
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesabout services and organizations available to them more 
easily and quickly (Gillespie et al., 2016, p. 12).
Lack of systematic support and information 
provision in new and changing host 
environments creates feelings of 
disorientation and helplessness.
Despite these demands, limited systematic information has been made available through official channels, especially in digital formats. Camps and other host areas, for instance, often do not have sufficient relevant-language applications 
or other online sites to communicate important laws, permits 
and other information to their refugee populations (Lepeska, 2016). In Europe, inadequate information is provided to refugees, and a pan-European information-sharing approach 
is clearly lacking (Gillespie et al., 2016, p. 2). The situation is 
further exacerbated because refugees are often suspicious of official and state bodies. As a matter of fact, in their home countries, governments are often the main sources of repression and persecution, and even United Nations officials 
are often believed to be linked with government officials 
(Hannides et al., 2016, p. 16). Moreover, refugees can develop distrust during their journeys because information received from different sources may fail to meet their expectations (Hannides et al., 2016, pp. 16, 24).
The sum of these obstacles compounds the issues that 
refugees face when moving through and settling in new environments. Therefore, there is a need to explore how various mobile learning initiatives have contributed 
to mitigating the negative impact of experiences of 
disorientation.
Assumptions and evidence base
In the media, and especially on social media, refugees’ use of mobile technology is the subject of highly controversial debates. Voices in tabloids and on social media frequently question the legitimacy of refugees’ search for support 
because there is the perception that people fleeing conflict 
have to be poor and cannot carry ‘costly’ smartphones. Other media reports, instead, emphasize the essential role that mobile phones play in supporting refugees in insecure and 
new environments during displacement and flight (Dubinsky, 
2015; O’Malley, 2015).
The current evidence base, which is comprised of qualitative 
studies, confirms the relevance of mobile technologies as the 
key resource for information gathering and problem-solving 
in situ, as well as for informal learning, in and across many new 
and changing contexts before, during and after flight.
Mobile instant messaging and mobile social media spaces 
are particularly useful for refugees. However, the benefits of these tools only materialize for some refugees, especially 
those who have been dislocated in the context of the Syrian crisis. Other refugees who were poorly connected before their escape benefit to a much lesser extent by comparison 
(Hannides et al., 2016). The key success factor that cuts across 
contexts is the development of trust among users, as refugee populations have good reasons to question any information 
provided by public and informal sources. Given the 
importance of developing a sense of trust for mobile learning offerings among refugees, the next section will share insights about how some projects and initiatives have attempted to build this trust.
Current practices and projects
Orientation before and during escape
In the insecure and unstable situations of crisis and especially 
during escape, refugees’ safety, and sometimes survival, 
very much depends on trustworthy and timely information, 
for instance for planning secure routes. To satisfy these basic informational needs, refugees have resorted to the creative and flexible use of mobile phones, which are harnessed for a set of functions including SMS, calling, maps, instant messaging (such as Viber, Facebook Messenger 
and WhatsApp) and social media. A variety of channels is 
necessary for responding to the changing infrastructural and regulatory conditions encountered by refugees as they move from one country to another, such as varying connectivity, internet access, access to power and mobile phone bans in detention centres.
Informal mobile communication can serve as the main 
information reservoir for refugees planning their flight route. Refugees source information by communicating with others who left before, to follow their paths and learn from their experiences (Gillespie et al., 2016, p. 48; Hannides et al., 
2016, p. 23). Mirroring this observation, refugees see instant 
messaging tools, such as WhatsApp, as a means to ‘demystify’ the journey (e.g. Manjoo, 2016).
During their journey, mobile phones are 
refugees’ lifeline, helping them solve problems 
as they navigate through unfamiliar and 
insecure geographical and linguistic terrain.
Mobile technologies also facilitate the sharing of image-based information relevant to flight. Figure 4 shows a map entitled 'The Road to Germany' in Arabic with a route from Izmir in Turkey to Germany by land, sea, rail and foot that has been 
widely circulated among Syrian refugees via WhatsApp. The 
information in this map is meticulously geared towards refugees’ information demands during their journey. The 
map includes more than just information about costs in the 29Mobile learning to address individual challenges
respective currencies and the diverse means of transport. 
For example, the names of locations along the route are 
transcribed in such a way to ensure that Arabic speakers will 
pronounce them correctly. The high level of demand-oriented details suggest both iterative and collaborative, and digital 
and non-digital, cycles of production (Gillespie et al., 2016, 
pp. 47–48).
Figure 4.
 ‘The Road to Germany’ map circulated on 
WhatsApp among refugees
Source: The origin of this digital image is unknown. It has been relayed many times on 
WhatsApp. The image is featured in the research report Mapping Refugee Media Journeys: Smartphones and Social Media Networks (Gillespie et al., 2016) published by the Open 
University, which has authorized UNESCO to reproduce the file in this publication.
During the journey, mobile phones are essentially the 
refugees’ lifeline, enabling them to navigate through 
unknown geographical and linguistic terrain by using online 
and offline apps such as MAPS.ME (Rutkin, 2016) and digital translation aids (see section 2.1.3.3). Location functions are 
invaluable in dangerous situations, such as during boat trips, 
because they present the only means of getting in touch with the coastguard or relatives to organize help, as the following 
narration from a Syrian refugee impressively demonstrates:‘We were in the rubber boat, all the phones were in bags, he 
was the only one not to put his phone in a bag so he could stay in touch with coastguards and send the location to his 
brother in the Netherlands. Each two minutes, he used to tell 
him where we were. ’ (Gillespie et al., 2016, p. 46)
Essentially, information that refugees receive via mobile and 
social media channels helps to keep them safe during the trip. However, this advantage is often not available to refugees with poor online connections before they left home, such as refugees from Afghanistan (Hannides et al., 2016) or refugees who cannot easily access the internet for a variety of reasons.
Beyond informal personal communication, the Alarmphone 
project offers broader and systematic support. Composed of activist networks from Europe and Northern Africa, the project set up a self-organized hotline for refugees in distress in the Mediterranean Sea. While it is not a rescue number to replace coastguard services, it acts as an instrument to increase immediate pressure on rescue attempts and 
seeks to counter pushbacks and other human rights 
violations at sea (Alarmphone, n.d.). There are also specific apps that systematically support refugees’ geographical trajectories, such as the Hungarian app InfoAid (InfoAid, n.d.), which provides transport information and updates on border-crossing opportunities to counteract the existing misinformation (Kozyra, 2016).
Orientation upon arrival and in resettlement
Mobile devices can be helpful not just before and during flight 
but also once refugees have arrived in their host countries. 
Upon provisional or definite arrival, and especially in the first weeks, refugees struggle to orient themselves to completely new environments. In these situations, the mobile phone can play a key role by supporting refugees in their informal learning and problem-solving processes. The large number of apps found on refugees’ smartphones, such as apps for language learning, news, media and translation, is indicative 
of the centrality of phones in refugees’ lives upon arrival in 
Europe (Kutscher and Kreß, 2016, p. 201).
The Syrian crisis has given rise to a 
proliferation of apps and programs available 
to satisfy refugees’ informational demands 
upon arrival – but only a few of them are used 
at scale.
One approach to supporting refugees’ information-seeking 
processes is the creation and development of apps and 
online/mobile information portals. The Syrian crisis has sparked the development of numerous refugee apps, ranging from general catch-all apps to specific apps that focus on distinct domains such as accommodation, health or authorities. A comprehensive analysis of the sheer volume 30
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesof new and emerging initiatives and applications would go 
well beyond the scope of this report. In fact, this dynamic has given rise to the development of meta-apps and meta-
platforms with the sole purpose of providing an overview of 
the existing resources, such as Apps for Refugees and Refugee Projects. The purpose of this section is thus to provide 
an overview, including the portrayal of selected projects, 
programs and apps, which is then broadly assessed against the informational and educational needs identified.
The provision of apps that support refugees’ orientation in 
their new environment is common. A remarkable example of a general, ‘one-stop shop’ app is Gherbtna, which seeks to support Syrian refugees in the provision of information to 
build new lives in Turkey. The scope is broad, covering legal, 
administrative, employment, banking, medical and dining information and more (see case study in section 2.1.3.3). The app has been downloaded about 50,000 times, which is roughly equivalent to 5 per cent of the Syrians living in Turkey (Lepeska, 2016). A similar app that was recently launched 
in Turkey is Alfanus (‘lantern’ in Arabic) (Lepeska, 2016). 
Another example is the app Bureaucrazy, which seeks to help 
refugees as well as ordinary citizens in Germany deal with administrative procedures (Oltermann, 2016). The interesting aspect of these three examples (and many others) is that they 
have all been developed by refugees.
SMS systems represent another technological means to 
provide refugees with information regarding resettlement and integration. SMS platforms are simple and can reach users on basic phones and in areas without internet coverage. Unsurprisingly, SMS technologies have been used in 
humanitarian situations and in areas with limited technological 
infrastructure. For example, in camp settings in rural Lebanon, refugees stressed the importance of mobile phones for receiving SMS-based aid information from UNHCR about food vouchers, 
diesel for heating and blankets (Talhouk et al., 2016, p. 337).
SMS platforms are often the only means to 
inform refugees in low-resource contexts. They 
are, however, no silver bullet with indefinite 
scalability, but rather require trust-building on 
the ground.
An interesting lesson was learned in the ASCEND project from 
UNHCR Innovation and Stanford University, which piloted the 
use of a mass-message solution with refugee communities 
in urban Costa Rica. The challenge of the project, which provided refugees with education about their rights and opportunities, was the development of trust, especially in 
situations in which refugees were confused by messages from 
the system’s unknown number. Accordingly, awareness and trust-building in close cooperation with a local partner turned out to be a key success factor (UNHCR Innovation, n.d.a).Refugees tend to use their mobile devices and mobile social 
media to address informational and educational needs after 
their flight in relatively informal and unstructured ways. Studies from different contexts have documented how refugees use 
digital tools for manifold practical and instrumental tasks 
among themselves as well as with third parties in day-to-
day situations or in emergencies. For example, a study on Syrian refugees in rural Lebanese camps describes women 
maintaining WhatsApp groups to coordinate issues such as transport with their neighbours (Talhouk et al., 2016, p. 336). 
Refugees are reported to use their phones to connect with local volunteers, for example via Facebook groups (Ritscher, 2016), 
for all sorts of practical guidance (Gillespie et al., 2016, p. 50). 
Also in integration contexts, as in flight settings, mobile 
technology plays an essential role in obtaining assistance in 
emergencies, including access to medical or police services 
(Bacishoga and Johnston, 2013; Walker et al., 2015, p. 331).
Particularly in the context of the Syrian crisis, 
refugees have adopted informal mobile and 
social-media-based channels to obtain and 
share critical practical and instrumental advice 
at a large scale in their new environments.
In contrast to many refugee-specific apps, social media have 
been widely adopted in the settings of the Syrian refugee 
crisis. Reports say, for example, that Syrians in Turkey access Facebook to obtain information on all types of integration 
issues, ranging from administration, jobs and housing to dining and events (Lepeska, 2016).
Reflections and emerging practice
A mobile phone is the key instrument for many refugees for 
their orientation to new, often confusing and sometimes 
insecure environments during and after their journey. 
Although the gathering of information for problem-solving 
is far from education in formal settings, it mirrors popular approaches that conceive ‘the processes of coming to know 
and being able to operate successfully in, and across, new and ever-changing contexts and learning spaces’ to be at the core 
of mobile learning (Pachler et al., 2010).
From a practical standpoint, refugees’ digital and mobile 
orientation processes are inhibited by a number of dynamics. 
These include the lack of systematic digital information from 
official institutions and refugees’ distrust in these institutions, 
high levels of misinformation in mobile social media spaces, 
and unequal access of groups of refugees to smartphone or 
internet-based resources.
The lack of systematic information from official institutions, 
and refugees’ distrust in these bodies, have resulted in the emergence of digital parallel worlds in social media 
and mobile instant messaging spaces in which a plethora 31Mobile learning to address individual challenges
of stakeholders, ranging from refugees, smugglers and 
volunteers to family and friends back home, create and share 
information. For refugees who fear persecution for themselves 
and their families, private and ‘safe’ spaces are key (Wall et 
al., 2017). However, although the on-demand information 
exchange in these spaces seems to cater to the informational 
needs of refugees in terms of flexibility, it is prone to misinformation and lack of security.
Specific apps for refugees are emerging with the purpose 
of counteracting the lack of systematic and trustworthy 
information, especially for refugees in (mostly European) 
resettlement contexts. Nevertheless, the majority of these apps are far from reaching the scale of the more informal mobile and social media spaces. One of the key challenges is to find ways of transforming the often provisional support into more sustainable solutions, as the curation of digital and 
mobile portals and apps requires considerable resources and 
needs robust funding models in the long term.
To address these issues, it is not only relevant to develop 
and sustain information platforms but also to reach groups of refugees and gain their trust. To this end, the use of social media spaces could be an interesting means for disseminating general information as well as promoting more formal 
educational messages or advertising courses to refugees who 
could not be reached by more traditional marketing means. To increase the reach and engage in user dialogue, existing or new apps and online platforms should be complemented by social media or instant messaging media (as the app Gherbtna does successfully, see section 2.3.3.2). The promotion of 
information and educational opportunities could also be 
achieved by collaborating with people with a well-developed social media reputation from within refugee communities. An example is that of a well-known YouTube personality in the Arabic-speaking community who was convinced to feature a learning platform in one of his clips (Welt , 2015).
Most existing apps, platforms and mobile social media programmes rely on internet connectivity and on the 
availability of advanced phones and power. However, 
smartphones are out of reach for many refugees, and the 
internet is often not accessible for them, especially in rural areas (UNHCR, 2016a). In addition, even refugees who own 
smartphones and have internet access are often not using 
the full range of available applications and functionalities. For 
example, it has been argued that even in the framework of 
the Syrian refugee crisis, which has mobilized unprecedented 
groups of highly educated and technologically well-equipped refugees, it is not the targeted apps or classic social media that 
are most popular, but rather much simpler instant messaging 
applications such as WhatsApp, Viber and Facebook Messenger (Rutkin, 2016). Arguably, one approach could be to support refugees in better leveraging the functionalities of their smartphones, and especially in accessing secure and private mobile communication spaces.In addition, and to avoid discriminating against refugees 
without smartphones or internet access, multichannel 
information approaches in many contexts require the 
provision of SMS-based solutions. Although the examples in this report clearly point to the feasibility of texting as a means 
for information and education provision in refugee contexts, 
SMS is not a ‘shotgun approach’ with indefinite scalability 
options; rather it requires intensive work on the ground and 
close collaboration with local stakeholders and NGOs to 
ensure the development of trust among users.
Exclusion and isolation
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
Feelings of isolation and exclusion are a key challenge that 
refugees face when they move to a new environment, as research on Syrian refugee children exemplifies (Sirin and 
Rogers-Sirin, 2015, p. 2). Felt and lived experiences of loneliness 
not only impact refugee learners’ success in formal education but also deprive them of the much-needed networks and 
communities that facilitate informal learning and knowledge 
exchange. In refugee populations, isolation can play out 
in two central ways. Firstly, many refugees are separated 
from families and friends who live in diasporic settings or back home. Secondly, feelings of isolation and exclusion are 
further aggravated by a lack of interaction with people in the 
mainstream culture of the host environment, particularly if 
refugees reside in camps in isolated parts of the host country.
Isolation from close ties causes loneliness and 
negatively affects education, especially for 
children who are deprived of parental support.
Suffering from the separation of close ties and wider 
communities is a common phenomenon among refugees 
and displaced persons that negatively affects their well-being 
and education. In contrast to clear-cut losses such as death, the uncertainty of an ‘ambiguous’ loss can be associated with 
relentless stress, depression, guilt and anxiety (Bacigalupe and 
Cámara, 2012, p. 1428). Children who are separated from one 
parent or who are completely unaccompanied are particularly 
vulnerable. According to a qualitative study from Canada, the separation of African high school refugees from family results in not only acute loneliness but also a lack of instrumental 
support usually provided by parents: ‘My father used to help 
me with schoolwork’ (Kanu, 2008, p. 923). A systematic review 
of educational needs and barriers for refugee students in the 
USA observed parental involvement in children’s education as 32
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesan important influencing factor on students’ success (McBrien, 
2005, p. 345).
Refugees’ detachment from mainstream host 
cultures is another key problem.
In addition to the separation of refugees from their home communities, connecting with people from the mainstream culture in host settings is also challenging. Detachment affects refugees’ daily lives and particularly their school environments. Refugee children’s experience of school-
based education is often characterized by isolation and 
exclusion, which is in turn significantly associated with learning difficulties in some refugee cohorts (Rousseau et al., 1996, p. 245). Compared to camp settings, refugee children in urban areas have less support in accessing psychosocial services and in addressing discrimination, harassment and bullying from teachers and peers (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 44). Syrian refugee parents fear sending their children to schools due to physical and emotional bullying (Dryden-Peterson, 2015a; UNICEF and Save the Children, 2012, p. 5). 
Bullying and exclusion in schools is also in evidence in high 
income countries such as the UK or the USA (Ager and Strang, 2008, p. 172; McBrien, 2005, p. 352). For example, Somali youth in the USA reported receiving negative treatment and taunts from peers for their head coverings and limited English language skills (Birman et al., 2002, p. 7).
Refugee children’s school experience is often 
marked by isolation and exclusion, which go 
hand in hand with academic problems.
Another vulnerable group are women. While children attend schools and men tend to work, women often stay at home and have significantly fewer chances to interact with people from the host setting. In Australia, this was found to lead to women’s isolation from the broader community and a longer 
time needed to adjust to local life (Ahmad et al., 2015, p. 39). 
In contrast to the rich social lives that some refugee women experience in their home countries, the limited opportunities to engage with neighbours and the wider community create a deep sense of loneliness (Walker et al., 2015, p. 331). In the UK as well, the stark contrast between the close social family ties in their original cultures and the feelings of isolation refugees 
experienced in the new settings was felt to be depressing 
(Ager and Strang, 2008, p. 183).
It is therefore necessary to understand how exclusion 
and isolation intertwine with mobile learning to create connections that support refugee integration.Assumptions and evidence base
The belief that mobile solutions can help address refugees’ need to stay in touch with their loved ones is reflected in projects and initiatives that distribute phones or SIM cards to refugees in diverse settings, ranging from European to African contexts.
Studies analysed for this report have yielded strong 
qualitative evidence confirming mobile media as the key and often the only resource for refugees to maintain and develop their social networks with friends, colleagues and family members back home or in diasporic settings. In this sense, the use of mobile media is crucial in the absence of other options. 
Further qualitative evidence positions mobile media as an 
important resource to support the process of building new social ties in host country environments. The development of social networks with home and host communities helps refugees and immigrants alleviate isolation and loneliness, and one qualitative investigation links refugees’ connectedness with their ability to exhibit higher levels of resilience. Developing and maintaining these networks also carries considerable learning potential from participatory and 
connectivist viewpoints.
It was not possible to find evidence proving that mobile 
media use results in the better integration of refugees into the mainstream cultures of their new host country settings. However, studies suggest that the use of digital communication tools can aid the integration process, and examples of how this integration occurs are shared in the next section.
Current practices and projects
Connecting with diasporic communities around the globe
Communication with friends and family is of paramount 
importance to refugees. A considerable number of studies confirm that mobile technology is key in meeting this 
demand. (See, for example, Almohamed and Vyas, 2016; 
Cuban, 2014; Gillespie et al., 2016; Hannides et al., 2016; Khoury, 2015; Kutscher and Kreß, 2016, p. 201; Leung, 2011; Talhouk et al., 2016; UNHCR, 2016a; Walker et al., 2015; Wall et al., 2017; and Xu and Maitland, 2015).
Refugees and migrants create mobile learning 
networks with their transnational families 
and friends. These are immensely important 
as a source for sharing tacit knowledge and 
stimulating feelings of proximity and mutual 
awareness.
In response to varying technological and structural conditions, refugees flexibly use different phone functions 33Mobile learning to address individual challenges
to connect with family, friends and colleagues during their 
flight (Gillespie et al., 2016, p. 48), in camps and shelters (e.g. 
Leung, 2011; Talhouk et al., 2016, p. 336; Wall et al., 2017), and 
in resettlement processes (Hannides et al., 2016; Kutscher 
and Kreß, 2016, p. 201; Leung, 2011). Feelings of proximity 
and mutual awareness are stimulated across transnational 
social networks by multimodal exchanges (e.g. sharing pictures) and ritualized communicative micropractices, that 
is, the exchange of small messages across longer periods 
of time (Cuban, 2014, p. 743; Thompson, 2009). The effects are perceived to be beneficial in almost all of the studies. A 
larger analysis of Syrian, Afghan and Iraqi refugees in their 
transition towards and into Europe concluded that refugees who maintain communication networks with other refugees, 
family and friends via mobile and social media channels are 
likely to be more resilient than refugees with lower levels of 
connectivity (Hannides et al., 2016, p. 4). The development of 
these digital social networks is also beneficial from a learning 
perspective. Transnational and dispersed families form mobile 
learning communities and share unofficial or tacit knowledge 
and information (Cuban, 2014, p. 747). In this sense, the 
appropriation of these resources could be conceived as a source of social capital (Bacigalupe and Cámara, 2012, p. 1431). While the subtle processes of connecting with 
and becoming a member of a globally dispersed community 
can be conceived as learning in its own right, more explicit forms of learning and instruction, such as language learning, 
were also observed as part of these processes (Cuban, 
2014, p. 748).
Recognizing the potential of mobile media in helping 
refugees connect with their loved ones back home and 
elsewhere, some initiatives are distributing phones and/or SIM cards to refugees. For example, a project to distribute free SIM 
cards preloaded with a small amount of credit to refugees in 
a camp in Rwanda was launched. SIM cards with credit were important because Burundian refugees could not use their 
phones for many reasons, including a lack of airtime and the 
absence of a stable power supply. To respond to this second challenge, a small mobile solar kiosk was built so that people 
could charge their devices (ICRC, 2015). While initiatives of this 
kind can be beneficial for refugees in the short term, further attention should be given to the sustainability of the projects, 
including considerations of the need for refugees to top up 
their credit once it runs out or to register a SIM card in those countries where such registration is mandatory.
Connecting with host settings
It is important for refugees to connect with the diaspora and 
other refugees like themselves as well as members of the host country community. Mobile phones are a central resource 
to connect with the same or similar ethnic groups and with 
mainstream cultures in new host environments (Bacishoga and Johnston, 2013; Chib and Aricat, 2016, pp. 7-8; Hunter, 
2015; Kim et al., 2013; Liamputtong et al., 2015; Walker et al., 2015). For example, one qualitative study showed that 
bonding enacted through mobile phones helped South African refugees overcome isolation and feel more accepted, safe and confident (Bacishoga and Johnston, 2013, p. 9). The 
connectivist and participatory affordances of mobile phones 
provide refugees and displaced people with the opportunity to become more central members of their respective local communities, as a study on illegal immigrants in Zimbabwe shows (Kim et al., 2013, p. 153). Similarly, a qualitative study 
in Singapore emphasizes the role of mobile phones as 
participatory platforms for learning and growth that facilitate cultural diversity of transnational migrants. However, this phenomenon was much more pronounced in work settings 
than in private spheres, making work a key vehicle for 
integration, with mobile phones acting as a means to support the process (Chib and Aricat, 2016).
While mobile phones are key in helping 
refugees and immigrants connect with similar 
ethnic groups in their new host environments, 
they do not automatically facilitate their 
inclusion in the mainstream culture.
In addition to the myriad informal processes, formal refugee peer support programmes aim to strengthen refugees’ inclusion and connectedness in host settings. A project in Australia facilitated peer-to-peer networks of refugee women 
from Afghanistan, Burma and Sudan who live dispersed 
throughout Australian suburbs, with members of their own community living many kilometres away (Liamputtong et al., 2015; Walker et al., 2015). The women were provided with mobile phones and free calls for at least one year and 
received peer support training once a week for six weeks 
and regular meetings thereafter (Walker et al., 2015). This blended approach triggered the establishment of stronger relationships, helping the refugee women to overcome isolation and develop a sense of happiness (Liamputtong et 
al., 2015, p. 5). Another way of better connecting refugees 
and local populations is through the establishment of joint learning programmes, such as the cooperation between Coursera and the US State Department shows. A massive open online course, or MOOC, was used with a mixed group of 
twenty-six Lebanese and refugee participants, with the goal of 
facilitating the development of a joint understanding among the group of learners (Ikonomou, 2016).
Reflections and emerging practice
The finding that mobile media serve as a key resource for refugees to overcome isolation and loneliness and to create informal local and global learning networks is supported by a range of qualitative and ethnographic studies. These 
networked spaces are used to engage with ties back home or 
in the diaspora, and with similar milieus in their host settings. 34
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesAlthough the networks are significant from connectivist, 
participatory and socio-emotional learning perspectives, refugees’ access to mobile connectivity and its associated benefits is not equally distributed. To help refugees realize the benefits of connecting with their social networks, they need 
additional infrastructural support, such as power supply or 
airtime.
In addition, mobile connectedness does not automatically aid 
the inclusion of refugees in the mainstream cultures of their host environments. Refugees can find it difficult to break away from their co-ethnic bonding networks, for example, due to language barriers and a lack of trust of outsiders, which can hinder integration (Bacishoga and Johnston, 2013, p. 9).
Ways to further leverage the largely unacknowledged and 
untapped potential of these networks are thus not only to create conditions that allow refugees and immigrants to better connect with peers, but also to strengthen their systematic connections with host cultures. In addition to offering joint mobile learning programmes, another approach would be to gradually enrich mobile peer support projects 
with interactions with volunteer native participants, blending 
conversation in collocated and digital spaces. The use of digital social media and instant messaging tools to connect refugees with volunteers in the context of the Syrian refugee crisis for instrumental purposes is indicative of their potential to facilitate inclusion and integration. This is all the more important because effective inclusion measures involve not only refugees but also host populations, and thus far the overwhelming majority of mobile learning initiatives conceive of refugees as the only beneficiaries.
In this chapter, key areas of individual challenges linked to the refugee experience were unpacked. The examples discussed show how mobile learning can help address these challenges but also make clear that mobile solutions alone cannot resolve each issue a refugee might encounter on the journey from flight to resettlement in a new host country. Nonetheless, the role that mobile technology can play in transforming the experiences of individual refugees demonstrates the potential for positive impact. It would be worthwhile 
to enlarge the evidence base in order to guide the elaboration of new or improved opportunities for mobile 
solutions to contribute to lowering barriers that individual refugees may encounter.
The next chapter moves from individual challenges to education system challenges, in order to understand 
how mobile learning is intertwined with wider education systems in contexts involving refugees and displaced populations.
 Mobile learning
to address education system
challenges38
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesMobile learning to address education system challenges
Some of the education-related challenges facing refugees 
transcend individual experiences, education levels and domains, and instead stem from issues in the education system more broadly. These can include:
●●Teachers who are unprepared for education for refugees
●●A scarcity of appropriate learning and teaching resources
●●Undocumented and uncertified educational progress
Teachers unprepared for 
education for refugees
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
Teachers are of utmost importance in the provision of equitable 
and inclusive quality education for refugees and displaced persons. They can not only address children’s physical and cognitive needs but also facilitate their psychosocial well-being and serve as a key resource in achieving normality (Kirk 
and Winthrop, 2007; Winthrop and Kirk, 2005). Teachers who 
work with refugees operate in different settings and can have heterogeneous backgrounds. They could be trained/certified teachers who are refugees themselves, or teachers who are refugees but have no prior teaching experience and are trained out of necessity, or finally teachers in host settings who work with refugees in their classrooms. Thus the challenges associated with the preparedness of teachers to work in settings with refugees are equally varied.
Qualified teachers are a highly demanded but rare resource 
across all levels and domains of education for refugees. This translates into large class sizes and high student/teacher ratios. 
Although the 2010–2012 UNHCR Education Strategy sets the 
goal of a maximum of 40 students per single teacher (UNHCR, 2012, p. 12), many refugee contexts have even larger class sizes. With a global rise of 30 per cent in 2014 only, the increasing number of school-age refugees further exacerbates the issue of availability of qualified teachers. It is estimated that at least 20,000 additional teachers and 12,000 additional classrooms would be needed on a yearly basis (UNHCR, 2016d , p. 8).
The quality of teacher education is another major concern. In many rural settings and camp situations, instructors do not have even the ten days of training that would qualify them as ‘trained’ (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 6), and even in high income countries affected by an influx of refugees, 
well-qualified teachers are often in short supply (UNHCR, 2016d, p. 11).
Qualified teachers are a very rare resource, 
and in many rural refugee settings instructors 
do not have even the ten days of training that 
would qualify them as ‘trained’ .
In addition to basic qualifications, teachers need specific training to prepare them to address the particular needs and challenges that refugees bring into the classroom. Although pedagogical standards emphasize the necessity of participatory 
and student-centred teaching, education in refugee contexts 
tends to be focused on mere transmission of knowledge from teachers to learners. Teachers who are poorly qualified tend 
to not involve or stimulate students but rather treat them as 
passive recipients of information (Dryden-Peterson, 2015b , 
pp. 10–11). Teacher- and lecture-centred education has been found across different refugee settings, including Gaza, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the West Bank (Hardman, 2014, p. 7) and 
Kenya (Mendenhall et al., 2015). The fact that many students 
come from illiterate backgrounds can be challenging even for well-qualified teachers in high income countries, for instance when it comes to adapting educational materials (Brown et al., 
2006). In addition, teachers are often unprepared to address 
the emotional demands of their students. For example, a rapid needs assessment conducted by UNICEF revealed that in Lebanon neither principals nor teachers knew exactly how to 
deal with the particular needs of displaced Syrians (UNICEF and 
Save the Children, 2012, pp. 4–5). In the worst cases, teachers may end up bullying their pupils instead of offering them protective and inclusive environments (UNHCR Innovation, 2016, p. 12), as is particularly the case in urban settings (Dryden-
Peterson, 2011, p. 44).
Teachers of refugees need to be prepared and 
supported to operate in the most difficult 
conditions: to activate and engage highly 
diverse, illiterate and traumatized students 
with limited host language skills.
Many existing programmes focus on short in-service training units. However, the lack of mechanisms for ongoing support 
and supervision structures, as well as for compensation and 
incentives, impacts not only teachers’ performance but also 
their motivation, absenteeism and retention rates (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, pp. 54–57). In camps, teachers are often 39Mobile learning to address education system challenges
refugees themselves, with low education levels and a high 
degree of vulnerability. This makes it necessary to equip them with the appropriate methodological repertoire and to 
address and support their well-being (Mendenhall, 2017).
Teachers in high income countries also need to be prepared 
and qualified to work with refugee learners. For instance, studies in the USA and Canada indicate that trauma 
experienced during crisis situations, during escape from their 
place of origin, in camps and during resettlement processes 
makes many refugees distrustful or fearful of authorities, 
including schoolteachers (Kanu, 2008, p. 924; McBrien, 2005, p. 344). In addition, refugees may be so accustomed to transmission-based teaching that their integration in 
education cultures with more self-directed forms of learning 
may prove problematic (Ager and Strang, 2008, p. 172; Dryden-Peterson, 2015b, p. 2; Kanu, 2008; McBrien, 
2005, p. 346). In these contexts, where many children report 
feeling lost (Kanu, 2008, p. 924), teachers need to support 
refugee learners through active engagement in the classroom 
(Dryden-Peterson, 2015b, p. 2).
Assumptions and evidence base
The potential of mobile learning to support teachers’ professional development has been a trending topic in recent 
years, with UNESCO’s numerous reports on mobile learning for 
teachers in Latin and North America, Europe, Asia, Africa and the Middle East representing one body of work particularly relevant to exploring this subject. The assumptions are that 
mobile solutions and devices can contribute to enhanced 
educational efficiency by supporting teachers in developing and applying a broad array of skills in the classroom (West, 
2012).
The current evidence base regarding mobile learning for 
teacher training in refugee contexts is surprisingly scarce. Studies with a robust evaluation conducted in this area 
could not be found. However, there are some indications 
that mobile learning can be used to provide mentoring and ongoing support to teachers. Additionally, some lessons can be learned from other teacher training initiatives in 
low-resource settings that incorporate basic technologies. 
The examples discussed in this section point to the value of mobile learning to help teachers of refugees improve their day-to-day teaching practice.
Current practices and projects
Mobile teacher training and support
The Teachers for Teachers project in Kenya incorporates 
a rich professional teacher development approach with a 
mobile mentoring element. After onsite training, and in addition to a face-to-face coaching component, mobile instant messaging is used to facilitate continuous learning 
and ongoing support. The project operates in the Kenyan refugee camp of Kakuma, where the student/teacher ratio is about 100:1. Less than one-third of the teachers are trained, and the great majority of them are refugees themselves. Many of them may not have benefited from systematic schooling, and some struggle with psychosocial and emotional issues 
stemming from their experiences as refugees (Mendenhall, 
2017; Teachers College, n.d.).
The training in the Teachers for Teachers project is based on a 
curriculum that incorporates freely available training materials 
developed by the Teachers in Crisis Contexts Working Group, 
a network founded in April 2014 that comprises seven partner 
agencies – Finn Church Aid, International Rescue Committee, 
Norwegian Refugee Council, Save the Children, Teachers 
College at Columbia University, UNHCR and UNICEF – and 
works in close association with the Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies. The training curriculum consists of five main competency pillars: (1) teachers’ role and well-being, (2) child protection, well-being and inclusion, (3) pedagogy, (4) curriculum and planning, and (5) subject knowledge. The onsite training is complemented by peer coaching and observation carried out by teachers who have completed the programme and received additional mentorship training (Bergin, n.d.).
The use of instant messaging spaces for 
mentoring can not only facilitate the repetition 
and application of training knowledge but 
also mediate instantaneous support for 
profound problems that teachers face in 
classrooms.
The supplementary mobile learning component is organized in the form of WhatsApp groups, through which global mentors, who are volunteers with extensive classroom teaching experience, facilitate discussions with groups of four to five teachers. The mentors guide the teacher trainees according to a suggested (and openly available) online 
mentoring curriculum, which provides scheduled core 
and follow-up messages, questions and instructive images 
and videos, with the goal of helping the teachers put their 
knowledge into practice and sustaining the effects of training 
in the longer term. Mentors reiterate key lessons from the 
curriculum through statements such as: ‘Constantly move 
around the classroom while teaching. Make sure there is at 
least one walkway through the students so that you can get to the back of the room. ’ They also try to stimulate teachers’ motivation and self-reflection with short assignments such as ‘Set yourself a goal for this week to help you feel motivated at work’ and questions like ‘Did you achieve your goal this week? Why were you able to achieve it? Why not? What can you do differently next week?’40
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesEvidence shows that teachers find the discussion groups 
valuable because they can receive instantaneous advice on pressing problems they face in their classrooms, not only 
from mentors but also from their peers. The depth of the 
discussions and the gravity of the challenges teachers face is 
sometimes profound and reaches beyond educational issues. 
For example, teachers feel they can open up on topics that 
cannot be discussed in the camp setting, such as suspicions 
of sexual violence. The global mentors receive initial and ongoing support on how to address these issues, and ‘silent observers’ in the groups can intervene in the event of serious 
problems such as health and safety concerns.
Other projects use mobile technology to support teachers’ 
face-to-face training with online and mobile content. The 
Borderless Higher Education for Refugees (BHER) project 
provides teacher training to qualify untrained teachers in the Kenyan refugee camps of Dadaab. While the main lecturing 
component takes place onsite, students can use tablets 
to access a learning management system that features 
textbooks, videos and articles. Similarly, the Connect to Learn 
(CTL) programme enables Syrian teachers in Iraq’s Domiz refugee camp to access digital resources via a cloud-based server. The content focuses on social-emotional skills, literacy 
and numeracy, and teachers can also use the technology to 
share their experiences with peers across the different camp 
schools (Dahya, 2016).
Teacher training programmes have also started to leverage 
blended learning through massive open online courses, 
known as MOOCs. Examples of online teacher training are 
Edraak (‘realization’ in Arabic), an Arabic-language MOOC platform implemented by the Queen Rania Foundation, or 
the Jesuit Worldwide Learning (JWL) teacher training 
programme (Gladwell et al., 2016a).
Reflections and emerging practice
Although the evidence base on the added value of mobile 
solutions for teacher training is still being established, some of 
the design elements applied in the projects examined in the framework of this report appear to be promising. Considering the high levels of attrition and the short induction trainings 
for teachers in refugee settings, the support that mobile 
mentoring can provide to help reiterate and apply key messages and better connect local and global practitioners appears valuable. This is all the more promising because it 
can be achieved by technologically simple and increasingly 
popular means. In addition, technology enables sustained conversational learning, which is otherwise difficult to achieve 
once in-person training has ended.
Successful ICT4D (ICT for Development) projects outside 
refugee contexts can also be seen as models for the use of simple technologies to support teachers in classrooms where hardly any books are available. The SMS Story project in 
Papua New Guinea leveraged SMS technology to provide 
stories and lesson plans to teachers in rural and low-resource 
settings with limited access to textbooks. An instructional poster and a total of 100 messages sent over a period of 
two academic terms resulted in significantly higher student 
achievement across four of the five reading skills tested, in comparison with the pupils in the control group. The number of children who could not read anything by the end of the programme was almost half of that in the control schools. The approach is certainly no panacea and should not be seen as a long-term solution to replace the use of textbooks, as no significant differences were observed with respect to reading 
comprehension (Kaleebu et al., 2013). However, it is one of 
the few low-cost and simple technology approaches that 
has shown some impact on students and is likely to also be 
effective in refugee contexts in which teacher support as well as literacy skills are key.
A UNESCO–Nokia teacher training project in Nigeria 
illustrates teachers’ interest in receiving phone-based practice and professional guidance. Over a fifty-two-week period, primary school teachers were provided with short daily messages including an image and text of 50 to 100 
words on how to plan, manage and assess their progress in 
English language and literacy classes. The pilot evaluation 
concluded that the use of simple mobile solutions can 
effectively improve the professional capacity of English-language primary school teachers. The analysis also found that the intervention enhanced feelings of connectedness among teachers who trained together in small groups. Teachers attached particular value to messages containing concrete ideas for lessons (in contrast to general pedagogical instruction), stimulating questions and reflective prompts. Perhaps the most interesting finding is that the initial number of 50 teachers increased to 70,000 when subscription to the 
service was opened to people outside the project context 
(Miao et al., 2017).
In light of these examples, it can be stated that mobile 
learning for teacher training is still in the nascent stages but could be useful in lowering some of the barriers that negatively impact refugee learners in education systems the world over.41Mobile learning to address education system challenges
A teacher’s perspective
Romans is a South Sudanese refugee who works as a teacher in Kenya’s 
Kakuma refugee camp, a context where basic educational infrastructure is insufficient and overcrowded classrooms are the norm. As a participant in the Teachers for Teachers project, he uses mobile instant messaging to receive advice on pressing problems from fellow teachers and his global mentor.
Romans is a South Sudanese refugee who was forced to 
leave his country at the age of 7, fleeing over the border into 
Kenya. He escaped to the refugee camp in Kakuma, where 
he attended primary school. After completing secondary education outside of the camp, he came back to Kakuma 
and began teaching in 2015 at a local primary school, in a 
context plagued by inadequate infrastructure and insufficient teaching and learning materials.
‘My classroom is large, with 180 students. We 
have desks, although there are not enough for 
everyone. ’While Romans undoubtedly has insider knowledge about the 
challenges and strengths of the refugee children he teaches, 
he did not have any prior teaching experience or professional 
teacher training. This limited the set of skills he could draw 
on in the classroom. In 2016, he joined Teachers College 
of Columbia University’s Teachers for Teachers initiative, a 
professional development programme for primary school 
teachers in Kakuma. An integrated model for continuous support, Teachers for Teachers combines onsite teacher 
training with peer coaching and mobile mentoring. The 
mobile mentoring component connects refugee teachers 
based in Kakuma with experienced and passionate educators 
outside the camp via WhatsApp. These global mentors © Danielle Falk/Teachers College42
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesprovide ongoing support, pedagogical tips and suggestions 
on how to address teaching challenges. Romans likes mobile mentoring because he receives instant advice and support from his mentor and other teachers on questions regarding difficult teaching situations:
‘The mentoring programme on WhatsApp 
has been really helpful. When there is an issue 
that I’m facing, I post it to the group. Then 
Kevin, the global mentor, or my other teacher 
colleagues give feedback on how it could be 
tackled. ’
According to Romans, one of the most valuable benefits of the mobile mentoring programme is the social learning design element, which helps him feel like he is not alone as he navigates the demands of teaching. Also, he appreciates that the initiative allows him to solicit ideas about how 
to cope with difficult situations in his classroom. Giving a 
concrete example of a problem he posted on the WhatsApp group, Romans describes a situation where he did not want to promote some of his students, because their near-failing marks demonstrated that they were unprepared to move on to the next grade:‘One of the teachers recommended I call the 
parents to discuss the issue, and if the parents 
think the student should be promoted with 
those marks, I should do it. My mentor added 
that I should tell the parents the positive 
and negative outcomes. I put this advice 
into practice. The parents appreciated our 
conversation and agreed that their children 
should repeat the grade to build a stronger 
foundation for the future. ’
Yet the support that can be gained through mobile mentoring is not without barriers of its own. Timely responses are necessary so that Teachers for Teachers can remain effective in helping refugee teachers try new strategies and solutions to overcome the challenges they face at school.
‘I love the mentoring programme because I 
get new ideas that I didn’t have before. The 
only limitation is time. For example, I can 
post a challenge now and it can take time 
for my mentor to respond, because we are in 
Africa and he is in the US, so time is the only 
difficulty. ’
Romans' experiences underscore the opportunities that mobile technologies offer in providing instant support and continuous development for teachers in refugee contexts, so that they can enhance their professional competencies.43Mobile learning to address education system challenges
Scarcity of appropriate learning 
and teaching resources
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
In refugee contexts, limited access to teaching and learning 
materials can further exacerbate the challenges faced by 
teachers, who often do not have adequate training and 
support to meet the needs of refugee learners. At the 
same time, when refugee learners do not have access to 
educational materials at school or in their homes, the process 
of adapting to their new learning environment may become 
even more burdensome than it would normally be. The scarcity of appropriate teaching and learning materials, such as textbooks and other teaching resources, in low and middle 
income countries (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 31) can amplify 
the impact of the individual challenges discussed in the section "Mobile learning to address individual challenges" .
A report from Mendenhall et al. (2015, p. 114) found that 
some classes in a refugee context in Kenya had to rotate sets of books among pupils, and in some classes no one 
had a text. In addition to materials for core subjects, pupils 
and teachers in Nairobi and in the refugee camp in Kakuma voiced the need for more supplementary learning materials. Another typical example is the situation of Sudanese refugee 
children in Chad: due to a lack of desks, many children sit on 
mats on the ground while the teacher, who is the only person with a textbook, writes notes on the blackboard (UNHCR, 2016d, p. 17).
The dearth of physical resources is often compounded by 
curricula that have limited relevance for refugee learners’ 
particular situations and backgrounds. For example, in a 
Kenyan refugee study, teachers bemoaned the fact that elements in the curriculum lacked relevance to the lives of many of the refugee pupils (Mendenhall et al., 2015, 
pp. 118–19). Sometimes the problem is not the lack of 
learning materials but rather their political nature. In many areas, curricula and learning resources are biased towards 
one side of a conflict, buttress stereotypes or worsen political 
and social grievances (UNESCO, 2016, pp. 103–4). Also, host country teachers are often not familiar with the curricula or contexts of refugee students’ home countries.
Learning materials in refugee contexts are 
often missing or, when they do exist, can lack 
relevance or be politically biased.Assumptions and evidence base
The educational response to the refugee crisis has identified 
in digital resources, and particularly in open educational 
resources, or OER, one possible avenue for addressing a 
variety of educational challenges, ranging from increasing 
access to textbooks and learning materials to improving 
education quality and reducing costs (Miao et al., 2016). The main potential associated with OER in crisis and refugee 
settings is that they can be adapted to local needs and rapidly 
implemented at low cost via mobile networks or other offline 
distribution mechanisms (Dahya, 2016; World Bank, 2016). Many of the resources currently used in refugee settings 
are freely accessible. However, their implementation is not 
without its own challenges. Resources tend to be scattered and distributed across different platforms, are often not 
harmonized or compatible, and frequently lack quality control. All of these limitations render the identification, evaluation 
and reuse of OER a difficult endeavour, especially in refugee 
contexts. Moreover, the majority of available OER are in 
English. There is an unmet demand for content in languages 
such as Arabic as well as content aligned with local curricula.
Given this set of circumstances, it is necessary to discern what 
educational materials relevant to refugee contexts have been developed and made accessible through mobile learning 
projects to date.
Current practices and projects
The development of new content, as well as the evaluation, 
selection and adaptation of existing content, is a persistent 
challenge in many mobile learning projects in refugee 
settings and beyond. A large number of content platforms 
have been used in education for refugees. Although some 
commercial providers have offered their content, most 
projects are leveraging content that is openly available. 
As the next two examples of platforms show, the lack of connectivity in many rural refugee contexts, especially those 
in low-resource settings, calls for the availability of offline content. The content platforms currently used in education 
for refugees range from static library repositories, digitized reference books and online encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, 
to rich multimedia platforms with high levels of interactivity 
and monitoring features to track student progress.
KA Lite is a lightweight server that can be positioned on the 
dynamic and interactive end of this spectrum. The open-source multimedia platform, which is also used by UNICEF’s 
Raspberry Pi for Learning (Pi4L) Initiative for refugees in 
Lebanon, reproduces the features of the online version 
of the Khan Academy in an offline environment, making 
this content available to learners with limited internet connectivity. Teachers and learners can select from thousands 44
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesof videos and exercises in ten different languages, including 
English and Arabic. This platform also provides interactive feedback in mathematics, science, history and economics, 
among other subjects. A point system is meant to encourage 
learners’ continued engagement, and automatically generated reports allow teachers or parents to track students’ progress (Learning Equality, n.d.).
The meta-platform RACHEL Offline incorporates a bundle 
of resources, including different learning and informational resources such as Wikipedia, Khan Academy and health 
information packages, that can be retrieved and loaded onto 
mobile devices (RACHEL Offline, n.d.). The digital materials are used in the Instant Network School project, which provides tablets preloaded with content to support school-based learning and teaching in various refugee settings in Africa.
Open educational resources are increasingly 
used in refugee projects, with some 
incorporating crowdsourcing approaches. 
However, resources tend to be scattered 
and difficult to identify, unharmonized or 
incompatible, and predominantly available in 
English.
While the aforementioned resources offer general educational materials, other platforms are geared towards the provision of materials following specific national curricula. Tabshoura 
(‘chalk’ in Arabic), for instance, is an initiative that provides free 
trilingual learning materials from kindergarten to university based on the Lebanese curriculum. The online platform, which draws on the learning management system Moodle, is organized by subject and grade and is freely accessible online. To date, the development and use of 2,350 educational activities has been piloted in early childhood education (Lebanese Alternative Learning, n.d.a). The content is used by diverse projects and initiatives in the context of the Syrian 
refugee crisis (Lebanese Alternative Learning, n.d.b).
Nafham (‘we understand’ in Arabic) is an OER initiative 
that provides online access to learning resources such as instructional videos. Nafham takes an interesting approach by including a crowdsourcing component, as some of the videos are generated by users (Nafham, 2016). Out of the more than 
15,000 educational videos for primary and secondary school 
learners from Egypt, Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Syria, more than 4,500 are crowdsourced (Center for Education Innovations, n.d.; Farahat, n.d.). According to the organization, approximately 1,000 videos cover about 35 per cent of the Syrian curriculum. The content is categorized by grade, subject, term and academic schedule (Nafham, 2016), and peer quality control is facilitated through a button that allows users to indicate if they understood the instructions 
in a particular video (Center for Education Innovations, n.d.). 
Video lessons from Nafham are used by Rumie’s Learn Syria initiative, which provides tablets preloaded with educational 
materials to Syrian refugees.
These examples provide insight into the types of initiatives 
that could help make educational materials available to teachers and learners in refugee contexts. Yet they also indicate the large scope of activities involved in implementing and sustaining such initiatives, which may limit feasibility in 
practice.
Reflections and emerging practice
Duplication of efforts and a lack of coordination among 
stakeholders is a major criticism raised against experiments 
with mobile-based processes intended to bridge education 
system gaps and help teachers and learners in refugee 
contexts access educational content. This is compounded by the fact that often initiatives and applications are not properly contextualized to the needs of the beneficiary populations. 
Because existing synergies are not adequately leveraged, 
educational content is constantly being reinvented, recreated 
and, if taken from freely available sources, re-evaluated. 
There is a demand for initiatives and platforms that identify existing content, review its quality (in part by measuring it against national or international curricula and standards), and link or aggregate it centrally on online and mobile portals, while making it available for offline usage as well. In addition to making the best of limited resources by avoiding the duplication of efforts, a systematic and curriculum-oriented structure could help detect and address gaps in content and topics.
In spite of efforts being made to develop new content, the 
vast majority of open and available educational resources is in English. There is an unmet need for materials in local languages as well as content that is tailored to local curricula or matched with international teaching standards. This is particularly though not exclusively the case for OER in 
Arabic (Miao et al., 2016, p. 224), as demand for the latter has 
spiked in the wake of the Syrian refugee crisis. In addition to Nafham and Arabic versions of Khan Academy, some open access repositories in North America and Saudi Arabia host and curate Arabic-language materials, but the quantity of materials available to date is limited (World Bank, 2016, p. 7).
Existing educational platforms also need improved content 
structuring mechanisms. A successful educational platform 
could use classifiers such as curriculum orientation, 
level of schooling, language, resource type, study time, 
device compatibility, and user rating and comments. The 
multistakeholder partnership mPowering Frontline Health 
Workers, which created the platform ORB in the framework of a health-related initiative, could represent a good example to follow. ORB offers open and quality-reviewed content to health workers across the world in a highly structured and accessible format. While platforms of this kind 45Mobile learning to address education system challenges
could be invaluable if used at the primary and secondary 
education levels, the growing number of MOOCs and higher education resources require additional oversight as well as higher degrees of openness (see also section 4.3 for more information on MOOCs).
In addition to the provision of structured online and offline 
content, there is also a need to incorporate pedagogical design into the OER development process (Miao et al., 2016, p. 225). In refugee contexts, it is particularly relevant 
to provide mechanisms that assess, visualize and aggregate 
learners’ progress. For example, the experience from the 
TIGER Girls programme (see section 4.1.3.2) shows that personalizing the dashboard and tracking features of the Open Learning Exchange (OLE) system allow refugee learners 
to explore and study in a self-directed manner, while teachers 
and easily trained coaches can manage teams of girls with 
heterogeneous levels of prior knowledge, which is a common 
occurrence in refugee settings. Using their dashboard, 
teachers and coaches can review the progress of the whole class and steer specific support to students experiencing difficulties (Rowe, 2016).
Undocumented and uncertified 
educational progression
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
Educational planners and managers face exceptional 
demands in times of crisis (Sinclair, 2002). In these contexts, education data at the individual, school and system levels tend to be poorly documented, and the low levels of granularity make it difficult to obtain nationwide overviews of aggregate statistics. Missing, incomplete or low-quality information drastically impedes the capacity of ministries of 
education and development organizations to rebuild, plan 
and manage education programmes involving refugees. 
This problem is tied to the lack of effective education management information systems (EMISs), which not only restricts capacity to monitor progress but also limits further 
planning and budgeting of the immediate response, as 
has been highlighted in the context of the Syrian refugee 
crisis (Syria Crisis Education, 2016). Accordingly, developing 
and implementing simple but flexible information systems 
to ensure the availability and use of quality data through 
functional EMISs is a key measure for system strengthening in emergency settings.The lack of reliable data in volatile crisis 
settings inhibits the rebuilding, planning and 
managing of entire education systems and 
highlights the need for simple yet flexible 
digital information systems.
A lack of data on refugees’ progress and attainments also 
contributes to the disruption of their educational pathways, 
especially when they move from one place to another. 
Following flight, refugees’ chances to continue education in 
the host settings may be hindered by the fact that they may 
not carry their paper-based educational certificates with 
them. In some instances, refugees have gone to extreme 
lengths, including undertaking life-threatening trips back home, to obtain this documentation (Gladwell et al., 2016a).
Additionally, education in settings of encampment, including 
through online and mobile learning programmes and courses, is often informal, undocumented and unaccredited. Online 
learning is not only valued less because of cultural beliefs 
about traditional delivery channels but also because online 
learning programmes tend to be associated with weak or 
non-existent forms of accreditation (Lorisika et al., 2015, p. 33). 
Education formats without a clear path to certification and diplomas can demotivate refugees (World Bank, 2016, p. 11) and even prevent them from continuing their education or developing hope for their future. Especially critical is the situation in camps and protracted displacement situations, in which, using the words of Waters and LeBlanc (2005, p. 144), ‘the myth of progress is implausible and many refugees have lost whatever future they formerly dreamed of’ . Furthermore, 
even official certificates are not consistently acknowledged 
across nations and education systems. A study from UNHCR 
found that school diplomas and certificates from the country 
of origin were not recognized in seventeen host countries in 
2010 (UNHCR, 2011b, as cited in Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 31). For instance, despite the Lebanese government’s intention to include all displaced Syrian students in the country’s school system, their entrance is obstructed by a lack of school and course certificates and legal barriers (UNICEF and Save the Children, 2012, p. 5). The problem of educational continuity remains when refugees move to high income countries or up the education system into higher and university education. Despite their high ambitions, refugees are often placed in 
low-level classes (McBrien, 2005; Suárez-Orozco, 1989) based 
on their local language skills rather than on their academic abilities. Deskilling represents one of the major causes of frustration, as exemplified by a study on refugees in Canadian high schools (Kanu, 2008, p. 924).
Lost certificates, uncertified achievements 
and unacknowledged certifications severely 
constrain refugees’ educational trajectories as 
they move from one place to another.46
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesThe sum of these barriers related to documenting and 
certifying evidence of previous educational attainment can contribute to a sense of disorientation and isolation for refugees. It is worthwhile to investigate how digital solutions might help prevent the disruption of educational trajectories 
for refugee learners.
Assumptions and evidence base
There is often an expectation that the use of ICTs can greatly 
help in collecting, aggregating and analysing education data in crisis and refugee settings. The idea is that improved data availability and quality can significantly enhance the planning, managing and monitoring of education systems.
The projects analysed in this section reveal that mobile 
technology can play an essential role in maintaining or 
establishing basic functions of education systems, especially 
in low-resource and low-infrastructure settings. In these contexts, mobile devices are often the only available 
technology that allows quick data capture on available 
infrastructure, teacher and student numbers, and other information, potentially enabling more rapid and appropriate responses.
Importantly, the analysis also illustrates the limitations of 
current technological approaches in addressing the challenge of documenting and certifying refugees’ educational progress. This is due in part to the fact that refugees generally flee from contexts where education certificates are not stored in a digital format, and they are often unable to prove prior educational attainments if they lose the paper-based versions they have received. Furthermore, while information systems in crisis and emergency settings tend to collect data at class, school or regional levels, some do not document individual attainments that would help refugees substantiate their educational background.
The inability to document and recognize prior achievements 
and the political and structural barriers in this area are profound concerns that go beyond technological issues. Solutions to these challenges should begin with establishing the necessary political and regulatory frameworks to help 
support digital achievement recognition and certification, 
and technology can only support these processes. The role 
that technology can play in documenting and certifying 
educational data has been explored in some refugee contexts 
with varying degrees of scale.
Current practices and projects
In crisis and refugee settings, data and progress at the level 
of learners, classes, schools and systems are often poorly, if at all, documented and aggregated. At the system level, this lack 
of information poses challenges in planning, operating and 
monitoring educational programmes and entire education 
systems. On an individual level, the lack of data, especially 
regarding students’ prior educational attainments and 
certificates obtained, restricts or destroys refugees’ chances 
of continuing their educational trajectories as they move 
from one place to another. Addressing these two challenges 
requires the documentation and visualization of educational 
data and student progress through flexible digital information 
systems.
Documentation and management to 
strengthen education systems
A few platforms collect and analyse data for the planning 
and management of education systems in refugee contexts. 
These products have incorporated technologies with differing 
functional repertoires. For example, EduTrac leverages simple SMS technology, Kmobile Schools is a mobile app, and 
OpenEMIS incorporates a suite of interrelated software that 
can be used on various mobile and non-mobile devices.
EduTrac is a simple data collection and monitoring tool 
used in refugee contexts in Uganda. It draws on RapidSMS 
technology, with the goal of supporting districts in planning 
activities and providing better and quicker supervision to schools. Head teachers and administrators regularly convey information on pupil and teacher attendance, child abuse and 
capitation grants via SMS (RapidSMS, n.d.). Starting in 2011, 
the system was improved through an iterative process. First, to structure the collection of data, an SMS-based poll system has been developed. People respond to structured text 
messages such as: ‘How many P3 [particular class/grade] boys 
are at school today?’ The data are subsequently visualized on an internet dashboard (UNICEF, 2013). The system involves 
9,093 reporters and 2,819 schools (RapidSMS, n.d.). Tracking 
refugee enrolments in northern Uganda allowed UNICEF and the Ministry of Education to quickly develop data-based 
responses to issues that previously would have taken weeks to 
address (Llamazares and Mulloy, 2014). The system’s mobility 
and simplicity make it conducive to ad hoc use in volatile 
refugee and crisis contexts.
Kmobile Schools is an app developed by the non-profit 
organization FHI 360 for Android-based tablets and smartphones that can be used to collect and analyse critical education indicators in refugee camps and urban areas 
(Dahya, 2016). These include exact school locations and 
related photographs, the number of students and teachers present at any given time, and the types and numbers of facilities (such as classrooms and latrines) and textbooks 
available (FHI 360, 2013, n.d.). Once data are uploaded, they 
can be displayed and analysed via Google Earth. The open-47Mobile learning to address education system challenges
source app was designed for UNHCR (FHI 360, 2013) and 
has been deployed in South Sudan, Sierra Leone and other 
UNHCR-supported countries to track and detail education 
offerings for refugees (Dahya, 2016, p. 13). FHI 360 claims that its app has helped reduce data collection and reporting time 
by at least 30 per cent (FHI 360, 2013).
The open-source education management information system 
OpenEMIS, which was developed by UNESCO and is being 
used in refugee contexts in Malaysia and Jordan, presents an 
even broader range of functionalities. The tool incorporates RapidSMS technology and enables the regular collection, 
aggregation and analysis of detailed data at national, 
regional, school, class and individual levels (OpenEMIS, 2016). 
OpenEMIS was implemented by UNHCR in Malaysia in 2012 to 
track the educational progress of 33,000 refugee children and 
to help bring this group with low school enrolment rates back 
into classrooms. By 2015, data from 48,000 refugee children 
and 700 staff in 142 education sites had been collected and 
analysed in Malaysia (OpenEMIS, 2016).
The incorporation of mobile and SMS 
technologies in education management 
information systems and their adaptation to 
refugee contexts are key in reaching refugee 
populations who are constantly on the move.
In the context of the Syrian refugee crisis, OpenEMIS is being 
leveraged on a much larger scale. In 2014, it was implemented 
with the support of UNESCO in schools and education centres in the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan. The system proved 
to be particularly valuable in addressing the specific issues 
faced by refugees, such as their mobility patterns, the lack of internet connection and challenges related to the types 
of recognized identification documents. In refugee settings, 
children often do not have national identification numbers; 
OpenEMIS circumvents this issue by assigning a new, unique 
identification number to students in order to track their progress (Izaguirre, 2016). The lack of internet connection 
was addressed by developing a local network and a server 
preloaded with the OpenEMIS system, with regular offline 
exchanges synchronizing the data with the central system. 
To account for the mobility in Jordanian refugee settings and to harness the availability of simple mobile phones, 
text messaging capabilities were implemented to collect 
EMIS data. The experience in this refugee setting has led the Jordanian government to roll out the system nationwide. 
Today, OpenEMIS Jordan covers more than 2,160,000 students 
and 140,000 staff in 6,893 schools (OpenEMIS, 2017).
YOBIS, Turkey’s EMIS for foreign students, also tracks 
enrolment, attendance and performance and generates report cards and diplomas/certificates (UNICEF, 2015) for 
non-Turkish students including Syrian refugees (Syria Crisis 
Education, 2016; World Bank, 2016). A recommendation is to further develop YOBIS to better track attendance and learning 
achievements and to support policy-makers in making 
informed decisions (Syria Crisis Education, 2016).
Documentation and certification to ensure 
learners’ educational trajectories
The documentation and validation of prior educational 
experience is a recurring challenge for refugees. People who flee their homes might not have the chance to bring their paper-based documentation with them. Also, some might come from education systems with no mechanisms and infrastructures for documenting educational trajectories. Insufficient documentation and certification creates issues 
when refugees seek to continue their education in host 
countries with little to no information on their backgrounds.
Mobile solutions can be used to document and certify 
the educational trajectories of refugee learners. Flexible information systems used in refugee contexts, such as YOBIS or OpenEMIS, allow for the production, reproduction and digital display of school certificates in the event that physical copies get lost during displacement. In this way, the documentation features can substantially enhance refugees’ chances of continuing their education in a different place. In OpenEMIS, all educational achievements are linked to students’ individual digital profiles, and paper-based education certificates, for example from pre-primary level, can 
be attached as digital photographs (Izaguirre, 2016).
In crisis settings, education initiatives, particularly digital 
learning courses, are often not certified and thus are less valuable to refugees. Novel solutions should add certifications to digital and mobile learning programmes. On a degree level, the higher education MOOC-based initiative Kiron 
(see 4.3.3.2) has developed approaches to tackle parts of this problem by combining off-the-shelf MOOCs with on-campus degree programmes. Kiron’s partner universities agree to recognize the credits that refugees gain through the successful completion of the MOOCs and allow students to complete certified degree programmes during the on-campus phase (Kiron, n.d.d ). In addition, the programme enables refugee students to begin the online portion of their 
studies regardless of their location. This can help refugees 
to start immediately while waiting for their asylum status to 
be granted (Kiron, n.d.a). However, a persistent challenge is 
that refugees need to be accepted by the respective partner 
university and their higher education entrance qualification 
needs to be verified by these partners (Rampelt, 2017).
Universities that take the lead in education projects for 
refugees have an advantage as they can directly award 
certifications for courses, modules and entire degree programmes. For example, certificates for InZone’s onsite and digital learning programmes (see 4.2.3.2) are awarded by university partners such as the University of Geneva or 48
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesPrinceton University (Moser-Mercer, 2017). In the Jamiya 
Project’s blended learning courses (see section 4.3.3.3), 
European universities act as development and certification partners, with the goal of providing a certified one-year 
programme equivalent to the first year of a university degree (Gladwell et al., 2016a, p. 19; Jamiya press release, 2016).
Finally, systemic approaches are being adopted to encourage 
the establishment of formal regulatory frameworks and 
procedures for the recognition of refugees’ prior educational 
attainment. For the European region, one example is the Recommendation on the Recognition of Qualifications Held by Refugees, Displaced Persons and Persons in a Refugee-
like Situation, adopted in November 2017 as part of the framework of the Council of Europe/UNESCO Convention 
on the Recognition of Qualifications concerning Higher Education in the European Region (the Lisbon Recognition 
Convention). The recommendation invites countries 
to facilitate the integration of refugees and displaced 
populations in their education systems and advocates for 
the establishment of assessment mechanisms to be applied when proof of prior qualifications is not available (Lisbon 
Recognition Convention Committee, 2017).
Reflections and emerging practice
In crisis contexts, EMISs are the digital applications that have 
reached the largest scale to date and can thus offer a number 
of lessons learned. First, the process of contextualizing tools 
to local and national contexts is complex and lengthy. Second, 
implementation can be strengthened if there is a clear 
governance and ownership model, with the government, and specifically the ministries of education, taking a leading 
role among stakeholders and sponsors. The open-source 
foundation of some EMISs can also be an advantage. 
For example, with OpenEMIS, technological innovations 
implemented in one country are freely available for use in all other countries (Izaguirre, 2016). Although the technical 
systems examined are not solely mobile, the incorporation 
of mobile and SMS technologies to reach refugees in volatile 
contexts is key. Lean, SMS-based applications, such as EduTrac 
in Uganda, are easier to implement and can be deployed 
faster in crisis settings compared with more robust systems. 
OpenEMIS is typically implemented in a three-year cycle, in order to customize the system according to the needs 
of the respective setting. However, once systems become 
more established, they can include not only the planning and allocation of resources but also the documentation 
and acknowledgement of refugees’ individual educational progress.
In light of ongoing and recurring crisis dynamics, the central 
questions to be examined are whether national information 
systems are prepared to address potential crises, and whether EMISs in host settings are capable of including refugee learners as an integral part of their processes. While 
current solutions partly address the challenge, they will 
encounter a bottleneck effect if they are not aligned with adequate regulatory frameworks that recognize learners’ prior attainments and reintegrate them into formal education systems. For the European region, the 2017 Recommendation on the Recognition of Qualifications Held by Refugees, 
Displaced Persons and Persons in a Refugee-like Situation 
represents a step in this direction that could be replicated in other parts of the world.
From a strategic and long-term perspective, it would be 
relevant to develop a holistic approach for crisis and refugee 
situations, perhaps in the form of internationally accepted and 
customizable refugee curricula. An intermediate step could be 
the development of a list of simple, age-based competencies aligned with internationally recognized systems, such as TIMSS/PIRLS and PISA. Digitized lists of such competencies 
could be made available to education providers, teachers and 
parents, and could be linked to existing digital resources and simple assessments (World Bank, 2016, p. 11). This list could be extended by building an open digital/mobile badge system that measures and acknowledges educational attainment across a range of digital and non-digital educational activities (Solve, 2016.). Digital or mobile badges are virtual symbols of 
achievement proving that a specific skill or competency has 
been acquired. An open badge system means that badges are awarded through different credible and trusted organizations, and learners can combine badges from different issuing 
agencies (Badge Alliance, n.d.). In crisis situations, education 
providers could issue badges following the completion of mobile or onsite learning courses. Once learners are resettled or when they move to a different site, the badges could serve as recognized digital proof of their prior educational achievements (Solve, 2016). Partnerships between public 
authorities and content providers should be established to 
ensure quality assurance and institutionalization of the badge systems.
Current technological developments, especially blockchains, 
can also play a role in the improvement of flexible and reliable educational data management systems in crisis settings. A 
blockchain – a decentralized digital database mechanism – 
holds a continuously growing, permanent and unmodifiable list of records. This distributed technology could help refugees prove their prior educational attainments and could contain other evidentiary documents, such as birth certificates and 
proof of citizenship, which would be accessible any time and 
anywhere.
One challenge closely related to certification is the way 
in which examinations are carried out. In some projects, examiners are flown into camp settings, or the examination is based on written essays that are corrected online. An 
interesting future route could be realized through digital 
certification mechanisms. The Duolingo language learning 49Mobile learning to address education system challenges
app, although not created specifically for refugees, offers 
features for mobile testing and certification. Adaptive tests offered on the app can be completed on mobile or desktop devices with a stable internet connection. To prevent cheating, a remote proctor monitors each learner via video 
to ensure that unauthorized assistance is not obtained 
(Duolingo, 2014). Duolingo’s approach illustrates how certification can be obtained through app-based testing services. However, challenges related to the recognition of identity documents need to be overcome. For example, in the case of Duolingo, of the ten countries where most refugees come from (UNHCR, 2016b, p. 16), only documents from Colombia are presently accepted to verify learners’ identity (Duolingo, n.d.a). Furthermore, automated quizzes and adaptive tests are certainly not the only means by which higher-order reasoning or critical thinking skills can be 
assessed. Nevertheless, as mobile connectivity improves in 
refugee settings, mobile technology might also allow more systematic assessment and certification through oral exams conducted by voice-based telecommunications, breaking new ground and potentially saving financial resources when compared to the costs associated with in-person testing.
In this chapter, education system challenges and the potential of mobile learning to address them were explored. Emphasis was placed on three issues that have a substantial impact on education for refugees: teacher training and support, availability of educational materials, and documentation and certification of educational trajectories. The analysis explored how each of these three barriers affects education systems and inevitably cascades to individual learners. The interrelationships found among the various elements of 
the education experience for refugees suggest that approaches to removing barriers can indeed make use 
of mobile technology but also rely heavily on the willingness of people to innovate in ways that might be difficult to scale. Further, projects meant to support education systems in a manner that benefits refugee learners can still fail if they do not consider issues related to the diverse educational levels. The fourth chapter of this report will therefore engage with issues viewed through the lens of education levels, that is, primary and secondary education, vocational training, and higher education.
 Mobile learning 
to address challenges 
related to specific
levels and types of education 52
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesMobile learning to address challenges related to 
specific levels and types of education
Refugee populations are quite heterogeneous in terms of age, 
socio-economic background, and prior education, training and work experience. Consequently, in addition to individual and system-related challenges, those working in the field of education for refugees might be confronted with issues 
specific to particular educational levels, such as:
●●Limited access to quality primary and secondary education
●●Obstacles to vocational training and the labour market
●●Restricted access to higher education
Limited access to quality primary 
and secondary education
Challenges and educational implications
Access to quality primary and secondary education holds 
enormous relevance for refugees and displaced people. In addition to providing qualifications, schooling plays an important role in bringing back stabilized routines into 
refugees’ disrupted lives. Both primary and secondary 
education produce high individual and social returns, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2004, p. 114). In addition, the opportunity to access secondary education is a motivator for refugees to pursue primary education (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 49).
Refugees’ access to primary and secondary 
education is severely limited, with only 50 per 
cent of refugee children enrolled in primary 
schools, compared with a global average of 
over 90 per cent.
Despite its relevance, access to primary and secondary education in crisis contexts is disrupted, restricted and uneven (Dryden-Peterson, 2015b , pp. 1–2). Recent reports estimate that 
only 50 per cent of refugee children worldwide are enrolled in primary schools, compared with a global enrolment rate of over 90 per cent (UNESCO, 2016, p. 106; UNHCR, 2016d , p. 4). For 
instance, it is estimated that at least two-thirds of the 700,000 school-age refugee children in Turkey, most of whom are Syrian, receive no formal education (Sirin and Rogers-Sirin, 2015; Whewell, 2016). Enrolment is even more restricted for girls, 
refugee children in urban areas (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 24; Sirin and Rogers-Sirin, 2015, p. I ) and learners who intend to 
pursue secondary education (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 24). 
Finally, about 75 per cent of all refugee adolescents aged 12 
to 17 years are not enrolled in secondary school, compared 
with a global average of 17 per cent for adolescents of lower secondary school age (approximately 12 to 14 years old) (UNESCO and UNHCR, 2016).
Low attendance and poor quality of learning 
can be tied to financial, infrastructural, 
resource-related, sociocultural and 
pedagogical barriers.
While access to education has become a priority on the agenda of many humanitarian actors, the quality of teaching and learning receives insufficient attention (Burde et al., 2015, p. 29). Even when refugee children are enrolled in 
schools, the quality of education tends to be low (Dryden-
Peterson, 2011, p. 32). Although data on refugees’ learning outcomes are limited, they are consistent in highlighting that refugees tend to have considerably lower levels of knowledge and skills than what is expected for their age (Dryden-
Peterson, 2015b, p. 10) and are more likely to receive poor 
or failing grades and to drop out, as can be seen in the case of Syrian refugee children (Sirin and Rogers-Sirin, 2015, p. 1). Dryden-Peterson (2015b, pp. 10–11) reports that less than 6 per cent of Eritrean refugee children in Ethiopia had reached benchmarks of reading fluency by Grade 4. Low educational attainment seems to also be prevalent in higher income 
countries and tends to persist over time. For instance, the 
reading abilities of immigrants’ children in OECD countries clearly lag behind those of children with non-immigrant 
heritage (OECD, 2012 p. 11).
Access to quality education is further hindered by challenges 
associated with the poor condition of learning environments in refugee contexts. In many instances, school buildings are not 
available, as a result of demolition or military and humanitarian 
occupation (Burde et al., 2015, p. 16). Such scarcity of schools is 
especially evident for secondary education (Dryden-Peterson, 
2011, p. 50). Double shifting, that is, establishing two or more shifts for different cohorts of learners to make better use of available space, can additionally deteriorate the quality of learning, as it is often associated with reduced classroom 53Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
hours (World Bank, 2016, p. 11). Further, although schools can 
and should be major sources of security for students (UNHCR, 
2016d , p. 10), many school environments are far from physically 
and emotionally safe, which poses yet another critical barrier to 
learning (Dryden-Peterson, 2015a ) as well as integration (Ager 
and Strang, 2008, p. 184) across a wide range of settings. As schools are often seen as symbols of the ruling party, in conflict areas they are likely to be targets of opposing forces (Burde et 
al., 2015, p. 56).
Financial issues include not only fees and 
other school-related costs but very often the 
trade-off between education and securing the 
household’s income.
In terms of financial barriers, low levels of school enrolment, especially in secondary schools, can be associated with high 
ancillary costs including transport, school materials and school fees (Burde et al., 2015, p. 16; Dryden-Peterson, 2011; UNICEF and Save the Children, 2012). Children, especially girls, often 
do not attend school because of opportunity costs such as 
the loss of household labour (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 50). 
A lack of financial resources and the need to support the 
household’s income were two of the main reasons cited by refugees in Jordan as to why their children were not attending 
school (UNHCR Innovation, 2016, p. 12). The tension between 
education and financial survival was also evident among Central American refugees in the USA, who struggled to attend 
high school while working intensively to secure their livelihoods 
(Suárez-Orozco, 1989). Teenage girls have an additional risk of dropping out of school due to early pregnancy or marriage, as 
shown in a study on Karen refugee groups in Thailand (Oh and 
van der Stouwe, 2008, pp. 601–2). In Australia, Karen refugee mothers encounter obstacles to meeting their own educational 
needs, such as learning the language of the host country, due 
to pressure to manage the household and care for children and elderly family members (Watkins et al., 2012, p. 132).
Political and legal restrictions further 
exacerbate issues related to primary and 
secondary education access.
Refugee children may also face legal restrictions to schooling in countries of first asylum. This phenomenon is particularly 
evident in countries that have not signed the 1951 Refugee 
Convention or its 1967 protocol. Under these circumstances, displaced persons often do not have the legal status of 
refugees and may be denied access to education (Dryden-
Peterson, 2015b, p. 7). In addition, lack of fluency in the host country’s language of instruction (see more details regarding 
language problems in section 2.1) can not only cause difficulty 
following teachers’ explanations at school but also constitute 
an entrance barrier to enrolment. In high income countries 
such as the USA, school dropout of refugees and immigrants is the consequence of additional factors, such as students’ 
self-perception, rejection by peers, a lack of psychological and academic preparation prior to enrolment, and an absence of future goals (McBrien, 2005, pp. 343–44).
Given the number and extent of the barriers blocking 
access to primary and secondary education for refugees, it 
is worthwhile to explore ways in which mobile solutions can play a positive role in ensuring that all refugees have access to inclusive and equitable quality primary and secondary 
education.
Assumptions and evidence base
The underlying assumption of many current projects and 
initiatives is that mobile learning enables and broadens refugee children’s access to primary and secondary education while enhancing the quality of learning and teaching. Also, some initiatives expect that mobile learning can compensate for the lack of formal education attained by out-of-school children.
The current evidence base does not confirm these 
assumptions. Most projects have not reached scale nor rigorously and systematically evaluated their impact on educational access and quality, and the limited evidence that has been gathered is inconclusive. Quantitative outcomes are mixed, while some qualitative evaluations point to positive effects, especially regarding connected and lifelong learning. However, even positive outcomes from pilot and short-term deployments that suggest heightened learner participation and gains in educational performance need to be viewed with caution, as some of these outcomes could be the result of the novelty effect of a new technology being introduced.
The question surrounding the cost-effectiveness of mobile-
based solutions for the provision of primary and secondary 
education should also be acknowledged. It remains unclear 
whether digital technologies are the most cost-effective 
solution to enhance learning and teaching, or if similar 
outcomes can be achieved with other, less costly approaches.
Against this background, the next section applies a critical 
lens to mobile learning projects at the primary and secondary education levels to understand how, if at all, the integration of mobile tools positively impacts the provision of education for refugees.
Current practices and projects
The mobile learning interventions identified vary with respect to their educational designs. They include the use of mobile learning to enhance formal classroom instruction, non-formal mobile learning in community education centres, and location-independent provision of mobile content and tutoring.54
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesFormal mobile learning in classrooms
Formal mobile learning involves the integration of mobile 
learning technologies, mainly devices preloaded with 
educational content and activities, into classroom teaching for 
refugees. The main objective of the mobile learning projects 
in this category is to compensate for the lack of textbooks and other educational materials available in education settings for refugees.
One of the largest programmes to address the shortage 
of educational resources is the Instant Network School programme, a joint initiative between UNHCR and Vodafone. 
For each target classroom, the programme provides a set 
of computer tablets, solar-powered batteries and a backup generator; a satellite or mobile network connection; a suite of preloaded content and online resources; and ongoing training of coaches and IT support staff (UNHCR Innovation, 
n.d.e). The programme, which also facilitates community 
learning, involves 30,000 students and 600 teachers in 20 primary and secondary schools in Kenya, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Tanzania and South Sudan (Vodafone, n.d.). Preliminary data analyses suggest increased levels of 
enrolment and retention in primary school settings (UNHCR 
Innovation, n.d.e), while a systematic external evaluation is scheduled for the near future (Strecker, 2017).
Ideas Box, which is geared towards strengthening refugees’ 
access to informational, educational and cultural resources, is another initiative that was reported to have positive effects in school contexts (UNHCR Innovation, n.d.d). According to an 
evaluation in Burundi’s refugee camps, students from primary 
and secondary levels had 23 per cent higher achievement in mathematics and French, on average, compared with control groups who attended their classes without using the Ideas 
Box. Additional qualitative analyses point to students’ higher 
levels of engagement with instruction supported by the Ideas Box. The intervention group was taught with the Ideas Box using its resources, which include tablets, books, apps, videos and education portals (including Khan Academy and 
Wikipedia), as well as tables, stools and modular furniture 
(Peich, 2016). In the context of the Syrian refugee crisis, 
many more initiatives, such as Learn Syria or Thaki, have 
started collecting new or second-hand mobile technology, preloading it with educational resources and providing it to refugee learners.
However, the use of mobile and other technology has not 
led to positive results in all settings. An approach similar to 
the Instant Network School programme was deployed in 
two Malaysian refugee learning centres. Although students 
and teachers enthusiastically used the tablets and curricular materials, standardized tests did not show evidence of 
increased academic performance that could be attributed to 
this use. In addition, although the cost for the procurement of reading materials decreased, the overall project costs 
exceeded these savings (UNHCR Innovation, n.d.b).
Non-formal mobile learning in education centresMobile technology is also being used to enable and support 
non-formal learning outside classroom settings, in places such 
as community or education centres. In these environments, 
tutors typically guide learners with the goal of bringing them 
back to formal school learning or helping them stay in school. 
Some projects explicitly focus on skills development and 
subjects relevant to primary and secondary education.
The E-learning Sudan project supports out-of-school 
children in community centres in Sudan by assisting with their mathematical skills development. Through this initiative, children aged 7 to 9 use a self-paced, guided educational game on solar-powered tablets each day for approximately 
45 minutes. A quasi-experimental study design – which 
evaluated the project and the participation of more than 500 children through mathematical tests, logged data and the Early Grade Mathematics Assessment (EGMA) – found that the children improved their mathematical abilities significantly by playing the game, although most only played two to three days a week. No differences were found with regard to gender (Stubbé, Badri et al., 2016; Stubbé, van der Klauw et al., 2016). 
In the last four years, the project has increased the number 
of programme beneficiaries from 66 to 589 in Sudan and has plans to scale up with the goal to reach thousands more in Sudan and in the Middle East (War Child Holland, 2016).
Non-formal mobile and connected learning 
can help refugees both stay in and return to 
school. It can also offer them a new vision for 
their prospective career path and help make 
them leaders in their local environment.
The Raspberry Pi for Learning (Pi4L) project provides flexible non-formal learning to children not enrolled in formal education. The goal is help them develop basic numeracy, science and coding skills. Raspberry Pi is a tiny computer (about the size of a credit card) that can be connected to 
peripheral devices, such as a keyboard and a computer screen. 
The project has been piloted in Lebanese community centres with 300 children who are not enrolled in formal schooling (UNHCR-UNDP Joint Secretariat, 2015). A unique feature of the project is the coding element: using the popular visual language Scratch, children learn the basics of computer programming. Learning to code is not only a goal by itself but also a means to practise other subjects such as mathematics, 
science and art (UNICEF Innovation, 2014).
In contrast to some other projects in this section that mainly 
target out-of-school learners, the TIGER (These Inspiring 
Girls Enjoy Reading) Girls programme works mainly with secondary school girls in the Jordanian Zaatari camp with 55Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
the goal of keeping them in school. It also aims to facilitate 
the girls’ lifelong learning and personal and professional development. Learning is organized in small teams of about ten girls who meet daily in community learning centres. With the support of coaches in the refugee camp, girls can 
access open and personalized reading, mathematics and 
civics learning resources on low-cost digital tablets, rate the resources and track their progress on their dashboard. Since the coach can review the progress of her team, she can pair weaker and stronger learners and support learners in topics they are struggling with. The Open Learning Exchange system, called Planet Learning, encourages the creation of local content by the girls and their coaches. In addition to academic learning, the girls engage in community development projects to create solutions to problems in their camp 
environments (Belfer Center for Science and International 
Affairs, 2016; Rowe, 2016). 
The overarching goal of the Tiger Girls programme is to help 
Syrian adolescent refugee girls develop a greater sense of personal power, meaning and connections in their lives with a vision for their future as productive and thriving adults. An interim, qualitative evaluation of the pilot with approximately 120 girls and 12 coaches found that the programme increased 
the girls’ confidence and motivation to stay in school 
(Phimister, 2016) and that it drew some of out-of-school adolescent girls back into school (Rowe, 2016). Furthermore, the evaluation highlighted the development of new collaborative problem-solving skill sets and stronger social networks among peers, and between peers and facilitators (Phimister, 2016).
Though the above findings from non-formal education 
contexts are promising, none of the programmes examined 
have reached scale, and a large portion of the evidence base of positive impact relies on qualitative data that have not been corroborated with quantitative evidence to strengthen the findings. The last primary and secondary education context to be considered in the next section concerns interventions that are location-independent and open up endless possibilities as to where learning can occur for refugees.
Location-independent mobile content and tutoring
Sometimes, teaching and learning in refugee situations can 
occur in non-traditional locations outside of classrooms and community learning centres. Location-independent mobile learning opportunities, which are not tied to any kind of onsite support, can provide a high level of flexibility in terms of when and where educational experiences happen, freeing teachers and learners from traditional structures that may 
prevent their needs from being met. However, the number 
of projects implemented in this category has been relatively limited.Integrated SMS approaches could offer 
valuable supplementary learning and 
formative assessment mechanisms, but their 
effectiveness remains to be demonstrated 
through rigorous evaluations.
The only example identified is Eneza’s Short Message Service Shupavu291, a collaboration between UNHCR, Eneza Education, Lutheran World Federation and the Xavier Project, implemented in Kenya’s Dadaab refugee camps (UNHCR, 2016c). The SMS content is aligned with the Kenyan 
primary national examination and provides students with 
access to study materials for all primary subjects, like English, mathematics, Kiswahili, science, social studies, general knowledge and religion. It is presented in the form of mini-lessons and subject- and topic-specific quizzes. For each submitted answer, learners receive corrections and an explanation of the solution to deepen their understanding. The tool also allows live Wikipedia searches and provides an Ask-a-Teacher feature, which learners can use to direct questions to qualified teachers and receive their responses via 
SMS. The service is being piloted in the Hagadera camp with 
1,000 learners who can use the content for free for one year (UNHCR, 2016c; Xavier Project, n.d.).
The focus on SMS technologies allows projects of this type to 
leverage learners’ mobile phone ownership to realize a bring-your-own-device (BYOD) approach. BYOD initiatives that use simple technologies can help considerably simplify upscaling efforts. The depth of knowledge acquisition possible via short 
messages and questions is clearly limited, especially with 
respect to the development of creativity and problem-solving skills, but such approaches are nonetheless complementary to schooling. They can also be a viable route for formative evaluation, especially if the aggregate findings generated for teachers enables them to understand students’ strengths and challenges.
Reflections and emerging practice
With the exception of the Instant Network School programme, mobile learning initiatives for primary and secondary education in refugee contexts have not yet reached scale. Nevertheless, the emerging experience shows that mobile learning designs can address some of the educational demands of refugees both 
inside and outside of school environments.
The most obvious need that projects in this category face 
is access to core and complementary learning materials for learners and teachers. The management of highly diverse levels of prior knowledge could be addressed by facilitating self-guided and inquiry-based learning mediated by mobile 
technology. However, one of the main obstacles is that 
teachers tend to adhere to transmission-centred teaching 56
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesstyles. In this sense, teachers sometimes use tablets and 
projectors as substitutes for the blackboard, without embracing child-centred pedagogies and exploratory learning methods, as has been observed in the Instant Network School programme (UNHCR Innovation, n.d.e). The initial 
reluctance to change required considerable levels of teacher 
training and support to enable a gradual transition away from transmission-based instruction to the facilitation of students’ dynamic, self-guided learning, in order to make the most  of mobile solutions. The Instant Network School programme trained dedicated coaches from the community to support the teachers in their work with the tablets (Strecker, 2017; UNHCR Innovation, n.d.e).
Many of the projects in informal and formal learning settings 
use tools adapted to the challenging situation in crisis and camp environments. These include offline content to prepare for a lack of connectivity; robust hardware or cases to better 
protect devices from dirt, dust and blows; and solar-powered 
systems to account for power shortages. The need for infrastructure other than technology is addressed by projects such as Instant Network Schools or Ideas Box, which also provide light furniture. However, particularly in the scaling-up phases, the procurement of infrastructure and technology 
was found to be a time-consuming exercise that constrained 
implementing agencies’ operations (UNHCR Innovation, n.d.e). An important aspect for consideration is the way in which technology fits into the overall educational needs ecosystem. Well-designed technology can work in crisis situations with a lack of educational resources, but it requires motivated teachers on the ground. It has been argued that technology cannot make teachers return to their schools, nor can it compensate for their absence in the classroom. In this respect, even the most innovative technological education approaches 
cannot surmount issues that arise from deeply embedded 
political and social problems (van Reijswoud, 2014).Although some reports about individual projects highlight the positive learning impacts that resulted from the interventions, the scientific underpinning is weak. More rigorous and longitudinal studies are needed to corroborate the positive and largely qualitative educational impacts observed in 
some projects. Future evaluations should also investigate 
cost-effectiveness, especially when interventions carry high implementation and maintenance costs. For example, Hughes (2014) asserts that ‘even at half the current cost, one [Ideas] Box would still be more than twice as expensive as building a modern primary school in Africa’ . A further issue related to the technology costs involved with mobile learning interventions in primary and secondary education is the secure storage of equipment. In Uganda, for instance, to protect one project’s technology equipment against vandalism and theft, it needed 
to be locked away in distant rooms, giving educators and 
caregivers only limited opportunities to prepare for lessons (Jeong, 2015).
The project implementation costs of mobile 
learning interventions in primary and 
secondary education are extremely high. 
Future research urgently needs to address 
issues of cost-effectiveness for the use of 
limited resources.
Finally, most of the projects reported in this section are aimed at refugee learners in camps and rural areas. While this is certainly a relevant target group, limited digital learning opportunities have been made available to refugees who live in urban and semi-urban areas and attend regular schools in 
their host countries, even though this group constitutes the 
majority of the refugee population.57Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
A learner’s perspective
Rima2 is a Syrian girl in Jordan’s Zaatari camp, a setting marked by high 
secondary school dropout rates for adolescent girls. As a participant in the 
TIGER Girls programme, she has joined a group of young girls who are being mentored by a female coach. The use of open-source digital libraries on tablets supports the girls’ formal education as well as their engagement in community-based learning projects.
2 The photos portray TIGER Girls participants, but to protect the privacy of the girls, the narrative of ‘Rima’ is a composite of experiences that the girls 
have experienced and are continuing to experience, extracted through qualitative interviews in the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan.Rima is a 13-year-old girl from the As-Suwayda Governorate 
of south-eastern Syria. She grew up with her family on a small farm, but when her father was drawn into the civil war, her mother fled with her and her younger brother to the safety of the UNHCR camp in Zaatari, Jordan. The situation of Rima’s family is common among Syrian refugees. Of the hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugee families in Egypt, Lebanon, Iraq, 
Jordan and Turkey, it is estimated that one in four is headed by 
a woman who struggles alone for her survival and that of her children (UNHCR, 2014).Today, Rima lives with her mother and brother in a crowded caravan with the family of Rima’s uncle. Due to the spreading civil war, Rima had been out of school for nearly a year, but in Zaatari she enrolled in a camp school. Although she likes going to school, the classes are overcrowded and she has to share the textbooks with her schoolmates. The situation is particularly difficult for adolescent girls. Many drop out 
because they need to help at home or as a result of early 
marriage (Education Sector Working Group, 2014). Rima © Open Learning Exchange58
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesrecalls the example of a 14-year-old friend, for whom marriage 
was arranged last month:
‘She had to marry an older man who wanted 
someone to care for him. She left school and 
I’ve hardly met her since then. ’
Soon after their arrival, Rima heard about the TIGER Girls programme, and with her mother’s encouragement she became a TIGER. She now meets her new friends and Nawar, her facilitator, every afternoon in the community centre to study and prepare for school. Rima accesses her multimedia 
library with digital courses and reading materials on a tablet, 
and when she has a question she discusses it with the other girls and the facilitator.
Rima particularly likes to work in the TIGER Girls community 
programmes. In addition to academic learning, the girls engage in practical, solutions-based community work. They 
identify an issue in their neighbourhood, devise a solution 
and propose it to community leaders to gain their support. 
Then they implement the solution, reflect on what they have 
achieved and present the results in a community meeting. 
Smiling, she reminisces about one of the projects she is particularly proud of, which involved recycling:
‘We used recycled materials to make a 
mural and to create arts and crafts, and we 
organized a debate about how to better 
protect our environment. We worked really 
hard on this. Before the debate, I used my 
tablet to learn about recycling and made a lot 
of notes. We also got advice from our coach. I 
saved my best arguments for the actual event. ’
During the debate, Rima’s mother was in the audience. Seeing her daughter’s performance moved her deeply: ‘I became so proud seeing my daughter so strong and confident on the stage. It has moved me to tears’ , she recalls. Recently, Rima has expressed interest in learning more about child health and development. In part, this has happened because of the time she spends taking care of her uncle’s small children.
 ‘I really enjoy taking care of my little cousins, 
and I think I want to be a paediatrician when 
I grow up. I want to be a mother myself. But I 
want to be more than that. ’
The coaches in the TIGER Girls project counsel and support the girls in moving towards higher education and professional career pathways. The girls learn about future career possibilities by studying information on their tablets. In Rima’s case, the coach has arranged for her to spend one 
afternoon after school each week volunteering with one of 
the paediatricians in the camp’s health clinic. The project has helped the girls to envision their future lives. Almost all of them have a career in mind, citing aspirations to become lawyers, engineers, clothing designers, doctors, teachers and coaches.
© Open Learning Exchange59Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
Obstacles to vocational training 
and the labour market
Scope of the challenge and 
educational implications
Supporting refugees’ prompt access to employment through 
vocational qualification measures is crucial, not only because it can help secure their material and financial survival, but also because it offers new perspectives and stability in shattered lives.
Technical and vocational skills development programmes can 
provide new chances to refugees who experience disrupted primary education (Dryden-Peterson, 2011) and are of particular relevance to young people in camp situations, which are marked by extensive periods of downtime and loss of a sense of purpose (Zeus, 2011, p. 261).
Very limited skill sets reduce self-
entrepreneurship and access to the labour 
market.
For example, a study on Eritrean refugees in Ethiopia reveals that 72 per cent of youth indicated not having worked in the past thirty days (Samuel Hall Consulting, 2014, p. 6). The same study finds that despite high levels of literacy, refugees’ limited skill set and basic educational background inhibit self-entrepreneurship and access to the labour market (Samuel Hall Consulting, 2014, p. 5). Vocational skills training can show young people a way out of boredom in camps and provide them with a route to a productive life in their future host or home country settings (Lyby, 2001). Another group with a particular need for occupational skills in camp situations are women, who in war- and crisis-affected areas often become the breadwinners for their households. For example, one out of four Syrian refugee families in Egypt, Lebanon, Iraq and Jordan is headed by a woman alone (UNHCR, 2014).
Despite the high relevance of developing job-related skills, 
expenditures for vocational training comprised just over 20 per cent of the UNHCR’s 2012 budget for post-primary education (US$10 million), with an additional US$7 million provided for vocational scholarships (UNHCR, 2011c , cited in Dryden-Peterson, 
2011, p. 51). One of the challenges is that the need for technical equipment can make vocational training more expensive, per refugee, than secondary education (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 52). In addition, although existing training programmes have turned out to meet the demands of local markets, they have also caused oversaturation in certain professions because of limited business opportunities (Dryden-Peterson, 2011; Moberg et al., 2009).Structural hurdles and a lack of information 
prevent refugees from accessing training and 
entering urban labour markets, often forcing 
them into idleness or exploitative informal 
economies.
There is also a demand for programmes aimed at updating 
occupation-specific skills for refugees and immigrants in urban settings to prevent unemployment and occupational downward mobility (Krahn et al., 2000; Shah and Burke, 2005; UNESCO, 2016). In addition to qualifications, a common employment hurdle is a lack of knowledge about urban labour market opportunities (Samuel Hall Consulting, 2014) and their associated rules and regulations. Refugees, displaced persons and immigrants require knowledge about the functioning of the labour market, including an understanding of industrial relations law and negotiation 
skills (Shah and Burke, 2005, pp. 1, 25). In particular, workers in 
the informal economy face a high risk of exploitation, calling for 
not only employment services but also programmes that raise 
awareness of worker protections (UNESCO, 2016, p. 114).
Rules and regulations that do not recognize refugees’ prior 
qualifications also prevent them from accessing training and employment (Krahn et al., 2000, p. 82; Samuel Hall Consulting, 2014; Shah and Burke, 2005). For example, lengthy asylum procedures have been criticized for driving numerous motivated asylum seekers in Germany to idleness, while early access to education and training would stimulate integration in many segments of the labour market (Morris-Lange and Brands, 
2016, p. 11). A study on Eritrean refugees in Ethiopia determined 
that the lack of work permits and the requirement to have an Ethiopian guarantor are some of the main barriers to accessing urban labour markets (Samuel Hall Consulting, 2014).
Any potential support that mobile learning might provide to 
refugees in terms of skills development and labour market participation could have significant positive implications. Accordingly, it is helpful to understand the underlying assumptions, evidence base and existing programmes that shape mobile learning initiatives in the area of vocational training and the labour market.
Assumptions and evidence base
An increasing number of studies demonstrate the rich pedagogical opportunities for mobile media to support learning for, through and in the process of work (Pachler et al., 2011; Pimmer and Pachler, 2014). In crisis and refugee contexts, however, there has been much less debate on the potential of mobile media to enhance refugees’ vocational training or to broaden their access to the labour market.
The evidence found in this report does little to redress this 
imbalance. Although the relevance of vocational training for 60
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesrefugees has been emphasized for a long time (Lyby, 2001), 
the role that mobile solutions can play in this area remains underexplored. Some qualitative studies indicate that mobile media act as key instruments for refugees and immigrants from low-resource settings as they seek and realize work opportunities, thus contributing to their participation in the labour market. Some of the examples also illustrate how digital and mobile devices can facilitate niche opportunities for refugees to pursue mobile-based employment, allowing them to circumvent hurdles that prevent them from entering local labour markets. However, such examples are scant in number and do not address challenges such as down-skilling or refugees’ poor access to local economies.
An increasing number of programmes and initiatives help refugees 
acquire coding and digital skills with the goal of equipping them with competencies relevant for local or global labour markets. While this is certainly an interesting approach, the effectiveness of such programmes remains to be seen and should be subject to systematic evaluation in the future.
Current practices and projects
Mobile-based solutions for participation in the labour market
Mobile phones are among the most important items for refugees 
and can become useful tools during resettlement. When it comes to seeking employment, for instance, phones can be used for job searches. A small-scale qualitative study with refugees and asylum seekers in Australia found that the use of specific apps helped refugees and asylum seekers find temporary employment (Almohamed and Vyas, 2016, p. 167).
In some refugee contexts, mobile phones are 
a relevant tool to seek and realize impromptu 
work opportunities.
In addition, mobile phones are key instruments for realizing ad hoc work opportunities in a variety of contexts, for example among Zimbabwean immigrants in Botswana (Kim et al., 2013, p. 153), or among Latin American refugees and immigrants in the USA (Pérez-Mendoza, 2015, p. 80). A study of South African refugees found that mobile phone use had a strong effect on their participation in the labour market, with phones serving as resources to search for employment and generate income (Bacishoga and Johnston, 2013).
The creation of mobile-based opportunities might also constitute 
a ‘gig economy’ for refugees. This includes forms of digital work that are being created as a means to help refugees gain legal employment by connecting them to people online, regardless of their location, and allowing them to offer services in exchange for payment.
An example of this is the NaTakallam (‘we speak’ in Arabic) 
platform, where refugees can work as language teachers. As interest in Arabic language learning has grown, more people seek 
flexible learning opportunities to learn or practise the language. 
NaTakallam harnesses the largely untapped skill sets of well-qualified Syrian refugees to act as conversation partners and, in an 
informal sense, as language teachers. The model is to pair Syrian 
refugees in Lebanon, Egypt, Germany, France and the Turkish city of Gaziantep with online Arabic language learners from an 
English-speaking background across the world (Rifai, 2016). The 
service is meant as an informal, colloquial learning activity to 
complement more formal language courses (Robins-Early, 2015). 
The pairing of learners and teachers is grounded in common 
interests or educational backgrounds (Rifai, 2016), and as a result 
the development of new friendships has even been observed 
(Robins-Early, 2015). One of the advantages of this form of telework 
is that no work permits are needed for refugees to get a job with the company because the assignment is conducted at a distance 
and online, through Skype. The simplicity of the service attracts 
teachers and learners and provides a win-win situation: refugees 
are able to earn a livelihood, and learners can enhance their Arabic 
skills in an affordable way (Sara, 2017).
Operating in the Dadaab camp in Kenya, Samasource is a non-
profit organization that provides refugees with skills training 
through a microwork concept. Refugees are first trained in areas 
of digital literacy including hard skills, like how to use laptops and word-processing software, and soft skills, like demonstrating 
professional behaviour online. The refugees eventually apply their 
newly acquired skills to small tasks like data entry for clients such 
as Google, CISCO, Yahoo and eBay. Samasource says that trainees 
have the potential to quadruple their earnings (from US$2.20 a day before becoming a microworker) (Samasource, n.d.). For a 
refugee, this would represent a substantial influx of income to support their integration into host country societies. However, 
although Samasource trained ninety refugees in the Dadaab camp, it struggled with operational and structural difficulties that 
eventually put them out of work (Hegarty, 2011).
Mobile training and upskilling opportunities
Despite promising mobile learning cases from other areas of 
vocational training, little is known about this domain in refugee contexts. Vocational and practical skills are at the centre of Jesuit 
Worldwide Learning’s community service learning tracks. Strengthening communities is deemed central, as the community 
is one of the first assets that refugees lose upon displacement. 
During six-month training programmes in diverse areas including 
health care and psychosocial case management, around 25 per 
cent of the learning is accomplished virtually in computer labs 
in community learning centres. Depending on connectivity and other infrastructure issues, the digital content is accessed offline 
or online through a learning management system. The digital 
learning activities focus on the development of domain-specific knowledge, whereas procedural knowledge (how to carry out 
specific tasks) and particular strategic knowledge (i.e. higher-order 
thinking skills) are primarily taught offline (Bonfini-Hotlosz, 2017).61Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
InZone, which provides training for refugees to serve as amateur 
interpreters in crisis situations, is another example of vocational training. Its virtual learning environment (VLE) draws on social constructivist learning theory and applies problem-based learning approaches to teach both ethics and skills in consecutive 
interpreting in a humanitarian setting. In the framework of 
this initiative, which targets refugees living in Sudan and in the Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya, mobile phones are used so that interpreters-in-training can take photos of the notes they have taken during training. An evaluative study found that the integration of mobile components into the VLE contributed to peer learning enhancement in conflict zones, encouraged collaboration and allowed regular contact with expert trainers (Moser-Mercer 
et al., 2013). The course developers also modified interpreting 
instructions on the VLE to streamlined learning activities that 
would require only 20 minutes or less to complete. For this, a 
stable internet connection was required less frequently. However, 
it was acknowledged that adaptation and flexibility are key in 
circumstances where mobile connectivity can be interrupted at a moment’s notice.
Although mobile learning could enhance 
vocational training of refugees directly in the 
workplace and help bridge school- and work-based 
learning, little evidence on existing initiatives is 
available.
An emerging trend for helping refugees enter the workforce in their host countries is to offer skills development programmes that focus on coding. Although the programmes target learners from various educational levels, the main goal of the mostly non-formal learning initiatives is to equip refugees with skill sets relevant to quickly accessing the labour market. For example, one of the 
largest events, Refugee Code Week, sought to decrease refugees’ 
unemployment rates in the context of the Syrian refugee crisis by training participants with a type of technical know-how that is in increasingly high demand among employers. Given the tight work restrictions in local labour markets, refugees expected to acquire skills that would allow them to freelance for foreign companies abroad (Rainey, 2016). A collaboration between SAP , UNHCR and the Galway Education Centre, the event was implemented in October 2016 in the form of coding workshops in UNHCR camps, community centres and universities in Jordan, Egypt, Lebanon and 
Turkey, for around 10,000 participants (Rainey, 2016; Refugee Code 
Week, n.d.).
There are many other nascent coding initiatives and academies. 
While some are tied to higher and formal education, such as Jamiya (see also section 4.3.3.3), the majority provide non-formal education in the form of courses that span several weeks to a 
few months. Many examples, such as CodeDoor, Refugees on 
Rails, Integrify and Hackyourfuture, are from European contexts 
and include the provision of laptops and mobile technology to 
refugees.Reflections and emerging practice
The projects shared in the previous section were developed in 
response to specific needs and challenges that refugees face when they wish to return to economic productivity after arriving in their host countries. Not only educational and skill-related shortcomings but also regulatory residence and movement restrictions can have a devastating impact on refugees’ ability to participate in the economies of the countries where they seek asylum. Against this background, reports and studies find that refugees are using mobile apps that include job search functions. However, informal mobile learning networks are probably even more important for refugees, especially if the only jobs they can obtain are in the informal economy.
The mobile employment opportunities that have been conceived 
and undertaken illustrate that while many context-based challenges exist, mobile technology does have the potential to help refugees access job opportunities. While not a long-term solution, mobile jobs can help refugees earn a living and make a positive contribution in lives marked by stagnation and waiting. However, the scale of these initiatives is limited, the context in which they operate is challenging, and the nature of the jobs offered is provisional and represents occupational downward mobility for well-qualified refugees.
Despite the capacity of mobile learning to support vocational 
training and skills acquisition in refugee contexts, the knowledge base in this area is thin and warrants future exploration of its potential. For example, Vosloo (2017) argues that the flexibility of mobile technology can help learners access resources on the go and just-in-time in workplace settings, and allows them to record learning experiences and discuss them remotely with tutors. In so doing, mobile-based solutions help accomplish a relevant pedagogical function because they bridge the gap between learning in the workplace and education in the classroom (Pimmer and Pachler, 2014), allowing refugees to integrate work and learning.
The most prominent trend is certainly the provision of refugees 
with coding and IT skills using onsite and blended learning courses to equip them with skills demanded by the labour market. Although anecdotal information indicates that refugees found jobs after the completion of these courses (Rowsome, 2016), there is a 
clear demand for systematic evaluation regarding the effectiveness 
of such programmes. With respect to pedagogy, anecdotal 
evidence ties classic higher education approaches, which divide coding units into lecture and exercise phases, to decreasing participation of refugee learners. On the other hand, participation rates were maintained with experiential teaching designs that started with a trigger, such as a code segment showing how a certain problem was solved, followed by a phase in which small groups of two to three people, guided by tasks from the lecturer, experimented with the code (Kühl and Lehner, 2016).62
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees
© Flora Roenneberg/Kiron Open Higher EducationA learner’s perspective
Ehab is a 24-year-old man from Homs, Syria. He escaped the civil war and 
now lives in Bielefeld, Germany. As a participant in Kiron’s higher education political science degree programme, Ehab has gained new perspectives and an aspiration to use his skills to help rebuild Syria once the war ends.
Ehab holds an engineering diploma and started his civic 
engagement early on. He volunteered with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent during the war in Lebanon in 2006 and continued the engagement during the civil war in Syria. As the conflict worsened, Ehab decided to flee to the Ivory Coast 
in 2013. The outbreak of Ebola in West Africa in 2014 led 
to further movement, and he journeyed to Istanbul before settling in Germany. ‘The arrival in Germany was challenging. I was put in a camp, there was no way for me to work, to continue my studies, or to contribute in any meaningful way. I was alone’ , he remembers. 
For the duration of the flight and resettlement processes, 
he was unable to see the family he had to leave behind in Syria. He maintained contact with them through digital communication tools such as WhatsApp. Despite technical challenges, including poor internet connectivity in the conflict zone, he tries to communicate with his family every day. He also has not given up on his aspirations, and his experience fleeing his homeland helped spark his interest in political 
studies.
‘The war made me change my interest. I 
believe that I can be more valuable for the 
society I am living in if I’m active in the political 
sector and part of the decision-making. ’
Initially, it appeared impossible to start studies in Germany 
because of the language barrier. After acquiring French in 63Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
the Ivory Coast and Turkish in Istanbul, Ehab is now learning 
German by attending daily language courses. In order to matriculate at a German university, he needs to achieve a 
certain level of proficiency in the language. Because Ehab wanted to start immediately, he searched the internet for 
degree programmes in English, since he already had some proficiency in this language. Through this search, he came across Kiron.
Ehab started Kiron’s online political science degree 
programme in March 2016, and to date he has successfully 
finished more than twenty courses offered through MOOCs. 
Early on, he built contact with the University of Applied 
Sciences in Bielefeld, one of Kiron’s partner universities. 
Although he has not been officially admitted yet, Ehab regularly visits the university to supplement his MOOC-based 
learning experiences.
‘I use the MOOC to get the online materials, 
PDFs and videos. But then I go to the university 
to discuss the topics with colleagues, lecturers 
and friends. This is how I learn. ’
Ehab actively organizes onsite study groups with other refugees at the university by using WhatsApp and email. He 
notes that he is being supported by German students from 
the university in a few ways:
‘They lend their books, answer my questions, 
and we can discuss the study topics. ’Ehab feels overwhelmed by the many languages he needs 
to master. The language of his new life is German, he speaks 
Arabic with his friends and family back home, and the online 
materials for his studies are in English. This can be confusing at times, and he wishes that MOOCs and online courses were available in German so that he could practise this language further.
The most challenging educational hurdle that Ehab must 
confront at present is bureaucratic in nature: 
‘I worry about whether the university will 
finally accept my Syrian A-level certificate and 
let me complete the on-campus phase for the 
political studies programme. I might end up 
studying online for two years without earning 
a degree. ’
Throughout these struggles, Ehab has displayed high levels 
of resilience. Kiron has provided him with new perspectives and hope for realizing his personal goals. His biggest wish 
is to return to Syria and use his skills to help rebuild the 
country. He firmly believes that education is one of the most 
important catalysts in this process. While he waits to make his 
return, Ehab has started the project Syrian Youth Assembly in cooperation with the United Nations. Drawing on the 
developed Syrian Youth Statement, the coalition is currently 
coordinating the involvement of young Syrians in the peace talks in Geneva. In this way, the education that he receives has helped Ehab to become a political activist who now seeks to contribute to the creation of stability and peace in his country 
of origin.64
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesRestricted access to higher education
Scope of the challenge 
and educational implications
Higher education in refugee and crisis contexts is pivotal 
for many reasons, perhaps most notably because highly 
educated refugees can help bring about social and economic 
development in their host and home communities and can make significant contributions to stability and peace (UNHCR, 
2016d, p. 30).
Refugees’ access to higher education is 
severely constrained, with enrolment rates of 
only about 1 per cent compared with 34 per 
cent globally.
However, despite the importance of higher education 
for refugee populations, access is extremely constrained. Although the number has to be interpreted cautiously (Gladwell et al., 2016a, p. 11), only about 1 per cent of refugees are enrolled in higher education programmes, compared with a global average of 34 per cent (UNHCR, 2016d). Higher 
education options are particularly limited in camps (Gladwell 
et al., 2016a, p. 13) and in protracted situations in which refugees are perceived to be only temporarily displaced and no priority is given to higher education measures (Zeus, 2011, p. 271). Due to movement restrictions in many camps, the higher education opportunities of university-ready students are confined to a few available NGO-based programmes and scholarship opportunities (Gladwell et al., 2016a). Additional limitations apply in settings in which the demand for primary and secondary education is not met (Dryden-Peterson, 2011, p. 52).
Refugees lack information about higher 
education opportunities available to them.
One of the most basic entry-level challenges is a paucity of information services for refugees about higher education opportunities (Gladwell et al., 2016a, p. 12; Lorisika et al., 2015). The lack of reliable counselling and orientation services has been emphasized, for example, in the Syrian refugee crisis (Lorisika et al., 2015, p. 24), which has seen the emergence 
of an unparalleled number of university-ready refugees 
(Gladwell et al., 2016a, p. 6).
Further barriers to quality higher education for refugees 
are financial hurdles, which include costs associated with enrolment and studying (Gladwell et al., 2016a) as well as opportunity costs related to the need to secure the household’s income (Lorisika et al., 2015). This is true across diverse contexts: in Germany for example, where university tuition is free of charge, low enrolment rates have been tied 
to costs related to studying, like learning materials and cost 
of living, which cannot be matched by the limited funding 
that refugees receive (Morris-Lange and Brands, 2016). Moreover, refugees’ higher education chances are inhibited by regulatory and political barriers related to not having a formal place of residence, restrictions on their movement, and the 
fact that often they do not have recognized documentation 
with them (Lorisika et al., 2015; Morris-Lange and Brands, 2016).
Movement restrictions, financial hurdles, 
regulatory barriers, inadequate university 
support structures and language barriers are 
among the key challenges.
Furthermore, refugees perceive university support systems as inadequate or non-existent, triggering feelings of discrimination in comparison with the host country and international students (Earnest et al., 2010). Also, gaps in 
skills and competencies, particularly related to language, 
need to be overcome (see section 2.1), and, from a curricular perspective, there is a limited choice of programmes geared towards the interests, employability and life perspectives of 
refugees (Lorisika et al., 2015, p. 24).
Even though online education can offer a wider range of 
opportunities, refugees tend to prefer on-campus learning. 
For example, more than 90 per cent of a cohort of Syrian 
refugees favoured onsite learning, whereas less than 10 per cent preferred online or blended courses as their main type of study (UNESCO, 2015b, p. 4). The issue is not only a lack of 
digital learning opportunities but also a lack of acceptance of 
online learning on the part of refugees (Lorisika et al., 2015).
In addition to the challenges identified above, refugees 
voiced a particular demand for full accredited degree 
programmes compared with other certificates and non-
degree programmes (UNESCO, 2015b, p. 18). Meeting the higher education demands of refugees is undoubtedly a complex endeavour. Mobile mechanisms that can be tailored 
to meet the needs of as many refugees as possible in a specific 
context could help tertiary level initiatives targeted at these individuals to scale.
Assumptions and evidence base
In recent years, digital learning and in particular MOOCs have been at the centre of the educational debate, with some 
commentators likening MOOCs to a digital tsunami that 
threatens to sweep aside conventional university education (Boxall, 2012). Only recently has the debate extended to the examination of the potential of MOOCs to strengthen higher 
education opportunities for displaced populations, in the 65Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
hope that they can be used to scale up online learning in 
refugee and crisis situations.
The current evidence base suggests that the hopes for MOOCs 
are not yet justified. Many projects remain in the development phase and have not gone beyond proof of concept. The 
phenomenon of high dropout rates, a common feature in 
MOOCs, is amplified when these types of courses are offered in refugee and humanitarian settings. Scaling up a MOOC in such contexts is possible but should be clearly framed by the need to develop additional online and offline support 
mechanisms for learner engagement. It is not the size of the 
online courses but their pedagogical design and how deeply they are embedded in full degree programmes that will make a significant difference to education for refugees at the 
tertiary level.
Current practices and projects
The ways in which mobile learning can strengthen refugees’ 
access to and success within higher education can be articulated around three main areas of focus: information and 
orientation about higher education opportunities, MOOCs, 
and short and bounded courses. To reflect a current trend, a distinction is made between MOOCs and more contained digital learning environments.
Information and orientation about 
higher education opportunities
An important need for refugees is the ability to obtain 
information about higher education opportunities. One 
of the few online approaches in this area is UNESCO’s Jami3ti Initiative, a platform that hosts information about scholarships and other higher education and training 
opportunities (Jami3ti, n.d.a). Refugees and other vulnerable 
youth can register online by creating a profile that includes their educational information and interests. Statistical information about learners’ needs can then be used by donors 
and higher education institutions to offer targeted courses, 
as users receive information about opportunities that match their profile. The project, whose primary goal is to provide better statistical information on the higher education needs of 
refugees in Jordan, is now open to all vulnerable groups and 
has been extended to Lebanon (Jami3ti, n.d.a–b).
The use of MOOCs to help refugees navigate into and 
within higher education is clearly on the rise. The Academic 
Refugee Project launched in October 2016 seeks to sensitize thousands of refugees across Europe to the value of higher education (MOOCs4inclusion, n.d.). In addition to information 
provision, the German project Ready4Study offers potential 
students a nationwide MOOC-based preparatory course to access higher education. The course, which has been piloted with 1,200 participants, provides information about 
higher education opportunities in Germany in parallel to German language training. Based on their prior education, 
personal interests and other conditions, refugees develop 
concrete outputs such as a curriculum vitae and motivation letters. They also receive training to develop hard skills for 
successful integration into the higher education system. The 
problem-based course focuses on supporting learners in 
acquiring the competencies and language abilities expected 
of students in a German higher education environment. To 
address the diversity in learners’ backgrounds, the mentored 
MOOC concept combines individual self-guided learning for knowledge and language acquisition with collaborative, task-
oriented learning in small groups. The latter is case-based, 
which means that learners accompany fictional but realistic 
refugee personas in their transition into the German higher 
education system (Seyfarth and Bremer, 2016; Seyfarth et al., 2016). While approximately 300 learners completed the 
course, the curricular trajectory of increasingly complex 
study (and language skills) implied that even learners who 
dropped out were able to reflect on their individual skills gaps. 
Although the involvement of as many participants as possible 
is a key indicator of course success, supporting refugees in a 
process of reflecting on their own higher education readiness is also valuable, as it enables them to identify suitable next 
steps while also participating in a community of like-minded 
learners. In this sense, the course design acknowledges the 
potential for early learner dropout or part-time participation 
but still illustrates that gaining appreciation for learners who successfully begin or continue a higher education programme 
in Germany is, in itself, a valid learning goal for refugees, as it 
may empower them to acquire knowledge of other avenues 
for earning professional qualifications (Seyfarth, 2017).
In addition to formal platforms and systematic learning 
approaches, non-formal mobile and social media spaces 
support access to and progress in higher education, as a 
recent study on learners from the Dadaab camp settings 
in Kenya observed. It was found that mobile social media accessed on the learners’ phones, such as Facebook and 
WhatsApp, play a crucial role in helping to raise awareness 
about tertiary education opportunities. These digital spaces 
are a key resource in refugees’ pathways towards and in higher 
education, especially for female learners. The use of mobile 
social media extends local support structures and enables 
social and instrumental support including guidance, tutoring, writing support, exam preparation and even course selection 
(Dahya and Dryden-Peterson, 2016).
UNESCO’s Jami3ti project in Jordan and the MOOC-based 
pilots in Europe illustrate different ways of using digital media 
to assist student transitions into and within higher education 
settings. Once made aware of the opportunities available 
to them in higher education, refugees have a desire to 
participate in courses, including those of the MOOC variety.66
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesMassive open online courses
MOOCs are being used by education providers to help 
refugees on their pathway towards higher education, as well as to deliver higher education courses and programmes. Central MOOC providers have opened up off-the-shelf MOOCs for refugees to access higher education content. The main approach is to establish cooperation with NGOs working 
directly with refugees. One example of this is a partnership 
led by Udacity, a MOOC provider. Udacity announced a partnership with NGOs to provide 1,000 ‘nanodegree’ scholarships to eligible refugees, starting with six locations in Germany (Shen, 2015). Another example is Coursera, which currently has twenty-four partners but is rapidly expanding its programme and provides administrative features, technical support, free access to courses for one year and a recommended course list. In a short time, about 500 refugees have enrolled in 1,964 classes, completed 386 courses and 
engaged in 9,500 learning hours (Ikonomou, 2016).
As the majority of digital higher education courses and 
particularly MOOCs offer career-relevant content in English, the inclusion of non-English speakers remains a key challenge. The non-profit Arabic-language MOOC platform Edraak 
has started to offer educational courses to disadvantaged 
populations and especially to refugees (Kanani, 2014). Another route forward can be the inclusion of subtitles in existing courses. For example, Coursera has started to develop courses with subtitles in languages such as Arabic, French and German, drawing on the support of 500 active translators in Arabic and more than 10,000 active translators in total (Ikonomou, 2016). However, the use of subtitles in refugee contexts still needs to be tested, and its effectiveness remains 
to be seen.
To support refugee learners, MOOCs are often complemented 
by an offline learning experience. This can include on-campus tutorials to deepen specific topics (Catholic University of Louvain, n.d.), or facilitated discussions such as the MOOC Camps developed through a partnership between Coursera 
and the US State Department. Through this programme, 
MOOCs are offered to communities with significant refugee populations and are supplemented by face-to-face discussions.
Examples of MOOCs that are complemented by an offline 
component include entire bachelor’s degree programmes, as is the case with Kiron’s approach. Refugees gain credits by participating in off-the-shelf MOOCs offered by providers such as Coursera, edX and Saylor Academy. After a MOOC-based learning phase lasting up to two years, students can continue their degrees on-campus at one of twenty-seven partner 
universities in Germany, France, Turkey or Jordan. The goal is 
to enable refugees to complete the first two semesters of a bachelor’s degree through MOOCs and allow them a smooth transition into higher education in their respective host countries. As of September 2016, Kiron has registered about 2,000 full-time students, primarily from Syria, Afghanistan and Somalia (Kiron, n.d.c). These students are following one of five study tracks: business and economics, engineering, computer science, political sciences or social work (Kiron, 
n.d.b), mainly in Germany, Indonesia, Turkey and France. The 
project is still in the pilot phase, with the goal to move the first twenty students to the on-campus phase in 2017. A scaling-up phase is scheduled upon the accomplishment of the proof of concept in 2018. Insights from the first phase have led Kiron to considerably extend its online and offline student support structures (Greenaway et al., 2016).
Current MOOCs for refugee interventions 
are neither particularly massive or open, nor 
exclusively online. Rather, their key success 
factor is the provision of additional offline 
mentoring and support structures.
While extended support and tutoring is relevant for refugees who access MOOCs in high income settings such as Europe, they are an absolute necessity in under-resourced contexts. In InZone’s MOOC projects, a number of cultural, technical and linguistic issues needed to be addressed in order to leverage 
off-the-shelf MOOCs for Somali and Syrian refugees in urban 
and camp areas in Nairobi and Amman, and in the Dadaab, Kakuma and Zaatari camps (Moser-Mercer, 2014, 2016). Challenges include, for example, issues related to connectivity, cost, webcam-based registration and the readability of a large volume of content on small mobile phones (particularly unstructured web forum threads). Additionally, the learner-centred pedagogy and the need to generate new ideas presented challenges to refugee students because they were used to transmission-based instruction where they were not 
often given the opportunity to participate directly.
For the InZone projects, the use of MOOCs required 
workarounds and considerable levels of additional support from academics, the local UNHCR community services officer and the MOOC provider (Moser-Mercer, 2014, 2016). In the InZone multicentre MOOC study, a total of fifty-two refugee learners were organized into small groups of ten participants each. Onsite support was provided in the form of tutoring and peer interaction, which turned out to be the single most relevant success factor, especially for female refugee students in camp settings (Moser-Mercer, 2017). 
Onsite support was complemented by virtual support from 
mentors, peers and professors, using a bundle of tools such as Skype and WhatsApp. The support also included a translated vocabulary list with difficult words for Syrian refugees with limited English skills. Although virtual mentoring without face-to-face tutoring seemed to have no observable impact on student success rates (Moser-Mercer, 2016), the WhatsApp tutoring groups were an invaluable tool for connecting learners within and across the multiple cultural sites (Moser-67Mobile learning to address challenges related to specific levels and types of education
Mercer, 2017). The analysis also found that session-based 
MOOC approaches were more challenging than on-demand MOOCs (Moser-Mercer, 2016). In contrast to approaches in which ICT skills are developed separately and often prior to an actual online course, this project integrated the familiarization 
with technology into the overall course implementation 
methodology (Moser-Mercer et al., 2016).
The MOOC experience for refugees varies based on how the 
courses are structured. Nonetheless, participation remains driven by the opportunity to learn in ways that might otherwise be unavailable in the context where the learners are based. The next section elaborates on experiences with smaller, bounded mobile-facilitated courses in order to make comparisons and draw contrasts between MOOCs and courses with a more traditional format.
Smaller and bounded courses
In contrast to MOOCs, which take place in seemingly massive 
environments, courses in the style of more traditional higher education contexts can also be made available with the help of digital technology. Some providers, such as the Jesuit Commons Higher Education at the Margins initiative, 
offer full online degrees. This programme allowed thirty 
students from refugee camps in Kenya and Malawi to start an online diploma in liberal arts. Volunteer teaching staff in the USA act as instructors by providing online advice, helping with coursework and grading assignments (Dankova and Giner, 2011). As with InZone’s MOOC pilot in Dadaab (Moser-Mercer, 2014), challenging technical conditions and learners’ unfamiliarity with online environments required special technical assistance onsite. The flexibility in accessing 
the materials benefited learners trying to balance volunteer 
work, family responsibilities and other duties in camp life. Despite initial scepticism, learners’ feedback indicated that the development of relationships among learners and between learners and teachers represented one of the most valued aspects of the programme. Mutual familiarization was further supported through the exchange of photographs and videos. 
Students in Malawi also reported increased self-esteem as a 
result of participation in the initiative (Dankova and Giner, 2011).
MOOCs and other digital materials enhanced 
by online and offline mentoring and peer 
support in smaller groups, which incorporate 
popular chat and instant messaging tools and 
are embedded in an overall curriculum leading 
towards certifications, can have a great value 
for refugees’ higher education.
A blended learning example with dedicated onsite learning phases is being realized in the Jamiya project, which is currently piloting an IT course for refugees in Jordan. Although the project uses the MOOC platform Edraak, the number of participants is confined to thirty (Jamiya press release, 2016), following the model of a small private online course (SPOC). In addition to the online engagement 
component made up of short videos, quizzes, readings, 
projects, homework and digital support, regular face-to-face tutoring is delivered in learning centre in Zaatari and Amman. Although the course languages are Arabic and English, students are encouraged to transfer gradually to English (Jamiya Project, n.d.).
In other initiatives, the campus component is even more 
substantial and the mobile learning part is seen primarily as a supplementary add-on, such as in the Borderless Higher Education for Refugees (BHER) project. This project provides refugees with tuition-free access to courses from partnering 
universities in different disciplines, with the goal of improving 
equitable delivery of quality education and enhancing the employability of course participants through portable certificates, diplomas and degrees. In addition to accessing computers in the learning centre, students are offered the opportunity to access learning materials, such as textbooks, videos or articles, on course management systems through 
the use of tablets. Like other projects, BHER provides specific 
support for learners with weak or low learning prerequisites, for example by granting them access to remedial courses, compensating transportation costs, and allowing students to repeat courses and rewrite assignments (Orgocka, 2017).
Reflections and emerging practice
The use of mobile-based solutions in higher education for refugees is widespread. Even in under-resourced settings, most of the projects enhance onsite education with the use of digital learning platforms and distance-based academic support (Gladwell et al., 2016b, p. 37). In these contexts, the 
use of digital media is particularly valued because it allows 
refugees to build global networks and engage with a wider learning community (Gladwell et al., 2016b, p. 46; Hollow, 2017).
Perhaps the most popular development in this field is 
the current increase of MOOCs for refugees. However, 
the characterization of massive, open and online courses 
does little to reflect the actual potential of digital media in refugee higher education. Although some of the current initiatives are scalable, many of the current refugee projects work with smaller cohorts, tend to support only certain subjects and are often supply-driven rather than demand-driven. Another restriction to the massive feature is the high dropout rate associated with MOOCs in traditional education settings (see, for example, Onah et al., 2014), which can be 
also observed in refugee learning contexts (Greenaway 
et al., 2016). Secondly, the open nature of MOOCs may be problematic in certain cases, as for some groups of refugees it is highly recommended to use closed spaces and even 68
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesaliases to protect users’ identities. In addition, experiences 
with learners from low-resource settings show that they are 
often unable to make use of open discussion forums due to 
technical and language-related restrictions and connectivity (Moser-Mercer, 2017). Finally, although MOOCs are delivered 
online, many successful projects opt for blended learning 
approaches, with onsite tutoring and peer learning becoming key success factors. Face-to-face learning components can also be a relevant motivator for refugees who are, at least initially, sceptical about online learning (Lorisika et al., 2015) and who need the social aspects of learning to help them 
better integrate in their new host environments (Lorisika et al., 
2015, p. 33).
These arguments reveal how the success of digital higher 
education courses in high and low income environments 
depends not so much on the use of massive digital spaces 
but rather on offline and online mentoring and support mechanisms. The need to develop additional online and 
offline pedagogical models around digital learning spaces 
is especially relevant in humanitarian contexts where high 
dropout rates would hurt vulnerable and discriminated 
populations anew, representing an ethically unacceptable practice (Moser-Mercer, 2014). For example, in response to 
the challenges with high dropout rates identified in the first 
cohort, Kiron has extended its service by offering significant local offline support, including study hubs in major cities, study buddies, psychological counselling, career mentors and 
English language support. In addition and as a complementary 
measure to the predominantly asynchronous MOOCs, Kiron has 
also integrated synchronous online tutoring, in which university 
lecturers volunteer to support refugee learners (Greenaway et al., 2016). Also, in a research study on refugee higher education programmes in low-resource environments, learners 
and facilitators pointed to the necessity of offline learning sessions, especially because they provide the opportunity to 
clarify aspects that have not been understood in the online presentations (Gladwell et al., 2016b , pp. 37–38).
Another important success criterion is the integration of digital learning into overall programmes that guide refugees towards certifications and degrees. While in higher income countries it is easier for refugees to engage in onsite or blended learning degree programmes offered by accredited higher education providers, refugees in remote and low-resource contexts have far fewer chances. Additionally, some countries do not recognize the legitimacy of online learning 
(Gladwell et al., 2016b, p. 48). The Connected Learning 
Consortium is working to address this concern by forming a collaboration between established partners, including higher education institutions, that can provide accredited courses and degree programmes to refugees in under-resourced contexts. At the core of this consortium – which includes partners such as UNHCR, InZone, Australian Catholic University, the African Virtual University, the Borderless Higher 
Education for Refugee Project, and other institutions and 
organizations – is sharing information about the development of post-secondary blended learning degree programmes in refugee and crisis contexts using a mix of different mobile solutions to overcome time and geographical restrictions (UNHCR Innovation, n.d.c).
Also in high income countries, digital learning offers considerably 
less value to refugees if it is not part of a full degree programme. MOOC providers and their partner organizations need to cooperate with university partners to embed massive (and not so massive) online courses in full degree programmes to make them attractive to refugees. This was the case for Kiron, which adapted and changed its offer to modularized curricula in response to the low completion rates in their initial, single-MOOC-centred model (Greenaway et al., 2016).
It is clear that much remains to be done if educational opportunities are to be put within reach of all learners in refugee contexts. While mobile learning can be a conduit for numerous possibilities, poor and one-sided implementation approaches can negatively affect potential outcomes. Moving forward, expanding the evidence base of what works and what can be improved will be key to promoting education participation among refugees at all education levels.
 Lessons
learned and conclusions 72
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesLessons learned and conclusions
This report has examined the evidence base and a large 
number of mobile learning projects and practices, with a view towards exploring how mobile solutions can enable and enhance refugees’ access to equitable and inclusive quality education and lifelong learning opportunities. To reflect 
the complex and multifaceted nature of refugee-related 
educational issues, the projects selected for this review cover multiple levels and types of formal learning from early childhood to higher education as well as informal education, situated learning and real-life problem-solving activities. They include learning in urban and rural environments, in high and low income settings, and across different phases of refugees’ trajectories from flight preparation to arrival and resettlement. With full recognition of the paramount importance of overcoming the primary challenge of low access to digital devices, internet connectivity and other essential resources, the report focuses on three categories of challenges faced by policy-makers and practitioners aiming to harness already 
available mobile devices, in order to enable quick responses 
to maintain or restore critical education and learning activities. Broadly, these three challenges include individual challenges faced by refugees, challenges related to education systems, and challenges related to specific levels and types of education. 
Undoubtedly, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to 
mobile learning for refugees, as each initiative needs to be 
conceptualized on the basis of the unique needs of the user 
population, including consideration of age; education level; refugee phase/status; place of origin and current location; gender; prior skills; interests and education goals; living conditions; technology access (ownership and connectivity); and income. These diverse and complex conditions increase the difficulty of making robust evaluations across projects. However, the insights drawn from the examination of the evidence base of theoretical assumptions and lessons learned from practical projects can still shed light on the planning and 
implementation of mobile learning projects urgently needed 
to address challenges across the three categories.Leveraging existing technology 
resources to deliver quick-response 
mobile learning while ensuring 
physical and cyber security
Refugees’ need for education is urgent, and the response to 
this need cannot wait for better conditions to be in place. One of the effective strategies for delivering quick-response plans to restore critical education services is to leverage all existing resources, including the mobile devices widely available to 
refugees. The use of mobile applications or mobile learning 
programmes that can be quickly developed and deployed to optimize the use of existing devices and educational resources has been proved successful.
When refugees scatter in large urban areas, it is challenging 
for aid and education providers to locate and reach them. In dynamic contexts, such as upon arrival and during resettlement, refugees are not only overwhelmed with information but also sceptical of official institutions, as in their 
home countries these can be the main sources of repression 
and persecution. With its potential to forward and spread messages across trusted sources, digital and mobile social media channels can be leveraged to inform refugees of education-related opportunities and deliver digital learning and educational courses. Social media campaigns require collaboration with people trusted by refugees, including other refugees, volunteers, activists and NGOs on the ground. Mobile network operators and social media providers 
recommended by trusted acquaintances and networks are the 
critical partners to reach refugees.
Of note to this report is the emergence and systematic 
adoption of simple mobile social media tools and instant messaging services. Their use has been reported across a wide range of contexts including settings with limited technological and other infrastructure, particularly in higher education and teacher training. Such tools are 
essential in helping refugees navigate new and confusing 
contexts, reconnect with family and social networks, and engage in informal learning for real-world problem-solving. Furthermore, they are increasingly used to support learning practices in more formal education contexts – for instance to organize study groups to maintain ongoing learning progression – or to restore access to education in new contexts. Some projects harness the popularity of these tools to systematically embed them in educational programmes such as teacher training or MOOC settings, where they enable 73Lessons learned and conclusions
conversational and situated learning in the form of mentoring, 
peer learning or the repetition and discussion of key learning messages. In this sense, mobile communication and instant messaging weave together various educational resources, learners and teachers across geographical and cultural 
boundaries in ways not possible before. Although these 
tools are not without costs and challenges, the advantage of leveraging and facilitating the use of pre-existing resources is underscored by their potential for scalability. 
From a technological viewpoint, many of the principles that 
apply to other mobile learning contexts are also applicable to projects designed for refugees. These include the requirement to adopt standards for physical and cyber security, which involve strategies to protect devices from harsh conditions (heat, dust, humidity or blows) as well as measures to protect the privacy of refugees, including considerations of the trustworthiness of app providers, data encryption mechanisms 
and the locations of the servers on which data are stored.
Ensuring inclusion and gender 
equality in mobile learning 
projects for refugees
Discrimination against women, children and other vulnerable 
groups is a striking pattern across education settings for refugees. Although the use of mobile solutions as learning tools has the potential to democratize access to teaching and learning experiences for refugee populations, the design 
of ICT-enhanced education interventions often does not 
promote the inclusion of refugees with diverse abilities or backgrounds.
Gender disparities are a common occurrence that can be 
observed in access to mobile technologies, with refugee women often having fewer opportunities to use mobile phones, as shown in a study on Syrian refugees (Wall et al., 2017, p. 7). Participation in tertiary education is another striking example where a digital gender gap exists between refugee women and men. The exclusion of refugee women from higher education opportunities in digital spaces is a persistent challenge that ranges from refugee camps in low-resource 
environments (Dankova and Giner, 2011) to refugee cohorts 
in high income countries (Greenaway et al., 2016). In these instances, initial ICT access played an outsized and influential role in terms of the number of females registered for digital higher education courses. Ensuring inclusion and gender equality should start with closing the divides in access and ownership as well as gaps in the skills needed to adopt mobile solutions, which have subsequent effects on the ability to use technology for educational purposes. This report shows that 
once they were registered, women used the digital learning 
platforms just as much as men, and in some cases more frequently than their male peers. Sensitizing all refugees about the opportunities available to them is another key component to facilitating the process of educational inclusion. Beyond awareness, disadvantaged groups need particular support to leverage mobile learning, such as providing childcare facilities to allow mothers to participate in education programmes that would otherwise be out of their reach. 
Promoting blended learning for 
quality provision of education 
The evidence base and many projects (e.g. the Jamiya project, 
Edraak, and the teacher training programme of Jesuits Worldwide Learning) examined in this report validate the mutually beneficial and magnifying relationship between mobile applications and human interventions in mobile 
learning. The in-depth integration of mobile learning with 
onsite and face-to-face human engagement emerges as a common trait of many successful initiatives in education for refugees. In primary and secondary education settings, learners often access digital mobile resources in classroom settings and are closely guided and supported by face-to-face educators and tutors. Even in tertiary education settings, 
where learners typically have higher levels of self-organization 
skills, onsite peer support is a success factor for many projects. 
The scarcity of resources and the high geographical 
mobility of some refugees, as well as the scepticism towards technology-enhanced education, make blended learning approaches difficult to sustain for entire courses and curriculum. However, programmes could start with an onsite learning phase, to be gradually enhanced with and 
eventually replaced by online activities. In this way, adding 
mobile learning components to pre-existing face-to-face programmes can improve their sustainability. That said, this approach should avoid further excluding the most marginalized groups, such as those who may find travel to face-to-face learning centres difficult. 
Massive open online courses, or MOOCs, are an interesting 
vehicle for delivering education to refugees, especially in higher education settings and if they lead towards certification and degrees. However, many examples in this report have shown that to be successful in refugee settings, 
especially in low and middle income contexts and rural 
camps, MOOCs require considerable adaptation. Ideally, mentored online and offline courses should include the provision of instructional materials, drawn from open content, digital quizzes and assessment tools, and possibly adapted in terms of language; integrated offline and online tutoring, mentoring and peer interaction; and support in smaller groups to facilitate conversational learning.74
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesEmpowering teachers to play 
pivotal roles in facilitating mobile 
learning and coaching refugees
Teachers are the key element in education for refugees. Future 
mobile learning initiatives should focus more explicitly on empowering and supporting teachers to facilitate mobile learning and support refugees’ self-empowerment. While teacher training is a standard component of most of the 
mobile learning projects reviewed in this report, the quality 
and sustainability of this training should be enhanced. For learning initiatives to yield results, it is not sufficient to stop with explaining to teachers the technological functions of the devices and the types of content available in a digitally enhanced classroom. Only comprehensive training on the integration of mobile technologies and appropriate pedagogical methodologies, as well as necessary subject matter knowledge, can equip teachers with adequate initial skills to design and facilitate mobile learning practices. 
Effective mobile learning projects also require ongoing 
support to guide teachers to use learner-centred techniques to respond to the myriad challenges in coaching refugees’ learning and self-empowerment activities. The transition from transmission-based instruction to facilitation needs to be managed with sensitivity, as it is likely to challenge the prior 
values and beliefs of both teachers and learners about what 
constitutes relevant learning in a changing context. 
It is worthwhile to pay special attention to strategies for 
unleashing the potential of mobile learning to empower teachers in refugee settings. With the growing number of refugees worldwide, it is estimated that at least 20,000 additional teachers would be needed on a yearly basis to meet the demand (UNHCR, 2016d, p. 8). In light of this need, the findings of this report endorse the power of mobile media 
in helping teachers access training resources on demand and 
receive real-time support. Some findings from low-resource settings suggest that using simple solutions to train and support mobile teachers can have significant impact.
Overcoming barriers to practising 
learner-centred pedagogy
To promote the quality of education for refugees and to make 
the learning outcomes more relevant for jobs and social inclusion, learning and skills development need to move from information transmission approaches to learner-centred pedagogies, in which teachers motivate and facilitate learners 
to obtain skills more relevant to their needs, and develop 
critical and creative thinking and problem-solving skills as well as other higher-order thinking skills. According to many of the projects analysed, non-hierarchical and peer-to-peer learning activities, as well as tasks which require learners’ creativity and self-direction, seem to overwhelm refugees. The pedagogical approaches that are commonly used in host countries are often completely new to refugees and contradict their understanding of what constitutes good-quality teaching and learning in their home countries. An effective mobile learning programme often not only blends both technology and human interventions, but also includes varied pedagogical 
modes that are relevant to the actual contexts and responsive 
to learners’ needs. Refugees from a background in which learning is almost exclusively determined and dominated by teachers might be disoriented by the multiple learning pathways of mobile learning that are designed based on personalized learning methodologies and collaborative digital learning environments. 
A gradual process with appropriate methodologies is needed 
at the beginning to sensitize refugee learners to the new pedagogical practices and the cultural beliefs underlying the pedagogy. Wherever possible, mobile learning programmes 
should design and provide user-friendly support functions 
including navigation maps, step-by-step guidance and orientation sessions with a low threshold to help familiarize beginner learners with the new learning pathways.
Cultivating skills for jobs, self-
fulfilment and entrepreneurship
Digitalization has been reorganizing both economic and 
public services with an unprecedented magnitude and in ways that have a profound impact on refugees’ jobseeking, self-fulfilment and social inclusion. As this report has shown, refugees increasingly use mobile media to access online 
services and opportunities for jobs and entrepreneurship. The 
core skill sets most demanded by the digitalized economy and society comprise digital skills and other complementary cognitive skills and non-cognitive skills, ranging from literacy and numeracy to interpersonal skills, critical and innovative thinking, complex problem-solving and collaborative skills. A recent report released by the European Commission shows that digital skills are required in all types of jobs in the European Union (Curtarelli et al., 2017). This means that those who do not have digital skills will be economically and 
socially excluded. In higher education settings for refugees, 
for example, it has been noted that students with limited prior ICT experience require substantial initial and ongoing training on digital skills to avoid continued exclusion or marginalization (Gladwell et al., 2016b, p. 48).
In this respect, it is crucial for education and training systems 
to help refugees develop adequate digital skills. Digital skills are generally understood as a cumulative continuum of skills 75Lessons learned and conclusions
needed to use digital devices, communication applications 
and networks to access and manage information, create and share content, communicate and collaborate, and solve problems for effective and creative self-fulfilment in life, learning, work and social activities. Entry-level digital skills, 
meaning basic functional skills to make rudimentary use of 
digital devices and online applications, have been recognized 
as part of a new type of literacy – digital literacy – necessary to effectively participate in life and work in the connected 
world. The intermediate level of the continuum covers skills 
required to make use of digital technologies in meaningful 
and beneficial ways. Further along the continuum are the 
higher-level skills that allow users to make use of digital 
technologies in empowering and transformative ways, including the advanced skills that form the basis of specialist 
ICT occupations and professions. As demonstrated by the 
exemplary projects in this report, digital skills development 
should be contextualized for refugees to address challenges they are facing in various circumstances. 
Although many applications for refugees are developed 
by non-refugee programmers, some successful examples in this report point to the potential of refugees and former refugees to develop new digital and mobile solutions for their peers. Technology entrepreneurship opportunities in host settings as well as in some countries of origin like Syria are burgeoning (World Bank, 2016). Mobile learning programmes designed to develop refugees’ professional and high-level digital skills, including the ability to code and programme, have demonstrated multiple effects. As this trend continues, it will likely encourage more youth to start entrepreneurial 
businesses, lead to more mobile solution designers from 
the local refugee communities, and improve the quality and relevance of mobile learning applications.
Shifting from a technocentric 
approach to need-centric and resource restructuring models
The level of implementation and use of mobile learning 
varies drastically in the projects analysed in this report. 
Broadly speaking, three main approaches have emerged: 
technocentric, integrated need-centric and resource 
restructuring.
The technocentric approach is deeply rooted in the belief 
that technology can act as a silver bullet to development 
problems, conceiving technology implementation as the most important part of the educational solution. Although these approaches have been widely criticized in education and development debates, they are still predominant in today’s political reality. In refugee contexts, technocentric approaches are reflected in projects that are primarily focused on the procurement of devices and the development software 
solutions. It is not to say that these models are without value, as they might aid refugees in self-guided learning and 
information retrieval processes. However, the sustainability of 
technocentric approaches as well as their potential to provide equal benefits to all learners need to be viewed with caution. 
Projects that focus on accomplishing educational goals and 
individual self-fulfilment needs by considering and addressing a plethora of elements in the wider educational environment 
can be classified as taking an integrated need-centric 
approach. In refugee contexts, this would comprise initiatives that create and provide comprehensive measures including onsite learning and teacher support, transportation to facilities, support mechanisms for female learner participation, and/or educational pathways that lead refugees towards certification and degrees. In the integrated need-centric model, technology is just one piece of the overall puzzle. While some of the projects reviewed began in a technocentric 
fashion, most of the more established and successful 
initiatives have adopted more comprehensive approaches.
A third, emerging model could be described as a resource 
restructuring approach, in which initiatives do not develop new technology or applications but rather restructure pre-existing technology, educational resources and human resources to generate more innovative business 
models to address refugees’ needs for education. One of 
the fundamental strategies of this approach is to leverage the power of mobile technology to locate and reorganize resources available in the nearby communities of the users. As an example of this approach, Kiron (see section 3.3) neither provides the MOOCs nor is in charge of the on-campus 
learning and teaching or accreditation, which remain the 
responsibilities of the university partners. However, Kiron’s 
resource restructuring model has been significantly enhanced 
by developing additional support structures such as study hubs, buddy systems and additional synchronous online tutoring. The initiative has even started to close content gaps between off-the-shelf MOOCs and university requirements by developing new MOOCs together with their partners. The resource restructuring approach, often based on an integrated need-centric model, can be primarily adopted in 
environments where learning and teaching resources are 
available, but it shows less potential in resource-poor settings with limited technological and educational infrastructure. However, even in these environments, projects can 
incorporate brokering aspects into their education models, for 
instance by leveraging and embedding refugees’ pre-existing communication practices in mobile instant messaging groups.
Based on the examination of the theoretical assumptions 
and the practical mobile learning solutions and projects, a human–organization–technology model can be suggested as a framework for mapping and assessing the value chain 76
A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugeesof mobile learning initiatives that aim to address individual 
refugee’s needs for learning and development as well as the institutional challenges of education systems in meeting refugees’ needs. Refugees’ needs for education and development should always be the trigger of the human–
organization–technology programming cycle and the value 
chain of mobile learning for refugees. As demonstrated in this report, mobile learning can take an individual form when individual refugees take the initiative to use mobile technology to address different levels of needs. But the value of mobile learning will be enlarged when education systems and other institutional aid providers holistically adopt a need-centric approach to planning and implementing strategies and projects to meet the comprehensive needs. Each of the three factors in this model form part of a hierarchy of needs, 
from basic safety and socio-emotional well-being to higher 
education, employment and self-realization (see Figure 5). These needs are interdependent and cumulative, meaning that the response to the basic category of needs often constitutes the foundation for the higher-level individual practices and system-wide strategies. Unless disruptive technology is adopted, the value of higher-level and comprehensive mobile learning models are often based on the innovative integration and restructuring of basic mobile learning apps and digital and human resources, as well as previously proven organization strategies.
Given the limited reach of this report, this model does 
not attempt to exhaust the effective strategies for using 
mobile learning to respond to refugees’ needs. It is rather 
designed to provide a framework to facilitate the mapping of refugees’ continuum of needs; the assessment of the extent to which education systems are meeting those needs; and the exploration of the role mobile learning can play in addressing needs that remain unmet. More importantly, the human–organization–technology model aims to provide an analytical framework to gain insights on the successful system-wide strategies underpinning effective projects as well as the programme gaps. It is also expected to help direct the 
way forward by shedding light on other hidden potentials of 
mobile learning that have not been unleashed by previous or ongoing projects.
Figure 5. A human–organization–technology model to map values of mobile learning for refugees
• Safety
• Reconnection with home
• Communication in host countries or 
communitiesHigher 
education
Vocational 
training 
and skills 
education
Primary and 
secondary 
education
Emergency 
education 
response• Navigation tools
• Social media
• Translation 
apps• Apps for quick-
response services• Mobile EMIS to measure and monitor education progression• Better-resourced study programmes
• Apps to train and support teachers• Enriching resources and empowering teachers of formal TVET programmes• Real work or microwork training
• Digital skills development including coding• Information platforms to sensitize higher education opportunities• Online courses to expand access to higher education• Blending MOOCs and human coaching to improve quality
• Learner-centric blended learning 
programmesORGANIZATION:
Education Systems
HUMAN:
Refugees’ 
NeedsTECHNOLOGY:
Enabler and 
Multiplier of 
Learning and 
Development
• Need-centric 
certified skills
• Community building
• Collaborative makers• Resources restructuring approach to providing 
higher 
education to massive numbers of refugees
• Literacy and language skills
• Continued cognitive 
and non-cognitive 
skills development
• Social belonging• Certified job skills
• Digital skills
• Life skills
• Economic and social inclusion• Higher education with recognized accreditation
• Employment
• Self-fulfilment and social esteem
© UNESCO77Lessons learned and conclusions
Major challenges and the way ahead
The continuing refugee and displacement dynamics and the 
increasingly central role that mobile media play in refugees’ 
lives and learning necessitate further research. The findings 
of this report point to two major challenges that need to be addressed more systematically in the future.
Validating educational impact and 
determining cost-effectiveness
The findings of this report need to be further strengthened 
by more rigorous research studies to add substance to the 
weak evidence base in almost all of the areas identified, and 
particularly in formal and non-formal education settings. This requires a deeper qualitative understanding of the 
mechanisms and circumstances that help refugees learn 
or prevent them from doing so. In addition, randomized quantitative designs need to compare the educational outcomes of mobile learning with the outcomes of other 
learning formats. 
The evaluation of cost effectiveness must accompany 
considerations of educational impact. Cost-effectiveness, 
which has been examined only to a limited extent in the 
studies and reports identified, is extremely critical, as some mobile learning solutions require high investments and costs. In other words, while the emerging evidence allows the 
conclusion that mobile learning contributes to addressing at least some of refugees’ key challenges, it remains unclear 
whether it is more efficient than other strategies. 
Scaling up and expanding reach
Almost all of the projects identified in this report have 
limited reach. Only a few initiatives involve large numbers 
of learners, and only a small fraction of refugee learners 
can benefit from existing programmes. Large projects have different dynamics in comparison to small pilots. Also, scaling 
up should not solely involve the distribution of devices, as 
technocentric designs with emphasis on the delivery of 
technology are unlikely to benefit refugees in equitable and 
sustainable ways. To this end, broad approaches that account for diverse sociocultural, political and financial aspects 
of refugee contexts need to be established in addition to 
the technological components. These approaches require 
collaboration and connections among stakeholders, sponsors 
and beneficiaries, leveraging existing resources and actors in the field through brokering models. While perhaps more 
time-consuming and resource-intensive, the ultimate goal 
of providing quality educational experiences to refugees is 
better achieved when stakeholders work in concert to realize 
educational opportunities for all.ReferencesA lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees80Ager, A. and Strang, A. 2008. Understanding integration: a 
conceptual framework. Journal of Refugee Studies, Vol. 
21, No. 2, pp. 166–91.
Ahmad, K. S., Sudweeks, F. and Armarego, J. 2015. Learning 
English vocabulary in a mobile assisted language learning (MALL) environment: a sociocultural study of migrant women. Interdisciplinary Journal of e-Skills and Lifelong Learning, Vol. 11, pp. 25–46.
Alarmphone. n.d. About. https://alarmphone.org/en/about/ 
(Accessed 14 December 2017.)
All Children Reading. n.d.a. Cologne Game Lab. https://
allchildrenreading.org/winners/cologne-game-lab/ (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
–––– . n.d.b. Apps Factory. https://allchildrenreading.org/
winners/apps-factory/ (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Almohamed, A. and Vyas, D. 2016. Designing for the 
marginalized: a step towards understanding the lives of refugees and asylum seekers. DIS ‘16 Companion: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems. Brisbane, Australia, ACM, pp. 165–68.
Ankommen. n.d. Ankommen [Arrive]. Nuremburg, Germany, 
Federal Office for Migration and Refugees. (In German.) https://ankommenapp.de/ ( Accessed 14 December 
2017.)
Bacigalupe, G. and Cámara, M. 2012. Transnational families 
and social technologies: reassessing immigration psychology. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, Vol. 38, No. 9, pp. 1425–38.
Bacishoga, K. B. and Johnston, K. A. 2013. Impact of mobile 
phones on integration: the case of refugees in South Africa. The Journal of Community Informatics, Vol. 9, No. 4.
Badge Alliance. n.d. Why Badges? http://www.badgealliance.
org/why-badges/ (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Baranoff, J., Gonzales, R. I., Liu, J., Yang, H. and Zheng, J. 
2015. Lantern: empowering refugees through community-generated guidance using near field communication. CHI EA ’15: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. Seoul, ACM, pp. 7–12. 
10.1145/2702613.2726950
Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. 2016. 
Community-Based Reading Programs for Syrian Refugee Children. 19 July 2016. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University. http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/publication/26816/communitybased_reading_
programs_for_syrian_refugee_children.htmlBenseman, J. 2012. Adult Refugee Learners with Limited 
Literacy: Needs and Effective Responses. Wellington, 
Ako Aotearoa. https://akoaotearoa.ac.nz/ako-hub/
ako-aotearoa-northern-hub/adult-refugee-learners-
Benseman
Bergin, C. n.d. Mobile Mentoring for Primary School Teachers 
in Crisis Contexts. New York, Teachers College, Columbia University. http://www.tc.columbia.edu/
refugeeeducation/resources/ ( Accessed 14 December 
2017.)
Betancourt, T. S., Newnham, E. A., Layne, C. M., Kim, S., 
Steinberg, A. M., Ellis, H. and Birman, D. 2012. Trauma history and psychopathology in war‐affected refugee 
children referred for trauma‐related mental health services in the United States. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, Vol. 25, No. 6, pp. 682–90.
Biermann, F. and Boas, I. 2010. Preparing for a warmer world: 
towards a global governance system to protect climate refugees. Global Environmental Politics, Vol. 10, No. 1, 
pp. 60–88.
Birman, D., Trickett, E. J. and Bacchus, N. 2002. Somali Youth 
Report. Denver, Colo., Spring Institute for Intercultural 
Learning. http://www.springinstitute.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/04/marylandreport.pdf
Bisignani, L. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 21 March 2017.
Bonfini-Hotlosz, C. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 22 March 
2017.
Boxall, M. 2012. MOOCs: a massive opportunity for higher 
education, or digital hype? Higher Education Network 
(blog), The Guardian, 8 August 2012. https://www.
theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/aug/08/mooc-coursera-higher -education-
investment
Bradby, H., Humphris, R., Newall, D. and Phillimore, J. 2015. 
Public Health Aspects of Migrant Health: A Review of the Evidence on Health Status for Refugees and Asylum 
Seekers in the European Region. Copenhagen, WHO 
Regional Office for Europe. (Health Evidence Network synthesis report, 44.)
Brown, J., Miller, J. and Mitchell, J. 2006. Interrupted schooling 
and the acquisition of literacy: experiences of Sudanese refugees in Victorian secondary schools. Australian Journal of Language and Literacy, Vol. 29, No. 
2, pp. 150–62.
Brunarska, Z. and Weinar, A. 2013. Asylum Seekers, Refugees 
and IDPs in the EaP Countries: Recognition, Social 
Protection and Integration: An Overview. Migration 
Policy Centre, CARIM-East Research Report, 2013/45. References81Florence, Italy, Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced 
Studies, European University Institute. http://cadmus.
eui.eu/handle/1814/29450
Burde, D., Guven, O., Kelcey, J., Lahmann, H. and Al-
Abbadi, K. 2015. What Works to Promote Children’s Education Access, Quality of Learning and Well-Being 
in Crisis-Affected Contexts. London, Department for 
International Development (DFID). 
Catholic University of Louvain. n.d. MOOCs for Refugees. 
https://uclouvain.be/en/digital-university/moocs/moocs-for-refugees.html (Accessed 14 December 
2017.)
CBC News. 2016. Language Turning Out to Be Key Hurdle in 
Welcoming Syrian Refugees. 12 January 2016. Ottawa, Ont., Author. http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/new-brunswick/syrian-refugees-language-arabic-
moncton-1.3399907
Center for Education Innovations. n.d. Nafham. Washington, 
DC, Author. http://www.educationinnovations.org/program/nafham (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Chib, A. and Aricat, R. G. 2016. Belonging and communicating 
in a bounded cosmopolitanism: the role of mobile phones in the integration of transnational migrants in 
Singapore. Information, Communication and Society, Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 482–96.
Colic-Peisker, V. and Walker, I. 2003. Human capital, 
acculturation and social identity: Bosnian refugees in Australia. Journal of Community and Applied Social 
Psychology, Vol. 13, No. 5, pp. 337–60.
Crombach, A., Nandi, C., Bambonye, M., Liebrecht, M., Pryss, 
R., Reichert, M., Elbert, T. and Weierstall, R. 2013. Screening for Mental Disorders in Post-Conflict Regions 
Using Computer Apps: A Feasibility Study from Burundi. 
Abstract for Trauma Assessment 2.0: Using Customized 
Computer Apps in Clinical Research and Praxis 
Symposium, XIII Congress of European Society of 
Traumatic Stress Studies (ESTSS) Conference, Bologna, 
Italy, 5–9 June 2013.
Cuban, S. 2014. Transnational families, ICTs and mobile 
learning. International Journal of Lifelong Education, Vol. 33, No. 6, pp. 737–54.
Curtarelli, M., Gualtieri, V., Jannati, M. S. and Donlevy, V. 
2017. ICT for Work: Digital Skills in the Workplace. 
Brussels, European Commission. https://ec.europa.eu/
digital-single-market/en/news/ict-work-digital-skills-
workplace
Dahya, N. 2016. Landscape Review: Education in Conflict and 
Crisis – How Can Technology Make a Difference? Bonn, Germany, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH.
Dahya, N. and Dryden-Peterson, S. 2016. Tracing pathways 
to higher education for refugees: the role of virtual support networks and mobile phones for women in refugee camps. Comparative Education, Vol. 53, No. 2, pp. 284–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03050068.201
6.1259877
Dankova, P . and Giner, C. 2011. Technology in aid of learning 
for isolated refugees. Forced Migration Review, Vol. 38, 
pp. 11–12.
de Jong, J. P ., Scholte, W. F., Koeter, M. W. and Hart, A. A. 2000. 
The prevalence of mental health problems in Rwandan 
and Burundese refugee camps. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, Vol. 102, No. 3, pp. 171–77.
de Leeuw, S. and Rydin, I. 2007. Migrant children’s digital 
stories: identity formation and self-representation 
through media production. European Journal of 
Cultural Studies, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 447–64.
De Vecchi, N., Kenny, A., Dickson-Swift, V. and Kidd, S. 2016. 
How digital storytelling is used in mental health: a scoping review. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp. 183–93.
Dryden-Peterson, S. 2011. Refugee Education: A Global Review. 
Geneva, UNHCR Policy Development and Evaluation 
Service.
––––. 2015a. Building a future for the youngest refugees. 
Usable Knowledge, 23 November 2015. Cambridge, 
Mass., Harvard Graduate School of Education. https://www.gse.harvard.edu/uk/blog/building-future-youngest-refugees
––––. 2015b. The Educational Experience of Refugee Children 
in Countries of First Asylum. Washington DC, Migration Policy Institute.
Dubinsky, Z. 2015. For Syrian refugees, smartphones are a 
lifeline – not a toy. CBC News, 12 September 2015. http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/for-syrian-refugees-smartphones-are -a-lifeline-not-a-toy-1.3221349
Duolingo. n.d.a. Accepted Identification. Pittsburgh, Pa., Author. 
https://englishtest.duolingo.com/ids (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
––––. n.d.b. Language Courses for Arabic Speakers. Pittsburgh, 
Pa., Author. https://www.duolingo.com/courses/ar (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
––––. 2014. Duolingo to Release Test Center: Fair Language 
Certification for All. Press release, 23 July 2014. 
Pittsburgh, Pa., Author. http://duolingo-data.A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees82s3.amazonaws.com/s3/press-assets/Duolingo_
TestCenter.pdf
Earnest, J., Joyce, A., de Mori, G. and Silvagni, G. 2010. Are 
universities responding to the needs of students from refugee backgrounds? Australian Journal of Education, Vol. 54, No. 2, pp. 155–74.
Education Sector Working Group. 2014. Access to Education for 
Syrian Refugee Children in Zaatari Camp, Jordan. Joint Education Needs Assessment Report.  New York/Geneva, Switzerland, UNICEF/REACH. https://www .unicef.org/
jordan/Joint_Education_Needs_Assessment_2014_E-copy2.pdf
Emerald Research Zone. n.d. Types of interview. How To... 
Conduct Interviews. Bingley, UK, Emerald Publishing. http://www.emeraldinsight .com/research/guides/
methods/interviews.htm?part=2 (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Farahat, M. n.d. Nafham: Free Online K-12 Educational Video 
Platform. Arlington, Va., Ashoka Changemakers. https://www.changemakers.com/play2learn/entries/nafham 
(Accessed 14 December 2017.)
FHI 360. n.d. Policy and Information Systems: Mobile Technology 
for Refugee Education Information. Durham, NC, Author. 
https://www.fhi360.org/sites/default/files/media/documents/Kmobile%20demo%204%20KDM.pdf (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
––––. 2013. Mobile Phone App Increases Access to Education 
for Refugees. Press release, 20 June 2013. Durham, NC, Author. https://www.fhi360.org/news/mobile-phone-app-increases-access-education-refugees
Gemenne, F. 2011. Why the numbers don’t add up: a review 
of estimates and predictions of people displaced by environmental changes. Global Environmental Change, Vol. 21, Supplement 1, S41-S49. 
Gillespie, M., Ampofo, L., Cheesman, M., Faith, B., Iliadou, E., 
Issa, A., Osseiran, S. and Skleparis, D. 2016. Mapping Refugee Media Journeys: Smartphones and Social Media Networks. Milton Keynes, UK/ Issy-les-Moulineaux, France, Open University/France Médias Monde.
Gladwell, C., Hollow, D., Robinson, A., Norman, B., Bowerman, 
E., Mitchell, J., Floremont, F. and Hutchinson, P . 2016a. Higher Education for Refugees in Low Resource Environments: Landscape Review. London, Jigsaw Consult. https://www.jigsawconsult.com/sites/default/files/files/Landscape%20review.pdf
––––. 2016b. Higher Education for Refugees in Low Resource 
Environments: Research Study. London, Jigsaw Consult. https://jigsawconsult.com/sites/default/files/files/Jigsaw%20research%20study.pdf
Greenaway, T., Hillers, L. and Rampelt, F. 2016. Can MOOC’s 
be a Model For Providing Quality Higher Education to Refugees? Lessons from the First Experiment. Paper for European Conference on Education 2016, Brighton, United Kingdom 29 June–3 July 2016.
GSMA. 2017. The Importance of Mobile for Refugees: 
A Landscape of New Services and Approaches. London, Author. http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/disaster-response/the-importance-of-mobile-for-refugees-a-
landscape-of-new-services-and-approaches
Guardiola, E. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 22 March 2017.
Hannides, T., Bailey, N. and Kaoukji, D. 2016. Voices of Refugees: 
Information and Communication Needs of Refugees 
in Greece and Germany. London, BBC Media Action. http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediaaction/publications-and-resources/research/reports/voices-of-refugees
Hardman, F. C. 2014. Baseline Study of Classroom Practices 
in UNRWA Elementary Schools. Final Report. Amman, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
Hegarty, S. 2011. How Silicon Valley outsources work to 
African refugees. BBC News, 18 June 2011. http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-13784487
Heil, C. R., Wu, J. S., Lee, J. J. and Schmidt, T. 2016. A review of 
mobile language learning apps: trends, challenges, and opportunities. EUROCALL Review, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 32–50.
Hollow, D. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 21 March 2017.
Hughes, R. 2014. A Box of Ideas. World Policy Journal, Vol. 31, 
No. 2, pp. 71–80.
Hunter, A. 2015. Empowering or impeding return 
migration? ICT, mobile phones, and older migrants’ 
communications with home. Global Networks: A Journal of Transnational Affairs, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 485–502. doi:10.1111/glob.12091
ICRC. 2015. Rwanda/Burundi: Free Phone Calls Help Refugees 
Stay in Touch. 15 July 2015. Geneva, Switzerland, International Committee of the Red Cross. https://www.icrc.org/en/document/rwanda-burundi-free-phone-calls-help-refugees-stay-touch
Ikonomou, M.-N. 2016. Written interview with C. Pimmer.References83InfoAid. n.d. InfoAid. Google Play. https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=com.migrationaid.infoaid&hl=en 
(Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Izaguirre, H. 2016. Interview with C. Pimmer. 16 December 
2016.
Jami3ti. n.d.a. About Jami3ti. Amman, UNESCO. https://
amman.unesco .org/pages/about (Accessed 14 
December 2017.)
––––. n.d.b. Jami3ti: Linking Refugee and Vulnerable Youth to 
Higher Education and Training. https://amman.unesco.org (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Jamiya Project. n.d. SPOC Pilot Evaluation. http://jamiya.org/s/
Call-for-proposals-JAMIYA-SPOC-Evaluation.pdf (No longer available.)
––––. 2016. Jamiya Project Press Release. 13 September 
2016. https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0B0EE859TKHyNN0hubjR0TU1laUk
Jeong, E.-Y. 2015. Expanding learning opportunities for 
refugee children: Uganda’s DigiSchool pilot. UNICEF Stories of Innovation, 30 September 2015. New York, UNICEF Innovation. http://www.unicefstories.
org/2015/09/30/expanding-learning-opportunities-for-refugee-children-ugandas-digischool-pilot/
Kaleebu, N., Gee, A., Jones, R. and Watson, A. H. A. 2013. SMS 
Story Impact Assessment Report. Madang, Papua New Guinea, Voluntary Services Oversees (VSO). https://
epsp-web.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/doc_
SMSStoryImpactAssessmentReportFINAL050214.pdf
Kanani, R. 2014. Why Edraak is the future of online learning 
in the Arab world. Thomson Reuters Foundation News, 17 December 2014. http://news.trust.org//item/20141217194218-jzxho/
Kanu, Y. 2008. Educational needs and barriers for African 
refugee students in Manitoba. Canadian Journal of Education, Vol. 31, No. 4, pp. 915–40.
Khabsa, M. and Giles, C. L. 2014. The number of scholarly 
documents on the public web. PLoS One, Vol. 9, No. 5, e93949. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0093949
Khoury, R. B. 2015. Sweet tea and cigarettes: a taste of refugee 
life in Jordan. Forced Migration Review, Vol. 49, pp. 93–94.
Kim, D. K., Chikombero, M. and Modie-Moroka, T. 2013. Innate 
health threat among a visibly hidden immigrant group: a formative field data analysis for HIV/AIDS prevention among Zimbabwean workers in Botswana. Journal of Health Communication, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 146–59.Kirk, J. and Winthrop, R. 2007. Promoting quality education in 
refugee contexts: supporting teacher development in Northern Ethiopia. International Review of Education, Vol. 53, No. 5/6, pp. 715–23.
Kiron. n.d.a. Kiron Jordan. Berlin, Author.  https://kiron.ngo/
jordan/ (14 December 2017.)
––––. n.d.b. The Academic Model. Berlin, Author. https://kiron.
ngo/our-kiron-model/the -academic-model/ (Accessed 
14 December 2017.)
––––. n.d.c. Kiron Open Higher Education for Refugees. Internal 
presentation. Berlin, Author.
––––. n.d.d. Kiron Open Higher Education. Berlin, Author. 
https://kiron.ngo/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Kiron_Short_Concept_EN_August_17_A1.compressed-1-2.pdf (Accessed 17 December 2017.)
Kozyra, A. 2016. Refugee Integration: The (Smart) Way To Do It? 
21 April 2016. Brussels, European Association for the Education of Adults. http://www.eaea.org/en/home/
news/refugee-integration-the-smart-way-to-do-it .html
Krahn, H., Derwing, T., Mulder, M. and Wilkinson, L. 2000. 
Educated and underemployed: refugee integration 
into the Canadian labour market. Journal of International Migration and Integration, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 59–84.
Kühl, N. and Lehner, J. 2016. Programming for refugees – 
an active learning approach for teaching Java to 
heterogeneous groups. H. C. Mayr and M. Pinzger 
(eds), INFORMATIK 2016: Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI). Bonn, Germany, Gesellschaft für Informatik, pp. 1175–78.
Kukua. 2016. SIMA’s Beta Version Is Finally Ready! San Francisco, 
Calif., Author. http://www.kukua.me/simas-beta-version-is-finally-ready/
Kutscher, N. and Kreß, L.-M. 2016. ‘Internet is the same like 
food’ – an empirical study on the use of digital media by unaccompanied minor refugees in Germany. Transnational Social Review, Vol. 6, Nos. 1–2, pp. 200–03.
Kwauk, C. and Robinson, J. P . 2016. Worldreader: Creating a 
Culture of E-reading around the Globe. Washington, DC, Center for Universal Education at Brookings. https://
www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/
FINAL-Worldreader-Case-Study.pdf
Lachal, C. 2015. Ideas Box: An Innovating Psychosocial Tool for 
Emergency Situations. Impact Study in the Kavumu and Bwagirisa Camps, Burundi. Washington, DC, Libraries 
Without Borders. http://www.ideas-box.org/images/
Rapport-Impact-IDB-2015-EN-light.pdfA lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees84Lamnek, S. 2005. Qualitative Sozialforschung [Qualitative 
social research], Vol. 4. Weinheim, Germany/Basel, 
Switzerland, Beltz Verlag.
Learning Equality. n.d. KA Lite: An Offline Version of Khan 
Academy.  https://learningequality.org/ka-lite/ (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Lebanese Alternative Learning. n.d. The Launching of 
Tabshoura Kindergarten: A Free E-learning Platform. Beirut, Author. http://lal.ngo/index.php/event/the-launching-of-tabshoura-kindergarten-a-free -e-
learning-platform/ (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
––––. n.d.b. Lebanese Alternative Learning website. http://lal.
ngo/ (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Lepeska, D. 2016. Refugees and the technology of exile. The 
Wilson Quarterly, Spring edn. http://wilsonquarterly.com/quarterly/looking-back-moving-forward/refugees-and-the-technology- of-exile/
Leung, L. 2011. Taking refuge in technology: communication 
practices in refugee camps and immigration detention. New Issues in Refugee Research, Research Paper No. 202. Geneva, Switzerland, UNHCR Policy Development and Evaluation Service. 
Liamputtong, P ., Koh, L., Wollersheim, D. and Walker, R. 2015. 
Peer support groups, mobile phones and refugee women in Melbourne. Health Promotion International, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 715–24.
Lisbon Recognition Convention Committee. 2017. 
Recommendation on the Recognition of Refugees’ Qualifications under the Lisbon Recognition Convention and Explanatory Memorandum. Adopted at the Extraordinary Session of the Convention on the Recognition of Qualifications Concerning Higher Education in the European Region, 14 November 2017, Strasbourg, France. http://www.enic-naric.net/fileusers/Recommendation_on_Recognition_of_
Qualifications_Held_by_Refugees_Displaced_Persons_
and_Persons_in_a_Refugee_like_Situation.pdf
Llamazares, M. and Mulloy, K. 2014. Unicef in Uganda: 
Using technology-based innovations to advance peacebuilding. Journal of Peacebuilding and Development, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 109–15.
Lorisika, I., Cremonini, L. and Safar Jalani, M. 2015. Study to 
Design a Programme/Clearinghouse Providing Access to Higher Education for Syrian Refugees and Internal Displaced Persons: Final Report. Brussels, European Commission.
Lyby, E. 2001. Vocational training for refugees: a case study 
from Tanzania. J. Crisp, C. Talbot and D. B. Cipollone (eds), Learning for a Future: Refugee Education in Developing Countries. Geneva, Switzerland, UNHCR, pp. 217–59.
Ma, A. 2015. Duolingo plans to offer free German lessons 
to Syrian refugees. Huffington Post, 24 September 2015. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/duolingo -german-lessons-syrian-refugees_
us_5602e8e7e4b0fde8b0d0e792
Manjoo, F. 2016. For millions of immigrants, a common 
language: WhatsApp. New York Times, 21 December 
2016. http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/technology/for -millions-of-immigrants-a-common-
language-whatsapp.html?_r=0
Mason, B. and Buchmann, D. 2016. ICT4Refugees: A report 
on the emerging landscape of digital responses to the refugee crisis. Bonn, Germany, Germany, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH. https://regasus.de/online/datastore?epk=74D5roYc&file=image_8_en
McBrien, J. L. 2005. Educational needs and barriers for refugee 
students in the United States: a review of the literature. Review of Educational Research, Vol. 75, No. 3, pp. 329–64.
Mendenhall, M. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer and U. 
Gröhbiel. March 21, 2017.
Mendenhall, M., Dryden-Peterson, S., Bartlett, L., Caroline 
Ndirangu, Imonje, R., Gakunga, D., Gichuhi, L., Nyagah, 
G., Okoth, U. and Tangelder, M. 2015. Quality education 
for refugees in Kenya: pedagogy in urban Nairobi and Kakuma refugee camp settings. Journal on Education in Emergencies, Vol. 1, No. 1., pp. 92–130.
Miao, F., Mishra, S. and McGreal, R. (eds). 2016. Open 
Educational Resources: Policy, Costs, Transformation. Paris/Burnaby, BC, UNESCO/Commonwealth of Learning. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0024/002443/244365e.pdf
Miao, F., West, M., So, H.-J. and Toh, Y. 2017. Supporting 
Teachers with Mobile Technology: Lessons Drawn 
from UNESCO Projects in Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan and Senegal. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002515/251511e.pdf 
Miller, J. 2009. Teaching refugee learners with interrupted 
education in science: vocabulary, literacy and pedagogy. International Journal of Science Education, Vol. 31, No. 4, pp. 571–92.
Moberg, L. and Johnson-Demen, A. 2009. Evaluation Report: 
‘Small-Small Steps’ to Rebuild Communities with YEP . Oslo, Norwegian Refugee Council. https://www.alnap.References85org/system/files/content/resource/files/main/9428537.
pdf
MOOCs4inclusion. n.d. Academic Refugee Project. http://
www.moocs4inclusion.org/index.php/catalogue/34-academic-refugee-project (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Morris-Lange, S. and Brands, F. 2016. German universities open 
doors to refugees: access barriers remain. International Higher Education, Vol. 84, pp. 11–12.
Moser-Mercer, B. 2014. MOOCs in fragile contexts. U. Cress and 
C. D. Kloos (eds), Proceedings of the European MOOC Stakeholder Summit 2014. Lausanne, Switzerland, EMOOCs, pp. 114–121. 
––––. 2015. A Decent Higher Education Agenda for Fragile 
Contexts. Geneva, Switzerland, University of Geneva/InZone. http://www.unige.ch/inzone/files/1614/8517/5422/2015ThinkPiece.pdf
––––. 2016. MOOC Multi-Center Study 2015. Internal InZone 
report. Geneva, Switzerland, University of Geneva/InZone.
––––. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 24 January 2017.
Moser-Mercer, B., Hayba, E. and Goldsmith, J. 2016. Higher 
Education Spaces and Protracted Displacement: How 
Learner Centered Pedagogies and Human Centered Design Can Unleash Refugee Innovation. Paper for 2016 UNESCO Chair Conference on Technologies 
for Development: From Innovation to Social Impact 
(Tech4Dev Conference), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2–4 May 2016. 
Moser-Mercer, B., Luchner, C. D. and Kherbiche, L. 2013. 
Blended Learning in Complex Environments: Reaching Learners in the Field. Paper for the Sixth Conference of MIT’s Learning International Networks Consortium (LINC), Cambridge, Mass., 16–19 June 2013. 
Nafham. 2016. Nafham. Washington, DC, Center for 
Education Innovations. https://giexchange-www.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/asset/document/Nafham%20Outline%203.43_En.pdf?_ZbIvHnwzrFgC6qli26H8DTKqramziis
Neumann, J. n.d. Literacy game for Syrian refugee children. 
Cologne Game Lab (blog). Cologne, Institute for Game 
Development and Research, TH Köln. http://www.
colognegamelab.de/antura-and-the -letters-among-
the-3-eduapp4syria-finalists/ (Accessed 14 December 2017.)
Ngan, H. Y., Lifanova, A., Jarke, J. and Broer, J. 2016. Refugees 
welcome: supporting informal language learning and integration with a gamified mobile application. K. Verbert, M. Sharples, T. Klobučar (eds), Adaptive and Adaptable Learning. EC-TEL 2016. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 9891. Cham, Switzerland, Springer, pp. 521–24.
Ngan, H. Y., Lifanova, A., Rahman, S. and Okunewitsch, A. 
2016. „Moin“ to new locals: helping migrants to adjust to Bremen with a mobile application. Resonanz: 
Magazin für Lehre und Studium an der Universität 
Bremen, 11 April 2016. https://blogs.uni-bremen.de/resonanz/2016/04/11/moin/
Norad. n.d. EduApp4Syria. Oslo, Norwegian Agency for 
Development Cooperation (Norad). https://www.
norad.no/eduapp4syria
O’Malley, J. 2015. Surprised that Syrian refugees have 
smartphones? Sorry to break this to you, but you’re 
an idiot. The Independent, 7 September 2015. http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/surprised-that-syrian-refugees-have-smartphones-well-sorry-to-break-this-to-you-but-youre-an-idiot-10489719.html
OECD. 2012. PISA. Untapped Skills: Realising the Potential of 
Immigrant Students. Preliminary Version. Paris, Author. https://www.oecd.org/edu/Untapped%20Skills.pdf
Oh, S. A. and van der Stouwe, M. 2008. Education, diversity, 
and inclusion in Burmese refugee camps in Thailand. Comparative Education Review, Vol. 52, No. 4, pp. 589–617.
Oltermann, P . 2016. Syrian refugees design app for navigating 
German bureaucracy. The Guardian, 5 August 2016. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/05/
syrian-refugees-app-navigating-german-bureacracy-bureaucrazy
Onah, D. F. O., Sinclair, J. and Boyatt, R. 2014. Dropout rates of 
massive open online courses: behavioural patterns. EDULEARN14 Conference Proceedings. Valencia, Spain, IATED, pp. 5825–34.
OpenEMIS. 2016. OpenEMIS Malaysia UNHCR. Updated 23 
August 2016. Paris, UNESCO. https://news.openemis.org/2016/04/openemis-malaysia-unhcr/
––––. 2017. OpenEMIS Jordan. Updated 28 August 2017. 
Paris, UNESCO. https://news.openemis.org/2016/04/openemis-jordan/
Orgocka, A. 2017. Interview with U. Gröhbiel. 11 January 2017.
Pachler, N., Bachmair, B. and Cook, J. 2010. Mobile Learning: 
Structures, Agency, Practices. New York, Springer US.
Pachler, N., Pimmer, C. and Seipold, J. 2011. Work-based 
mobile learning: an overview. N. Pachler, C. Pimmer 
and J. Seipold (eds), Work-Based Mobile Learning: A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees86Concepts and Cases. Bern, Switzerland, Peter Lang, pp. 
3–25.
Patton, M. Q. 1990. Qualitative Research and Evaluation 
Methods, 3rd edn. Thousand Oaks, Calif., Sage Publications, Inc.
Peich, M. 2016. Reinforcing the Quality of Education in 
Emergency Situations: Ideas Box Increases Academic Performance by 23%. Washington, DC, Libraries Without Borders. https://www.bibliosansfrontieres.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/etude_IDB_Burundi_
en_15042016.pdf
Pérez-Mendoza, K. C. 2015. Texting conscientizaçäo? A 
study of immigrant Latina/o adults and mobile learning. Dissertation Abstracts International. Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences, Vol. 75, No. 9-A(E). Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles.
Phimister, R. 2016. Tiger Girls – Harvard evaluation update. 
Open Learning Exchange (OLE) Blog, 12 July 2016. Cambridge, Mass., OLE. http://www .ole.org/2016/07/
tiger-girls-hgse-update/
Pimmer, C. and Pachler, N. 2014. Mobile learning in the 
workplace: unlocking the value of mobile technology for work-based education. M. Ally and A. Tsinakos (eds), Increasing Access through Mobile Learning. Burnaby, BC/Athabasca, Alta, Commonwealth of Learning/Athabasca University, pp. 193–203.
Pimmer, C., Spikol, D. and Glocker, S. 2013. Intercultural 
Communication Challenges Between Health Professionals and (Im)Migrants – and the Potential of Digital and Mobile Technology. Grundtvig EU Lifelong Learning Programme. Brussels, European Commission. http://www.christoph.pimmer.info/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Intercultural-communication-challenges-between-health-professionals-and-immigrants.pdf
Piper, B., Zuilkowski, S. S., Kwayumba, D. and Strigel, C. 
2016. Does technology improve reading outcomes? Comparing the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of ICT interventions for early grade reading in Kenya. International Journal of Educational Development, Vol. 49, pp. 204–14.
Porter, M. and Haslam, N. 2005. Predisplacement and 
postdisplacement factors associated with mental 
health of refugees and internally displaced persons: a 
meta-analysis. JAMA, Vol. 294, No. 5, pp. 602–12.
Psacharopoulos, G. and Patrinos, H. A. 2004. Returns to 
investment in education: a further update. Education Economics, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 111–34.RACHEL Offline. n.d. Meet the Little Device That Is Changing 
the World, One School at a Time. Irvine, Calif., World Possible. https://worldpossible.org/rachel/
Rainey, V. 2016. Coding classes open new doors for Syrian 
refugees. Al Jazeera, 22 October 2016. http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/10/coding-classes-open-doors-syrian-refugees-161022080625712.html
Rampelt, F. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 21 February 2017.
Ranieri, M. and Bruni, I. 2013. Mobile storytelling and 
informal education in a suburban area: a qualitative 
study on the potential of digital narratives for young second-generation immigrants. Learning Media and Technology, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp. 217–35.
RapidSMS. n.d. EduTrac. https://www.rapidsms.org/projects/
edutrac/ (Accessed 15 December 2017.)
Refugee Code Week. n.d. About Refugee Code Week. http://
refugeecodeweek.org/about/about-refugee -code-
week/ (Accessed 15 December 2017.)
Rifai, R. 2016. Ventures hire refugees to harness talent and 
skills. Al Jazeera, 7 February 2016. http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2016/02/ventures-hire-refugees-harness-talent-skills-160207175849614.html
Ritscher, A. 2016. Mehr als blosser Klicktivismus [More than 
mere clicktivisim]. Der Bund, 27 July 2016. http://www.derbund.ch/digital/social-media/Mehr-als-blosser-Klicktivismus/story/31473105
Robins-Early, N. 2015. This language startup connects Arabic 
learners with Syrian refugees. Huffington Post, updated 23 September 2015. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
entry/natakallam-syrian-refugees-arabic-language-startup_us_55f5d0c0e4b063ecbfa4acbe
Rousseau, C., Drapeau, A. and Corin, E. 1996. School 
performance and emotional problems in refugee 
children. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, Vol. 66, 
No. 2, pp. 239–51.
Rowe, R. 2016. Interview with C. Pimmer. 12 December 2016.
Rowsome, A. 2016. Welcome to London’s refugee coding 
school. Refugees Deeply, 19 October 2016. New York, 
News Deeply. https://www.newsdeeply.com/refugees/articles/2016/10/19/welcome-to-londons-refugee-coding-school
Rutkin, A. 2016. Phoning in refugee aid. New Scientist, Vol. 230, 
No. 3069, pp. 22–23.
Samasource. n.d. Impact Sourcing. https://www.samasource.
org/model (Accessed 16 December 2017.)References87Samuel Hall Consulting. 2014. Living out of Camp: Alternatives 
to Camp-based Assistance for Eritrean Refugees in 
Ethiopia. Commissioned by Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC). Nairobi/Oslo, Author/NRC. http://samuelhall.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Living-
Out-of-Camp-Alternative-to-Camp-based-Assistance-
in-Ethiopia.pdf
Sara, A. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 9 January 2017.
Savill-Smith, C., Chopra, R. and Haure, O. 2012. The use of 
mobile technologies as a bridge to enhance learning 
for ESOL students. D. Mallows (ed.), Innovations in English Language Teaching for Migrants and Refugees. 
London, British Council, pp. 129–40.
Sawhney, N. 2009. Voices beyond walls: the role of digital 
storytelling for empowering marginalized youth 
in refugee camps. IDC '09: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children. Como, Italy, ACM, pp. 302–05.
Schmidt, T. 2016. Chocolate-covered drill and practice? 
Möglichkeiten und Grenzen des ‘gamifizierten’ , 
adaptiven Übens in Fremdsprachenlern-Apps 
[Possibilities and limitations of ‘gamified’ , adaptive practice with language learning apps]. E. Burwitz-Melzer, F. Königs, C. Riemer and L. Schmelter (eds), Üben und Übungen beim Fremdsprachenlernen: Perspektiven und Konzepte für Unterricht und Forschung [Practice and exercises in foreign language learning: perspectives and approaches for teaching and research]. Tübingen, Germany, Narr Francke Attempto 
Verlag, pp. 200–10. (In German.)
––––. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 18 January 2017.
Seyfarth, F. C. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 21 January 
2017.
Seyfarth, F. C. and Bremer, C. 2016. Der Mentored MOOC 
„Ready for Study“ für Flüchtlinge in Deutschland [The 
mentored MOOC ‘Ready for Study’ for refugees in 
Germany]. N. Apostolopoulos , W. Coy , K. von Köckritz , U. Mußmann, H. Schaumburg and A. Schwill (eds), GML² 2016 Tagungsband: Grundfragen Multimedialen Lehrens und Lernens. [GML² 2016  conference proceedings: basic questions of multimedia teaching 
and learning]. Münster, Germany, Waxmann Verlag, pp. 
259–74. (In German.) 
Seyfarth, F. C., Bremer, C. and Paland-Riedmüller, I. 2016. 
Integrative Bildungsangebote für Flüchtlinge online skalieren: Ein didaktisches Modell zur Kompetenzvermittlung [Online scaling of integrative educational offers for refugees: a didactic model for teaching skills]. J. Wachtler, M. Ebner, O. Gröblinger, M. Kopp, E. Bratengeyer, H.-P . Steinbacher, C. Freisleben-Teutscher and C. Kapper (eds), Digitale Medien: Zusammenarbeit in der Bildung [Digital media: cooperation in education]. Münster, Germany, Waxmann Verlag, pp. 270–75. (In German.)
Shah, C. and Burke, G. 2005. Skilled Migration: Australia. 
Working Paper No. 63. Victoria, Australia, Centre for the Economics of Education and Training, Monash 
University.
Shen, C. 2015. Rebuilding Refugee Lives through Education. 23 
October 2015. Mountain View, Calif., Udacity. http://
blog.udacity.com/2015/10/rebuilding-refugee-lives-through- education.html
Siemens, G. 2005. Connectivism: a learning theory for the 
digital age. International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, Vol. 2, No. 1.
Sinclair, M. 2002. Planning Education in and after Emergencies. 
Paris, UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning, Paris. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001293/129356e.pdf
Sirin, S. R. and Rogers-Sirin, L. 2015. The Educational and 
Mental Health Needs of Syrian Refugee Children. Washington, DC, National Center on Immigrant Integration Policy, Migration Policy Institute.
Solve. 2016. Check Out Our Solve Challenge Semifinalists’ 
Solutions! 19 September 2016. Cambridge, Mass., MIT. https://solve.mit.edu/articles/check-out-our-solve-challenge-semifinalists-solutions
Stiftung Warentest. 2016. Apps zum Deutschlernen: Nur 
zwei von zwölf empfehlenswert [Apps for learning German: only two out of twelve are recommended]. 2 May 2016. Berlin, Author. https://www.test.de/Apps-zum-Deutschlernen-Nur-zwei-von-zwoelf-empfehlenswert-4989440-0/
Strecker, J. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 10 February 2017.
Stubbé, H., Badri, A., Telford, R., van der Hulst, A. and van 
Joolingen, W. 2016. E-Learning Sudan, Formal Learning 
for Out-of-School Children. Electronic Journal of e-Learning, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 136–49.
Stubbé, H., van der Klauw, M., Langefeld, J. J., Theunissen, N. 
C. M. and van der Hulst, A. H. 2016. E-Learning Sudan: Final Report Phase II. Soesterberg, Netherlands, TNO. 
http://publications.tno.nl/publication/34622338/
qyKofj/TNO -2016-R11141.pdf
Suárez-Orozco, M. M. 1989. Central American Refugees and US 
High Schools: A Psychosocial Study of Motivation and Achievement. Palo Alto, Calif., Stanford University Press.A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees88Syria Crisis Education. 2016. Syria Crisis Education Strategic 
Paper. London 2016 Conference. No Lost Generation/
Supprting Syria and the Region. http://www .oosci-
mena.org/uploads/1/wysiwyg/160128_UNICEF_MENARO_Syria_policy_paper_final.pdf
Talhouk, R., Mesmar, S., Thieme, A., Balaam, M., Olivier, P ., 
Akik, C. and Ghattas, H. 2016. Syrian refugees and 
digital health in Lebanon: opportunities for improving 
antenatal health. CHI ’16: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, Calif., ACM, pp. 331–42.
Teachers College. n.d. Teacher Professional Development in 
Refugee Contexts. New York, Columbia University. http://www.tc.columbia.edu/refugeeeducation/teachers-for-teachers-kakuma/ (Accessed 17 December 2017.)
Thompson, E. C. 2009. Mobile phones, communities and social 
networks among foreign workers in Singapore. Global Networks, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 359–80.
UNESCO. 2013. Children Still Battling to Go to School. 
Policy Paper 10, EFA Global Monitoring Report. Paris, Author. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002216/221668E.pdf
UNESCO. 2015a. Education for All 2000–2015: Achievements 
and Challenges. EFA Global Monitoring Report 2015. Paris, Author. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002322/232205e.pdf
––––. 2015b. UNESCO–EU Jami3ti Initiative: mapping of higher 
education needs and opportunities for Syrian refugees. Survey Report. http://www.reachresourcecentre.info/system/files/resource-documents/reach_jor_unesco_education_report_20151409_en.pdf
––––. 2016. Education for People and Planet: Creating 
Sustainable Futures for All. Global Education Monitoring Report 2016. https://en.unesco.org/gem-report/
UNESCO and UNHCR. 2016. No More Excuses: Provide Education 
to All Forcibly Displaced People. Global Education Monitoring Report, Policy Paper 26. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002448/244847E.pdf
UNESCO Institute for Lifelong Learning. 2012. UNESCO 
Guidelines for the Recognition, Validation and Accreditation of the Outcomes of Non-formal and Informal Learning. Hamburg, Germany, Author. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002163/216360e.pdf
UNHCR. 2004. Protracted Refugee Situations. Adopted at the 
30th meeting of Standing Committee of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner’s Programme on 10 June 2004. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/40c982172.pdf
––––. 2012. Education Strategy 2012–2016. Summary. Geneva, 
Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/4af7e71d9.html
––––. 2014. 145,000 Syrian Refugee Women Fight for Survival 
as They Head Families Alone. Press release, 8 July 2014. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/news/press/2014/7/53ba6b066/145000-syrian-refugee-women-fight-survival-head-families-alone.html
––––. 2016a. Connecting Refugees: How Internet and Mobile 
Connectivity Can Improve Refugee Well-Being and Transform Humanitarian Action. September 2016. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/5770d43c4
––––. 2016b. Global Trends: Forced Displacment in 2015. 
Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/576408cd7.pdf
––––. 2016c. Kenya Factsheet. March 2016. Geneva, 
Switzerland, Author. http://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/30731
––––. 2016d. Missing Out: Refugee Education in Crisis. 
Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/publications/education/57d9d01d0/missing-refugee-education-crisis.html
––––. 2017. Figures at a Glance. June 19, 2017. http://www.
unhcr.org/en-us/figures-at-a-glance.html
UNHCR Innovation. n.d.a. Ascend: Using SMS to Improve 
Communication Between UNHCR, Partner NGOs, and Urban Refugees. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/innovation/labs_post/ascend/ (No longer available.)
––––. n.d.b. BrainPOP . Increasing Refugees’ Access to Learning 
Resources Through Digital Content. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr .org/innovation/labs_post/
brainpop/ (No longer available.)
––––. n.d.c. Connected Learning. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. 
http://innovation.unhcr.org/labs_post/connected-learning/ (No longer available.)
––––. n.d.d. Ideas Box. Connecting Displaced Communities to 
the Outside World, Providing Them Access to Information, Knowledge, and Culture. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://innovation.unhcr.org/labs_post/ideas-box/ (No longer available.)
––––. n.d.e. Instant Network Schools. Leveraging Mobile 
Technology to Improve the Quality of Education Provided References89for Refugees. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://
innovation.unhcr.org/labs_post/instant-network-schools/ (No longer available.)
––––. n.d.f. Worldreader. Using Information Communication 
Technology to Improve Refugee Children’s Reading Skills. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://innovation.unhcr.org/labs_post/worldreader/ (No longer available.)
––––. 2016. Beyond Technology: Innovation at UNHCR, Year 
2015. Geneva, Switzerland, Author. http://www.unhcr.org/innovation/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Innovation_at_UNHCR_2015.pdf
UNHCR-UNDP Joint Secretariat. 2015. Compendium on Good 
and Innovative Practices in the Regional Response to the Syria Crisis. Amman, Jordan, Author. http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/download.php?id=10051
UNICEF. 2013. eduTrac. Tracking and Monitoring Education. New 
York, Author. https://www.unicef.org/education/files/EduTrac_Documentation_-_March_2013.pdf
––––. 2015. UNICEF Annual Report 2015: Turkey. New York, 
Author. https://www.unicef.org/about/annualreport/files/Turkey_2015_COAR.pdf
––––. 2016. Uprooted: The Growing Crisis for Refugee and 
Migrant Children. New York, Author. https://www.unicef.org/publications/index_92710.html
UNICEF and Save the Children. 2012. Education Rapid Needs 
Assessment for Displaces  Syrian Children in Schools, 
Community and Safe Spaces. Beirut, Authors. https://
data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/download/36499
UNICEF Innovation. 2014. Raspberry Pi for Learning 
Initiative (Pi4L). UNICEF Stories of Innovation, 8 May 2014. New York, Author. http://www.unicefstories.org/2014/05/08/raspberry-pi-for-learning-initiative-pi4l/
Valenta, M. and Berg, B. 2010. User involvement and 
empowerment among asylum seekers in Norwegian reception centres. European Journal of Social Work, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 483–501.
Valentine, G., Sporton, D. and Nielsen, K. B. 2009. Identities 
and belonging: a study of Somali refugee and asylum seekers living in the UK and Denmark. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, Vol. 27, No. 2, pp. 234–50.
van Reijswoud, V. 2014. MobiStation in Uganda – appropriate 
technology destined to fail. MIS4D: Management and Information Systems for Africa (blog), 28 July 2014. https://mis4d.com/2014/07/28/mobistation-in-uganda-appropriate-technology- destined-to-fail/Vesselinov, R. and Grego, J. 2012. Duolingo Effectiveness Study: 
Final Report. Pittsburgh, Pa., Duolingo. http://static.duolingo.com/s3/DuolingoReport_Final.pdf
Vodafone. n.d. Instant Network Schools. Newbury, UK, 
Vodafone Foundation. http://www.vodafone.com/content /index/about/foundation/instant-network-
schools.html# (Accessed 17 December 2017.)
Vosloo, S. 2012. Mobile Learning and Policies: Key Issues to 
Consider. Paris, UNESCO. (UNESCO Working Paper Series on Mobile Learning.) http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002176/217638E.pdf
––––. 2017. Mobile Learning and TVET for Greater Inclusion. 
Bonn, Germany, UNESCO-UNEVOC.   http://www.unevoc.unesco.org/go.php?q =Mobile+learning+and+TVET+for+greater+inclusion
Walker, R., Koh, L., Wollersheim, D. and Liamputtong, P . 2015. 
Social connectedness and mobile phone use among refugee women in Australia. Health and Social Care in the Community, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 325–36. doi:10.1111/hsc.12155
Wall, M., Campbell, M. O. and Janbek, D. 2017. Syrian refugees 
and information precarity. New Media and Society, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 240–54.
Wang, A. I. 2017. Interview with C. Pimmer. 21 March 2017.
War Child Holland. 2016. E-Learning Sudan. Amsterdam, 
Author. https://www.warchild.nl/sites/default/files/
bijlagen/node_13537/27-2016/6_pager_-_e-learning_
sudan_may_2016.pdf
Warriner, D. S. 2007. Language learning and the politics of 
belonging: Sudanese women refugees becoming and being ‘American’ . Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 
Vol.  38, No. 4, pp. 343–59.
Waters, T. and LeBlanc, K. 2005. Refugees and education: mass 
public schooling without a nation-state. Comparative Education Review, Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 129–47.
Watkins, P . G., Razee, H. and Richters, J. 2012. ‘I’m telling 
you… the language barrier is the most, the biggest challenge’: barriers to education among Karen refugee women in Australia. Australian Journal of Education, Vol. 56, No. 2, pp. 126–41.
Welt, M. 2015. Integration on Campus FH Lübeck. YouTube 
video, posted by MaroWeltShow, 6 December 2015. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9a690ndvT0g
West, M. 2012. Mobile Learning for Teachers: Global Themes. 
Paris, UNESCO. (UNESCO Working Paper Series on Mobile Learning.) http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002164/216452E.pdfA lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees90Whewell, T. 2016. Syrian refugees missing school in Turkey. 
BBC News, 30 June 2016. http://www.bbc.com/news/
world-europe-36558870
Winthrop, R. and Kirk, J. 2005. Teacher development and 
student well being. Forced Migration Review, Vol. 22, pp. 18–21.
World Bank. 2016. ICT and the Education of Refugees: A 
Stocktaking of Innovative Approaches in the MENA Region. Washington, DC, Author. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/25172
Xavier Project. n.d. Eneza Education. Nairobi, Author. http://
www.xavierproject.org/eneza-education/
Xu, Y. and Maitland, C. F. 2015. Communicating Abroad: A 
Case Study of Za’atari Syrian Refugee Camp. Paper for 2015 Regional Conference of the International Telecommunications Society (ITS), Los Angeles, Calif., 25–28 October 2015. 
Zeus, B. 2011. Exploring barriers to higher education in 
protracted refugee situations: the case of Burmese refugees in Thailand. Journal of Refugee Studies, Vol. 24, 
No. 2, pp. 256–76.AppendixA lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees94Search strategies
The search strategy included three main approaches: (1) 
systematic and selective searches in academic databases, 
(2) selective web searches and (3) interviews. Peer-reviewed 
and journal articles are relevant as they present the most rigorously analysed evidence. In light of the limited number 
of research papers on formal mobile learning and refugee projects, the second approach has been invaluable, as it 
permitted the research team to include project experience not yet reviewed and documented in the form of research 
papers. Interviews allowed the consideration of even more recent and detailed on-the-ground project experiences not 
yet publicized on websites or in project reports, as well as the inclusion of experiences from subject matter experts.
a. Systematic searches in scientific databases: Web of 
Science; ERIC, PsycINFO and MEDLINE(R) (via Ovid)
Systematic and selective searches were carried out in the academic databases Web of Science, PsycINFO, ERIC and 
Google Scholar. To do justice to the interdisciplinary nature of the topic, the Ovid search interface was used to search 
articles from diverse databases including PsycINFO (4 million 
bibliographic records centred on psychology and behavioural 
and social sciences), MEDLINE(R) (23 million biomedicine 
and life science citations) and ERIC (1.5 million educational 
literature records). The Web of Science Core Collection 
was used to access contributions from 18,000 high-impact 
journals. For pragmatic reasons, the search focused on English 
articles. The main searches were carried out between August 
and October 2016. The searches combined search terms 
from three domains including (1) refugee and displacement 
contexts, (2) digital mobile technology and (3) education. One 
example from a Web of Science database search was:
 TS=(refuge* OR "asylum seeke*" OR immigran* OR 
migran* OR "people on the move" OR "displaced perso*" 
OR resettlement OR returnee* OR "stateless perso*") AND 
TS=(educat* OR learn* OR teach* OR lectur* OR traini* OR 
instruct* OR information OR knowled* OR supervi*, mento* 
OR "competence development" OR school* OR Universit* OR college*) AND TS=("mobile technolog*" OR "mobile phon*" 
OR smartphon* OR PDA* OR "tablet PC" OR "feature phon*" OR "cell phon*" or phon*) NOT TS="digital immigran*"
b. Selective searches in Google Scholar (using the above 
search terms)
In addition, Google Scholar was searched using selective search approaches, because this database was estimated 
to cover 100 out of 114 million English-language scholarly documents (Khabsa and Giles, 2014). Importantly, the 
searches in the Google databases did not allow an exhaustive examination. For example, the Google search for refugees 
and ‘mobile learning’ alone resulted in 84,100 hits. In addition to using the above terms, new searches were carried out 
to address terms and categories that emerged from the development of the report. For example, as the role of MOOCs 
in education for refugees became evident, additional searches in which the term MOOC was combined with the above terms 
were carried out.
c. Selective web searches
Additional web search strategies with the above search 
terms were carried out using Google’s search engine. This 
was particularly relevant because the search in the scientific databases revealed much about informal mobile learning, but 
only a few projects with formal or semi-formal learning mobile learning approaches.
d. Back search of papers and online sources
This included projects and studies identified in prior reviews 
and landscape reports.
e. Snowball sampling
This was based on referrals from people, projects and 
programmes working in this area.
f. Other ways of information sources
Leads were followed from conferences and meetings such 
as the mEducation Alliance 2016 and resources such as the 
UNESCO ICT in Education division.
g. Interviews with experts and project managers
Although the review was based mainly on information that 
was publicly available, selective interviews were carried out to gather novel experiences that had not yet been documented 
on project websites or elsewhere.
Inclusion criteria
For a project to be considered in the analysis the following criteria needed to be met:
Projects embracing mobile learning activities: To be 
included, projects needed to be in line with a purposefully broad definition of mobile learning: the use of digital mobile 
technology, such as phones and tablet computers, for learning and teaching, and/or digital technologies that support 
learners’ mobility. For example, although the higher education project Kiron does not specifically rely on mobile technology, 
it supports refugee learners’ educational mobility as they move Appendix95across Europe, or within one country through the different 
stages of their asylum-seeking process. The review also 
considered projects that include but do not focus exclusively 
on mobile technology. For example, the Ideas Box includes tablets but also a much wider range of digital and non-digital resources.
This report also sheds light on informal mobile learning and 
situated problem-solving. Many functions and apps on mobile 
phones can serve as vital informal learning and problem-solving tools during the highly volatile situations refugees encounter during their flight and in camp or resettlement 
contexts. However, the sheer volume of emerging and existing 
apps that target refugees’ broad information demands would 
require a separate report. In this domain the report can thus 
only selectively spotlight a few of the more popular examples. 
In addition, the report also includes initiatives that support 
refugees in developing coding skills, first because most of these are facilitated through mobile devices, and second because they are significant insomuch that they make refugees the designers of future mobile learning and communication 
solutions.
As UNESCO’s definition of mobile learning embraces 
broad educational purposes such as effective education administration and information management, this kind of mobile learning system is also included. Although these systems 
do not enable direct learning and teaching activities, their 
mobile and flexible documentation features serve as a basis for monitoring and planning in highly volatile refugee and crisis contexts. No less importantly, the digital documentation of 
educational attainments can ensure learners’ mobility as they 
progress through different educational stages or geographical areas, meeting a key educational need of refugee learners.
Refugee contexts: This report focuses mainly on mobile 
learning projects and studies to be carried out in refugee 
contexts, involving persons who have been forced to leave 
their country in order to escape war, persecution or natural disaster. This includes studies and projects involving refugees in different stages of mobility, ranging from flight and provisional 
or protracted camp contexts to phases of resettlement and 
integration. However, after initial searches returned only a limited number of papers and projects, some of the arguments have been additionally bolstered with a selective number 
of studies and reports on groups with characteristics similar 
to refugees, i.e. people displaced by emergencies and/or fleeing socio-economic hardships. In this regard, studies from integration and immigration settings, which include but do not 
focus explicitly or exclusively on refugees, were also considered.
Real educational activities on the ground: To be considered, 
a project needed to have moved beyond the stage of conceptualization with at least pilot activities in place. One of the few exceptions are the finalists of the EduApp4Syria 
competition, as these apps were subject to intensive expert screening and field piloting, and the principles and concepts of 
the apps endorsed are of interest to a wider readership.
Scale and innovation: Although the report sought to include as many projects as possible that met the above criteria, the number of existing projects exceeded the scope of the report. 
Therefore, priority was given to larger projects and/or projects 
with innovative and novel approaches.
It is important to state that in light of the many existing and 
emerging initiatives in the field, the broad educational scope 
of the report (covering all levels/fields of education, learning 
and teaching) and the reliance on web-based searches (which 
allow selective and not exhaustive analysis), it is impossible to 
cover all projects, and some interesting initiatives are likely to 
be overlooked.
Interviews
To be included, the interview partner needed to meet at least 
one of the following selection criteria: (a) being an academic 
expert with a publishing record that matched the scope of 
the report; (b) being a specialist with a practice-based track 
record, either with extensive experience, i.e. overseeing 
and working in several projects and initiatives; or intensive experience, i.e. an in-depth involvement in one of the projects examined in this report; or (c) being a refugee who 
has created, worked with or learned from mobile learning 
solutions. However, the dynamic development of the field 
and the limited time frame made it impossible to interview 
all experts in the field. In part, the recruitment was based on chain-sampling (Patton, 1990) and was opportunity-driven, 
e.g. interviews were carried out with experts available during 
Mobile Learning Week 2017. The interviews were conducted 
online via Skype and face-to-face during Mobile Learning 
Week. Interviews were semi-structured involving pre-defined question guides (see section 7.4). The questions were adapted according to the particular background and experience of the 
interviewee. They addressed (1) refugees’ needs, (2) the design 
and context of the respective mobile learning project(s), (3) 
the formal and/or informal mobile learning activities, and 
(4) evidence pointing to associated benefits and constraints. According to established qualitative research standards, the 
questions were discussed flexibly and adapted according to 
the specific context of the interviewee. The discussion of new 
themes that emerged during the interviews was explicitly 
encouraged (Emerald Research Zone, n.d.; Lamnek, 2005). Upon approval from the interviewees, the conversations were 
audiorecorded and notes were taken during the interview. 
After each interview the notes were expanded and analysed.A lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees96Question guide
Refugees’ needs
What are refugees’ educational needs (in the setting of your 
project(s) and in general? What are particular challenges that they face in accessing educational opportunities?
The design and context of the respective mobile learning 
project(s)
Can you describe your mobile learning project? Who were the 
learners and teachers? What were the learning and teaching 
activities and associated goals? In which settings were the 
learning activities carried out? What kind of curriculum was used? What kind of hardware and software and other infrastructure was deployed? Were there any certification mechanisms in place?Evidence pointing to associated benefits and constraints
Have you carried out any kind of systematic analysis of the 
feedback from learners and teachers? If so, how, and what were the results? What were the key challenges in developing and realizing the mobile learning intervention? What were success/influencing factors that impacted your project(s) and the educational outcomes? What makes mobile learning and refugee projects successful? What are other insights or lessons learned?
Further questions
Are you aware of other interesting/successful mobile learning 
and refugee projects? Can you recommend some further experts to us?Appendix97List of interviewees
Interviewee Organization Interviewer* Date
1. Richard Rowe OLE CP 12.12.16
2. Haydee Izaguirre OpenEMIS CP 16.12.16
3. Chris Earney UNHCR Learn Lab CP 20.12.16
4. Moujahed Akil Namaa solutions CP 4.01.17
5. Aline Sara NaTakallam CP 9.01.17
6. Ana Rodriguez and Kate Radford Warchild UG 13.01.17
7. Aida Orgocka BHER UG 11.01.17
8. Negin Dahya University of Washington CP 18.01.17
9. Torben Schmidt Leuphana University Lüneburg CP 18.01.17
10. Felix Seyfarth University St Gallen CP 20.01.17
11. Richard Dent Refugee Futures Initiative CP 20.01.17 
12. Mary Mendenhall Columbia University UG / CP 23.01.17
13.  Barbary Moser-Mercer InZone, University of Geneva CP 24.01.17
14. Olly Parsons GSMA RZG 24.01.17
15. Jacqueline Strecker UNHCR CP 10.02.17
16. Florian Rampelt Kiron Open Higher Education CP 21.02.17
17. Ehab Badwi Kiron (learner) CP 17.02.17
18. Geoff Stead Cambridge University CP 20.03.17
19. Alf Inge Wang Eduapp4Syria, NTNU CP 21.03.17
20. Lucrezia Bisignani Kukua CP 21.03.17
21. David Hollow Jigsaw Consult CP 21.03.17
22. Tim Seal The Open University UK CP 21.03.17
23. Emmanuel Guardiola Cologne Game Lab CP 22.03.17
24. Cindy Bonfini-Hotlosz Jesuit Worldwide Learning CP 22.03.17
*  CP: Christoph Pimmer; RGZ: Ronda Zelezny-Green; UG: Urs GröhbielA lifeline to learning: Leveraging mobile technology to support education for refugees98List of projects and initiatives
1. Alarmphone
2. Antura and the Letters 
3. Ascend 
4. Borderless Higher Education for 
Refugees (BHER) 
5. BrainPOP 
6. CHICAM 
7. CodeDoor 
8. Connect to Learn (CTL)
9. Coursera/US State Department refugee project
10. DigiSchool 
11. EduTrac 
12. E-learning Sudan
13. Feed the Monster 
14. hackyourfuture
15. ICRC/RRCS Rwanda refugee phone project
16. Ideas Box 
17. Instant Network School
18. Integrify
19. InZone interpreter project 
20. InZone MOOC project 21. Jami3ti initiative 
22. Jamiya project
23. Jesuit Commons Higher Education at the Margins
24. Jesuit Worldwide Learning community service learning tracks
25. Jesuit Worldwide Learning teacher training Programme 
26. Kiron 
27. Kmobile Schools 
28. Learn Syria
29. Melbourne refugee peer support training programme 
30. MoLeNET (refugee projects)
31. Nafham 
32. NaTakallam 
33. Nowall 
34. Edraak online teacher training courses
35. Piagge social media storytelling 
project 
36. Raspberry Pi for Learning Initiative 
(Pi4L)37. Ready4Study
38. Refugee Code Week
39. Refugees on Rails
40. Samasource
41. Shupavu291
42. SIMA 
43. SMS Story project 
44. Tablet-computer-based survey 
programme for combatants in 
Burundi
45. Tabshoura 
46. Teachers for Teachers
47. Thaki 
48. TIGER Girls 
49. Udacity’s nanodegree refugee scholarship programme
50. UNESCO–Nokia mobile teacher training project
51. Voices Beyond Walls 
52. Worldreader early grade reading project in Kenya
53. Worldreader e-book reading project in Tanzania 
List of apps and platforms
1. Alfanus 
2. Ankommen app
3. Antura and the Letters app 
4. Apps for Refugees platform 
5. ASCEND SMS system
6. Bureaucrazy
7. Coursera 
8. Duolingo app
9. Edraak 
10. EduTrac 
11. edX MOOC platform
12. E-learning Sudan mathematics game13. Facebook
14. Feed the Monster app
15. Gherbtna app
16. InfoAid app
17. Jami3ti platform
18. KA Lite 
19. Khan Academy 
20. Kmobile Schools app
21. MOIN app 
22. Nafham 
23. Nowall app
24. Open Learning Exchange system 25. OpenEMIS
26. RACHEL Offline
27. Refugee Projects platform
28. Saylor academy platform
29. SIMA app
30. Tabshoura
31. Tarjemly Live app
32. Udacity MOOC platform
33. WhatsApp 
34. Worldreader app
35. YOBIS99Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms  
BHER Borderless Higher Education for Refugees
BYOD Bring your own device
CHICAM Children in Communication about Migration
CTL Connect to Learn
EFA Education for All
EGMA Early Grade Mathematics Assessment
EMIS Education management information system
ERIC Education Resources Information Center
FHNW Fachhochschule Nordwestschweiz (University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Northwestern 
Switzerland)
GESCI Global e-Schools and Communities Initiative
ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
ICT Information and communication technology
ICT4D ICT for Development
IT Information technology
JWL Jesuit Worldwide Learning
KA Khan Academy
MoLeNET Mobile Learning Network
MOOC Massive open online course
n.d. No date
NGO Non-governmental organization
NTNU Norwegian University of Science and Technology
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OER Open educational resources
OLE Open Learning Exchange
Pi4L Raspberry Pi for Learning
PIRLS Progress in International Reading Literacy Study
PISA Programme for International Student Assessment
RACHEL Remote Area Community Hotspot for Education and Learning
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SMS Short Message Service
SPOC Small private online course
TIGER These Inspiring Girls Enjoy Reading
TIMSS Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
UK United Kingdom
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
USA United States of America
USAID United States Agency for International Development
VLE Virtual learning environmentA lifeline to learning
Leveraging technology to support education for refugees
Over 65 million individuals were forcibly displaced worldwide in 2016 due 
to persecution, conflicts, violence or human rights violations, presenting the 
highest levels of displacement on record since the end of the Second World 
War. Among them are nearly 22.5 million refugees (people who fled their 
countries to seek protection elsewhere), over half of whom are under the age 
of 18. The repercussions for education are severe and profound. The Sustainable 
Development Goals will not be achieved by 2030 if refugees and displaced 
populations are left without access to equitable and inclusive quality education and lifelong learning opportunities. In response to this need, individuals and 
organizations are attempting to leverage mobile phones, the most widely 
available technology in refugees’ hands, to enable quick educational responses and sustainable interventions.
This publication examines the evidence base for key assumptions on using 
mobile technology to address individual refugees’ learning challenges, broader 
education system challenges, and challenges to providing refugees with specific levels and types of education. The report presents findings from a review of 
117 relevant papers and reports, and lessons drawn from the implementation of 
52 projects that use mobile learning for refugees and the actual use of 35 digital 
apps or platforms. While acknowledging a limited reach, the report identifies 
effective mobile solutions and organizational strategies that should be scaled up.
9789231 002625
