 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 74  
 
An Applied Data Justice 
Framework : Analysing 
Datafication and 
Marginalised Communities in 
Cities of the Global South  
 
RICHARD HEEKS  & SATYARUPA SHEKHAR  
 
 
2018  
 
 
 
ISBN:  978-1-905469 -88-8 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www. gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/  
 
Educators ’ Guide from : 
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/educators -guide/    
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Datafication, (Urban) Development and Data Justice  ................................  3 
C. Case Background and Methods  ................................ ................................ . 6 
C1. BACKGROUND : DATA INJUSTICE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES  ................................ ..................  7 
D. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 8 
D1.  PROCEDURAL DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ........................  8 
D2.  RIGHTS -BASED DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ....................  11 
D3.  INSTRUMENTAL DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ...................  14 
D4.  STRUCTURAL DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ .......................  15 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ..... 18 
E1. DISTRIBUTIVE DATA JUSTICE  ................................ ................................ ......................  18 
E2. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ..... 19 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  22 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
1 
 An Applied Data Justice Framework : 
Analysing Datafication and Marginalised 
Communities in Cities of the Global South  
 
 
Richard Heeks  
Centre for Development 
Informatics, University of 
Manchester, UK  
 & Satyarupa Shekhar  
Citizen Consumer and Civic 
Action Group , Chennai, 
India  
2018  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Rapid recent growth in the role of data within international development has meant analysis 
of this phenomenon has bee n lagging; particularly, analysis of broader impacts of real -world 
initiatives.  Addressing this gap through a focus on data’s increasing presence in urban 
development, this paper makes two contributions.  First – drawing from the emerging 
literature on “d ata justice” – it presents an explicit, systematic and comprehensive new 
framework that can be used for analysis of datafication.  Second, it applies the framework to 
four initiatives in cities of the global South that capture and visualise new data about 
marginalised communities: residents living in slums and other informal settlements.  
Analysing across procedural, rights, instrumental and structural dimensions, it finds these 
initiatives deliver real incremental gains for their target communities.  But i t is external 
actors and wealthier communities that gain more; thus increasing relative inequality.  
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
Datafication – the presence, use and impact of data in social processes – is a growing 
phenomenon worldwide, including in the domain of international development (Taylor & 
Broeders 2015).  This growth has seen both hopes and concerns for the developmental 
impact of new data streams (Spratt & Baker 2015).  But, because of the novelty of the 
phenomenon, writing has sometimes had to be based on overviews or extrapolations from 
pilot projects or experiences in the global North ( ibid. , Lokanathan 2017).  There have been 
relatively few analyses to date of real -world initiatives, and the field is still assessing 
analytical approaches to use (Sengu pta et al 2017).  
 
This paper thus aims to do two things.  First, to introduce a conceptual framework drawn 
from the sub -field of data justice that can be used for analysis of data initiatives.  Second, to 
utilise that framework to analyse a set of data ini tiatives within the domain of urban 
development; in particular seeking to understand the full breadth of impact of such 
initiatives on those who are already marginalised within the physical city.  
 
There follows next a review of datafication, particularly i n relation to urban development, 
and presentation of the data justice analytical framework.  Then the methods used for this 
paper – study of urban data initiatives in Chennai, Nairobi, Pune and Solo through primary 
and secondary sources – are explained.  F indings and conclusions follow.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
3 
 B. Datafication, (Urban) Development and Data Justice  
 
Data has always been part of international development as it – or at least its processed and 
utilised form, information – is essential and integral to all decisions, including development -
related decisions.  But the advent of digital technologies and their significant diffusion in 
developing countries during the 21st century have led to a step change.  The increasing 
datafication of development can be described in term s of a growing volume, velocity, 
variety and visibility of data (Heeks 2018).  This increasing presence of data within 
development is part -encouraging, part -driven -by greater use of new forms and streams of 
data in decision -making; in turn leading to emerg ent developmental impacts associated with 
this datafication ( ibid. ). 
 
This broader picture is instantiated in the various development domains, including the 
particular focus here: urban development, with the expanding role and importance of data 
recognised  within the New Urban Agenda that is intended to guide future development 
(UN-Habitat 2017).  New forms and flows of data are especially associated with growth of 
the “smart city” agenda in the global South (Shekhar 2016) and with the affordances of 
digita l technologies: mapping cities by remote sensing, gathering environmental and other 
data via ground -based sensors, creation of “data twins” of urban areas such as mobility 
maps created by tracking mobile phone use (Lokanathan et al 2016, Willis 2017).  
 
These initiatives come with much promise around the benefits they will bring to urban 
planning and development; improving its efficiency by enabling decisions and results to 
occur more quickly and/or more cheaply; and improving its effectiveness by enabling b etter 
decisions and results: better -informed, more objective, more transparent, better -able to 
meet citizens’ needs (van Veenstra et al 2014, Samarajiva et al 2015).  But alongside this 
have been concerns about datafication of the city (Townsend 2013, Kitc hin 2014, Taylor & 
Richter 2015, Baud 2016): procedurally that initiatives are not being implemented right; 
instrumentally that the promised results are not being achieved; and critically that there are 
problematic distributive impacts.  Main critical conc erns are that urban datafication is 
associated with growing inequality; especially, in developing countries, with the exclusion or 
adverse incorporation of those already marginalised within the physical city, such as those 
living in slums and other forms o f informal settlement (Donovan 2012, Pfeffer & Verrest 
2016).  
 
Given the extent of urban inequality – 30% of the urban population in developing countries 
lives in slums (UN -Habitat 2016) – and the history of this population being excluded from or 
marginali sed by new initiatives, some development actors have begun what we may call 
pro-equity data initiatives (PEDIs).  Though coming with other labels attached, an essence of 
these activities has been creation of new dataflows and datasets by and/or about and/o r for 
slum communities.  Examples include community wi -fi that enables new dataflows within, 
into and out of slum communities; open data / right -to-information that enables new 
dataflows into slum communities; and community mapping that creates new dataset s about 
slum communities (Chakraborty et al 2015, Willis 2017).  
 
But how should these (and other) data initiatives be understood and evaluated, given recent 
recognition of a lack of evaluative frameworks to analyse datafication and development Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
4 
 (Hagen 2017,  Sengupta et al 2017)?  One approach would follow descriptors used for the 
datafication concerns expressed above: “injustice” (Townsend 2013), “ethical concerns” 
(Kitchin 2014), “ethical challenges” (Taylor & Richter 2015).  This would suggest analysis 
using ideas within the emerging literature on “data justice”: “the specification and pursuit of 
ethical standards for data -related resources, processes and structures”  (Heeks 2017a); a 
small body of work within critical data studies echoing our specific inter ests around equity.  
 
This has been conceptualised from a capabilities perspective (Taylor 2017, Heeks & Renken 
2018) but we wanted to take a broader view of data justice that specifically encompassed 
three things highlighted in recent literature.  First, t he concerns about urban datafication 
expressed earlier: procedural, instrumental, critical.  Second, a specific focus on data and 
data praxis and data rights given the understanding from critical data studies that any social 
injustices may relate more to f orms and flows and use of data than to specifics of the 
technologies that carry and process and display that data (Taylor & Broeders 2015, Neff et al 
2017).  Third, the argument of other critical data studies literature that broader social 
structure must b e incorporated into any analysis because of its role in shaping data -related 
outcomes (Dalton & Thatcher 2014, Kitchin & Lauriault 2018).  
 
The model developed from these principles is summarised in Figure 1 (adapted from Heeks 
2017b, which should be referr ed to for further details of its development) and examines five 
dimensions of data justice:  
 Procedural: fairness in the way in which data is handled.  This handling is understood in 
terms of the information value chain: the steps by which data is transform ed into 
developmental results (see Figure 2).  
 Instrumental: fairness in the results of data being used.  
 Rights -based: adherence to basic data rights such as representation, privacy, access and  
ownership . 
 Structural: the degree to which the interests and po wer in wider society support fair 
outcomes in other forms of data justice.  
 Distributive: an overarching dimension relating to the (in)equality of data -related 
outcomes that can be applied to each of the other dimensions of data justice.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Conceptual Model of Data Jus tice (adapted from Heeks 2017b ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The Information Value C hain (adapted from Heeks 2017b )1 
 
Further explanation of the two models will follow below through their use as analytical 
frameworks for evaluation of four urban PEDIs, following an outline of the initiatives and 
methods used for evidence -gathering.  
 
 
                                                      
1 Knowledge links to all steps of the chain and therefore is not associated with any individual stage: up -, mid - 
or downstream.  RIGHTS -BASED  
DATA JUSTICE  
Data  
- Source  
- Capture  
 
Knowledge  
Learning  
Information  
- Process  
- Output  
Decisions  
 Actions  
 Results  
Upstream  
 Midstream  
 Downstream  
 Instrumental  
Context  
Institutional 
Control  
Structural 
Relations  
Resource 
Control  
Data  
System  
Practice: Information 
Value Chain  
STRUCTURAL  
DATA JUSTICE  
Utility  
 Results  
Data -
fication  
INSTRUMENTAL  
DATA JUSTICE  
 PROCEDURAL 
DATA JUSTICE  
Epistemic 
Control  
Data 
Rights  
DISTRIBUTIVE  
DATA JUSTICE  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
6 
 C. Case Background and Methods  
 
Among the possible types of pro -equity data initiative, we chose those involving community 
mapping, which  aims to counter the relative invisibility of (i.e. lack of data about) 
marginalised communities by gathering, visualising and utilising new data on locations, 
assets and issues within those communities.  Mapping was chosen because it is quite well -
establi shed and widespread as a PEDI in cities of the global South (Patel & Baptist 2012, 
Panek & Sobotova 2015).  While the analysis here speaks to broader trends of datafication, 
this means there is a ready direct literature and constituency of relevance.  
 
The four initiatives chosen for analysis are:  
 Map Kibera (MK): begun in 2009 by two Americans, this used local young people to 
gather data on Kibera, a slum roughly estimated at 250,000 people located in South -
West Nairobi, and then mapped that data.  Via crea tion of social enterprise GroundTruth 
Initiative, expertise from Kibera has subsequently been applied to other slum areas in 
Africa and the Middle East.  
 Our Pune Our Budget (OPOB): begun in 2006 by local NGO, the Centre for Environment 
Education (CEE), thi s sought to bring greater objectivity and fairness into the city’s 
budgeting process, as a foundation for which, it organised a city -wide data -gathering 
and mapping exercise.  
 Solo Kota Kita (SKK): begun in 2010 Kota Kita is an Indonesian NGO based in the c ity of 
Solo (official name, Surakarta).  Its Solo Kota Kita project sought to enable citizen 
participation in the participatory budgeting process initiated by mayor (currently 
Indonesian President) Joko Widodo.  It did this by gathering and mapping data ac ross all 
city neighbourhoods.  Kota Kita has subsequently rolled out its methodology to other 
cities across Asia.  
 Transparent Chennai (TC): begun in 2009, this involved a series of projects to gather and 
map data on issues within the city’s marginalised communities including lack of public 
services, homelessness, and informal livelihoods (specifically of waste -pickers ).  In 2014, 
Transparent Chennai was rolled into a wider initiative, the Transparent Cities Network  – 
housed in local NGO Citizen Consumer and Civic Action Group – that focuses on data and 
the urban poor.  
These were chosen because they were relatively lon g-standing PEDIs2, which – unlike many 
initiatives – moved well beyond pilot stage; because there existed some secondary 
literature for each; and because they operated in cities with substantial slum populations: 
50% of the city population in the case of N airobi (Kovacic & Lundine 2013), 40% in Pune 
(Jobst & Malherbe 2017), at least 8% in Solo (Obermayr 2017), and 28% in Chennai 
(Krishnamurthy & Desouza 2015).  
 
The findings below are drawn from four sources which were combined and then analysed 
through the thematic lens of the data justice model presented above.  First, nine interviews 
                                                      
2 MK, OPOB and TC are ‘targeted’ pro -equity init iatives that specifically sought to reduce marginalisation of 
slum communities; though in OPOB’s case this was seen to require city -wide data.  SKK is an ‘inclusive’ pro -
equity initiative in seeking to ensure those in informal housing were included within a wider pro -equity goal of 
“levelling the playing field” between citizens and government so that citizens could shape urban budgeting 
decisions.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
7 
 with senior figures in the data intermediary organisations (MK,  CEE, SKK, TC ) associated with 
each of the four projects, structured around the concepts of data justice3.  Seco nd, 
evaluation documents from the projects which are reflective, to some degree self -critical, 
and sometimes themselves based on primary fieldwork (e.g. Menon 2013, Padmanabhan et 
al 2013, Rifai et al 2016, Hagen 2017).  Third, independent secondary source s of research 
specifically on these projects, most of which are based on primary fieldwork (e.g. Berdou 
2011, Grillos 2017, Jobst & Malherbe 2017).  Fourth, broader independent sources that 
incorporate analysis of these projects among a number of others (e .g. Donovan 2012, 
Haklay 2013, Shkabatur 2014, Baud 2016).  
 
C1. Background: Data Injustice and its Consequences  
 
Before analysing the cases in terms of data justice, we first outline the rationale behind the 
initiatives: the data injustices and consequence s thereof which obtained prior to the PEDIs 
being undertaken.  
 
The communities studied suffer a range of injustices but of specific attention here was the 
data rights injustice relating to representation: that the physical marginalisation of these 
communit ies was mirrored by a virtual marginalisation within urban datasets.  The 
communities were invisible or poorly visible: not merely that the areas themselves were 
unmapped as locations but that data on the assets, services, voices and livelihoods of citizen  
were absent (iMK1b, iOPOB2, iSKK).  Data had sometimes been gathered – by NGOs and 
academics in Kibera, by government in Chennai and Pune – but it fell short on the five 
“OCARA” measures of data quality: openness, completeness, accuracy, relevance, 
approp riateness of presentation (Heeks 2018).  Data on slums was generally treated as 
proprietary, and was inaccessible to the community or to other organisations (iMK2, iTC1, 
Shekhar & Padmanabhan 2015).  Where it might be accessed, the data covered only part o f 
the settlement, or was many years out -of-date, or was held on paper forms and records 
scattered across many different government departments (iOPOB2, iTC2, Shekhar & 
Padmanabhan 2015).  
 
This marginalisation within the data twin of the city – an inequalit y compared to the better 
representation of more prosperous and formalised settlements (iTC2, Patel & Baptist 2012) 
– underpinned infrastructural and political marginalisation.  The lack and poor quality of 
slum data “ directly results in poor planning and m aintenance of public infrastructure, and 
poor provision of public services ” (Shekhar & Padmanabhan 2015:3); for instance, with lack 
of data on concentrations of population leading new toilets in Chennai to be planned and 
placed where government had availab le, accessible land rather than where they were 
needed (iTC3), or with water points in Kibera poorly maintained due to lack of data on their 
functioning (iMK1b), and with every type of public service – water, sanitation, roads, 
lighting, health, education,  policing, etc – provided to a very limited degree or poorly 
provided or simply not provided at all, in part due to lack of data about locations, needs, 
existing infrastructure, etc (iMK1a, iOPOB1, iSKK, iTC3).  
 
                                                      
3 These will be referred to below as iMK1a, iMK1b, iMK2, iOPOB1, iOPOB2, iSKK, iTC1, iTC2 and iTC3.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
8 
 Lack of data also marginalised communities p olitically, ceding and skewing power within 
decision -making and service provision to political elites and their interests.  With data on 
neither what the community already had nor on what it needed, there was no basis for 
engagement with urban planning dec isions, nor a basis to challenge the decisions already 
being made, leading to political exclusion (iOPOB2, iTC2).  Those who are data -less in the 
city – the slum dwellers, the homeless, the waste pickers – could be treated much worse 
than other citizens – subject to police raids or evictions – with few consequences for those 
guiding these actions (iTC2, iTC3, Otiso 2002, Padmanabhan et al 2013).  Likewise there was 
a lack of political accountability around provision of public services given the absence of 
data on provision decisions or on provision itself (iTC1, Menon 2013, Feruglio & Rifai 2017).  
 
 
D. Findings  
 
As per the model shown in Figure 1, the findings here will be presented in terms of each of 
the dimensions of data justice in turn, with distributiv e data justice considered in the final 
section.  
 
D1. Procedural Data Justice  
 
Because of the sampling or transect approaches used, only a minority of community 
members could be direct respondents within the four projects.  In only one case – Map 
Kibera – were community members used to capture data (iMK1b).  In other cases, data 
capture was undertaken by students (in Solo and Pune and one Chennai project) or by NGO 
or local government staff in the other Chennai projects (iOPOB2, iSKK, iTC1, iTC2, iTC3).  The  
young people employed from Kibera were able to upload the data captured on their GPS 
devices but in this and in all other cases, the “midstream” (see Figure 2) activities of 
recording data onto a geographic information system, processing it, and visualisi ng – for 
example printing out as a paper -based map – were generally undertaken by voluntary or 
paid professionals from outside the community (iMK2, iOPOB2, iSKK, iTC1, Hagen 2011).  
 
The data produced by PEDIs is not always used: sometimes data is gathered without 
downstream information value chain processes existing that could feed that data into 
decisions and actions (iMK1b, Shkabatur 2014, Hagen 2017); sometimes those processes 
exist but they are not accessible, such as government decisions about urban pl anning or 
service delivery or evictions for which data from the community is not wanted, or for which 
officials are unaware of data being available (iOPOB1, iSKK).  It may also be used only 
indirectly: as part of general advocacy, such as pressure on gover nment by NGOs or local 
media for slum improvements (iOPOB2, iSKK, iTC1).  
 
Where data was directly used, those involved in downstream processes might either be 
within or outside the community.  For the latter, impact was understood mainly in terms of 
visibi lity and results, discussed below.  Regarding the former then, for the Pune and 
Transparent Chennai initiatives, it was not the intention that data would be used by the 
community.  For Map Kibera, this was an aspiration but one that was not realised (iMK1a ).  
In all these cases, then, any tracked use of community data was by organisations outside the Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
9 
 community.  In Solo, data was fed back to communities in the form of a “mini -atlas” (see 
Figure 3; a translation of the actual map provided in Bahasa Indonesia ).  This was present in 
community meetings held as part of the overall process of participatory budgeting in the 
city.  However, the minority of informal settlements and poorer residents in each 
neighbourhood plus time, confidence, literacy and other barri ers to participation of the poor 
meant any use of the data for prioritisation decisions was dominated by richer residents 
(iSKK, Grillos 2017).  And these meetings were in any case only the first in a chain of budget 
decisions that were taken outside the c ommunity.  
 
In general then, although all of these were intended as pro -equity data initiatives that would 
counteract the marginalisation of informal settlements, they were somewhat “extractive” in 
utilising some community residents as data sources but largely excluding them from all 
other information value chain processes.  Exclusion from up -and midstream processes 
tended to be on instrumental grounds that they lacked skills or motivation and/or that 
mapping had to meet a short time -scale.  Exclusion fr om downstream processes tended to 
be for more systemic or political reasons, such as an absence of mechanisms for involving 
citizens in service provision or urban development decisions.  Exceptions only occurred 
through deliberate efforts of data intermedi ary organisations; and took quite some effort to 
achieve.  
 
It would be normal to decry this limited usage and to seek prioritisation of the 180o 
approach that extracts data from communities but then feeds it back into those 
communities so that residents an d community -based organisations (CBOs) can improve 
their decision -making (Sanchez et al 2013).  Of course this has merit but Berdou (2011) 
observes that such prioritisation may be an external imposition.  Kiberans themselves 
prioritised the downstream use of their data not by the community, which may already 
know itself to some extent, but by outside agencies which do not know the community; 
believing this was the best way to bring in what they wanted, which was money – via visitors 
or donor funding or even  business investment.  
 
Nor should one ignore the procedural benefits for communities and their members.  Indeed, 
one argument has been that these benefits have tended to be relatively ignored or 
downplayed compared to the instrumental impact of community d ata projects (iMK1b, 
Shkabatur 2014).  Even where not directly used for decisions and actions, data has value if 
fed back into the community e.g. via posters displayed at meetings or on public buildings 
(Patel & Baptist 2012, Hagen 2017, Jobst & Malherbe 2 017).  There was an interpretive 
value: giving residents a feeling of pride and of greater legitimacy as citizens.  And there was 
an epistemic value: making residents aware of issues that need addressing, and giving them 
knowledge of local services they mi ght previously have been unaware of e.g. the nearby 
presence of a school, clinic, water point, toilet, etc.  
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
10 
  
 
Figure 3: Example Mini -Atlas from Solo Kota Kita (SKK 2010)  
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
11 
 This broad but shallow impact of data capture and dissemination ran alongside repo rts of 
deeper but much narrower impacts on those who were gathering the data. They gained 
human capital in the form of technical skills and confidence and greater knowledge of the 
community, and social capital – both quantum of connections and qualitative gains of 
greater trust – in the form of a network of contacts in the community, intermediary 
organisation and more widely (iMK1b, iTC1, Berdou 2011).  But, of course, only in the case 
of Map Kibera were these gains for community members, and the social cap ital then only 
arose due to deliberate efforts to send the Kiberan mappers to academic conferences, tech 
workshops and so forth (Hagen 2017).  
 
There were other process gains but they always lay outside the community:  
higher -level technical skills develope d by the data professionals involved in midstream 
activities (iMK2, Haklay 2013), and a combination of human and social capital developed by 
those within the intermediary organisation involved in using the data for advocacy purposes 
and in encouraging data -utilising activities by government such as budgeting or other urban 
planning decisions (iMK1a,  iSKK, iTC1).  While these external stakeholders continued their 
relation with the informal settlements, these capital accumulations might be applied on 
behalf o f the community.  So, also, for the interpretive impact of data on external 
stakeholders.  This was most often expressed as the changed worldview or “slum imaginary” 
of government officials; from perceiving Solo residents as passive and ignorant to seeing 
them as active and knowledgeable (iSKK); from seeing Chennai slums as illegitimate to 
accepting if not ownership rights than at least rights to basic services (iTC1); from seeing 
Kibera as asset -poor to asset -richer (iMK1b)4. 
 
D2. Rights -Based Data Justice  
 
Data rights – particularly the right to be fairly represented in datasets and the right to hold 
some aspects private; but also rights of data access and ownership – were most often 
discussed in terms of who and what was visible, and to whom.  
 
Informal se ttlements have been partly - sometimes wholly -invisible within the city; denying 
them right of representation.  All of the PEDIs render these settlements more visible in 
some way, mapping or otherwise recording their locations, boundaries, buildings, roads,  
paths; their assets: e.g. clinics, water points, public toilets, schools, businesses, markets, 
religious buildings, community offices, lighting; and their issues: e.g. health problems, crime 
hotspots, levels of poverty (iMK1b, iOPOB1, iSKK, iTC1, iTC2, iT C3).  An illustrative 
comparison can be made, for instance, between Kibera’s appearance on Google Maps and 
on OpenStreetMap; the latter used to record some of Map Kibera’s data (see Figure 4).  
 
                                                      
4 Hagen (2017) cites the example of the District Education Officer expecting there to be around 100 schools in 
Kibera where the data mapped from the community showed her that there were more than 330.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
12 
  
 
 
 
Figure 4: Visible Slums: Google Street Map (top) vs. OpenStreetMap (bottom) views of 
Kibera  
 
Right of access to these digital representations of the community was skewed.  Although 
growing over time, absence or high cost of mobile let alone fixed -line internet was notable 
in the communities.  As a result, they had to access data in paper -based form; which is more 
limited in utility (iMK2, iSKK).  For external stakeholders, digital access was much easier.  
 
This external visibility – an exercised right to more accurat e representation – brought with it 
various perceived values.  As noted above, there were changed perceptions of slums, and 
some resident felt this gave them some type of legitimacy and would offer them protection, 
for example from eviction (Padmanabhan et al 2013, Hagen 2017).  This wider visibility even 
impacted some government officials where they felt that open availability of data via the 
web might attract national or even international attention to their actions (Kovacic & 
Lundine 2013).  And, as discu ssed in the next section, there was a perceived instrumental 
value: the more complete, accurate and objective data now available was seen as the basis 
to replace or to challenge past decision -making processes that were variously regarded as 
non-existent an d/or of poor quality and/or driven by the politics of external stakeholder 
interests (iMK1b, iOPOB2,  iSKK, iTC2).  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
13 
  
But this external visibility draws in Scott’s (1998) notion of legibility: the process by which 
states simplify and standardise data about their citizens in order to control them.  Legibility 
disrupts local control over data and knowledge, undermining the power and the value of 
local understandings within slums (Donovan 2012, Sanchez et al 2013).  When data is owned 
and held within the local community, there is local control; no doubt skewed and imperfect 
but localised nonetheless.  As data becomes more widely circulated – up to the point where 
web -based digital forms are available to anyone, anywhere with internet connectivity – that 
local co ntrol is lost.  These slum areas – all of which now exist virtually in some form of web -
based map – are now legible not just to the state but to local and international NGOs, donor 
agencies, media organisations, academics (iMK1b, iSKK); all of whom can kno w the slum to 
some extent and make decisions and actions using data about the slum without the 
permission or even the knowledge of anyone living there.  The right to be represented can 
thus mean that the right to own and control is ceded to these external agents and to their 
particular interests and agendas, benevolent or otherwise.  
 
This loss of control and histories of data extraction to the benefit of others but not the 
community have led to resistance to data capture; with rights to privacy being assert ed.  
Residents in Kibera were often antagonistic to data being captured by video after years of 
NGOs, movie -makers, tourists, media organisations coming to the area, and making it visible 
to external audiences for their own rather than the residents’ advan tage (Hagen 2011, 
Benequista 2015).  Some businesses – schools, pharmacies – in Kibera did not wish to be 
mapped, fearing their visibility to the state might lead to closure if their location became 
known and their informal status or activities (e.g. sales  of stolen drugs) were then 
discovered (Berdou 2011).  Particular settlements in Chennai refused to participate in data -
gathering as they believed drawing attention to their existence and informal status – being 
under the “gaze of the state” – would increa se the likelihood of eviction (iTC1).  Transparent 
Chennai itself had concerns about this – for example, capturing data on issues facing 
informal waste -pickers in the city but not their location or legal status, in order to protect 
them from state action ( iTC3).  If given a choice (which many were not) most slum dwellers 
had expressed primacy of their right of representation: to be incorporated into urban 
datasets.  But for some this was seen to be in tension with their right to privacy, and for a 
few who w ished to fly under the state’s radar the latter was dominant.  
 
While varying across projects, local residents could sometimes shape the balance between 
rights of representation and privacy, making an input to determination of what data should 
be captured a nd, hence conversely, what remained invisible.  More broadly, there should be 
recognition of who and what remain invisible, without a realised right to representation.  
Transient populations (e.g. labourers or street sellers who come daily into the city to  make a 
living but then leave) , the homeless5 and in some cases those without legal citizenship were 
excluded from data gathering and hence from representation (Feruglio & Rifai 2017).  
Qualitative data was lost: what is captured is simplified and deracina ted, stripping away the 
local meanings and histories and relations and all other aspects of local knowledge into 
which data is always embedded, leaving knowledge -less data that is mobile and readily 
inserted into external contexts and processes (Hagen 2011 ). 
                                                      
5 Save one Transparent Chennai project specifically mapping hom elessness (iTC1).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
14 
  
If we look at urban decisions, then data can be provided about four elements: background, 
priorities, process and results.  Background data – location, assets, etc – about slum 
communities was universally provided.  The needs and priorities of those co mmunities were 
sometimes made visible and sometimes not.  But other aspects often stayed invisible with 
community members being granted no right to access: the process by which decisions were 
made e.g. by government officials; the final decisions; and the extent of implementation of 
those decisions.  As a result, community members were unable to either participate in or 
monitor the decisions being made about them unless the data intermediary organisations 
undertook specific actions to counteract this (iTC2,  Menon 2013, Feruglio & Rifai 2017).  
 
Finally, we observed what may be called “spotlight and shadow”: by rendering some issues 
more visible, others can be rendered relatively more invisible.  This was most notable in the 
Transparent Chennai case where TC i tself and other groups had collected and published 
data about the resettlement tenement blocks into which some slum residents had been 
moved following eviction.  They saw some limited improvements in those blocks but that 
this data activity “ would also leg itimise or validate these tenements and the approach of the 
government to evict slum dwellers and resettle them in far -flung, poor quality tenements”  
(iTC1).  By highlighting the tenements, data -gathering was seen to adumbrate the eviction 
process and to e ncourage an increased rate of tenement building and eviction in the city: 
representation of one group and issue thus ‘unrepresenting’ another group and issue.  As a 
result, TC had stopped gathering this type of data.  
 
D3. Instrumental Data Justice  
 
The evi dence available is of relatively few results arising from direct decisions and actions by 
community residents and community -based organisations.  These results likely exist – 
residents using a school or clinic they were previously unaware of; residents att ending a 
community meeting having seen a map of issues – but they were not captured.  This reflects 
the more general point noted above.  Users of the open data twin of communities – 
whether on a public poster or loaded onto a web site – and any resulting a ctions within the 
community are untraceable unless they contact or otherwise come to the attention of data 
intermediaries (Hagen 2017).  
 
In all four cases, government was a downstream presence.  Systematic tracking of the value 
chain through to results see med, unfortunately, to be rather rare; let alone independent 
verification.  Evidence was thus based more on anecdotes and claims than one would have 
wished, and more on decisions such as plans than on implemented actions:  
 Gathered data – in the form of com munity “mini -atlases” – was fed into community 
decision making to set priorities for spending of devolved budgets in Solo. The actual use 
of the data as information for prioritisation appears to have been somewhat limited 
(iSKK).  Rifai et al (2016:63) des cribe this process as “challenging”, in part because it is 
management committees that then make final decisions on which projects will be 
funded.  While the end result is community development projects, the link to data is 
unclear, and analysis shows spend ing to flow disproportionately to the least -poor areas 
(Grillos 2017).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
15 
  Community data was used in Pune as the basis to set an objective, needs -based budget 
that took account of the prevalence of poverty and inadequate housing across the city.  
Unfortunatel y that budget was then “unset” by local politicians (iOPOB1).  Slum areas 
did see some investment but there was a skew towards middle -class issues (e.g. road 
building/improvement) and areas: 40% of Pune’s population lives in slums but only 10% 
of the budge t was allocated for slum improvement (Menon 2013).  
 Data from Map Kibera was used to improve government resource flows into Kibera 
schools, including involvement of informal school teachers in government -run activities 
such as a teachers’ retreat (Hagen 201 7).  But the resource flow was, as expected, 
mainly to the 25% of schools that were government -run, while the extent and 
sustainability of wider results was unclear.  
 Transparent Chennai engaged more with government from the start of the project but 
the rep orted outcomes were rather circumscribed: the city built 15 homeless shelters 
not the 75 that the data had shown to be required (iTC1), or laid on a ceremony to 
present a few waste -pickers with entry cards to the local waste site, but not the ID cards 
they  had been seeking (iTC2).  
 
Other uses were also limited, and examples only given for Kibera: of international 
development agencies and NGOs using the data for improved planning of education 
resource flows, or for siting of water and sanitation facilities (iMK1b, Hagen 2017).  These 
and the government usage descriptions highlight an issue raised by interviewees: that the 
upstream activity of data gathering and processing and visualisation is fairly quick, easy and 
“clean” in terms of local politics; but ens uring downstream use of the data let alone actual 
results is much more difficult, time -consuming, costly and “dirty” (iMK1a, iSKK, iTC1).  Data 
intermediary organisations must identify potential users; build links and trust with them 
over time, seeking to persuade them of the value of new data; work alongside them during 
often -protracted and politicised sequences and iterations of decision making; and then not 
merely monitor results but have the power to act if implementation falls short of plans 
(iSKK, iTC 1, iTC2, Hagen 2011).  
 
D4. Structural Data Justice  
 
There is evidence of some level of structural determinism in the case studies: of these pro -
equity initiatives to still reflect structural inequalities, and for data to flow along the fault -
lines of power  in society.  
 
A consistent theme across all initiatives was that operation of the full information value 
chain depended on whether or not the data had utility for powerful local actors; particularly 
those in local government.  In Solo, the mini -atlases bec ame an officially -mandated part of 
participatory budgeting because Mayor Widodo wanted his urban development innovations 
to work (iSKK, Bunnell et al 2013).  By contrast, government officials in Pune were resistant 
to the participatory budgeting process, m aking it much harder for new data to be utilised 
(iOPOB1, Jobst & Malherbe 2017).  
 
In relation to institutional forces, formal control of urban development decision processes 
rested with external agencies; particularly local government.  Hence, it was thei r perception 
of the utility of that data which determined whether or not it would be used, in what Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
16 
 manner and to what end.  Data also flowed according to the topography of trust in the city.  
Notwithstanding examples of government officials changing their view of the assets and 
issues in slum areas, they still tended to mistrust those communities (iSKK, iTC3).  At best, 
substantial investment in advocacy and “bridge -building” activities by the data 
intermediaries was required to enable those officials to us e the data provided; but at worst, 
even this did not stop officials from devaluing data about the community and being 
reluctant to use it.  
 
All four initiatives were funded to a significant degree by international donors. That control 
of resources meant th e initiatives were shaped by the agenda of those donors, which were 
for highly -visible, short -term results (iMK2, iTC1, Hagen 2017).  This meant activity in all 
projects was a right -skewed distribution curve with rapid early growth but then tailing off to 
much lower levels that struggled to sustain (iMK2, iTC1).  And it meant an upstream —
downstream disconnect: donors would pay for production of data artefacts, especially 
physical and digital maps, but were much less interested in paying for the longer -term,  less-
visible activity of getting that data used to change urban decisions; in particular, not funding 
use of data by communities themselves (iMK1b, iOPOB2).  
 
Conversely, the lack of resources among community members – mainly their financial 
poverty but al so lack of knowledge and skills – shaped their engagement with the PEDIs.  For 
many it meant non -engagement because of the opportunity cost that time invested in the 
project was time lost from earning a livelihood.  So people: did not respond to requests f or 
data, did not join in mapping of their community, did not engage in community use of data 
(Grillos 2017, Hagen 2017, Jobst & Malherbe 2017).  And where they did engage, they 
brought an instrumental rather altruistic agenda; thus Map Kibera mappers came forward 
because the work was paid and even volunteer mappers were focused on the skill - and job 
opportunity -developments the work could offer (iMK1b, Berdou 2011, Lundine et al 2012).  
 
Structural relations were most often understood in terms of the relatio n between state and 
citizens.  For Map Kibera, the state’s monopoly of legitimate violence had shaped data use.  
They avoided “provocative” uses of data that might antagonise state actors and lead to 
“vengeance” (iMK1b).  For example, they did not gather o r use data relating to housing 
demolitions and evictions.  They saw this would potentially lead to protests that would be 
violently suppressed by the authorities and – reflecting state control over NGOs – lead to 
Map Kibera Trust being shut down.  For Tran sparent Chennai, the lack of accountability of 
state institutions to citizens shaped data use.  As an example, the local Slum Clearance 
Board and Water Corporation had no elected representatives, no public hearings, no open 
reporting policies (iTC1, iTC2).   As a result, there were no incentives for them to change their 
practices and make use of new streams of community data.  
 
Finally, in terms of epistemics, the strength of smart -city discourse shapes outcomes.  With 
its emphasis on data and technology, it drives the idea among funders and other 
stakeholders that an upstream focus will be sufficient; that the addition of digital 
technologies into urban processes is enough to deliver urban development (iMK1b, Shekhar 
2016).  This makes it more difficult to en gage funds and actors in the more difficult aspects 
of downstream processes and socio -political factors.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
17 
 On the “input” side, then, there was evidence of structural determinism but looking at the 
“output” side this was not quite a story of full path depen dency.  No social structure is 
stable and, while there was substantial reproduction of the structures of power, datafication 
had enabled some incremental changes to the architecture of urban development, as 
discussed next.  
 
Regarding utility, there are alw ays competing agendas and interests in any urban 
development setting.  The new data streams from the PEDIs assist those looking to make 
more open and/or more objective decisions6.  Interests in openness were rarely found: it 
applied only and to only some d egree to the mayoralty of Joko Widodo in Solo (Bunnell et al 
2013).  There were more interests in objectivity: an occasional presence in local government 
in Pune and Chennai; more strongly felt by external development agencies such as UNICEF 
and GOAL worki ng with Map Kibera (iMK1b, iOPOB1, iTC2, Hagen 2017).  And data itself – 
via its advocacy use by data intermediary organisations, local NGOs and local media and/or 
via concerns that urban decisions were visible to a wider world – could modify the perceived  
interests of decision -makers, nudging them in a few cases and temporarily towards greater 
concern for slum residents (iSKK, iTC1, Kovacic & Lundine 2013).  
 
Institutional change was minor: in formal terms, the only regulatory change was the Solo 
mini -atlas  incorporation; there were no examples of legal recognition of rights to land or 
even occupancy.  In informal terms, there was some trust -building but less between citizens 
and government direct than between some community members and the data intermediary  
organisation; and then between the intermediary and some government officials.  
Structurally, too, insertion of the data intermediary into the landscape was the most notable 
feature – acting as that trust -building bridge, translating epistemes and logics,  to some 
degree equalising the power inequalities between citizens and outside agencies (iMK1b, 
iTC3, Song 2016).  But these intermediating relations were contingent: broken off or 
downgraded, for example, when new government officials came into office (iO POB1, iTC3).  
And they were bounded.  There were “no -go” areas that were deemed too politically -
sensitive, for example if touching on corruption (iTC1, Swain  2012).  They could have been 
the basis for holding state and other actors to account except, as no ted, data on actions and 
results – on the extent to which new infrastructure, services and resources were being 
delivered into the slums – was not being gathered (iTC2, Menon 2013, Feruglio & Rifai 
2017).  
 
Epistemic change was also bounded.  Communities to  some extent, and external actors to a 
greater extent, had better knowledge of these informal settlements.  We noted evidence of 
“slum imaginaries” of some of those external actors changing to a more positive view.  But 
negative images persisted, at least among some local government officials (iTC3, Menon 
2013).  
 
Lastly, the key resource change is the availability of data.  There were barriers to this flowing 
to slum residents; having to be converted to a less -valuable analogue (i.e. paper -based) 
form due t o lack of access to digital technologies within slums.  Meanwhile, being open and 
                                                      
6 Data is never completely open or neutral or objective, but it is the perception that PEDI data is more open 
and more objective than previous data that matters here.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
18 
 digital, it flowed more readily to others outside the community.  And as a usable resource, it 
favoured those with the other resources – skills, knowledge, time, confidence, money – 
necessary to make the value chain operate; resources which the marginalised community 
lacked.  The impact of that use could benefit the community: the data intermediaries 
empowered to better advocacy on behalf of communities; the international NGOs  
empowered to planning better interventions.  But control and empowerment still resided 
outside the community.  In particular, it is the data intermediary organisations that are 
empowered – interrogating openness, one finds that it is often sub -sets or sum maries or 
visualisations of data that are being circulated.  Control over the foundational dataset 
including ownership and rights to update typically rests with the data intermediaries.  
 
 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  
 
E1. Distributive Data Justice  
 
Distributive data justice – the concern for who gets what as a result of data systems – is a 
lens applied across the other dimensions (see Figure 1).  It has particular relevance here 
given the foundational concern about marginalisation, and the injustices  of data -based 
inequality suffered by the slum communities: their location, assets, issues are less visible 
than those of more affluent areas and residents, with a knock -on to inequality of 
infrastructure, service provision and political role.  
 
Procedurall y, the overall picture could be seen as a pyramid.  At the base, the majority of 
community members are not involved in the data -information -decision -action processes of 
the information value chain.  Above them, the largest number of beneficiaries are withi n the 
community but gain only the interpretive value of data; the mappers who capture data are 
far fewer but gain more; the midstream professionals are fewer still but gain greater 
capabilities; and the intermediary organisations benefit most of all.  
 
A similar picture can be seen in terms of visibility.  The most marginalised – those without 
homes, those without identification, those residing on the physical margins who come in to 
the city to make their living – are rarely made visible by these data initia tives.  Conversely, 
data that might truly challenge political elites e.g. enabling them to be held to account, 
remained largely invisible.  The communities which are made visible reap some benefit 
directly but they lose control of their representation; bec oming legible to others who can 
make use of the community’s data twin for their own purposes.  From this, we can see the 
ambivalence of legibility.  Slums must be legible to government, NGOs, development 
agencies, etc if they are to benefit from the resour ces, services, support, etc that these 
external organisations offer.  But that same legibility exposes slum residents to any other 
agendas these organisations may hold; agendas that may be orthogonal to slum interests or 
even counter to those interests: ex tractive, persecutory or predatory.  Even if direct 
evidence of the latter was limited, the fear of it led some data intermediaries to avoid 
gathering certain types of data, and led some groups to prioritise their right to privacy and 
either resist or refu se to engage with data gathering.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
19 
 External agendas have served the slums: these data initiatives bring better -planned and 
more resources and services.  But alongside the glass half -full is a glass half -empty.  These 
absolute improvements are always less t han intended or needed, and sometimes merely 
symbolic or temporary.  Marginalised groups find some greater voice and place in urban 
decision making than previously thanks to these data initiatives.  But, particularly in city -
wide initiatives as in Pune and  Solo, relative inequality still grows as more formalised areas 
and wealthier residents retain a stronger voice and benefit more.  
 
This overall picture is both explained by and reflected in the structural data justice evidence.  
Path dependency is the main  narrative: the wider structural inequalities of power -interest 
significantly shape the data systems and operations of the information value chain.  In turn, 
the value chain largely reproduces that wider configuration and constrains pro -equity 
aspirations.   This is not a completely static picture: the value chain does reshape – subtly, 
incrementally – the structural determinants of power and utility.  There is an incremental 
empowerment in terms of new data access, external perceptions of self -interest and of 
slums and their residents, and the landscape of organisations and trust.  But there is no 
evidence of a wider transformation of the substrates of urban inequality, with communities 
potentially more dependent on external forces as a result of their heigh tened legibility.  
 
E2. Conclusions and Recommendations  
 
Datafication is a key trend within international development; with effects seen in every 
development sector and effects growing every day.  Yet analysis of real -world experiences 
and their breadth of impact has to date been limited; in part due to a lack of analytical 
frameworks.  
 
This paper therefore makes two significant contributions.  First, it exposes a full picture of 
the impact of one type of pro -equity data initiative – community mapping – on those who 
are marginalised within the city.  New data flows do have an impact but disproportionately 
serve those with the motivation and power to use that data.  Results are certainly beneficial 
for slum communities and other marginalised citizens, and thes e initiatives can be justified 
on that basis.  However, though there can be no exact calibration from qualitative research, 
it is likely that these pro -equity initiatives actually increase relative inequalities.  Ordinary 
community members have seen some b enefits but external actors who find the data to 
match their agenda and capabilities, benefit more.  It is the latter who are more empowered 
to access, use and control the new data.  
 
Second, and in order to perform this evaluation, the paper presents and d emonstrates an 
explicit, systematic and comprehensive framework for the analysis of data systems and 
initiatives.  The framework is data -based: acknowledging the important growth in both 
reality and discourse around datafication by placing data at the hear t of the model.  But it 
simultaneously decentres data and digital technology by guiding attention to wider 
processes, impacts and structures.  There was some overlap in the dimensions used; with 
the rights discussion particularly touching on procedural, in strumental and structural issues.  
However, in general the perspectives were additive; offering new insights and particularly 
substantiating the need to incorporate and understand context – rights, structures, interests 
– in order to fully understand the i mplications of datafication.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
20 
  
The framework was applied here to analyse just one type of data initiative.  It should be 
equally applicable to all types of datafication – urban and otherwise – but that application 
must form part of a future research agenda.   Another part will be action research; working 
with data intermediary and other organisations in using the framework to guide design and 
implementation of data initiatives.  In advance of that, one can – building from Fox (2015) – 
identify three approache s to pro -equity data initiatives: technical, social and critical.  
 
A technical approach focuses just on the digital data and technology, and the findings here 
show this to be too limited a view that falls short both in terms of conceptualisation and 
impact .  A social approach focuses on achievement of development results.  Findings here 
suggest such an approach should recognise the procedural benefits that can emerge 
alongside instrumental results.  And they suggest that such projects need a clear theory of  
change, with the information value chain providing the basis for that.  Project design can 
either look for or seek to create a functioning information value chain; one that has utility as 
its driver and the necessary resources present as enablers.  
 
A critical approach would encompass the wider context of rights, power and interests.  The 
findings suggest value in modesty of expectations for what can be achieved through pro -
equity data initiatives; accepting incremental rather than transformational outc omes; 
accepting absolute improvements in informal settlements, even if broader inequalities may 
widen.  They highlight the importance of identifying tensions and disjunctures within the 
context: seeking out NGOs that see an advantage over others within the  competitive 
funding environment if they make use of new or more -objective data; looking for newly -
appointed mayors or urban commissioners or development agency directors who bring a 
new agenda that new or more -objective data could be seen to assist.  And they highlight the 
important structural role performed by data intermediary organisations: as channels 
through which citizens can influence the balance of representation/privacy and the nature 
of data ownership and access; as important determinants of the constitution and 
distributive benefits of information value chains.  
 
More generally, the findings support the value of imbuing data projects with the values of 
data justice; ensuring their design and implementation follow principles of procedural, 
rights -based, instrumental, structural and distributive justice.  Such principles may be found, 
for example, in the “Data -Justice -for-Development Manifesto”  (see Box 1; Heeks 2017b).  
These can be a guiding framework, particularly for data intermediary organisatio ns given 
they are focal nodes for emancipatory action.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
21 
  
Box 1. A Data -Justice -for-Development Manifesto  
 
 
 
1. Demand just and legal uses of development data.  
2. Demand data consent of citizens that is truly informed.  
3. Build upstream and downstream data -related  capabilities among those who lack them 
in developing countries.  
4. Promote rights of data access, data privacy, data ownership and data representation.  
5. Promote data system outcomes that address international development goals and 
priorities; including the goals and priorities of data subjects.  
6. Support “small data” uses by individuals and communities in developing countries.  
7. Advocate sustainable use of data and data systems.  
8. Create a social movement for the “data subalterns” of the global South.  
9. Stimulate an  alternative discourse around data -intensive development that places 
issues of justice at its heart.  
10. Develop new organisational forms such as data -intensive development cooperatives.  
11. Lobby for new data justice -based laws and policies in developing countrie s (including 
action on data monopolies).  
12. Open up, challenge and provide alternatives to the data -related technical structures 
(code, algorithms, standards, etc) that increasingly control international development.  
 
 
  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
22 
 References  
 
Baud,  I. (2016).  Digitisat ion and participation  in urban  governance.  In Local  Governance,  
Economic  Development  and Institutions , G.M.  Gomez  & P. Knorringa  (eds),  Palgrave  
Macmillan,  Basingstoke,  UK, 86-97. 
 
Benequista,  N. (2015).  Journalism  from  the ‘Silicon  Savannah’.  Stability , 4(1),  1-16. 
 
Berdou,  E. (2011)  Mediating  Voices  and Communicating  Realities . IDS, Brighton,  UK. 
 
Bunnell,  T., Miller,  M.A.,  Phelps,  N.A.  & Taylor,  J. (2013).  Urban  development  in a 
decentralized  Indonesia.  Pacific  Affairs , 86(4),  857-876.  
  
Chakraborty,  A., Wilson,  B., Sarraf,  S. & Jana,  A. (2015).  Open  data  for informal  settlements.  
Journal  of Urban  Management , 4(2),  74-91. 
 
Dalton,  C. & Thatcher,  J. (2014).  What  does  a critical  data  studies  look  like, and why do we 
care?  Society  + Space , 29. 
 
Donovan,  K. (2012).  Seeing  like a slum.  Georgetown  Journal  of International  Affairs , 
Winter/Spring,  97-104.  
 
Feruglio,  F. & Rifai,  A. (2017).  Participatory  Budgeting  in Indonesia . Making  All Voices  Count.  
 
Fox, J.A. (2015).  Social  accountability.  World  Development , 72, 346-361.  
 
Grillos,  T. (2017).  Participatory  budgeting  and the poor.  World  Development , 96, 343-358.  
 
Hagen,  E. (2011).  Mapping  change.  Innovations , 6(1),  69-94. 
 
Hagen,  E. (2017).  Open  Mapping  from  the Ground  Up. Making  All Voices  Count.  
 
Haklay,  M. (2013).  Neogeography  and the delusion  of democratisation.  Environment  and 
Planning  A, 45(1),  55-69. 
 
Heeks,  R. (2017a).  Data  justice,  presentation  at IFIP WG9.4  conference  ICTs for Promoting  
Social  Harmony , Yogyakarta,  Indonesia,  22-24 May.  
 
Heeks,  R. (201 7b). A Structural  Model  and Manifesto  for Data  Justice  for International  
Development , GDI Development  Informatics  Working  Paper  no.69 . University  of 
Manchester,  UK. 
 
Heeks,  R. (2018).  Information  and Communication  Technology  for Development . Routledge,  
Abingdon,  UK. 
 
Heeks,  R. & Renken,  J. (2018).  Data  justice  for development. Information  Development , 
34(1),  90-102.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
23 
  
Jobst,  M. & Malherbe,  M. (2017).  Participatory  Budgeting  in Pune . Uppsala  University,  
Sweden.  
 
Kitchin,  R. (2014).  The real-time  city?  GeoJournal , 79(1),  1-14. 
 
Kitchin,  R. & Lauriault,  T. (2018).  Towards  critical  data  studies.  In Thinking  Big Data  in 
Geography , J. Thatcher,  J. Eckert  & A. Shears  (eds),  University  of Nebraska  Press,  Lincoln,  NE, 
3-20. 
 
Kovacic,  P. & Lundine,  J. (2013).  Mapping  Kibera.  In Bits and Atoms , S. Livingston  & G. 
Walter -Drop  (eds),  Oxford  University  Press,  Oxford,  115-129.  
 
Krishnamurthy,  R. & Desouza,  K.C. (2015).  Chennai,  India.  Cities , 42, 118-129.  
 
Lokanathan,  S. (2017)  Mapping  Big Data  for Development  and the Global  Goals . LIRNEasia,  
Colombo . 
 
Lokanathan,  S., Kreindler,  G.E.,  de Silva,  N.N.,  Miyauchi,  Y., Dhananjaya,  D. & Samarajiva,  R. 
(2016).  The potential  of mobile  network  big data  as a tool in Colombo’s  transportation  and 
urban  planning.  Information  Technologies  & International  Development , 12(2),  63-73. 
 
Lundine,  J., Kovacic,  P. & Poggiali,  L. (2012).  Youth  and digital  mapping  in urban  informal  
settlements.  Children  Youth  and Environments , 22(2),  214-233.  
 
Menon,  S. (2013).  Participatory  Budgeting  in Pune . Centre  for Environment  Education,  Pune.  
 
Neff,  G., Tanweer,  A., Fiore -Gartland,  B. & Osburn,  L. (2017).  Critique  and contribute.  Big 
Data , 5(2),  85-97. 
 
Obermayr,  C. (2017).  Sustainable  City Management . Springer,  Cham.  
 
Otiso,  K.M.  (2002).  Forced  evictions  in Kenyan  cities.  Singapore  Journal  of Tropical  
Geography , 23(3),  252-267.  
 
Padmanabhan,  V., Raman,  N.V.  & Shekhar,  S. (2013).  Plan  B: Practical  Strategies  to Improve  
Planning  in Indian  Cities . Indian  Council  for Research  on International  Economic  Relations,  
New  Delhi.  
 
Panek,  J. & Sobotova,  L. (2015).  Community  mapping  in urban  informal  settlements.  
Electronic  Journal  of Information  Systems  in Developing  Countries , 68(1),  1-13. 
 
Patel,  S. & Baptist,  C. (2012).  Documenting  by the undocument ed. Environment  and 
Urbanization , 24(1),  3-12. 
 
Pfeffer,  K. & Verrest,  H. (2016).  Perspectives  on the role of geo-technologies  for addressing  
contemporary  urban  issues.  European  Journal  of Development  Research , 28(2),  154-166.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
24 
  
Rifai,  A., Asterina,  N. & Hidayani,  R. (2016).  Improving  the Transparency,  Inclusivity  and 
Impact  of Participatory  Budgeting  in Indonesian  Cities . Making  All Voices  Count.  
 
Samarajiva,  R., Lokanathan,  S., Madhawa,  K., Kreindler,  G. & Maldeniya,  D. (2015).  Big data  
to improve  urban  planning.  Economic  & Political  Weekly , 50(22),  43-48. 
 
Sanchez,  C., Mackaness,  W. & McLaren,  R. (2013).  Sustainable  mapping  projects,  paper  
presented  at GISRUK  2013 , Liverpool,  3-5 Apr.  
 
Scott,  J.C. (1998).  Seeing  like a State . Yale University  Press,  New  Haven,  CT. 
 
Sengupta,  R., Heeks,  R., Chattapadhyay,  S. & Foster,  C. (2017).  Exploring  Big Data  for 
Development , GDI Development  Informatics  Working  Paper  no.66 . University  of 
Manchester,  UK. 
 
Shekhar,  S. (2016).  Introduction:  (re)prioritising  citizenship  in smart  cities  governance . In 
(Re)Prioritizing  Citizenship:  Setting  a New  Agenda  for Smart  Cities  Governance , S. Shekhar  
(ed),  CAG,  Chennai,  5-8. 
 
Shekhar,  S. & Padmanabhan,  V. (2015).  The Quality  of Civic  Data  in India  And the 
Implications  on the Push  for Open  Data . Transparent  Chennai,  Institute  for Financial  
Management  and Research,  Chennai,  India.  
 
Shkabatur,  J. (2014).  Interactive  community  mapping.  In Closing  the Feedback  Loop , S. Bailur  
& B. Gigler  (eds),  World  Bank,  Washington,  DC, 71-106.  
 
SKK (2010).  Gilingan  Neighbourhood  Map . Solo  Kota  Kita,  Solo.  
 
Song,  L.K. (2016).  Planning  with  urban  informality.  International  Development  Planning  
Review , 38(4),  359-381.  
 
Spratt,  S. & Baker,  J. (2015).  Big Data  and International  Development . IDS, University  of 
Sussex,  UK. 
 
Swain, S.S. (2012). The unequal access to municipal services and the role of local elected 
representatives, paper presented at N-AERIS XIII , Paris, 22 -24 Nov.  
 
Taylor,  L. (2017).  What  is data  justice?  Big Data  & Society , 4(2).  
 
Taylor,  L. & Broeders,  D. (2015).  In the name  of development.  Geoforum , 64, 229-237.  
 
Taylor,  L. & Richter,  C. (2015).  Big data  and urban  governance.  In Geographies  of Urban  
Governance , J. Gupta,  K. Pfeffer,  H. Verrest  & M. Ros-Tonen  (eds),  Springer,  Cham,  175-191.  
 
Townsend,  A.M.  (2013).  Smart  Cities . W.W.  Norton,  New  York,  NY. 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 74  
25 
 UN-Habitat  (2016).  World  Cities  Report  2016 . UN-Habitat,  Nairobi,  Kenya.  
 
UN-Habitat  (2017).  New  Urban  Agenda . UN-Habitat,  Nairobi,  Kenya.  
 
van Veenstra,  A.F.,  Esmeijer,  J., Bakker,  T. & Kotterink,  B. (2014).  Data  and the City. TNO,  
Delft.  
 
Willis,  K. (ed) (2017).  Whose  Right  to the Smart  City?  Plymouth  University,  UK. 
 
 
Acknowledgements  
The authors thank Jaco Renken for comments on an earlier draft of this paper.  
 