See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/338396923
An ICT Integration in Higher Education Institutes of Pakistan: A Critical
Literatu re Review
Article    in  International Journal of Comput er Ne twork and Inf ormation Security  · No vember 2019
CITATIONS
3READS
1,245
5 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
eLearning  View pr oject
E learning  View pr oject
Zulfiqar Ali Solangi
Royal Commission f or Jub ail
29 PUBLICA TIONS    158 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Aftab A. Chandio
Chinese Ac ademy of Scienc es
24 PUBLICA TIONS    182 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Zulfiqar Ali Solangi  on 05 Januar y 2020.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security , VOL.19 No.11,  November  2019  
 
 17 
Manuscript received November  5, 2019  
Manuscript revised November  20, 2019  An ICT Integration in Higher Education Institutes of Pakistan: A 
Critical  Literature Review  
Shahmurad Chandio, Nazish Nawaz  Hussaini , Altaf Hussain Abro , Zulifqar  Ali Solangi,  Aftab Ahmed 
Chandio  
 
†Institute of mathematics & Computer Science, University of Sindh, Pakistan   
††Jubail Technical Inst itute, Colleges and Institute Sector Royal Commission for Jubail, Saudi Arabia  
 
Summary  
This is the era of Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT), because ICT have a lucid impact on every sector of life. 
Interestingly, ICT practices has become the  backbone in 
providing the quality of education. Therefore, ICT is used as a 
key to success and has become indispensable part of the 
education sector from primary education to Higher Education. 
ICT helps students as well as teachers to augment their 
knowle dge, skills, as well as learning. Education being the main 
pillar of society needs modern approaches to enhance the scope 
impact of education. Hence, ICT is best tool for this. Even ICT 
has become inevitable tool in every sector. Thus, developed 
world and developing nations are also adopting ICT. This paper 
has reviewed ICT related literature including different plans and 
projects by government of Pakistan and its autonomous bodies. 
Meanwhile, to compare the real situation, it also considered the 
papers pub lished in world recognized journals as well reports and 
surveys by United Nation’s subsidiary bodies like UNESCO and 
World Bank .  The reading of relevant literature resulted in four 
factors to be highlighted in this review paper. The factors to be 
highligh ted consist of ICT importance, infrastructure, challenges 
to its successful use and suggestions to improve the usage. All 
these factors are drawn from previous literature and discussed 
comprehensively in comparison with findings. Finally, the 
current findi ngs and expected targets for ICT in education are 
discussed with specific recommendation based on literature 
evaluation.  
Key words:  
ICT Integration, Higher Education, Literature Review, Pakistan  
1. Introduction  
The literature review includes the relevant w ork from the 
year 2007 up to 2018. The included literature is 
specifically focused to ICT integration in higher 
educational institutions in Pakistan. The detailed review is 
categorized in form of research framework divided in four 
aspects discussed in past  research. It consists of 
importance of ICT, infrastructure of ICT, challenges to 
ICT, and suggestions about ICT provided in previous 
literature. Mostly the research about benefits of ICT in 
education is categorized in importance of ICT category, 
while the  literature demonstrating current level of 
adoption is categorized in infrastructure of ICT category. 
The research on critical thoughts appears in challenges of ICT category. While the literature demonstrating current 
level of adoption is categorized in in frastructure of ICT 
category, the research that focus on critical thoughts has 
been portrayed in challenges to ICT and, the research that 
highlights suggestion to overcome the challenges to ICT is 
kept in suggestion category.  
(i). Importance of ICT  
In, evaluating the usage and impact of ICT in context of 
students, it was found that ICT is very essential and 
increases the efficiency of students [10]. Likewise another 
study highlighted that, in order to compete with 
international graduates, there is dire need to train and 
develop human resource with ICT skills in Pakistani 
educational institution [11]. The paper about importance 
and use of ICT by academics states that, it is difficult for 
an institution to compete without the utilization of ICT in 
the institution [12]. Shahzad and Khan ,in a research on 
role of interactive media in teaching learning process at 
higher education pointed that interactive media improves 
education up to international standards [13]. Bakhsh et.al. 
assert that the ICT is considered a standard, by which the 
worth of  institutions is measured [14]. Abbasi e t.al. find 
that, the organizations seems to be compelled to invest a 
significant amount of capital into information technolo gy 
services [15]. 
(ii). Infrastructure of ICT  
Though the vast literature is available that determines the 
importance of ICT in higher educational institution in 
Pakistan, the studies with actual statistics are scarce. Yet, 
the study with statistics revealed b asic infrastructure 
comprising Internet, computer labs, digital library access, 
video conference systems, provided in higher educational 
Institutes declaring either unsatisfactory implementation 
level or usage of ICT [16]. Similarly Shaikh, point out that 
despite the elementary availability of ICT equipment, 
digital library access and various ICT based information 
system, many stakeholders including students, acad emics, 
administration lack the use of ICT [17]. In a study about 
the role of ICT in shaping the future of Pakistani higher IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security , VOL.19 No.11,  November  2019  
 
 18 
 education system measured the challenges for ICT 
integration in higher education inst itutes, found that the 
ICT usage is 50%, while low infrastructure, non - uniform 
policy, improper budget lack of training and facilities are 
main challenges towards success of ICT usage [17].  
(iii). Challenge s to ICT  
A study [18] depicts that the low infrastructure and lack of 
training, remain the main challenge. The teachers in 
academic institutes are not properly motivated towards  
ICT tools [19]. Afaq et al. cla im that even all the 
stakeholders of universities including administration, 
faculty and students have limited knowledge about use of 
ICT [20]. Swar and Khan claim that, the inequitable 
access  to ICT resources is major issue [21]. The recent 
figure shows that overall only 15% of govern ment projects 
succeeded while most IT projects failed, due to failure of 
technology management, politics and finance [22]. The 
study about the entrepreneurial mindset for state of higher 
education institutions claims that higher educational 
institutes in Pakistan cannot have not attained the required 
level of performance during preceding five decades [23]. 
While Abbas et al. proclaims that the promises have been 
made for educational reforms, yet not a single national 
educational policy h as been fulfilled [24].   
(iv). Suggestions to improve ICT  
Number of researchers have given suggestions in their 
work to improve the ICT status in higher educational 
institutes of Pakistan. Most researchers emphasized on 
providing the latest ICT equipment and to keep up to date 
with the technology advancements [25] and skilled 
teachers bring quality in education [22], and increasing 
budget for institution to update ICT infrastructure [26], 
[27]. It is also suggested to focus on academic’s trainings 
with respect to ICT acceptance and usage, as academics 
are the driving force towards success of ICT in education 
[12], [28] . In addit ion academics provide training to 
administrative staff [29]. Thus, universities should provide 
ICT based skilled trainings to all employees [25], [30]  and 
embrace whatever is new and advancement in technology 
[31]. 
2. Findings  
Let the above relevant literature revealed that ICT is well 
known in higher education in Pakistan. While, following 
aspects need comprehensive focus and definite policy.  
a) Increase of budget for ICT upgradation and 
facilities.  
b) Uniform and simultaneous policy for ICT 
implementation.  
c) ICT training and maintena nce department  d) Key point indicators for ICT implementation and 
usage level.  
e) Inter-university online collaboration and research 
programmes.  
f) Campus Management Information System.  
g) Inter-university Online Public Access Catalogue.  
3. Discussion and Conclusion  
Based on literature review it is well justified to say that the 
ICT integration is inevitable in higher education. While 
integration of ICT does not guaranty quality. Hence, 
quality to education comes through proper utilization of 
ICT resources as well as  updated infrastructure and 
environment. The research work has highlighted finding 
focused on the successful integration of ICT to bring 
quality in higher education of Pakistan, specifically the 
important aspects that need to improve for successful ICT 
integration. Higher education budget in Pakistan is overall 
much less [24]. Even ICT project are included in regular 
budget, despite high expenses of modern technologies and 
their maintenance [31]. Mostly the IC T projects are 
planned in distinct phases where the continuity of 
implementation is lost with change of administration. 
Frequent changes in administration of organization bring 
more problems than solutions, Thus, almost different 
projects are not completed  or if completed then face the 
lack of maintenance and upgrade [32]. It is recorded that 
most of the initiatives taken for ICT integration in higher 
educational institutions face this challenge of different of 
policies between incumbent and upcoming management 
[22]. Therefore, ICT latest technology supply should be 
applied simul taneously across the board in different 
regions and same administration should be given specific 
time to implement it. There should be ICT relevant 
training and maintenance department in each higher 
educational institute like developed world universities. 
That division could be linked with central ICT resource 
department under higher education commission of 
Pakistan or its regional branches. The Central ICT 
resource centre for higher educational institutes should set 
criteria or key parameters for ICT stand ard integration and 
usage at all institutes across the board. It should make 
accreditation annually. There should be digitization of 
classrooms, campus based wi -fi availability and free 
licence software’s and training to employees to use new 
systems. In ad dition to this, there is need of online 
platform which could bring academicians of all over the 
university at one platform and provide them facility to 
share and respond. Hence, it was revealed through 
literature review that there is no common platform eve n 
researchers individually send their surveys or queries to 
official emails of academics or go to query at different 
international independent research platforms. Thus, it IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security , VOL.19 No.11,  November  2019  
 
 19 
 creates gap among Pakistani researchers. Hence, it can 
affect overall Pakistani rese archers’ performance. Even 
there is no online public access catalogue (OPAC) in 
many higher educational institutes of Pakistan. This keeps 
books, manuscripts and historical research articles aside 
from the researchers working in other universities or 
colle ges. Therefore, it is required to update all educational 
institutes’  libraries with OPA facility and integrate it web 
based system with all institutes to facilitate all institutes to 
borrow resources from each other. Finally, the Campus 
management informat ion system (CMIS) should be 
provided to every institute, still more than half of HEIs are 
relying upon manual record keeping and correspondence 
or even independent applications of information systems 
for different applications. This makes institutes 
enviro nment much complex and affect working 
environment and accountability. Therefore, all institutes 
should be integrated with CMIS. this will bring the 
evaluation easily and will boost the performance of 
employees across the board.  
4. Recommendations  
Based on  discussion it can be recommended that;  
a) There should be separate budget allocation for 
ICT infrastructure and latest technology.  
b) There should be uniform policy for ICT 
integration in all institutes of Pakistan.  
c) An independent central body should be formed  to 
measure the ICT integration and usage similar to 
that of universities in developed countries.  
d) Separate ICT division in each higher education 
institutes should be responsible for maintenance 
of infrastructure and training of employees.  
e) Web based OPAC s ystem should be implemented 
in all libraries of HEIs  
f) Interuniversity online research and collaboration 
platform should be provided to all academics in all 
over universities of Pakistan.  
g) Integrated Management Information System 
should be implemented to mana ge university 
matters and records.  
5. Achievements and Future Work  
This research has attempted in summarizing the past and 
present development on ICT integration in higher 
education institutes of Pakistan. The categorization of past 
research in form of imp ortance, infrastructure, challenges 
and suggestion demonstrates real picture of ICT in higher 
education institutes of Pakistan. It can be summarized that 
this research sets the milestone for future ICT policy by 
education ministry and higher education comm ission. The 
future work could be to identify world top university ICT infrastructure to be adopted in all Pakistan’s Higher 
education institutes.  
 
Reference  
[1] Z. Sahito and P. Vaisanen, “Effect of ICT Skills on the Job 
Satisfaction of Teacher Educators: Evidence from the 
Universities of the Sindh Province of Pakistan,” vol. 6, no. 4, 
pp. 122 –136, 2017.  
[2] Sultana, “Need analysis for capacity building of faculty for 
online teaching,” Abasyn J. Soc. Scinece , no. Speci al Issue, 
pp. 88 –100, 2016.  
[3] U. Toro and M. Joshi, “ICT in Higher Education: Review of 
Literature from the Period 2004 -2011,” Int. J. Innov. Manag. 
Technol. , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 20 –23, 2012.  
[4] J. S. Fu and C. Technology, “ICT in Education : A Critical 
Literatu re Review and Its Implications Jo Shan Fu,” Int. J. 
Educ. Dev. Using Inf. Commun. Technol. , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 
112–125, 2013.  
[5] Anwar, Greer, and Brooks, “Privacy enhanced 
personalizatin in e -learning,” in International conference on 
privacy, security and tr ust, 2006.  
[6] B. Yousaf and H. Mujahid, “Digital Opportunity In itiative : 
For Pakistan A paper evaluating Pakistani eReadiness 
Initiatives.”  
[7] F. Shafique and K. Mahmood, “Indicators of the Emerging 
Information Society in Pakistan,” Inf. Dev. , vol. 24, no. 1, 
pp. 66 –78, 2008.  
[8] World Economic Forum, The Global Information 
Technology Report 2016 Innovating in the Digital Economy . 
2016.  
[9] J. Webster and R. T. Watson, “Analyzing the Past To P 
Repare for the Future : Writing a Literature Review,” MIS 
Q., vol. 26, no. 2, 2002.  
[10] M. W. Nisar and S. A. Munir Ehsan Ullah Shad, “Usage and 
Impact of ICT in Education Sector ; A Study of Pakistan,” 
Aust. J. Basic Appl. Sci. , vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 578 –583, 2011.  
[11] U. Rana, “Human Resource Management and Technology 
Advancement in Education in Pak istan,” 2010 Int. Conf. 
Educ. Manag. Technol. , pp. 565 –568, 2010.  
[12] S. Chandio, M. Sadry, S. Samsuri, and A. Shah, 
“Acceptance and use of Information and Communication 
Technology by Academicians: towards a conceptual  
framework ,” 2016.  
[13] A. H. Shahzad and A. Kh an, “Role of Interactive Media in 
Teaching Learning Process at Higher Education,” World 
Wide Web Internet Web Inf. Syst. , pp. 2 –7, 2009.  
[14] M. Bakhsh, A. Mahmood, and N. A. Sangi, “An assessment 
of students’ readiness towards mobile learning at AIOU, 
Pakistan ,” 2015 Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. ICICT 
2015 , 2016.  
[15] F. Authors, “Impact of individualism and collectivism over 
the individual’s technology acceptance behaviour A 
multi -group analysis between,” 2015.  
[16] M. Ahsan, “Digital Divide and digitization initiat ives in 
Pakistan: A Bird’s eye view,” in 13th International 
Conference on Electronic Publishing: Rethinking Electronic 
Publishing: Innovation in Communication Paradigms and 
Technologies , 2009, pp. 515 –520. 
[17] Z. A. Shaikh, “Role of ICT in Shaping the Future o f 
Pakistani Higher Education System,” Turkish Online J. IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security , VOL.19 No.11,  November  2019  
 
 20 
 Educ. Technol. 10(1), 149 -161., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 149 –161, 
2011.  
[18] Z. Shaikh, “Usage, acceptance, adoption, and diffusion of 
information & communication technologies in higher 
education: a measurement  of critical factors,” J. Inf. Technol. 
Impact , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 63 –80, 2009.  
[19] a Nawaz, Z. Awan, and B. Ahmad, “Integrating educational 
technologies in higher education of the developing 
countries,” J. Educ. Pract. , vol. 2, no. 2, 2011.  
[20] A. N. and B. S. Qa mar Afaq, Shakeel Ahmad, Najeebullah 
Khan, “ICTs FOR HIGHER EDUCATION 
COMFORTABLE AND UNCOMFORTABLE,” Gomal 
Univ. J. Res. , vol. V ol: 25, no. No 2., p. pp 47 -57., 2007.  
[21] B. Swar and G . F. Khan, “Mapping ICT knowledge 
infrastructure in South Asia,” Scientomet rics, vol. 99, no. 1, 
pp. 117 –137, 2014.  
[22] A. Abbas, A. Faiz, A. Fatima, and A. Avdic, “Reasons for 
the failure of government IT projects in Pakistan: A 
contemporary study,” 14th Int. Conf. Serv. Syst. Serv. 
Manag. ICSSSM 2017 - Proc. , 2017.  
[23] J. Nayyar and S.  Sohail H. Naqvi, “Proposed model of 
entrepreneurial mindset for the state government higher 
education institutions in Pakistan,” J. Enterprising 
Communities People Places Glob. Econ. , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 
167–182, 2013.  
[24] W. Abbas, M. Ahmed, R. Khalid, and T.  Yasmeen, 
“Analyzing the factors that can limit the acceptability to 
introduce new specializations in higher education 
institutions: A case study of higher education institutions of 
Southern Punjab, Pakistan,” Int. J. Educ. Manag. , vol. 31, 
no. 4, pp. 530 –539, 2017.  
[25] U. R. Shamsi, U. Imtinan, and A. Imtinan, “Human resource 
management and technology advancement in education in 
Pakistan,” 2010 Int. Conf. Educ. Manag. Technol. , pp. 
565–568, 2010.  
[26] Z. Salim, “The ICT Facilities, Skills, Usage, and the 
Problems F aced by the Students of Higher Education,” vol. 
8223, no. 8, pp. 4987 –4994, 2017.  
[27] Ismail; Mahesar;, and Idress, “ELECTRONIC 
INFORMATION SOURCE (EIS) PREFERENCES BY 
FACULTY MEMBERS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF 
PESHAWAR,” Grassroots , vol. 51, no. I, pp. 282 –295, 
2017. 
[28] H. Fawad and I. A. Manarvi, “Student feedback & 
systematic evaluation of teaching and its correlation to 
learning theories, Pedagogy & Teaching skills,” Proc. IEEE 
Int. Conf. Teaching, Assess. Learn. Eng. Learn. Futur. Now, 
TALE 2014 , no. December, pp. 398–404, 2015.  
[29] F. Shafique and K. Mahmood, “The role of educational 
information systems for survival in information society and 
the case of Pakistan,” Int. Inf. Libr. Rev. , vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 
164–173, 2010.  
[30] A. Saleem and K. Higuchi, “Globalization and ICT  
innovation policy: Absorption capacity in developing 
countries,” Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. Technol. ICACT , pp. 
409–417, 2014.  
[31] S. Waqar Ul Qounain Jaffry and U. R. Kayani, “FOSS 
localization: A solution for the ICT dilemma of developing 
countries,” 2005 Paki stan Sect. Multitopic Conf. INMIC , 
2005.  [32] F. Khan, S. Khan, and B. Zhang, “Public -Private 
Partnerships and E -Government Public -Private Partnerships 
in E-Government: A Global View,” Knowl. Creat. Diffus. 
Util., vol. 2, pp. 221 –228, 2012.  
[33] N. Okoroma, “Effects of Frequent Changes in Educational 
Policies on Secondary School Administration in Rivers 
State of Nigeria,” no. March, 2015.  
 
View publication stats