1
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESCGD Note
Sep 2019
DIGITAL ID AS A DEVELOPMENT TOOL 
India has emerged as a leader in building on its biometric digital ID (Aadhaar) to reform service and 
program delivery. It moved quickly to consolidate the rollout of Aadhaar, and then to embed the 
unique Aadhaar number into program databases. A range of applications, including digital signature 
and payments, was then constructed on top of the Aadhaar foundation (the India Stack). Together 
with partners, the Center for Global Development is analyzing the effects of Aadhaar-based reforms. 
India offers lessons for many other countries as their focus evolves from rolling out an ID system 
towards using it to improve the efficiency and inclusivity of service delivery. Some programs using 
Aadhaar are federally administered but others are implemented at state level. It is already clear that 
some states and sectors are reforming better than others, generally because of better design of the 
digital reforms or stronger capacity to implement them. The three programs we discuss below high-
light achievements as well as challenges that need to be overcome for greater efficiency and inclusion.
AN INTEGRATED TRINITY: THE JAM
India recognized early the need to integrate Aadhaar into two other pillars for reform: mobile com-
munications and financial access. The resulting trinity is known as JAM: Jan Dhan (financial inclu-
sion), Aadhaar (biometric ID), and mobile connections. With 1.2 billion unique numbers, Aadhaar 
now covers about 95 percent of India’s population, including almost all adults. In 2014, the govern-
ment announced the Jan Dhan program to achieve the goal of universal financial inclusion; by 2017 , 
82 percent of India’s adult population had access to a bank account, up from 56 percent when the pro-
gram started. Mobile phone subscriptions increased from 17 per 100 inhabitants in 2007 to 85 in 2016, 
approaching universal access with a growing share of smartphones and internet-enabled devices. 
The JAM trinity brings together three digital transformations and exploits synergies among them. 
Aadhaar enables customers and banks to easily fulfill know-your-customer (KYC) norms necessary 
to obtain a bank account or a mobile SIM card, while costs have been further reduced by allowing 
the possibility of digital or e-KYC. Aadhaar is therefore linked organically to new bank accounts and Building on Digital ID 
for Inclusive Services:
Lessons from India
Alan Gelb and Anit Mukherjee
This note was first published in the ID4Africa 2019 Conference Almanac.2
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESmobile connections, making them accessible to large sections of the population. In turn, much of the 
increase in financial access has been spurred by the Aadhaar-based reforms to social programs that 
routed benefits through bank accounts. 
Having substantially bridged the access gap in financial services and mobile services, the JAM ap-
proach has facilitated service delivery reforms through: 
• linking Aadhaar with beneficiary databases for public services and subsidies
• implementing Aadhaar-enabled remote authentication services to verify beneficiaries at the point 
of service for subsidized food and fertilizers, pensions, and other benefits
• transferring subsidies and cash directly to beneficiary bank accounts through the Aadhaar Payment 
Bridge, an interoperable system that uses Aadhaar-linked bank accounts for financial transactions
CONCERNS OVER PRIVACY AND AUTHENTICATION FAILURE
Before drawing lessons from particular applications, it is essential to flag two policy debates relating 
to Aadhaar itself.   
Aadhaar, together with its managing organization the Unique Identification Authority of India (UID-
AI), were introduced by an executive order and in advance of enabling legislation. Partly as a result, 
and also because India still does not have a law protecting the privacy of sensitive personal data, it 
has been subject to numerous legal challenges before India’s Supreme Court. Even though Aadhaar 
collected minimal personal data, the prospect that the unique number could soon be incorporated 
into individual records of all types—both private and public sector—fanned concern over the impact 
on privacy. The first Court judgment ruled that Indians did indeed have a right to privacy but that 
it was not absolute; that privacy needs to be weighed, in individual policy applications, against the 
State’s interest in effective administration. A second, much-anticipated, Court judgment set out the 
implications for Aadhaar—its use was authorized in the two specific areas of the administration of 
government benefits and programs, as well as in tax reporting. While the full import of the ruling is 
still being worked out, it places Aadhaar into a perhaps similar status as the US Social Security Num-Jan Dhan – Aadhaar – Mobile Trinity
AADHAAR
JAM
Trinity
3
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESber, whose use is also restricted to certain purposes by law. The Court’s ruling has set off a further 
round of debate and innovation, including the introduction of Tokenized Aadhaar (a 16-digit virtual 
ID number cryptographically derived from the Aadhaar number), a formal Aadhaar Card capable of 
providing offline authentication for less-demanding applications without disclosing the full number, 
and commitment to finalizing a data protection law. Aadhaar’s proponents may be correct in that the 
path of “build first and legislate later” was the only way to move forward in India, but the lessons for 
other countries is clear:  this is a risky approach and is not recommended.
A second, debated, feature of Aadhaar has been its emphasis on online authentication against the 
central database, particularly using biometrics. Although many people carried an “ Aadhaar Card” 
(before the one mentioned above) this was only a piece of paper with the number and perhaps a pic-
ture; it was not used, for example, to authenticate a recipient for a benefit. Many factors can cause on-
line authentication to fail: biometric mismatch, communications failure, or server overload, causing 
the attempt to time out. Even if all beneficiaries were successfully enrolled in Aadhaar, such frictions 
could cause legitimate claimants to be excluded from essential benefits or, at least, to suffer serious 
inconvenience. The UIDAI has been emphatic in stressing that programs and schemes must have pro-
tocols to deal with cases of biometric failure and has, indeed, provided for a range of alternative au-
thentication methods, including iris and one-time-passwords sent to a mobile linked to the Aadhaar 
number. Nevertheless, studies of several programs suggest that adherence to exception-management 
protocols has been uneven. Beneficiaries have been more likely to face authentication exclusion in 
some states (Jharkhand appears to be an example) than in others. Even though the 2017–2018 State 
of Aadhaar report finds that non-Aadhaar factors tend to be a more significant cause of exclusion 
than those relating to authentication in the three states it surveyed (Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, and 
West Bengal), experience with Aadhaar offers an important lesson for other countries—the critical 
importance of strong policies and protocols for handling cases of technology failure. Some examples 
emerge from the cases below.
TOWARDS MORE EFFICIENT AND EQUITABLE SUBSIDIES: LPG AND PAHAL
India has long suffered from inefficient and inequitable fuel subsidies. For household LPG cylinders, 
most of the subsidy was captured by higher-income groups, mostly urban residents. Duplicate con-
nections, ghost beneficiaries, and significant diversion of domestic subsidized LPG towards commer-
cial use led to long wait times for genuine beneficiaries. The subsidy also came at a significant fiscal 
cost and with uncertainty due to volatile international energy prices. The poor were excluded from 
the LPG distribution network and had to use firewood to cook, leading to severe health problems, 
especially for women who also had to bear most of the time cost of collecting fuel.  
Starting in 2013, the PaHaL program reformed this system. Instead of paying a subsidized price for 
LPG cylinders, beneficiaries paid the market price and the government transferred the subsidy di-
rectly to their bank accounts when they paid the dealer to deliver the cylinder. Payment was con-
firmed by SMS sent to mobile phones. Customers were empowered – they could track their deliveries, 
rate their distributors, and change them if dissatisfied. 
The program created a clean list of beneficiaries, removing some 25 million false and inactive recipi-
ents. Dealers could no longer profit from diverting subsidized cylinders so that wait times for refills or-
dered by genuine households decreased. The reform also led to fiscal savings, although the quantum is 
open to debate. With the subsidy individualized to identified people and households, nearly 10 million 
LPG consumers voluntarily relinquished it through the government’s GiveItUp campaign, and further 
targeting measures have been taken to gradually shift more of the benefits toward the poor.4
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESIt is difficult to link all these outcomes directly to 
Aadhaar; the first phase of deduplication relied on 
name and address matching as penetration of the 
unique ID number had not yet reached saturation. 
Still, the program now links consumers’ Aadhaars, 
as well as Aadhaar-linked bank accounts and mo-
bile numbers, to the beneficiary database. Unique 
identification has been key in the transformation 
of the subsidy regime. Surveys indicate high rates 
of customer satisfaction with the changes, partic-
ularly because of the greater efficiency of the sys-
tem.
Building on the success of PaHaL, in 2016 the fed-
eral government announced a program (Ujjwala) 
to provide 50 million poor rural women with LPG 
connections within three years. The program has 
been a huge success. Aadhaar is now mandatory 
to obtain a new LPG connection so new applicants 
can be checked against existing beneficiary lists to 
eliminate fraud. Moreover, many of the Jan Dhan accounts were opened by rural women to receive 
the subsidy.
EMPOWERING WOMEN THROUGH A SOCIAL REGISTRY: RAJASTHAN
In 2014, the newly elected government of Rajasthan—a famously patriarchal state in northern In-
dia—began building a registry of families who received public subsidies, benefits, and transfers. The 
Bhamashah program required families to register their members along with their respective Aadhaar 
numbers and to own an active bank account to receive direct benefit transfers. The government also 
mandated that a woman had to be designated as the head of the family for benefit purposes. All family 
cash transfers, such as social pensions, would be delivered to her Aadhaar-linked bank account. 
Once families were registered, they could access public benefits, such as food rations through the 
public distribution system (PDS), social pensions, scholarships, and the cooking gas subsidy. Aad-
haar-based biometric authentication at point-of-service was required for PDS benefits. 
Our household surveys found that most people had positive views of the newly digitized programs. 
Many felt that they had more control over their entitlements and that there was less corruption in the 
food and pension distribution systems. 
Our surveys also confirmed a significant improvement in financial inclusion for women. Nearly two-
thirds of the women heads of households had to open a new account to comply with the government 
policy. By the time of the survey, many had started to transact on their accounts, though they were 
often accompanied by a husband, son or other male family member, usually because of transport 
difficulties in getting to a bank or because they were not sufficiently literate to undertake financial 
transactions on their own. Ujjwala program: inclusive access and wom-
en’s empowerment
5
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESSOME CAUTIONS FROM RAJASTHAN
Our Rajasthan study revealed several problems that countries may face as they transition towards  
digitalized services. 
• Digitization. Existing databases may not be consistent, and errors in seeding the unique ID num-
ber in beneficiary lists can compound the problem, creating aggravations for beneficiaries or even 
denial of benefits. These difficulties were compounded in Rajasthan by the restructuring of pro-
gram databases into the Bhamashah registry and by efforts to shrink beneficiary rolls at the same 
time as they were being digitized. 
• Authentication. As noted above, the reliability of biometric authentication is also a challenge. Fin-
gerprints alone are not enough—they may not always work or work smoothly. Backup methods are 
needed and, indeed, the Aadhaar approach provides for other options. But sometimes these are 
not used by frontline service providers, who may ignore protocols and send beneficiaries away to 
come back another time, or possibly even deny them their benefits. The risk is arguably greatest 
for the most vulnerable beneficiaries, who have the least capacity to assert their rights before the 
frontline providers. 
• Digital literacy. Eighty percent of women heads of households cannot read or write text messages 
or even make a call using mobile phones. While the use of ID to create a social registry can promote 
inclusion and greater financial access, not everyone will have the necessary tools to participate 
fully in a digital environment. As these systems mature, bridging the digital capacity gap will be an 
important issue for the development and technology communities to address.
DIGITAL ID AS A FOUNDATION FOR DIGITAL GOVERNANCE: KRISHNA AND 
ANDHRA PRADESH
Over the last two decades, Andhra Pradesh (AP) state in southern India has promoted a technolo-
gy-based development strategy. Home to Microsoft and Google, among other tech titans, AP has fos-
tered a culture of innovation within the state government, providing incentive for administrators to Beneficiary perception of digital service reforms
Better Neutral Worse Don’t know/Can’t sayPDS
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100PensionPAHAL6
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICEStry new ideas. Over time, it has built a tech-
nically skilled workforce that can help to im-
plement digital reforms rapidly and at scale. 
Within AP, Krishna District has been a recog-
nized leader in using technology to improve 
public service delivery.
Aadhaar is the foundation of AP’s digital gov-
ernance framework. It is integrated into all 
programs and administrative departments, 
effectively making it mandatory to receive 
any public services, subsidies, or transfers. 
Although AP has not restructured programs 
around an integrated social registry like 
Bhamashah, the ubiquitous use of Aadhaar 
makes every beneficiary and each transaction trackable in real time at the individual level. 
Using the power of uniqueness and trackability, AP has introduced portability in the delivery of public 
services. PDS beneficiaries can obtain food rations from any fair price shop in the state, benefitting 
migrants who were denied their benefits in the earlier system. Social pension recipients can now 
collect their benefits from any local government office, reducing travel cost and inconvenience, espe-
cially important for the elderly. Customers can “vote with their feet,” making them less vulnerable to 
exploitation by frontline providers. 
While other states, like Rajasthan, also collect real-time data on the delivery of programs, AP has gone 
beyond digitally recording administrative data to actively building on this data to increase efficiency 
and accountability and to reduce exclusion. A central hub collates all service delivery data gener-
ated through Aadhaar-based transactions in real time, analyzes the data, and provides dashboards 
for monitoring implementation. The hub also collects information on grievances and tracks their 
resolution within a specified timeframe. At local levels, each community has a Village Revenue Of-
ficer (VRO); these VROs are mandated to deal with the (very few) exceptions and cases of technology 
failure. They may use other methods of authentication, such as face recognition, when unable to au-
thenticate through regular means and may also vouch for beneficiaries in case all else fails.  
As the digital governance system has matured, AP has integrated a rapid, high-frequency feedback 
mechanism as part of the real-time governance approach. Each beneficiary must agree to be part of a 
quality survey process and receives a feedback robocall on service quality every time they access a ser-
vice. In the case of PDS alone, this would imply around 10 million calls per month, covering every fair 
price shop in the state. Those responding with negative feedback are rolled over to a manual system 
to register complaints, which must then be resolved within specified periods. The data generated is 
then analyzed to rank different districts, mandals, and villages, as well as service programs, scoring 
them on a “happiness index” which is used as a management tool. Feedback can also be used to rede-
sign delivery mechanisms to make them more beneficiary-centric—for example, the most recent shift 
to deliver pensions through Panchayat offices, which many pensioners find most convenient -- rather 
than banks. 
This combination of real-time feedback and clear human accountability is intended to promote in-
tegrity and efficiency at each level of the administration, thereby increasing inclusion and trust in 
the system. The digital systems also provide flexibility to design, evaluate, and restructure service Women’s financial inclusion through Jan Dhan
7
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESdelivery mechanisms to promote inclusion and 
increase efficiency. 
Does it work? We surveyed beneficiaries and 
service providers, and conducted focus group 
meetings. The results show that beneficiaries 
and service providers generally viewed the Aad-
haar-enabled system positively, and that they 
approved of the government’s digital governance 
strategy. The picture is not perfect: some respon-
dents express frustration with less-than-smooth 
biometric authentication at points of service. 
However, people are able to recognize tradeoffs 
and judge a reform on the basis of a combination 
of positive and negative features. For example, 
80 percent of the majority who found the new 
PDS system to be better asserted that rations were 
no longer diverted, but so did 46 percent of the 
minority who considered the new system to be 
worse. Conversely, while 100 percent of those who 
thought the new system worse considered that 
authentication failures were frequent, so did 42 
percent of the majority who thought that the new 
system was better. Reforms do not have to be per-
fect in order to be viewed favorably, 
Our results also suggest that the combination of beneficiary choice, real-time feedback loops, and 
clear accountability for grievance redressal and technology failure has eliminated perceptions of 
technological exclusion. AP appears to be in the forefront of dealing with this problem, one that will 
arise for any system seeking to transition to the use of a digital ID system for point-of-service authen-
tication. The findings confirm those of the 2017–18 State of Aadhaar report that exclusion appears to 
be very rare in AP.  
Did AP’s digital reforms produce savings? In contrast to many other reforms, their main stated objec-
tive has been to improve service quality rather than to save resources. In common with many other 
South Indian states, AP maintained, and still maintains, a generous social safety net. Unlike Rajas-
than, it did not seek to remove beneficiaries from the rolls as it digitized them, even though it does 
collect data, through Smart Pulse surveys, that can be used to rationalize beneficiary rolls. We cannot 
estimate the overall balance of benefits and costs from its digital governance reforms, but they appear 
to have generated some substantial savings at program level. Estimates for the PDS system put savings 
on the order of 33 percent of costs, from a combination of eliminating nonexistent beneficiaries and 
preventing the diversion of subsidized products
SOME LESSONS FROM INDIA’S EXPERIENCE
India is currently the world’s laboratory in the application of digital ID. Transformation using the 
JAM strategy is unfolding on a massive scale, in multiple programs and across different states. The 
lessons are still accumulating, but already they suggest some key takeaways for African countries in-
tending to pursue digital governance reforms based on digital ID.Multi-authenticator used in Krishna: finger, 
iris, face
8
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESRapid roll out facilitates use. The strategy of 
rapidly rolling out a minimalist but fully digital 
ID, achieving saturation coverage within a short 
period, and embedding it rapidly into service de-
livery programs has advantages. Had India not 
achieved such high coverage so quickly, it would 
not have been able to build on Aadhaar to reform 
subsidies, benefits, and other programs. The roll-
out has been facilitated by separating the ID from 
attributes such as proof of nationality that many 
people would not have been able to provide easily. 
Rapid take-up also requires an upfront focus on 
creating an effective authentication ecosystem, an area neglected by some countries as they focus on 
rolling out the system. 
Do not neglect the legislative framework. As described earlier, the path of “build first and legislate 
later” may have been the only way to go in India, but it is a risky approach and not recommended for 
other countries. 
Exploit the synergies between ID, mobile communication, and financial inclusion. An integrated 
approach to the entire digital revolution spectrum is critical for inclusive and effective policy design. 
It is important to understand the strengths of each of the three digital pillars (ID, mobile, and finan-
cial services) and to exploit complementarities among them, including in the delivery of programs. 
This may be particularly important for African countries considering the rapid growth of digital com-
munications and mobile money in that region. 
Good program design is essential. The main goal should be to improve the efficiency, equity, and 
inclusiveness of service delivery. Successful programs seek complementarities among a range of de-
velopment goals, such as financial inclusion and women’s empowerment. They can also take advan-
tage of the flexibility that digital technology provides to undertake mid-course correction based on 
data and evidence of impact, as well as to open up choice to beneficiaries over where to receive their 
services. Fiscal savings should emerge from the design and not be the sole motivator for reform.
Reforms take sustained effort, attention, and political will. At the time of our surveys, AP’s reforms 
had been pushing forward for at least five years and those in Rajasthan for half that time; reform of the 
LPG system has also been ongoing over several years. Digitizing databases, embedding ID numbers, 
and correcting the inevitable errors take time. Even when political will and administrative capacity 
exists, digitization of service delivery can cause considerable inconvenience for genuine beneficia-
ries. Success depends on sustaining the effort, ensuring continuity, and demonstrating effectiveness 
early in the implementation process.
Reshape incentives towards performance. Reforms challenge vested interests who benefited from 
the previous system. There may be a need to improve incentives along the service supply chain to 
compensate for less opportunity for fraud and corruption and prevent vested interests from mobi-
lizing against the reforms. In each of the three cases discussed here, service margins were increased 
(from low levels) to partly compensate for the elimination of opportunities for diversion and corrup-
tion. The extensive data generated by digitized delivery systems also makes it more feasible to tailor 
incentives to service delivery.  
Andhra Pradesh real-time government center9
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESInstitute clear accountability for grievance redressal. Technology is not infallible. Many individuals 
have limited capacity to participate in digitized programs, and these are often the most dependent 
on the benefits they provide. To prevent exclusion, it is essential to have clear protocols for exception 
management and clear accountability for handling cases of technological failure. The more choice 
that can be provided to beneficiaries—over alternative providers and also alternative ways to authen-
ticate themselves—the more smoothly the new systems will operate.
Build on administrative data to empower the customers. Digitized service programs, as imple-
mented in India, create vast quantities of administrative data, much in real time. This increases the 
premium on using the data to improve performance, and also on protecting data. It also offers op-
portunities to build further on transactions records, to superimpose real-time monitoring and ben-
eficiary service assessments on top of the digitized programs. The case of AP suggests that not only 
can this feedback play an essential role in strengthening performance and improving efficiency and 
inclusion, but it can also draw program administrators’ attention to weak points and encourage them 
to explore other modalities for delivering services.10
BUILDING ON DIGITAL ID FOR INCLUSIVE SERVICESWWW.CGDEV.ORG
This work is made available under the terms of the Creative Commons  
 Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 license.Ideas to Action: Independent 
research for global prosperityALAN GELB  is a senior fellow at the Center 
for Global Development.
ANIT MUKHERJEE  is a policy fellow at the 
Center for Global Development.
Contact:
Alan Gelb,
agelb@cgdev.orgFURTHER READING 
State of Aadhaar Report 2017-18 IDinsight. https://stateofaadhaar.in/wp-content/uploads/State-of-
Aadhaar-Report_2017-18.pdf
Aadhaar and Food Security in Jharkhand. Dreze, Khalid, Kheera and Somanchi. Economic and Polit-
ical Weekly, Volume 52 No. 10, December 2016. https://www.epw.in/journal/2017/50/special-articles/
aadhaar-and-food-security-jharkhand.html
Digital Governance in Developing Countries: Beneficiary Experience and Perceptions of System Re-
form in Rajasthan. Gelb, Mukherjee and Navis. Center for Global Development Working Paper 489, 
2018. https://www.cgdev.org/publication/digital-governance-developing-countries-beneficiary-ex-
perience-and-perceptions-system
Fuel Subsidy Reform in Developing Countries: Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG Cooking Gas Subsidy 
in India. Mittal, Mukherjee and Gelb. Center for Global Development Policy Paper 114, 2017 . https://
www.cgdev.org/publication/fuel-subsidy-reform-developing-countries-india
Digital Governance: Is Krishna a Glimpse of the Future? Aadil, Gelb, Giri, Mukherjee, Navis, and 
Thapliyal. Center for Global Development Working Paper 512, 2019. https://www.cgdev.org/publica-
tion/digital-governance-krishna-glimpse-future-working-paper