 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 82  
 
Community -Based Data 
Justice: A Model for Data 
Collection in Informal Urban  
Settlements  
 
DENISSE ALBORNOZ, KATHERINE REILLY  & 
MARIELIV FLORES  
 
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester ’s 
Sustainable Consumption Institute  and Canada ’s 
International Development Research Centre  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac.uk  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www. gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Background  ................................ ................................ ..............................  4 
B1. DATAFYING INFORMAL SETTLEMENTS IN LIMA................................ ................................ . 4 
B2. INVESTIGATING DATA JUSTICE USING CONCEPTS DEVELOPED BY IRIS MARION YOUNG  ............  7 
C. Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 10 
D. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 12 
D1.  DATAFICATION AS A PROCESS TO ACCESS JUSTICE  ................................ ..........................  12 
D2.  DATAFICATION AS A PROCESS TO DEVELOP CAPABILITIES AND TAKE ACTION  .......................  18 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ..... 20 
E1. RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................  22 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  23 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 25 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 25 
ANNEX : SOCIAL CONNECTION MODEL BY IRIS MARION YOUNG  ................................ ..............  26 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
1 
 Community -Based Data Justice:  
A Model for Data Collection in Informal 
Urban  Settlements  
 
 
Denisse Albornoz  
Hiperderecho       & Katherine Reilly  
Simon Fraser University  &            Marieliv Flores  
Hiperderecho  
2019  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Non -governmental organizations (NGOs) have become important curators of data from 
informal urban settlements. Given the absence of these communities  in public dataset s, 
they work to take informal settlements from a state of invisibility and injustice to one of 
visibility and justice, in and through data. The working premise of these NGOs is that by 
producing data about informal settlements, data can act as a “currency ” through which 
individuals can access different forms of justice. However, the literature that studies 
datafication in marginalized urban communities  shows this is not always the case. Data 
scholars have pointed out that datafication implies a series of risks, as well as new forms of 
exclusion and inequality for vulnerable populations and minorities. This paper studies, 
through the analysis of intervie ws of residents of informal settlements in Lima,  Peru,  
whether intensive data collection in informal settlements is considered a process to access 
justice by vulnerable communities.  
 
The study concludes that in the short term, datafication does not give ac cess to justice to 
vulnerable communities but in fact, deepens or reproduces instances of oppression by 
reinforcing the perception of their lack of knowledge, lack of capabilities or lack of authority 
to use data to lead their own development. However, par ticipating in the process of 
datafication sparked an interest among  community leaders about the different ways in 
which data could be used to further their capabilities, mobilize collective action and address 
their development needs. Community leaders are interested and willing to use data in 
constructive ways to collaborate with diverse actors and transform their conditions. 
However, this interest, power and potential needs to be activated through capability 
development and the cooperation of data partners  willing to invest their resources to 
provide this training.  The paper closes with a list of recommendations, suggested by 
community leaders from informal settlements, on how to build a community -based data 
collection model that redresses harms and individ ual forms of injustice from previous 
experiences.  
 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
“As a society we have learned to perpetuate inequality by building walls, gates and 
divisions that go beyond the physical and reinforce the idea that the city is only for a 
few people ” (TECHO –Perú , 2018)  
 
In Peru, and most parts of Latin America  and the wider global South , the state does not 
collect basic data about the living conditions o f informal settlements. Their absence results 
in a two -tiered system of citizenship. Those  who live in informal settlements and their needs 
remain invisible in public data and as a result are not considered as part of the urban reality 
of the city (Canales and Maulen, 2011). This new form of invisibility reinforces a historical 
inequality that Peruvian anthropologist José Matos Mar has described as the existence of 
two Peru s: the “official Peru ” made up of formal institutions and the “marginalized Peru ” 
made up of urban masses that operate in clandestinity (see also Plöger, 2012).  
 
In response t o this situation, non -governmental organizations (NGOs) have become 
important curators of data from informal urban settlements in Peru. In parti cular, the NGO 
TECHO –Perú, the Peruvian branch of TECHO – an organization with over 15 years of 
experience worki ng on social development and  affordable housing projects in contexts of 
urban poverty  – is producing dataset s about life in  local  informal settlements through a 
cadastral survey  or Relevamiento1 in Spanish. Through this data -intensive work, TECHO –
Perú  is attempting to integrate the “marginalized Peru ” into a “datafied official Peru”  and 
improve the representation of the former’s  needs in public policies (TECHO –Perú , 2018) . In 
other words, the aim of their  work is to take informal settlements from a sta te of invisibility 
and injustice to one of visibility and justice in and through data.  
 
This study  takes a closer look at this assumption: that intensive data collection in informal 
settlements can be a process to access just ice for vulnerable communities.  The working 
premise of the Relevamiento  is that the “the violation of rights in informal settlements is 
furthered by the absence of data ” (TECHO –Perú, 2018 ). By producing data about informal 
settlements , TECHO –Perú implies data can act as a “currency ” through which individuals can 
exercise their rights and access different forms of justice. However, the literature that 
studies datafication in marginalized urban communities  shows this is not always the case. 
Data scholars have pointed out that datafication implies a series of risks, as well as new 
forms of exclusion and inequality for vulnerable populations and minorities (Donovan, 2012; 
Heeks and Renken, 2018). Data gatheri ng is increasingly being theorized as a form of 
dispossession (Thatcher et al., 2016 ) that benefits external actors who have the resources to 
use the information, more than community members who provide their dat a (Heeks and 
Shekhar, 2019). This study  explores the se issues  from the perspective of the residents of 
informal settlements : What does this data -intensive process mean for  them?  Do they 
consider that gaining “visibility ” through data is a means to  access justice? Or do they 
believe it will deepen th eir risk of further exclusion or deprivation?  
 
                                                      
1 The Relevamiento is an adaptation of a traditional cadastral survey. The cadastral survey focuses on collecting 
information about land property in informal settlements. The Relevamiento collected this information, as is 
explained in Section B, but it also collected socio -cultural information about life in these spaces.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
3 
 The paper will first provide  context to the Relevamiento conducted by TECHO –Perú . It then 
provides an overview of Iris Marion Young ’s approach to justice (1990, 2006) and  explains  
how we used her understanding  of oppression to think about access to justice in data -
related activities in informal settlements.  The Methods section describes our process to 
collect testimonies from community members who live in  one particular informal 
settlement of Lima – San Juan de  Miraflores  (SJM) – and the methodological tools we used 
to interpret their participation as well as their refusal to participate in our study. The 
Findings sect ion describes the common themes that emerged in testimonies regarding data -
related activities in informal settlement s, analyzed using Young ’s concepts. And the 
Discussion section elaborates on how these findings and the experience of SJM can inform a 
community -based data justice model.  
 
This work  aims to contribute to a broader understanding of the concept of “data justice ” as 
theorized in early works by Heeks & Renken (2018) and Taylor (2017). The community -
based data justice model can also be a useful tool for data intermediaries like TECHO –Perú  
that are working overtime with limited resources to bring justice and equity to communities 
fraught by urban poverty. But above all, this paper hopes to be a platform from which the 
voices of community members of SJM can inform the design and reduce the harm  of future 
data practices implemented by develo pment practitioners in vulnerable communities.  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
4 
 B. Background  
 
B1. Datafying  Informal Settle ments in Lima  
Over the past few years, attention has been placed on the importance of creating datasets 
from developing countries and marginalized urban communities  as a means to improve 
their representation in the  production of knowledge and information (Graham et al.,  2012). 
The open data movement in particular, as part of its mission to promote access to 
knowledge, advocates for bottom -up production of urban data sets in  rapidl y transforming 
urban societies  (Liu et al.,  2015) . According to data scholars, the production of data about  
marginalized communities can contribute to more diverse knowledge production, as it 
open s up new research opportunities  in urban studies and planning ( Crooks et al.,  2015), as 
well as  contributing  to the inclusion of these communities in urban planning and 
management (Chakraborty et al.,  2015).  Others have argued, from  a more  critical 
standpoint, that the datafication of i nformal settlements can be tied to efforts of policy 
makers to reduce complexity in governance. Kevin Donovan (2012) draws from James 
Scott ’s Seeing  like a State  (1998) to reflect on how the turn to datafication  is part of a larger 
effort of state -led “simplification ” and “standardization ” that enables powerful ent ities to 
maintain political control over diverse communities2. In all cases, data is conceived as a 
means to act ivate political will and mobilize policy makers to include informal settlements in 
public policy.  
 
This rationale  has been picked up in Latin America. Tamara Canales and Andrea Maulen 
(2011) who studied “invisibilization ” of informal settlements in Chile argue the absence of 
data about informal settlements in “official figures ” makes it impossible for these spaces to 
be “quantified, intervened and considered ” in public policy and urban planning. Similar to 
other initiatives around the world that open up data of informal settlements such as Map 
Kibera or Map Mathare from Keny a, TECHO –Perú’s work is a response to “the urgency to 
make visible  the conditions of poverty and vulnerability in which informal settlers li ve” in 
Latin America ( TECHO –Perú , 2018).  
 
In the specific case of Lima, TECHO –Perú  (2018) suggests that the invisibility  of informal 
settlements in public policy disqualifies the sector as a potential area of public investment, 
leaving its communities in a situation of precarious access to services and territorial 
segregation. Furthermore, they argue that collecting this da ta can also stimulate citizen 
action. As in the case of Map Kib era, the absence of an open, up -to-date dataset  about 
informal settlements, “leaves their [residents] disempowered and unable to use information 
to solve problems ”, excluding them from debates that influence policy and from the 
possibility of using this information to drive their own development (Hagen, 2011).  
 
With th ese objectives in mind, TECHO designed the Relevamiento project : a large -scale 
regional effort to generate information to locate,  quantify and develop a socio -territorial 
characterization (who lives there, type s of organization s, needs, etc.) of informal 
                                                      
2 Both Scott and Donovan warn that this over -simplification is against the interest of the public. It threatens to 
reduce the public’s political autonomy and their ability to participate in decision making. I n the words of 
Donovan: “What changes through state simplification is that information becomes accessible on a larger scale, 
one where community ties are less influential.” (Donovan, 2012).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
5 
 settlements in Latin America. The data collection methodology was designed by the Centre 
for Soci al Research (CSR) of TECHO  in Chi le and mainstreamed across local branches of 
TECHO in Latin America. So far the cadaster  or Relevamiento has been done in Argentina, 
Chile, Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Uruguay at the national level, and in Guatemala  City, 
Bogotá, Asunción, Turgua and Lima at the city level. In Peru, the Relevamiento was 
conducted in the district of San Juan de Miraflores  (see Figure 1) , one of the five areas with 
the highest concentrations of urban poverty in Lima, according to the Minist ry of 
Development and Social Inclusion3. This district has a total population of 432,282 people 
and is also considered the 8th most populated district in Lima hosting  approximately 5% of 
the total population (TECHO –Perú , 2018).  
 
 
Figure  1: Map of the dist ricts of SJM. Retrieved from the Relevamiento report  
(TECHO–Perú , 2018)  
 
The main data collection instrument was a survey designed by TECHO ’s CSR to collect socio -
territorial and geo -referenced data of the settlements in a standardized manner. Before 
deploying the questions, TECHO –Perú  adapted the survey to the local context. They held a 
meeting with diverse actors that included state represen tatives, academics, community 
leaders from SJM , civil society organizations and private sector entities. The feedback 
                                                      
3 In Lima, 3.6 million people – from a total population of 9.3 mil lion – live in urban poverty (Redacción Gestión, 
2017). Most of the urban poor live in “urban marginal cities”, areas characterized by the total or partial 
absence of infrastructure and basic services such as water network, electric energy or drainage syst em ( Dede , 
2018; Ministerio de Vivienda, 2017). Informal settlements are sub -sets of urban marginal cities where more 
than half of the population do not have a property title (TECHO –Perú, 2018).  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
6 
 provided in this meeting was incorporated into the survey. The survey was  then  conducted 
in SJM by 10 staff members and 300 volunteers  (see Figure 2)  who were trained to collect 
data and survey every household  in SJM between October 2017 and June 20184. The data 
collection was conducted using Kobo Toolbox, an open source digital app developed by the 
Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, designed for non -governmental organizations that conduct 
research in the midst of humanitarian crises.  According to TECHO –Perú  (2018) , Kobo 
Toolbox allowed them to work more efficiently, since it automat ically generated an online 
data base, aggregated the data and mapped the geo -referenced coordinates of the informal 
settlements . 
 
The results of the Relevamiento were  published in 2018 and it  made available 
unprecedented data about SJM. It identified 138 informal settlements within SJM and 
estimated that at least 46, 755 families live in a situation of informality, which represents 
10.8% of the total population. It collected information regarding their lack of access to 
services: finding that 91% of informal settlements do not have access to th e public water 
network , 92% do  not have a drainage system, and 97 % of settlements do not have property 
titles. It also collected information about community governance and social relations 
between SJM residents . It found that 80 % of residents appreciate community solidarity  and 
that 95 % of settlements have a community board5 recognized by the local m unicipality. It 
concluded that informal settlements are predominantly political spaces where “governance 
is characterized by self -management of their territories and the struggle for th eir rights ” 
(TECHO –Perú, 2018).  
 
The data was published in an open data portal and presented to Congress representatives, 
SJM community leaders and civil society organizations. So far, its publication has inspired a 
working group in the Peruvian Congress t o address the main problems affecting informal 
settlements and has also been picked up by local media. According to the Executive Director 
of TECHO –Perú, it has not impacted public policy at a large scale, but they have been 
successful at initiating a publ ic conversation. I t is still unclear whether community members 
consider this data -intensive process has created new opportunities to access justice for 
them or not.  
 
                                                      
4 TECHO –PERÚ staff mentioned that about five informal settleme nts within SJM refused to participate in the 
Relevamiento.  
5 Community boards are groups of “neighbors” or individuals who mobilize and lead community governance. 
They are democratically elected and are chosen to lead social development programs to improve  community 
infrastructure (TECHO –Perú, 2018).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
7 
  
Figure  2: Volunteers h eading to conduct surveys in SJM . Retrieved from Relevamiento 
report ( TECHO–Perú , 2018)  
 
B2. Investigating  Data Jus tice using Concepts Deve loped by Iris Marion Young  
To investigate  access to justice through data  we turn to the work of Iris Marion Young (1990, 
2006);  specifically  her conceptualization of  structural in justice and how it can be challenged.  
Young  defines  social justice as “the elimination of institutionalized domination and 
oppression ” (1990, p 15); where domination and oppression refer to institutional 
constraints that prevent individuals from developing  their capacities, expressing their needs, 
thoughts and feelings , and participating in discussions related to decisions that directly or 
indirectly influence their lives ( Young, 1990;  Uhde, 2010). This conception of injustice and 
oppressio n is structural. Young argues justice  is not the result of a specific cho ice, policy or 
program (1990, p  5), but that these power dynamics are sustained by the norms, rules and 
practices present in the social, economic and political structures in which we participate. In 
our case study, this prods us to look beyond the effects of the Relevamiento itself, and to 
consider if this initiati ve is contributing to larger social and cultural  dynamics  that produce 
injustice.  
 
According to Young, s tructural domination and oppression constrain the self -determination 
and self -development of social groups6 in different ways, affecting the power and 
capabilities they have to make decisions about their own lives.  
 
                                                      
6 Young defines a social group as a collective of persons differentiated from at least one other group by 
cultural forms, practices, or way of life. Members of a group have a specific affinity with one another because 
of their similar experience or way of l ife, which prompts them to associate with one another more than with 
those not identified with the group, or in a different way (Young, 1990).  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
8 
 “Structural injustice exists when social processes put large categories of persons 
under a systematic threat of domination or deprivation of the means to develop and 
exercise their capacities, at the same time as these processes enable others to 
dominate or have a wide range of opportunities for developing and exercising their 
capacities. ” (Young, 2006 , p 114)  
 
To determine if a social group is oppressed, Young describes five f orms of oppression, from  
which we draw three: exploitation, marginalization and powerlessness  (see Table 1)7. These 
concepts are grouped in to a sub -category  of injustices that lead to the  work  and social 
contribution of individuals not being recognized in society (Uhde, 2010). These concepts are 
useful to understand if those who participated in the data collection process led by TECHO –
Perú  perceive dataficati on as a process that sustains or challenges former or current 
experiences  of oppression.  
 
Concept  Definition  Pathway to justice  
Exploitation  The social process by which the 
results of work performed by one 
social group are appropriated to 
benefit another  Reorganization of institutions and 
practices of decision making and 
alteration of the division of labor  
Marginalization  A social group is expelled from 
useful participation in social life, 
and experiences uselessness, 
boredom, and lack of self -respect  Establishing cultural, practical, and 
institutionalized conditions for 
exercising capacities in a context  of 
recognition and interaction  
Powerlessness  A social group experiences lack of 
authority, lack of decision making 
power and exposure to 
disrespectful t reatment  Capability development and creating 
conditions in which those who hold 
power recognize the auth ority, 
expertise and influence  of the social 
group  
 
Table 1 : Summary of analytical framework concepts retrieved from Young (201 2) 
 
Young also sheds light on how oppressed social groups can take action to access justice. In 
the social con nection model of responsibility8 she develops in Responsibility and Global 
Justice (2006), she  explains that every individual who participates in economic, social or 
cultural processes,  including those who experience oppression,  bears a degree of 
responsibility for t he unjust outcomes they produce  (Young, 2006). Even though this may 
sound counter -intuitive, this defin ition recognizes that groups who  are usually perceive d as 
the victims of injustice have the power to change their conditions  through collective action. 
They not only have a greater interest in structural transformation, but also have unique 
insights into the sour ces of structural injustice. In this sense, re medying injustice involves 
creating the institu tional conditions in which oppressed  groups can  harness their power  to 
change their conditions. While identifying what  these conditions should be was out of the 
scope of this study, we sought to recognize the se unique insights by documenting the 
                                                      
7 The other two concepts are violence and cultural imperialism (Young, 1990).  
8 For more detail, see features of the Social Connection Model of Responsibility in the Annex.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
9 
 recommendations  of community members  on how datafication could  create new 
opportunities for capability development and collective action.  
 
Overall, Young ’s approach to social justice is useful to evaluate how the globa l turn to 
datafication is impacting local communities, and in particular, how the social processes that 
arise from datafication may put vulnerable communities at risk of further domination or 
deprivation. At the same time, there  is an instrumental value to investigating  data -related 
dynamics from the perspective of community members. Through the concepts developed by 
Young, we could assess if community members consider datafication furthers relations of 
oppression, or if it activates their agency and afford s them opportunities to engage in 
collective action to transform their conditions through data.  A summary of our approach is 
presented in Table 2.  
 
Research question  Research concepts 
developed by Marion Young 
(1990, 2006)  Insight these concepts 
provide regarding justice and 
data  
Do community members 
consider the 
Relevamiento  offers a  
means to access justice?  Conceptualization of injustice 
and five faces of oppression  Understand how data 
collection processes can 
sustain or challenge structural 
injustice  from the community 
perspective  
Do community members 
consider the 
Relevamiento  enabled 
them to take action to 
remedy injustice?  Parameters social groups can 
use for thinking about their 
own action in relation to 
structural injustice  Understand if data col lection 
practices enable or constrain 
vulnerable populations to take 
action to remedy injustice  
 
Table 2 : Applying  Young’s concepts to assess community perspectives on access to justice 
through dat a 
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
10 
 C. Methods  
 
To learn about community pers pectives, we conducted four in-depth unstructured 
interviews with SJM community leaders (or dirigentes ) that mobilize social development 
programs within SJM and who are the point of contact for TECHO –Perú . For the interview 
itself, we used open -ended inter view schedules that guided the conversation along the lines 
of the aforementioned themes. The interviews were then analyzed  by the research team to 
identify common themes that capture the perspectives of SJM community members 
regarding the collection and u se of their data in urban planning processes such as the 
Relevamiento . This approach was inspired by the work of Tawana Petty, Mariella Saba, 
Tamika Lewis, Seeta Peña Gangadharan and Kim M. Reynolds in Our Data Bodies Project  
(Petty et al.,  2018 ). This report collected testimonies of individuals who are targeted for 
intensive data collection “as they confront  data collection and data -driven systems in the 
process of meeting their basic human needs ” in order to  “identify  commonalities and 
differen ces” between those  testimonies while honoring  the diverse histories and contexts of 
interviewees  (201 8, p 2). Drawing from their methodology, we analyzed  the perceptions 
that inform the decisions SJM community members are making regarding data -related 
activities and sought to emphasize how these emerge in a particular context of structural 
injustice.  
 
We also consulted ethnographic methods designed to negate extractive forms of knowledge 
production that privilege our research interests over those of the com munity we were 
interviewing. Max Liboiron (2018) and her team at the Civic Laboratory for Environmental 
Action Research in Newfoundland have been exploring what community peer review might 
look like and how to iteratively check in with researched communiti es to ensure consent 
over time. In this spirit, we created opportunities to obtain input and reiterative consent 
both from TECHO –Perú and the SJM community. For six months, we held several meetings 
with TECHO –Perú and collaborated with their staff to desig n the research process. This 
involved requesting their input regarding research deliverables, such as the funding 
proposal and the study write -up, requesting their consent whenever there was a change in 
research scope and making a commitment to work togeth er at the completion of the study 
to translate research findings into actionable data collection strategies. The relationship 
with the SJM community was mediated by TECHO –Perú (e.g., see Figure 3). All of the 
interviews with community leaders were coordina ted by the Research Director of TECHO –
Perú, conducted along with a TECHO –Perú volunteer and held in SJM around the availability 
of community leaders. We took these measures to ensure the research did not harm the 
relationship of trust that has been built b etween SJM and TECHO –Perú over the past 15 
years.  
 
In spite of these efforts, many community members refused to participate in our study. We 
initially hoped to conduct at least ten interviews with community leaders. The process of 
contacting them, setting a time to visit the informal settlements and securing their 
availability took three months, and only four interviews were secured. Eight community 
members refused or were unavailable to participate.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
11 
  
Figure 3: Maria Falcone, community leader ; Brennda Huarcaya, TECHO–Perú  volunteer ; 
and Denisse Albornoz, author. Photo requested by Ms. Falcone , taken and used  with her 
consent; May 2019  
 
Ruha Benjamin (2016) has worked on the concept of “informed refusal ” and how expressing 
refusal creates new, m ore equitable relationships between researchers and researched 
communities. Indigenous scholar Audra Simpson (2007) also describes the choice of refusal 
as an articulation “to ourselves and to outsiders ” of “who we are, who you are and th ese 
are my rights ”. We interpret their refusal as an intention to set boundaries with TECHO –
Perú  and our organization  regarding the use of their time and their information. Kim Tall 
Bear (2013) also prods us to consider these silences “as productive and supportive ” of the 
self-determination of social groups (Benjamin, 2016). Future data justice research that seeks 
to involve the perspectives of communities who are constantly the target of data collection 
must be aware of these constraints and allow for refusal and silence to  inform and adapt 
the research timeline in constructive ways.  
 
Finally, to complement the interviews, we also conducted desktop research about informal 
settlements in Peru and TECHO –Perú ´s rese arch methodologies, and undertook two 
interviews with TECHO –Perú staff who participated in the design or implementation of the 
Relevamiento . With this information, we sought to contextualize the information provided 
by community members regarding the involvement of TECHO –Perú  in SJM and learn more 
about community partnerships with the organization.  
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
12 
 D. Findings  
 
This section summarizes our findings to addre ss our two research questions , that address : a) 
if community members of SJM consider datafication – or acquiring visibilit y through data  – a 
process through which they can access justice  as operationalized by Young ; and b) if 
community members of SJM consider datafication a process through which they can 
develop capabilities and activate collective action to remedy injustice.  
 
D1. Datafication as a Process to Access Justice  
Through the interviews , we found that community members spoke favorably  about the 
intention to systematize and standardize the problems of SJM with the Relevamiento . 
However, interviewees also provided examples of how the data collection process and its 
aftermath is sustaining experiences of  Young’s three forms of oppression – powerlessness, 
exploitation and marginalization – that already exist within the community of SJM.  
 
Data fication  and powerlessness9 
We found that  participating in the Relevamiento  impacted the community ’s perceptions 
regarding their own power in three ways. First, SJM community leaders believe  the 
Relevamiento and the production of a data -based report about SJM, could  empower  them 
to make more objective and effective diagnosis of their development problems.  
 
“The Relevamiento is very important. Our work needs to be based on a diagnosis. 
Imagine if we start worki ng without knowing anything and we do everything based 
on our opinion. Suddenly we will leave aside the highest priority for the community. If 
you do not work with a diagnosis, you do not have a good result. Thanks to TECHO–
Perú  we have been able to identi fy our priorities. ” 
 
“We have worked with data [before]. We [used it to make] a short and medium -term 
schedule. This is how we built our stepped pathways and obtained street lighting. 
That schedule was done with TECHO–Perú  and with their orientation. ” 
 
The turn towards data -driven planning is not only in demand at the policy level, but is now 
becoming increasingly valued at the community level as well, most likely as a result of 
exposure to datafication processes . This also implies that other ways of knowin g based on 
intuition, opinions or lived experiences are perceived as less valid or useful to plan and 
execute community programming than data -intensive approaches. In the long run, the 
growing pervasiveness of data collection exercises in the community may  impact the forms 
of knowledge the community welcomes, values and desires to describe their context.  
 
Second,  the data produced through the Relevamiento  was thought of as a tool they could 
use to  challenge their own sense of powerlessness in front of more powerful actors . In 
particular, communit y members who considered data to be a source of legitimacy and 
authority, thought  the Relevamiento could  enable  them to communicate on more equitable 
terms with three  individuals and institutions . First, the mu nicipal government authorities: 
                                                      
9 This section summarizes findings that speak to whether datafication furthers powerlessness – be it by 
furthering a sense of lack of authority, a feeling of incapability, or exposure to disrespec tful treatment.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
13 
 who have most power and political interest to improve the living conditions of SJM. Second,  
central government authorities  such as Congress representatives and policy makers who can 
steer political will and public narratives  surrounding informal settlements. And t hird, 
research and civil society organizations who regularly visit informal settlements and request 
up-to-date data to understand the needs of the community and plan the scope of their 
work.  
 
“When the survey began, municipality authorities said: “we are going to support and 
listen to everyone ”. The municipality was very willing to support the Relevamiento 
and use the data to support the needs that we have in the future. And who better 
than the municipality, to implem ent and make the most of the results of the 
Relevamiento? ” 
 
“There are several [civil society] organizations that come in to work and require 
information. Such as how many women currently live in the community, or what are 
the occupations of our neighbors.  It would be important for me to be able to use the 
data collected by the Relevamiento to provide them this information. ” 
 
However, most community members mentioned having the data in and of itself is not 
enough to use it effectively  to enable collaboration . They emphasized the crucial role p layed 
by TECHO –Perú  as an intermediary that should not only  collect and share this data, but 
should also provide advice on how to use it strategically to mobilize power and resources. 
The expectation to cont inue working with  TECHO –Perú is grounded in the trust the SJM 
community has  placed in the organization, however it also threatens to generate  
dependency on the organization and further the notion that  the community is  incapable of 
using data  to obtain support from powerful actors without their mediation.  
 
And third , community leaders  consider  the Relevamiento is an opportunity to ch allenge 
misleading discourses about informal settlements  and what life is like in these spaces. 
Culturally, those  who live in informal settlements are  subject to racism, classism and other 
forms of oppressive discourses that portray the members of settlements as informal, illegal 
and i nvisible outsiders, and are used to delegitimize their perspectives and expectation s of 
development (Sakay et al., 2011). Community members believe  that these discourses are 
not only held by the general public, but also  by decision makers  such as policy makers or 
public service providers . In their view, becoming visible through data is an opportunity  to 
speak to these actors, tell their stories  in their complexity  and mostly, to be heard with 
empathy. However, some community leaders felt the questions asked in the survey of the 
Relevamiento  did not give them this opportunity:  
 
“There wer e a lot of questions missing in the questionnaire10. Sometimes I thought: ‘I 
want you to ask me this ’ but it was not in the questionnaire. The questions 
lacked...empathy. They did not ask: Why is the community like this? Why have you 
not progressed? I would  have liked to be asked questions about why we do not have 
                                                      
10 TECHO –Perú staff explained that even though they sought to include more qualitative questions in the questionnaire, 
they were constrained by the standardized survey designed by the Centre for Social Research from TECHO in Chile. The 
regio nal branch from Chile had encouraged them to use the same questions to make comparative analyses across the 
region.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
14 
 property titles until now. I have plenty of stories. Stories about terrorism, crime in the 
area. There are a lot of topics to be heard about. ” 
 
They expressed discomfort about how the data  produced  by the Relevamiento will now 
shape what people know about SJM without providing  the context or a more 
comprehensive explanation that humanizes informal settlers. As a result, one of their fears 
is that the final diagnosis  produced by the Relevamiento misrepresents their reality, and 
does not get to the deeper structural factors that facilitate or constrain their developm ent. 
Furthermore, if community members cannot verify what story is being told by the data, they 
will not be able to identify whether t his narrative is harmful to their community and if so, 
make informed decisions regarding the impact of future data collection activities:  
 
“The fear is that the information is not real, that it does not reflect our needs and 
that only some [people] have be en represented [in the data]. That the final results 
don’t reflect what we really want. The intentions behind this work have been really 
good but we worry that we will look at the information and think: what is this good 
for? We do not know if this is the case, because we have not seen it. Only after seeing 
the results, we will know if the job is well done. If it reflects the real needs. Only then 
we can talk about solutions. ” 
 
This problem  was also evident in an anecdote told by the Executive Director of TECHO –Perú . 
When a local newspaper shared the  results of the Relevamiento  (Rosas, 2018) , it 
emphasized the unsafe living conditions of SJM.  While TECHO –Perú  thought this was a great 
opportunity to raise awarene ss about urban poverty in Lima , community leaders were 
disappointed  with the coverage . They felt that the  report oversimplified  the problem and 
did not highlight the community -led initiatives  to reduce the risks. This discomfort suggests 
that the data collection and dissemination process, as it is  currently designed, is not 
determined by how community members choose to tell their stories, but is rather ruled by 
what intermediaries such as TECHO –Perú  believe will be most effective approach to obtain 
institutional attention and support.  In this sense  the interests, priorities and decisions of the 
intermediary prevail over those of the community.  
 
Datafication and exploitation11 
We found that e xploitation manifested in two ways.  First, there is a general perception that 
community leaders who participated in the Relevamiento  have not benefited f rom having 
participated . Two years have passed since the Relevamiento  was conducted  and to  this 
date, many remain uncertain about how this  data is being used, who is using it and wh at 
they have gained due to this process . The interviews show community leaders  are still 
unsure about whether their expectations were taken into consideration:  
 
“The neighbo rs asked TECHO–Perú : In what way will this be useful or beneficial for 
us? What are we going to obtain from participating? The TECHO–Perú  representative 
explained that the survey would tell us the most urgent problems we have, and we 
told him that [we already knew] that our most urgent problem was lack of access to 
                                                      
11 This section summarizes findings that speak to whether the Relevamiento created conditions of exploitation 
for community leaders in which more powerful groups benefitted from their work.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
15 
 clean water. It has been almost two years since the Relevamiento  and nothing has 
improved. Things are still the same. We wanted progress, but [our district] has the 
least clean and most expensive water in all of Li ma. And the Relevamiento  is not 
attacking this problem. Maybe it is attacking other problems. We did not want this 
Relevamiento to be just a study, a paper. We want it to translate to ‘obras’ – to 
tangible outcomes .” 
 
Even though consent was obtained to co nduct the research , it is not clear whether TECHO –
Perú  was aware of why community members chose to participate in this process and 
provide their data. Were community leaders expecting an outcome in particular? Did they 
explicitly delegate the decisions regarding data use to  the data intermediary, in this case 
TECHO –Perú ? Did they create a system to demand accountability from the intermediary? By 
asking community members why they want to participate, data intermediaries can learn 
about the value communiti es ascribe to their raw data and thoughtfully incorporate these 
expectations into the design of their criteria for consent , use of data  and the process of data 
collection.  
 
Second, the reluctance to demand results from the  Relevamiento is tied to the techn ical, 
capability and knowledge constraints faced by community members. Currently, they lack a 
general understanding about where  to find the data and how they can use this data to 
generate action.  These constraints also limit the decisions communities can make regarding 
their data and how they would like to use it to address their development needs. 
Interviewees suggested TECHO –Perú  should host regular assemblies every year to present 
the results o f the Relevamiento and ensure there is continuity in the action plans that have 
been devised based on the results.  
 
“The Relevamiento  should be presented in front of the recently elected community 
leaders who are preparing their work plan. The new leaders do not know anything. It 
would be good to have a meeting every year and tell them: this is what we collected 
and learned from the Relevamiento .” 
 
Even though the final report of the Relevamiento  has been published in an open data portal, 
most community mem bers do not have access to the digital devices, infrastructure or know -
how to find it. As a result, many have not been able to use the data or request updates 
about the state of the study. The lack of access to it creates a situation in which the data can 
ultimately only be used for the purpose, benefits or intere sts of those who can access it and  
creates condition s of exploitation in which community members participate in a data 
collection process  to produce an output they are not able to enjoy or use.  
 
Datafication and marginalization12 
We found that  while the Relevamiento  is creating a space in which voices and needs of 
historically marginalized communities can be represented, it is also amplifying social 
divisions and political struggles that already ex isted within SJM . The conflicts interviewees  
mentioned are diverse and complex , spanning from political tensions between community 
                                                      
12 This section summarizes findings that speak to whether the Relevamiento led community members to feel 
excluded from useful participation in social life.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
16 
 leaders, accusations of corruption , and ethnic tensions between immigrants from different 
regions of Peru. Community leaders talked about how the data collection process 
contributed to these tensions . Even though TECHO –Perú  made an effort to include as many 
community groups in the process as possible, ultimately, coordination meetings were most 
frequent with the groups that had the most political leverage and who were more effective 
at building partnerships with civil society organizations. The process ultimately became 
politicized and was perceived by some as biased:  
 
“When the survey came around, I felt it became biased little by little. I felt that it only 
considered some people and left other people aside. There are communities with 
whom progress has been made, while with us, the communication slowed down. We 
feel like we are not being listened to. As a resident, you think to yourself: ¿ya para 
qué? - What is the point of participating? ” 
 
This sent the message to those who already felt marginalized by the data collection process 
that only the needs of the most powerful groups of the community would be represented in 
the Relevam iento and that as a result, only their concerns would be integrated into the 
public agenda. In other words, that only those who actively participated in the Relevamiento 
process would be able to access justice, while the rest would be excluded from the deb ates 
and programs designed after this data.  This belief has been strengthened by the difficulties 
some community members are having to work with  the municipal government:  
 
“The municipality closes many doors for us. If you do not agree with them, they 
marg inalize you. If you do not agree with their thoughts, they marginalize you. Why 
should I go and negotiate [with them] if I am not going to be listened to? ” 
 
Data is  not sufficient to enable collaboration between different actors  and ensure the 
equitable participation of the least powerful groups . Be it between municipal government 
authorities  and SJM residents, or between community leaders, inclusion and collaboration  is 
ultimately more contingent on community relations than on a vaila bility of information or 
data. Recognizing the political conflicts and social divisions of the community and how they 
will affect the access and use of information, is a precondition to using this data  effectively 
as a political and social tool to red ress power imbalances . This also places more 
responsibility on  civil society organizations that collect  data in histori cally n eglected 
population s to develop mechanisms that  identify pre-existing community conflicts and 
mitigate  possible  risks or harms  brought about by the  intervention.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
17 
 Summary  
A summary of these findings is presented in Table 3.  
 
Form of 
Injustice  Instances in which Injustice can be 
Challenged Through Datafication  Instances in which Injustice can be 
Sustained Through Datafication  
Powerlessness   The data collection process has led to 
an appreciation of data and data -
based planning by the community.  
 Data is perceived as a valuable asset 
that ought to be used, managed and 
applied by the community to 
transform their living conditions.  
 Communicating the problems of the 
community using data is perceived as 
an opportunity to demonstrate the 
urgency of the problems faced by 
informal settlers and highlight the 
most pressing needs.  
 Some community members believe 
the use of data grants legitima cy, 
authority and objectivity to 
community knowledge.  
 Data allows community members to 
communicate and cooperate on more 
equitable terms with powerful actors 
who consider data -based knowledge 
a more accurate and trustworthy 
source of knowledge.   The data co llection and dissemination 
process is not determined by the 
priorities of community members but 
is rather ruled by what intermediaries 
such as TECHO –Perú, believe will be 
most effective approach to obtain 
institutional attention and support.  
 The turn to da tafication is making data 
more valuable. Data is considered 
more legitimate and useful than other 
ways of knowing such as intuition, 
opinions or lived experiences that are 
also present in the community.  
 The role of an intermediary that 
advises communities on how to use 
the data effectively could generate 
dependency and further the notion 
that the community is incapable of 
using this data without their 
mediation.  
 Community members fear a data -
based narrative about the realities of 
the informal settlement tha t lacks 
context portrays them in harmful, 
undesirable or dehumanizing way s.  
Exploitation   Community members are demanding 
accountability from the data 
intermediary ; TECHO –Perú . They wish 
to know how their data has been 
used and who is benefitting from it.  
 Criteria for obtaining consent in data 
collection processes can incorporate 
the decisions made by community 
members regarding their data: such 
as why they are providing it and what 
they are expecting in return.   Communities remain uncertain about 
how the d ata has been used, who is 
using it and what they have gained due 
to this process.  
 Data is published in open data portals 
community members cannot access 
due to technical, capability and 
knowledge constraints.  
 These constraints also limit the 
decisions comm unities can make 
regarding their data and how they 
would like to use it to address their 
development needs . 
Marginalization   Datafication creates a space in which 
voices and needs of historically 
marginalized communities can be 
represented.  
 Data can be used to capture attention 
of powerful actors such as elected 
government officials, international 
development organizations and policy 
makers.   If the data collection process does not 
include every community, it risks 
amplifying the voices of the most 
powerf ul groups within the 
community.  
 Data is not enough to spark the 
interest of political actors. Political will 
is more contingent on community 
relations than on availability of 
information or data . 
 
Table 3: Summary of findings on powerlessness, exploitation and marginalization  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
18 
 D2. Datafication as a Process to Develop Capabilities and Take Action  
A more strategic use of community data could enable community leaders  to challenge 
oppressive relations and  take action to transform their  conditions. Iris Marion Young argues 
in the social connection model of responsibility (2006 , p 123 ) that “structural processes can 
be altered only if many actors in diverse social positions work together to intervene in these 
processes to produce different outcomes ”. SJM community leaders identified three ways in 
which they can participate on more equitable terms in data -based initiatives and decisions. 
These ideas contemplate data capability development and are oriented towards improving 
conditions for decision making r egarding the use of data in community development.  
 
Datafication has generated interest in the community towards developing data capabilities  
The data -intensive process facilitated by TECHO –Perú has sparked a strong interest in the 
community to develop data capabilities. The frustration of no t being able to access the data  
has led community leaders to reflect upon the value data has for their community and how 
they could use it in strategic ways to improve their livelihood s and collaborate with diverse 
actors. Even though the community of SJM already collects its own data through 
community -based initiatives, community leaders seem interested in learning to conduct 
large -scale, systematic process es such as the Relevamiento. Among the examples they 
provided, they wish to be able to access the data generated by the Relevamiento, cross -
reference it with community data, and use it to inform ongoing community development 
programs and to improve managemen t and planning of the community resources.  
 
Community leaders want to transition from being data providers to data owners  
After the Relevamiento, community leaders think of data as a source of power and as a 
valuable asset. However, they currently lack the  technical resources, knowledge and 
infrastructure to engage with it in a meaningful way and to set the terms for its use. A 
community leader used a powerful metaphor to explain how data could contribute to self -
determination by comparing it to a “multi -purpose knife ” or a “first-aid backpack ”, in that 
their  utility depend s on the readiness and sophistication of the user.  
 
“The results of the Relevamiento  should be like a first -aid backpack or a multi -
purpose knife. These knives have scissors, a bottle opener, a screwdriver, even a little 
hammer. Everything that could help me in an emergency. That is what the 
Relevamiento  should do. It is a tool for us and  also for the authorities. But you have 
to know how to use it. You need to know where to find it. ”. 
 
“If you give us the results on paper, [...] we will not understand what that report 
means. If someone comes and explains it to us: ‘now you have this benef it, or you can 
achieve this, and this. Or we have achieved this and this with the survey. ’ If it benefits 
us, we are going to do something with it. ” 
 
To address this gap, community leaders suggest the development of training materials and 
learning modules that build data literacy, digital literacy and digital rights with an anti -
oppressive lens.  Their idea is to bridge the gap between data and the community through 
the use of creative tools, such as animated cartoons, dynamic videos or short movies, “that 
you can watch with the whole family ”, and that se ek to situate and humanize data  as part of 
“the reality ” of the SJM community.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
19 
  
Community -based data infrastructure is  key for community data management  
Finally, interviewees also expressed an interest in the  creation of community -based data 
infrastructures where communities who provided their data can access it, manage it and set 
terms over how it is used. In practical terms, they suggested the creation of a digital 
repository or platform designed specificall y for community leaders, where they can access 
and update their own data.  
 
“All the community leaders of SJM should be able to use and manage that data. [I 
would like to] have a transparency portal with our data. We need a platform 
designed with the specif ic needs of SJM in mind. The data is currently available in a 
link, but they have not designed it with a [community] approach. A community leader 
should be able to access the data and feed the platform with new information. For 
example, if we know that the re are more children being born or that there are new 
members in the community, we should be able to add it. I ’m currently trying to use 
Excel. We need this information to be up -to-date to plan accordingly. ” 
 
This suggests that SJM residents aspire to crea te conditions where they can see themselves 
as the experts and “owners ” of their data, and create a system in which they have the 
power to decide what data to use and for  what purpose . This is not to say that communities 
will use the data in an intrinsical ly positive or neutral way, but eliminating constraints on 
self-determination and self -development  can possibly afford communities more agency to 
make decision s regarding data and also place  more responsibility on them for how their 
decisions affect the ov erall system.  
 
Box 1: List of recommendations to build  a community -based data collection model  
 
1. Collect information about expectations and aspirations of community me mbers 
around data  
2. Collect multiple forms of data that reflect how communities wish to be portrayed 
publicly  
3. Co-design creative ways in which community members can share their own stories 
and perspectives beyond the use of quantitative data  
4. Explain the value of different forms of data  to community members  and how each 
form of data can be used t o achieve different purposes  
5. Ask for consent both when collecting data, and again when using it.  Ask for consent 
not just to collect data, but also about types of data use  
6. Create strategies to cross -reference and integrate community data and data collected  
at a larger scale by external organizations  
7. Build community capacities to use data for program and resource management  
8. Develop digital and non -digital mechanisms to share data with the community ai med 
at reaching diverse publics  
9. Design advocacy roadmaps t hat outline how data will be used to achieve community -
defined objec tives  
10. Design a comm unity -based data infrastructure  where communities who provided 
their data can access it, manage it and set terms over how it is used  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
20 
  
E. Discussion and Conclusions  
 
Datafication is not only a technical process, but an activity that is deeply influenced by the 
power dynamics and the social, cultural and political tensions that operate within a given 
context. While in this study we mostly focused on identifying instance s of oppression and 
the reproduction of inequality in data -intensive practices, Young ’s work  prodded us to  
consider how residents of historically marginalized communities hold responsibility and 
agency  to transform their conditions. Broadly speaking, dataf ication as it is being 
implemented now does not create justice for  vulnerable communities. In fact, it s process  
deepens or reproduces instances of oppression by reinforcing community  perception s 
regarding  their lack of knowledge, lack of capabilities or la ck of authority to use data  to lead 
their own development.  
 
However, participating in a process of datafication along with a tru sted partner such as 
TECHO –Perú , sparked an interest in community leaders about the different ways in which 
they could use data to further their capabilities, mobilize collective action and address their 
development needs. Community leaders perceive themselves as capable and willing to use 
data in constructive ways to transform their conditions. This interest and power needs to be 
activated through capability development. The themes that emerged in the case study also 
led to the following four reflections:  
 
First, the case illustrates how the cultural meanings given to data in historically marginalized 
communities are as important a s the processes and practices we put in place to use it. In the 
case of Peru and SJM, we learned that datafication had a much stronger political and 
cultural significance than anticipated. For many, data was an objective form of expression 
that conferred  authority to community leaders and was able to systematize the  chao tic, 
complex and misunderstood reality of informal settlements. It also represented the 
opportunity to speak a lingua franca that bridged  the gap between powerful decision 
makers from the “official Peru ” and communities from the “marginalized Peru ”. However, to 
other community leaders,  data embodied institutional power. It represen ted the imposition 
of a new set  of rules, unmet expectations and the burden to learn new skills to stay relevant  
in the system. All in all, these perceptions highlight how datafication can simultaneously 
represent hope and oppression for vulnerable communities, and how these perspectives are 
not homogenous. The approach of each individual and each community group to  data will 
be situated in their lived experiences and the power relations they are a part of. However, 
this case illustrates how these expectations, concerns, motivations, among others, are 
seldom considered in the design or the aftermath of the data colle ction process, leading to 
new forms of cultural marginalization, exploitation and powerlessness in which the 
perceptions of data producers and their contributions are ultimately marginalized or 
deemed irrelevant for the final output of the project.  
 
Second, datafication also proved to be a  process through which different actors acquire 
power, while others feel powerless or incapable of participating . Institutional actors or 
individuals who feel comfortable with the use of data will resort to dataficat ion as a tool to 
boost their legitimacy and solve their problems,  as is the case of local authorities who 
demand the use of data in evidence -based policy making or civil society organizations who Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
21 
 require data to legitimize the work they do with vulnerable communities. However, we 
learned that individuals who lack the capabilities necessary to handle data, or the 
opportunities to develop these capabilities, feel they cannot use the data they provided and 
once owned in order to make informed decisions to addr ess their development needs. In 
other words, not developing data capabilities creates conditions of exploitation in which 
individuals are providing their data to meet the purposes and benefits of external actors, 
while not being equipped to proactively rea p benef its for their own community. A  process 
of datafication that is not coupled with data capability building , limits the choices individuals 
from marginalized communities can  make regarding their own data.  
 
Third, the case of SJM suggests that NGOs and civil society organizations that act as data 
intermediaries can play a fundamental role in  developing these capabilities and in enabling 
what Michael Gurstein calls “effective data use ” (2011). We learned that the path towards 
becoming an effective interme diary involves understanding how to navigate community —
researcher —practitioner rel ations in an equitable way. If  data intermediaries have the social 
and cultural capital to build relationships of trust with community members, they can also 
create the condi tions to develop relevant data capabilities in the community and boost 
community -based datafication. We consider this should be the ultimate goal of 
organizations that undertake data -intensive practices in vulnerable communities: to create 
the conditions i n which datafied systems are built and sustained by the community under 
norms, rules and practices set by the community. This is a particularly timely approach. As 
the trend towards datafication grows, every citizen will need these skills to uphold their 
rights and participate in society. Residents from informal settlements, along with other 
vulnerable communities will most likely be neglected by this process and will not have 
access to the opportunities to develop these skills in the same measure as other groups in 
society. Data skills and data justice principles could position them to assert their agency not 
only in datafication but in their ability to exercise their citizenship in the city.  
 
And finally, the path towards a community -based data justice mod el involves imagining 
socio -technical practices and infrastructures that enable community data stewardship. The 
case of SJM illustrated how the Relevamiento was not designed to achieve structural change 
in and of itself, but to create  tools SJM residents c ould use to exist and interact on more 
equitable  terms within system. In this sense, the idea of a community -oriented data 
infrastructure is promising. Community members in SJM did not reject the process of 
datafication, but imagined a datafied system in w hich they would be able to access the data,  
and manage it continuously improve it. This introduces a different way to think about data 
that is built on the basis of community – as opposed to individual – ownership and 
stewardship. Many questions remain abo ut the benefits or risks of this model: what data 
rights do they hold as a community? How can they establish boundaries for external, more 
powerful actors, that wish to access and use their data? Would this model reproduce the 
hierarchies of the current model by establishing gatekeepers and limited users of 
information? However, we  believe it is a step forward to reduce  the power of those who are 
currently leading datafi cation initiatives, and enable  communities to define new rules for 
what datafication i n development should do, in what way and for whom.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
22 
 E1. Recommendations  
Practical recommendations were outlined above in Box 1. From an academic standpoint, 
future studies should attempt to use Young ’s framework to understand data -related 
injustice. Her co ncepts  were very useful to identify specific ways in whic h datafication could 
mitigate or further an individual  sense of injustice. However, more  in-depth research is 
required to understand how  larger, institutional forms of injustice are challenged or 
sustained by datafication. It is also key to continue investigating how  relations of  
dominat ion-oppression can translate  into and affect other areas of life with wider 
implications for livelihood and survival  over time . Some questions include: i n what ways do  
powerless ness , exploitation and marginalization constrain  access to social, economic or 
political participation? How do perceptions  of these affect the decisions oppressed 
communities make in their personal, family and community life? How does injustice 
experienced in datafication intersect with other forms of powerlessness, exploitation and 
marginalization  experienced on the basis of gender, race, socio -economic status, etc.?  
 
To continue developing a community -based data justice model, future studies sho uld 
explore  community  data  management. On this occasion  we found  that community 
management is  organized around collective  action ; yet this ideal is constrained by the 
political and ethnic conflicts that e xist between the diverse social groups that exist in spaces 
like informal settlements . Many questions remain about w hat socio -technical systems need 
to be in place to enable effective community data governance : how will their cultural and 
social divisions translate into mechanisms for community data managem ent? Who will have 
the power to manage community data? What checks and balances will need to be in place 
to ensure representation and accountability? As these questions are tackled, studies should 
continue to center  the voices of those who live in marginal ized communities and portray the 
diversity, complexity and power imbalances they navigate.  
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
23 
 References  
 
Benjamin,  R. (2016 ) Informed  refusal:  Toward  a justice -based  bioethics.  Science,  Technology,  
& Human  Values , 41(6), 967-990.  
Canales,  T., & Maulen,  A. (2011 ) Microcampamentos  y su invisibilidad  en la macrohistoria.  
Revista  CIS, 9(14),  117-125.  
Chakraborty,  A., Wilson,  B., Sarraf,  S., & Jana,  A. (2015 ) Open  data  for informal  settlements:  
Toward  a user’s  guide  for urban  managers  and planners.  Journal  of Urban  Management , 
4(2), 74-91. 
Crooks,  A., Pfoser,  D., Jenkins,  A., Croitoru,  A., Stefanidis,  A., Smith,  D., ... & Lamprianidis,  G. 
(2015)  Crowdsourcing  urban  form  and function.  International  Journal  of Geographical  
Information  Science , 29(5), 720-741.  
Dede,  A. F. (2018)  Ciudad  Ilegal . Lima:  El Comercio.  
https://elcomercio.pe/opinion/colaboradores/urbanizacion -lima -callao -ciudad -ilegal -
aldo -facho -noticia -497386  
Donovan,  K. (2012)  Seeing  like a slum.  Georgetown  Journal  of International  Affairs , 
Winter/Spring,  97-104.  
Graham,  M., Hogan,  B., Straumann,  R. K., & Medhat,  A. (2014)  Uneven  geographies  of user -
generated  information:  Patterns  of increasing  informational  poverty.  Annals  of the 
Association  of American  Geographers , 104(4), 746-764.  
Gurstein,  M. B. (2011 ) Open  data:  Empowering  the empowered  or effective  data  use for 
everyone?.  First  Monday , 16(2). 
Hagen,  E. (2011)  Mapping  change.  Innovations , 6(1),  69-94. 
Heeks,  R., & Renken,  J. (2018 ) Data  justice  for development:  What  would  it mean?  
Information  Development , 34(1), 90-102.  
Heeks,  R., & Shekhar,  S. (2019 ) Datafication,  development  and marginalised  urban  
communities:  an applied  data  justice  framework.  Information,  Communication  & Society , 
22(7),  992-1011 . 
Liboiron,  M., Zahara,  A., & Schoot,  I. (2018 ) Community  peer  review:  A method  to bring  
consent  and self-determination  into the sciences.  Preprints  2018 , 2018060104.  
Liu, X., Song,  Y., Wu, K., Wang,  J., Li, D., & Long,  Y. (2015 ) Understanding  urban  China  with  
open  data.  Cities , 47, 53-61. 
Matos,  J. (1986 ) Desborde  Popular  y Crisis del Estado  (3rd ed.). Lima:  IEP. 
Ministerio  de Vivienda  (2012 ) Situación  de los Barrios  Marginales  en el Perú . Lima:  Dirección  
Nacional  de Urbanismo , Ministerio  de Vivienda . 
http://www3.vivienda.gob.pe/dgprvu/docs/Estudios/08%20Situaci%C3%B3n%20BUM%
C2%B4s%20en%20el%20Per%C3%BA%20201 2%20 -%202da%20Aprox.pdf  
Petty,  T., Saba,  M., Lewis,  T., Gangadharan,  S. P., & Eubanks,  V. (2018 ) Our Data  Bodies:  
Reclaiming  our Data  (interim  report ). Detroit:  ODB  Project.  
Plöger,  J. (2012 ) Gated  barriadas : Responses  to urban  insecurity  in marginal  settlements  in 
Lima,  Peru.  Singapore  Journal  of Tropical  Geography,  33, 212-225.  
Redacción  Gestión  (201 7) Midis:  Ahora  existen  más pobres  urbanos  que pobres  rurales  en el 
Perú.  Gestion , 5 Jan. https://gestion.pe/economia/midis -existen -pobres -urbanos -
pobres -rurales -peru -126049  
Rosas,  Y. (2018 ) SJL: 70%  de habitantes  de asentamientos  vive en riesgo  ante  
deslizamientos.  Diario  El Comercio , 17 Oct. https://elcomercio.pe/lima/sucesos/san -
juan -miraflores -asentamientos -son-vulnerables -deslizamientos -noticia -568615  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
24 
 Scott,  J. C. (1998 ) Seeing  like a State:  How  Certain  Schemes  to Improve  the Human  Condition  
have  Failed. New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press.  
Simpson,  A. (2007 ) On ethnographic  refusal: Indigeneity , ‘voice’  and colonial  citizenship.  
Junctures:  The Journal  for Thematic  Dialogue,  9, 67–80. 
http://junctures.org/index.php/junctures/issue/view/11/showToc   
Taylor,  L. (2017)  What  is data  justice?  The case  for connecting  digital  rights  and freedoms  on 
the global  level.  Big Data  & Society , Jul-Dec,  1-14. 
TECHO –Perú . (2018 ) Relevamiento  de Asentamientos  Populares  - San Juan  de Miraflores . 
Lima:  TECHO –Perú.  http://datos.techo.org/dataset/39047c97 -5b38 -478a -a958 -
f8d9d7bd 28be/resource/99e59185 -d06e -4921 -b0b5 -baee3b8cd9ad/download/informe -
relevamiento -de-asentamientos -populares -sjm.pdf  
Thatcher,  J., O’Sullivan,  D., & Mahmoudi,  D. (2016)  Data  colonialism  through  accumulation  
by dispossession:  New  metaphors  for daily  data.  Environment  and Planning  D: Society  
and Space , 34(6), 990-1006.  
Uhde,  Z. (2010 ) On sources  of structural  injustice:  A feminist  reading  of the theory  of Iris M. 
Young.  Human  Affairs,  20(2), 151-166.  
Young,  I. M. (1990)  Justice  and the Politics  of Difference . Princeton:  Princeton  University  
Press.  
Young,  I. M. (2006)  Responsibility  and global  justice:  A social  connection  model. Social  
Philosophy  & Policy , 23, 102-130. 
Young,  I. M. (201 2) Five faces  of oppression.  In: The Community  Development  Reader  (2nd 
ed.),  J. Defilippis  & S. Saegert  (eds).  New  York:  Routledge,  328-337.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
25 
 Acknowledgements  
The “Urban Data, Inequality and Justice in the Global South ” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowship funded by the University of Manchester ’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institute  with additional financial support from Canada ’s International 
Development Research Centre . We would like to acknowledge the trust and support 
provided by TECHO –Perú  and the community leaders of San Juan de Miraflores to conduct 
this study.  
 
About the Author s 
Denisse Albornoz holds a BA in International Development and Sociology from the 
Universi ty of Toronto. Her research and advocacy work in India, Canada and Peru has looked 
at questions of power and inequality in knowledge production, science, technology and  
education. S he currently works  for Hiperderecho, a digital rights organization based in  Peru 
where she  investigates gender and technology, data justic e and feminist digital culture.   
 
Katherine Reilly  is Associate Professor in the School of Communication at Simon Fraser 
University , Canada . Her work focuses on the role of communications in international 
relations and international development. Her areas of research interest include the impact 
of information and communications technologies on political and social processes in Latin 
America, the role of open data in development processes, and the political economy of 
media reform in Latin America. Most recently she has begun to study the sharing economy 
in Latin America.  
 
Marieliv Flores holds a BA in Communication for Development from the Pontificia 
Universidad Católica del Perú and is a n MA candidate on Gender Studies at Ottawa 
University, Canada . She currently works for Hiperderecho in Lima, Perú.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 82  
26 
 Annex: Social Connection Model by Iris Marion Young  
 
1. Social Connection Model of Responsibility developed by Iris Marion Young. Concepts and  definitions 
retrieved from Section IV of Responsibility and Global Justice (Young, 2006). Table created by the authors.  
 
Feature  Definition  
Not isolating  In a context of structural injustice, finding a few people guilty of perpetrating specific 
wrongful actions does not absolve from bearing responsibility others whose actions 
contribute to the outcomes. A social connection model of responsibility recognizes  how 
the actions of every actor who participates in the structure has an impact over the just or 
unjust outcomes of the structure.  
Judging background 
conditions  A model of responsibility understands the mediated connection that agents have to 
structural injustices. It often brings into question the background conditions – historical 
legacies, institutional rules, accepted cultural norms – that shape decision making of 
actors who belong to the structure and perpetuate injustice.  
More forward -
looking than  
backward -looking  
 Assigning and taking responsibility for injustice is more forward -looking than backward -
looking. This recognizes there are an ongoing set of processes that will likely continue 
producing harms unless there are interventions. The point is  not to blame, punish, or 
seek redress from those who created a specific act of injustice, but rather to enjoin those 
who participate by their actions in the process of collective action to change it.  
Shared 
responsibility  Shared responsibility recognizes  each individual is personally responsible for the risks of 
harmful outcomes produced by a group of persons in a partial way. The specific part that 
each person plays in producing the outcome cannot be isolated and identified, thus the 
responsibility is es sentially shared.  
Discharged only 
through collective 
action  Forward -looking responsibility can be discharged only if many actors in diverse social 
positions work together to intervene in these processes to produce different outcomes.  
 
2. Parameters of reas oning social actors can use to think about their own action in relation to structural 
injustice. Concepts retrieved from p137 of Responsibility and Global Justice  (Young, 2006). Table created 
by the authors.  
 
Parameter  Definition  Young’s reflections regarding action and justice  
Power  The degree of potential or actual 
power or influence over the processes 
that produce the outcomes.  Agents do not always have sufficient energy and 
resources to respond to all structural injustices to 
which they are connected. They should focus on 
those where they have a greater capacity to 
influence structural processes.  
Interest  Degree of interests i n the maintenance 
or transformation of structures that 
produce injustice.  
 Victims of structural injustice often have a greater 
interest in structural transformation. But those with 
the greatest interest in perpetuating the structures 
are those with the gr eatest power to influence their 
transformation.  
Privilege  Degree of privilege acquired by virtue 
of the structures. Privilege often 
coincides with power.  Persons who benefit relatively from structural 
injustices have special moral responsibilities to 
contribute to organized efforts to correct them, not 
because they are to blame, but because they are 
able to adapt to changed circumstances without 
suffering serious deprivation.  
Collective 
ability  When interest, power, and existing 
organization enables peo ple to act 
collectively to influence processes 
more easily regarding one issue of 
justice than another.  The structural processes can be altered only if many 
actors in diverse social positions have the 
capabilities to work together and intervene in these 
processes to produce different outcomes.  
 