 
 TECHNICAL NOTE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CÔTE D’IVOIRE     
 
EVALUATING DIGITAL P AYMENT 
SYSTEMS FOR EXPANDIN G SOCIAL 
PROTECTION COVERAGE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DECEMBER  2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 CONTENTS  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  3 
I. MOTIVATION AND OBJEC TIVES  ................................ ................................ ........................  4 
Choice of Social Protection and Labor Programs Included in this Note  ................................ .......  4 
Structure of this Note  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  5 
II. ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DIGITAL PAYMENT S ................................ ........................  5 
Institutional Framework  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  5 
PSP landscape in Côte d’Ivoire  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 5 
KYC Requirements  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  6 
Interoperability  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  6 
Identification Systems  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  6 
III. EFFECTIVE MONITORING  OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS  ................................ ............................  8 
PSP Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  8 
Specific Challenges of Monitoring Digital Payments  ................................ ................................ . 8 
The Grievance Redress Mechanism  ................................ ................................ ............................  9 
GRM Basics  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 9 
GRM and M&E  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  10 
Putting It All Together: A Monitoring System for Digital Payments  ................................ ...........  10 
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATI ON................................ ................................ .........................  12 
Evaluation Framework  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  12 
Detailed Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  13 
Accessibility  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  13 
Integration  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 15 
Lessons Learned from Global Experience  ................................ ................................ ..................  16 
V. RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 18 
Interoperability, choice and quality -based competition  ................................ ............................  18 
Monitoring and Accountability  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 19 
Grievance Redress  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  19 
Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  19 
VI. ANNEXES  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  22 
A. Fundamental Performance Indicators for Payment Mechanisms  ................................ ...... 22 
B. Good Practice for M&E of Digital Payments  ................................ ................................ .......  23 
C. Good Practice for GRMs  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 25 
D. Example Survey Instrument for Payment Monitoring – PFSP  ................................ .............  28 
E. Example Grievance Form – PFSP  ................................ ................................ ........................  30 
F. ISPA Payment Assessment Tool Overview  ................................ ................................ .........  32 
 
 3 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
This technical note was prepared as part of the World Bank's technical assistance program1 (2015 -2018) 
in Côte d'Ivoire on social protection  and labor policy (contributory and non -contributory), "Building 
Productive and Resilient Social Pr otection and Labor Systems" and "Strengthening Social Protection and 
Labor Delivery Systems". The note complements the  broader  World Bank policy note, Modernizing 
Social Protection and Labor Policy for Inclusive Growth  (2019).  The present  note  is based on  an 
adaptation of the Inter  Agency  Social Protection Assessment s’ (ISPA) Payment s Assessment Tool , 
described in Annex D.  The program was implemented in partnership with the Intersectoral Social 
Protection Technical Committee under the Presidency, responsible for the operationalization of the 
National Social Protection Strategy and the National Employment Plan (2016 -2020), as part of the 
National Development Plan 2016 -2020. This work has accompanied investment projects on 
strengthening t he social protection and labor system for vulnerable populations, funded with support 
by the World Bank/International Development Association (IDA), under the Productive Social Nets 
Project and the Social Protection and Economic Inclusion Project, managed by the Ministry of 
Employment and Social Protection and the Ministry of Solidarity, Social Cohesion and Poverty 
Reduction. The team appreciates the effort, time and views shared by public and civil society 
representatives as part of the preparation of this  work.  
This technical note was prepared by a World Bank team including Chris Tullis (Consultant, Digital 
Development Specialis t) and Heba Elgazzar (Senior Economist, Social Protection and Jobs), with 
contributions by Meritxell Martinez (Operations Officer,  International Finance Corporation/IFC), Giulia 
Parzani (Consultant, Operations), Rita Oulai (Consultant, IFC)  and Michael Muhanna (Consultant, Social 
Protection) .  The work benefited from helpful inputs and discussions with Robert Palacios (Lead 
Economist , Social Protection and Jobs), Tina Georges (Senior Public Sector Specialist, Social Protection 
and Jobs), Laura Rawlings (Lead Social Protection Specialist),  and Kathy Lindert (Lead Economist, Social 
Protection and Jobs).  
The team thanks the peer reviewer s of this work for their helpful comments and suggestions, including 
Giuseppe Zampaglione (Lead Specialist, Social Protection and Jobs), Silvia Baur -Yazbeck (Financial 
Analyst, International Finance Corporation) and John Van Dyck (Senior Specialist, Social  Protection and 
Jobs).  The team also thanks the broader Côte d'Ivoire country team, including Oumou Coulibaly 
(Program Assistant, Abidjan Office), Lydie Anne Billey (Program Assistant, Washington) and Dora Harris 
(Senior Program Assistant, Washington) for  their helpful logistical and office assistance.  
The technical assistance program was mobilized under the general direction of Jehan Arulpragasam 
(Practice Manager, Social Protection and Jobs, Africa Region) and Pierre Laporte (Country Director, Côte 
d'Ivo ire). 
  
                                                           
1 This work has received generous financial support from the Rapid Social Response Trust Fund and these donors (Sweden, 
Norway, the United Kingdom, Australia and the Russian Federation), with sincere appreciation from the authors.  
 
No part of this report may be reproduced or disseminated in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, photocopying 
or recording, storage, or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the World Bank.  
 
The observations, interpretations and conclusi ons expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the countries that they represent, or the financial donors to the work.  The 
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of t he data cited in this report.  
 4 I. MOTIVATION AND  OBJECTI VES 
Coverage of social protection and labor programs (SPL) in Côte d’Ivoire  remains very  limited, but 
emerging delivery platforms hold the promise of enhancing inclusion among the most vulnerable 
groups .   As of  20142, labor market programs covered 0.3 percent ; all social insurance, 7.9 percent; all 
social assistance covered 27.5 percent, including cash transfers at 0.2 percent.     While this means that 
33 percent of the population are covered in total, the bulk is in -kind food assistance, followed by 
pensions for formal sector workers.  Given that 46 percent of the population is under the poverty line, 
determining the relative effectiveness of different SPL instruments can help maximize the value of 
spending for the poorest households.   
Côte d’Ivoire’s 2014 Na tional Social Protection Strategy (NSPS)  calls for  a shift  in public expenditures 
towards a more  targeted, focused approach on the poor, and this note aims to shed light on innovative 
approaches to delivering services to the hard -to-reach in rural regions .  Within the framework of the 
NSPS, the Ministry of Employment and Social Protection (MESP) plays an important role in coordinating 
key programs  and has been gradually instituting a new delivery platform, with a focus on designing 
coherent payment,  targeti ng, identification , and monitoring  systems to support income and livelihoods  
programs across agencies .  Prior to the creation of the NSPS steering committee in 2015, coordination 
across programs has been limited since financing, implementation, program dat abases, policies, 
targeting and delivery mechanisms remain largely independent.   Concerns around error, fraud and 
corruption (EFC)  and international experience with different payment modalities , discussed outside the 
scope of this note, have led to more e ffective and transparent mechanisms for delivering benefits, 
notably those in cash used by pension schemes, labor programs, cash transfers, and voucher schemes 
for education and health programs.  
The main objective of this note is  to evaluate the institutional and implementation framework needed  
for strengthening payment systems as a core element of delivering SPL benefits to the poor, around 
which targeting, identification  and monitoring systems operate . The assessment aims to support 
improving ho w new  national programs and initiatives identify the poorest households, assess their 
needs and facilitate the delivery of investments and services to them  by ma ximizing digital financial 
technology .   
Choice of Social Protection and Labor  Programs Included in thi s Note  
The four SP L programs features in this note were chosen for several  reasons. The first is their size. Côte 
d’Ivoire’s  SPL system is still in its  early stages, with relatively few programs that reach a substantial 
percentage of the population . The tw o pension funds —the Caisse Natioale de la Prévoyance Sociale 
(CNPS ), for the private sector, and the Caisse Générale de la Retraite des Agents de l’Etat ( CGRAE ), 
which covers the public sector —and by far the two most mature and developed SPL programs in the 
country . While the PFSP is significantly smaller —currently in its pilot phase —its scope is set to expand 
manifold in the short and medium term.  Payment and c ontribution mechanisms used for other 
programs, notably e mployment programs and health insurance , will form th e basis of future dia gnostic 
work based on lessons learned from applying the approach for this  assessment.  
The other facto r is significance to Côte d’Ivoire’s  SPL strategy.  The SP L system is in the process of 
undergoing major reform. The current system is dominated by the two pension funds, which cover only 
formally e mployed workers, and represent 93 per cent of total SPL spending  in Côte d’Ivoire. However, 
formal e mployment arrangements account for only 6-10 per cent of the active labor force . Recognizing 
that the  current focus excludes significant portions of the population that could benefit from SP L 
                                                           
2 Most recent data , similar to 2015 -2018 relative distribution . Data on how beneficiaries are distributed across quintiles are 
available from the National Household Living Standards Survey, which may not accurately reflect th e number of beneficiaries 
found in administrative databases.  Data available from administrative databases is used in discussing each individual progra m 
in this policy note.  5 programming, the current gov ernment strategy calls for this gap to be filled. The two most strategically 
significant programs are current the CNPS, which is currently in the process of implementing an 
ambitious program to extend contributory pensions to the entire informal sector, an d the PFSP, which 
is set to offer non -contributory uncondi tional transfers to the bottom 20 per cent of the population by 
income, regardless of employment status.  
Structure of this Note  
The note is structured as follows.  Following the introduction  in section I, section II looks at institutional 
framework, including the regulatory environment for financial services as well as the  personal 
identification  (ID) landscape in Côte d’Ivoire. Section III assess es the current payment systems in the 
four focus programs chosen. Section IV provides recommendations for improvement of the payment 
systems of the four focus programs in the short and long term, with an eye not only toward improving 
service delivery for the beneficiaries of individual pro grams, but also toward improving coordination 
between programs. Th e final  section also discusse s in detail monitoring and evaluation and grievance 
redress mechanisms and how they link to payments. The note  concludes with a summary of key 
opportunities and challenges to coordinating payment systems between SP L programs.  
II. ENABLING ENVIRONMENT  FOR DIGITAL PAYMENTS   
Institutional Framework  
PSP landscape in Côte d’Ivoire  
While Côte d’Ivoire has an established banking sector,  its reach is limited to only 15  per c ent of the 
population, and only 10 per cent of the rural population .3 Banks’ traditional service models, which rely 
on capital -intensive bank branches for service  delivery , inherently limit banks ’ ability to reach several  
population segments, including tho se in rural areas.  
In recent years, technology has allowed FSPs to innovate alternative FSP service -delivery models to 
better reach lower income clients. Some examples of such service -delivery models include agency 
banking, OTC transfer services, and mobi le money. While many markets have a mix of different types 
of services, mobile money is clearly dominant in Côte d’Ivoire. The following chart shows the extent to 
which the network of access points of mobile money providers in Côte d’Ivoire dwarfs the comp etition  
(Figure 1 ). 
Figure 1 Number of financial service access points by PSP type  
 
Source: MIX Market (2015 -16). 
 
There are several  reasons for this, but a key reason is regulatory. While mobile money services have 
been given the regulatory space to flourish in WAEMU, the regulatory environment has not been 
hospitable to agency banking over the same period, providing a barrier to the development of this 
sector as an alternative to mobile money. 4 From the perspective of SPL delivery systems, mobile money 
                                                           
3 Global Findex, 2014, latest available data.  
4 CGAP study, p21  
6 systems offer advantages to other PSPs as they are already familiar to most of the population, requiring 
less time to adopt particular ly among rural populations.  
KYC Requirements  
Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements are a basic aspect of financial sector regulation that 
establishes minimum standards that FSPs must adhere to identify their customers. Traditionally, KYC 
regulation requir es identity documents that much of the financially excluded population are unable to  
provide. Banks have the most stringent requirements, which in Côte d’Ivoire include a valid state -issued 
photo identification and a valid proof of address. Both documents can be costly to obtain, especially 
when accounting for informal and indirect costs, and remain inaccessible to certain vulnerable groups, 
including those who se birth is not registered in the civil registry.  
Recognizing the barriers to financial inclusion of overly stringent KYC requirements, the regional 
regulator (BCEAO) is working on risk -based KYC requirements that would decrease the rigor of required 
documentation for certain low -value accounts. A mobile money account can already by opened with 
an ID only, without proof of address. Additionally, new regulation provides for the opening of low value 
accounts (transacting less than 200,000 FCFA or $325 per month) without any proof of identification at 
all. Wh ile this is a very encouraging step, and a potential boon for SPL programs, especially those 
targeting low -income and informally employed populations, there is one caveat. Namely, despite 
regulations allowing low -value accounts not to be identified for several years , no mobile -money 
provider in Côte d’Ivoire has to date offered  such a low -value account. Although i t is unclear exactly 
why this is the case , the fact that identification is  required to purchase a SIM card (sales of which are 
governed by a diffe rent regulator) , which is a prerequisite for using mobile money , may be a principal 
barrier .5 
Interoperability  
Some markets feature a robust environment of interoperability in payments systems, whereby money 
stored in an account at one provider can be tra nsferred to an account at a competitor. This can benefit 
all participants in the SPL payments ecosystem, with governments find it easier to administer payments, 
beneficiaries being able to choose the PSP most suited to their needs, and PSPs themselves gain ing 
additional revenue from payments in interoperable systems that they may no t be able to achieve 
otherwise .6  
Currently, sector -wide interoperability in Côte d’Ivoire is limited to th e banking sector, where the 
regional SICA -UEMOA  switch allows inter -bank wire transfers and the GIM -UEMOA network allows card 
withdrawals at competing banks’ ATMs. There is currently no interoperability or sector -wide payment 
switch for mobile money. Interoperability between mobile money and the banking sector (including 
some  MFIs) does exist, but this functionality still immature and limited to bilateral partnerships 
between individual banks and mobile money providers. In the absence of sector -wide switches to 
ensure interoperability, there are certain payment aggregators on the market, which allow SPL 
programs make payments using multiple PSPs while only themselves dealing with a single actor for the 
purposes of making payment orders and reporting.  
Identification Systems  
In general, SPL program need to be able to  both  identi fy their beneficiaries  initially  and then also 
authenticate t hese  identities at the time of service delivery . Historically, the main SPL programs in Côte 
d’Ivoire  were contributory programs such as the  public - and private -sector pension funds, both of which 
used the national ID card for identification  purpose s. Despite the limited coverage of this document, it 
has been possible to rely on it because the pension funds, themselves limited in coverage to the 10 per 
                                                           
5 CGAP study.  
6 Benson and Loftesness 2012  
 7 cent of the adult population in  formal  employment ,7 had target populations that in practice were 
subset of the population covered by the national ID card . Only recently has the national SPL strategy 
called for expanding contributory coverage to the informa lly employed as well as offering non -
contributory benefits, such as the means -tested social safety net (PFSP) and subsidized health insurance 
scheme (CNAM).8 
The primary ID document in Côte d’Ivoire is the national ID card. In general, coverage is limited to 
Ivoirian nationals who have access to documentary evidence to prove their nationality. Despite efforts 
in recent years to expand access to this document, coverage remains at 64  percent  of the adult 
population by one recent estimate.9 
There are also othe r ID cards available in Côte d’Ivoire, but ma ny of them share the same accessibility 
issues as the national ID card. The ID card for the CNAM ’s was cause for high hopes for expanding 
coverage when it was introduced, given the CNAM’s mandate for universal c overage. In its current form 
however, this card  suffers from many of the same accessibility limitations as the national ID due to the 
need for breeder documents (another state -issued ID card or a birth certificate) as a prerequisite for 
obtaining a CNAM ID  that vulnerable populations may not have access to. Apart from the accessibility 
issues, this card is highly attractive, with a robust identifier whose uniqueness is guaranteed by 
fingerprint biometrics.  
The PFSP also issues a program ID card to one perso n designated as the primary transfer recipient in 
each beneficiary household. This card is non -biometric,  and the identity of its bearer is not backed up 
by any breeder documents, but instead by community witness testimony given during the community 
valida tion of the program’s beneficiary lists. The decision to forego breeder documents was made by 
the program to ensure the card’s accessibility. Unfortunately, the lack of a legal basis for the community 
identification method used limits the card’s applicabil ity outside of the PFSP program itself, and 
ultimately the utility of the card to the beneficiary. These limitations extend to receiving the PFSP 
benefit itself, as in the future the card will no longer be accepted by the mobile money provider who 
delivers  the PFSP payments. Thus,  PFSP beneficiaries will have to acquire an additional ID document to 
receive their payments (or designated a proxy recipient who has). Additionally, it should be noted that 
the identifier used for the PFSP card is a household -level identifier (due to the program’s beneficiaries 
being defined on a household level) and not an individual identifier, further limiting the card’s 
usefulness outside of the program.   Further work will delve in to linkages with the development of the 
propose d national biometric identification system.  
The characteristics of the cards issued by the SPL programs selected for this asse ssment are 
summarized in  Table 1.  
Table 1 ID documents issued by SPL programs in Côte d’Ivoire  
 PFSP  CNAM  CNPS  CGRAE  PEJEDEC  
Issues program -
specific ID?  Yes Yes No No n/a 
Number included on 
program ID?  Yes (household -level identifier 
only, no individual identifier)  Yes n/a n/a n/a 
How is uniqueness of 
the identifier assured?  Witness testimony during 
community validation of 
beneficiary lists  Biometrics 
(fingerprints)  n/a n/a n/a 
Biometrics included in 
program ID ? No Yes (fingerprints)  n/a n/a n/a 
                                                           
7 Côte d’Ivoire Modernizing  Social Protection and Labor Policy for Inclusive Growth , World Bank, forthcoming . 
8 République de Côte d’Ivoire (2013), “Stratégie Nationale de Protection Sociale.”  
 http://www.coopami.org/fr/countries/countries/cote_ivoire/social_protection/pdf/social_protection07.pdf  
9 Joseph Atick (2015), “Identification for Development (ID4D) Identification Systems Analysis: Côte d’Ivoire Country 
Assessment,” World Bank Group.  
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25197/108189.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y  8  PFSP  CNAM  CNPS  CGRAE  PEJEDEC  
Prerequisites for 
program ID  No breeder documents required, 
only witness testimony from 
community to the beneficiary’s 
identity  National ID card or 
birth certificate  n/a n/a n/a 
Program ID enough  to 
fully benefit from 
program?  No, to open the required mobile 
money account , transfer recipient 
must have a  valid  state -issued ID  Yes n/a n/a n/a 
Source: World Bank staff compilation.  n/a: not available.  
III. EFFECTIVE MONITORING  OF DIGITAL PAYMENTS  
Monitoring digital payments to SPL program beneficiaries presents unique challenges no t faced when 
monitoring cash payments. The core of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for digital payments 
consists of two fundamental building blocks:   The Grievance Redress System and PSP reporting. Because 
the GRM also has an important role as a f iduciary safeguard in addition to serving as an M&E data 
source, this section will begin with a presentation of the GRM overall along with some examples of 
international good practice before detailing  its role in payment monitoring specifically. Then the r ole 
of PSP reporting will be described, and finally it will be explained how GRM and PSP data can be 
combined to form a coherent monitoring system for digital social payments.   
PSP Reporting  
All providers of digital payments have the capacity to produce i ndividual -level reports on bulk 
payments. Because this technical capacity is inherent to the digital payment platform, there is no 
reason that SPL program administrators should settle for aggregate reporting, which is frequently used 
in cash programming. T his individual -level data is not only important because it allows transactions to 
be reconciled individually and thus helps reduce losses due to fraud and corruption on the part of PSP 
staff, but also because it provides an important input to the program’s  M&E system.  
Specific Challenges of Monitoring Digital Payments  
Monitoring cash payments is conceptually a straightforward affair. Since program / PSP staff are 
physically present at the moment when beneficiaries receive cash in their hands, monitoring is often 
little more than  keeping a checklist of who receives cash and who does not. Even if in practice this type 
of monitoring can be costly and open to corruption, it is theoretically simple to implement.  
When payments are digitized and  deposited onto a transaction account on behalf on the beneficiary 
instead of being paid in cash, monitoring becomes more complex. Conceptually, it becomes necessary 
to divide the payment into two steps: first, there is the deposit onto the transaction account, and 
secondly, the beneficiary must  access this store of value. It is important  not to conflate the concept of 
access with a cash withdrawal. Funds can be accessed in a variety of ways, including not only withdrawal 
(in cash) but also by making a transfer or payment (within the digital ecosystem). In addition to these 
various active ways of accessing the payment, an SPL program beneficiary can also access her payment 
passively if she is aware that the deposit has been made onto her account but chooses to save it instead 
of using it immediately.  
From a monitoring perspective, one key advantage of digital payments is that they allow rigorous 
monitoring of the deposit onto the account. However, in environments where program beneficiaries 
are not accustomed to digital payments —and in many cases have just opened their first -ever financial 
account in the context of the program in question —having data on deposits is not enough  to 
determined that beneficiaries were also able to access their payments. There are many reasons who a 
beneficiary might not have access to a deposit made in her name. For example, she might have 
misplaced the physical hardware (ATM card, mobile phone, etc.) needed to access her benefit. Or she 
may not understand the payment mechanism enough (for example, how to enter a PIN code) to access 9 her account. Or she may simple not be aware that the deposit had been made. In such cases, 
beneficiaries may find themselves in a situation where, although money is successfully being deposited 
on an account in their name, they are unable to take the additional steps needed to access or  benefit 
from this transfer.  
It is also important to note that even in cases where programs can obtain access to the PSP’s data on 
beneficiary transactions (such as withdrawals), this data is still not enough  to monitor the success of 
the payment. Withdra wal and transaction data are unable to differentiate between cases where 
beneficiaries who were unable to transact, for whatever reason, and those who chose not to —to save, 
for example. Because empowering beneficiaries to save is one of the key advantages of making SPL 
payments onto a digital account, it is not desirable to discourage this savings behavior to make 
monitoring more straightforward. Instead, the monitoring system needs to be adapted to complex 
array of choices that digital payments offer progr am beneficiaries.  
The Grievance Redress Mechanism  
GRM Basics  
A GRM is meant to given program -affected persons (PAPs) an avenue to express any concerns they may 
have concerning the project implementation. The type of grievance handled by the GRM will depend  
on the type of program. In the context of cash transfer programs, complaints will often be linked to the 
payment mechanism (non -receipt of transfer, problems with PIN, etc.). In programs that are targeted, 
complaints will likely relate to eligibility (imp roper inclusion or exclusion from the program). Other more 
general complaint types might include inefficient service delivery, bribery or malpractice, sexual 
harassment, etc.  
Once complaints are made by PAPs, they are recorded in the program’s complaints database, which 
ideally should automatically assign a unique tracking number to each complaint. Then the complaints 
are then referred to the appropriate actors —which may be program staff, but could also be staff of 
partner organizations, such as the PSP, o r actors in the local justice system —for investigation. Once the 
appropriate action has been taken, the grievance is marked as resolved in the tracking system and the 
outcome is communicated clearly to the complainant. This process is summarized in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2 The Life Cycle of a Complaint in the GRM  
 
Source: World Bank staff compilation.  Reception
Grievance 
channels:
Phone hotline
Local program staff
Local community
leaders
Other intermediariesRecording
Data entry into 
tracking system
Complaint tracking 
number assigned
Confirmation sent 
to complainant
(unless 
anonymous)Investigation
Complaint codified 
according to type
Case assigned to 
appropriate 
personnel
Investigation 
carried outResolution
Grievance 
resolved according 
to procedures in 
GRM manualFeedback
Complaintant 
informed of 
resolution
(unless 
anonymous)10 A good GRM is accessible to and understood by all PAPs (not only program beneficiaries), giving them 
adequate means to express any grievances they may have. It also has efficient processes for resolving 
grievances and  communicates clearly and proactively w ith PAPs about not only the resolution but also 
the process and any expected delays. Annex F gives a summary of good practice in GRM design SPL 
programs as well as some examples of programs that have effectively implemented GRMs with these 
features.   
GRM a nd M&E  
Although the grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is often considered more as a fiduciary safeguard, 
from an M&E perspective, the GRM has a core role in providing payment monitoring data  when 
monitoring digital payments. When a GRM is well functioning —that is, when grievance channels are 
well understood by program beneficiaries and are accessible —then it not only allows grievances to be 
resolved in an efficient manner, but it also supplies a steady stream of qualitative and quantitative data 
on any prob lem areas in the program. It is the GRM’s quality as a data source that makes it central to 
the M&E system.  
Putting It All Together: A Monitoring System for Digital Payments  
Figure 3 illustrates the logical framework needed to assess whether beneficiaries h ave meaningfully had 
access to their digital payment. To begin, it should be noted that knowing whether  there has been a 
transaction on the beneficiary account is always insufficient to determine whether  the beneficiary had 
access to their benefit. This is  true both in cases where there was a transaction was and was not 
observed. For example, a beneficiary would not have accessed her benefit despite the program observe 
a withdrawal in the PSP data if that beneficiary was a victim of fraud (PIN stolen, etc.) . Similarly, a 
beneficiary would have accessed her benefit despite not transacting on her account if she was aware 
of the deposit on her account but had chosen to save and withdraw later .  
It follows then that PSP transaction data, while necessary for moni toring digital payments, is always 
insufficient for monitoring the delivery of social payments deposited onto beneficiary accounts. This is 
due to the very nature of digital deposits, where in general —in contract to traditional cash payments —
the expectatio n is that no program or PSP staff are physically present at the moment when the benefit 
is accessed. Indeed, in the case of saving, there is no event to observe apart from the beneficiary’s 
internal intention to save. To determine whether beneficiaries hav e accessed their benefits, the PSP 
data must thus be supplemented by data collected from beneficiaries themselves: either passively (in 
the case of the GRM) or actively (in the case of spot checks and surveys).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 Figure 3 Logical framework for access of digital SPL payments, including suggested data sources  
 
Source: World Bank staff compilation.  
 
In general, due to the challenges of monitoring digital payments, a key to successful monitoring is to 
combine various data sources to assemble a complete picture of beneficiaries’ access to their transfers. 
In addition to data on deposits from the PSP (an d, if possible, transfers and withdrawals), other data 
sources include surveys of beneficiaries, data produced by grievance redress systems (GRMs) or 
complaints hotlines, and mystery shopping exercises. Although administering a survey to each 
beneficiary f ollowing each payment is unlikely to be cost -effective in the context of most SPL, if surveys 
12 are deemed necessary the costs can be kept to a minimum by extrapolating from small samples (spot 
checks), conducting surveys by phone, or both.  
Among these vario us sources of data,  however,  two should be considered as primary, namely the 
payment report from the PSP and the GRM.  The primacy of the GRM over surveys and spot checks is 
due to the facts that a) it makes use of an existing system, b) the system gives da ta in real time, as 
opposed to the periodic nature of surveys, c) the system is passive, and thus is less costly to administer 
than surveys, which are usually the most expensive item in any M&E budget.  
In a well -functioning SPL program, data from the  PSP and GRM alone  is usually enough  to conclude, on 
a day -to-day operational level, that payments are being made successfully and that beneficiaries have 
access to their transfers. In general, the monitoring system will have produced strong evidence that a 
beneficiary had access to her transfer if the following five conditions are met  ( 
Table  2). 
 
Table 2 Conditions for effective monito ring of digital payments using data from GRM and PSP  
 Condition  Data source  
1 The beneficiary is aware that they should expect a transfer and of the transfer amount  Precondition  
2 A deposit has been made onto the beneficiary’s account  PSP reports  
3 The beneficiary is aware of and can use the GRM  Precondition  
4 The GRM data is feeding into the M&E system  Precondition  
5 No complaint has been filed complaining of non -payment  GRM data  
Source: World Bank staff compilation.  
 
It should be noted that since the three preconditions in the above table must be met for the PSP and 
GRM data to allow adequate payment monitoring. As such, these preconditions themselves should also 
be monitored periodically in order ensure the reliabilit y of such a payment -monitoring system. 
Additionally, although the above system provides for some quality assurance of the PSP data some 
initial monitoring of potential fraud on the part of the PSP, at intervals it will also be necessary to 
perform addition al quality assurance where beneficiaries are systematically surveyed to ensure that 
they have received their transfers. For example, an SPL program’s M&E plan could provide for periodic 
spot checks where beneficiaries are explicitly asked whether they rece ived and how they used their 
transfer, to complete the original picture offered by the PSP data and GRM. The survey instrument that 
is used for such post -payment surveys in the PFSP is provided as an example in Annex C.   
Additionally, a n example of a PSP reporting framework that is adapted to the specificities of mobile 
money providers’ ICT platforms  and can be integrated into contracts with mobile money PSPs  is 
provided in Annex B.  
IV. PERFORMANCE  EVALUATION  
Evaluation Framework  
The assessment approach  used i n this note  is adapted from  standardized methodology developed by 
the Inter Agency Social Protection Assessments (ISPA) group, housed at the World Bank.  The ISPA 
payment assessment tool, whose detailed methodology can be found in Annex E, specifically look s at 
the quality of SPL program delivery, assessing three criteria , namely  accessibility, robustness and 
integration , ranging on a scale of 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest) in terms of effectiveness and performance . 
The tool  was specifically designed to review th e payment mechanis m used by an individual program  or 
those payment mechanisms used across the whole SPL sector , providing  a common framework for 
comparing multiple payment delivery mecha nisms  ( 13 Table 3). An existing SPL program ’s payment mechanism can be measured against these criteria to 
provide a snapshot of its stage of development as well as tracking its evolution over time.  This 
assessm ent approach is designed to  help to identify areas that may benefit from strengthening, in line 
with best practice, as well as ensuring that trade -offs between criteria are made explicit to policy 
makers.  
 
Table 3 Summary of Assessm ent Scores for Selected SPL Programs  
  PFSP  CNPS10 CGRAE  PEJEDEC  
 Cost of Access  3.33  TBC TBC TBC 
Accessibility  Appropriateness  2  3  
 Rights and Dignity  2.33     
 Reliability  1.4    
Robustness  Governance  3    
 Security  2.33     
Integration  Financial Inclusion  2.67   3.5  
 Coordination  1    
OVERALL  SCORE  2.25     
Source: World Bank staff compilation.  
 
The scores of the selected payment systems assessed in this note  are summarized in  
Table 3. The following sections will give details of these assessments  by sub-score .   The discussion in 
the following section focuses on the case of PFSP and  discusses the following key areas in deta il in this 
note given the availability of data to date: cost of access, appropriate ness,  rights and dignity , security 
and financial inclusion .  Preliminary scores are given for reliability (based on a nearly 90  percent  success 
rate in payment delivery as o f 2017 based on the first 5,000 beneficiaries, with an additional 30,000 
beneficiaries to follow), governance and security  and a more detailed discussion of these dimensions 
will follow through future work.  
Detailed Findings  
Accessibility  
The PFSP payment  system is fully digitized, based on mobile money technology. This choice was made 
possible by the relatively advanced development of the Ivoirian mobile money market, which boast ed 
53 per cent  of the transaction volume of the entire seven -country WAEMU re gion.11 At the same time, 
the market is not yet so mature that providers’ agent networks extend into beneficiaries’ villages. 
Indeed, during the current pilot phase of the program, only 3 of the 56  pilot villages had a permanent 
mobile money agent present  in the village itself (although in many cases there was an agent in a nearby 
market town) . In order the overcome this limitation in the next phase of the program, the PFSP staff 
have begun working with mobile money providers to help them expend their agent networks to cover 
program villages. Until this is accomplished, the payment s are made by roving agents who come to 
villages on a fixed schedule after payments are made and  facilitate on -site withdrawals.  
• Cost of access  
The PFSP program management has clea rly thought about cost of access and has put several  measures 
into place to minimize the cost to beneficiaries. During the program’s pilot phase, the cost of not only 
the SIM card but also the phone was subsidized to 100 per cent.  Additionally, PFSP progra m officers 
                                                           
10 Note: The assessment for CNPS, CGRAE and PEJEDEC will depend on data availability; the note mainly focuses on the case 
of PSNP as a case study representing th e main challenges and opportunities faced across SPL programs.  
11 BCEAO (2015), “Situation des services financiers via la téléphonie mobile dans l’UEMOA à fin septembre 2015.” 
http://www.bceao.int/IMG/pdf/situation_des_services_financiers.pdf  
 14 came to beneficiary villages to collect the documents necessary to open their mobile money accounts 
and opened accounts on their behalf. The program also gave all beneficiaries a free program -specific 
ID card that they could use to authenticate the first few payments. Cash  out was also subsidized, with 
the market rate withdrawing the full transfer amount at one time added to the amount of the original 
transfer (the PSP backend software offers no way to eliminate cash -out fees directly  for transfers  or 
accounts ). Additionally, for those villages where the PSP did not have a permanent presence, the PSP 
sent itinerant agents to beneficiaries’ villages on a set sched ule, once after each transfer, lowering 
beneficiaries’ transport costs to zero.  Because the villages where small , wait time were also low.   
There are however some costs that still get passed on to beneficiaries. For example, if beneficiaries 
wish to withdraw at another time or wish to withdraw in multiple tranches, then they must cov er their 
own transport costs to regular mobile money agent, which in many cases can be far away. Additi onally, 
the cost of obtaining a  national ID card, which will be required to continue receiving electronic 
payments after the pilot period, is not subsidi zed. This will likely imply significant expenses for certain 
groups of beneficiaries, including migrants  and internally -displaced persons , who may have to travel to 
a far -away birthplace to acquire a birth certificate.  
There is some evidence that some ben eficiaries may be excluded from the program and/or prevented 
from receiving their benefit because they are being discriminated against by local leaders, on whom 
the program depends for communication with beneficiaries. The program plans to review its 
commu nications strategy to make more use of above -the-line communications, including posters and 
radio announcements in local languages, in addition to expanding below -the-line communication, 
primarily through the line ministry’s national network of  social work ers. 
Although O range money accepts a variety  of ID documents for account opening, 12 what these 
documents have in common is that in almost all cases they require the account holder to have access 
to a birth certificate, not only for themselves but in many cases also for their parents . This is problematic 
for non -citizens, IDPs, and those whose birth s were registered in civils registers that have been lost, 
either due to the 2002 –2011 political crisis  or due to poor archival conditions . In the short term, Orange 
Money has agreed to open accounts for these beneficiaries and pay them based on  the program -
specific ID document that the PFSP has issued to beneficiaries, while waiting for them to obtain a 
national ID document such as the CNI. It is not yet clear what percentage of PFSP beneficiaries will be 
able to obtain the necessary ID document s by the time that Orange Money stops accepting the project -
specific ID. At this point, it is likely that at least some beneficiary households will lose access to the 
current payment mechanism.  
Training on the payment channel for PFSP beneficiaries has be en inadequate to allow them to 
autonomously make withdrawals and perform basic function s on their accounts (change PIN,  etc.). 
Training on the payment mechanism needs to be reinforced significantly  to minimize fraud as well as 
to maximize the financial -inclusion benefits of the accounts .  
• Appropriateness  
The social workers are not well placed to offer supplementary training during these on -site payments 
because of time pressure to complete all the payments within the allotted time (usually one-half day).  
Beneficiaries general understand the frequency of the payments, which are quarterly, but they only 
learn the actual date that the roving agent will pass through their village with one- or two -days’  notice. 
They are communicat ed this info rmation mainly by soc ial workers , which is problematic, as some 
evidence suggests that they are not reliably transmitting PFSP messages  on time due to a variety of 
factors often outside of their control , but it will be important to monitor whether and why information 
is being  withheld .  
                                                           
12 The list of acceptable identification documents includes the national ID card, passport, driver’s license, voter registration  
card, and birth certificate for citizens, as well as a foreign national ID card, consular card, or passport for non -citizens.  15 Currently, beneficiaries have no choice of PSP. The PFSP has an exclusive contract with Orange Money 
for the first two transfers, after which a competitive -bidding process will be used to select another PSP, 
possible Orange Money again, for anot her exclusive contract. There is also the question of the inherent 
appropriateness of mobile money to populations such as the one targeted by the PFSP, since some 
beneficiaries, due to illiteracy or other factors, may be ill equipped to use payment channel  that 
requires manipulating a phone, and may thus be at heightened risk for fraud.  
• Rights and Dignity  
There is a complaints mechanism,  but it is still in the preliminary stages of development . Evidence from 
the first payment shows that the complaints mecha nism is highly utilized, suggesting that it is well 
publicized and accessible. Its chief manifestation at the moment is through a helpline, whose number 
is printed on the back of the program ID card that was issued to each transfer recipient.  
Although due  to the lack of PSP agents in PFSP localities, most withdrawals are currently performed 
using special itinerant PSP agents that are dispatched according to the PFSP timetable. It is, however, 
not necessary that beneficiaries use this program -specific infra structure if they happen to live in one of 
the few localities with a PSP agent or they travel to an area where there is one.  
• Security  
Training is currently poor,  and most beneficiaries do not know how to use their phones independently 
to perform basic fun ctions, such as changing their PIN code, or making a withdrawal.  
Current means by which payroll lists are communicated is not secure and open to fraud. No systematic 
review of fraud risks has been conducted and no systematic effort has been made to establ ish protocols 
for mitigating fraud risks.  
Integration  
• Financial Inclusion  
The current method for subsidizing beneficiaries’ withdrawal fees penalizes beneficiaries who choose 
to withdraw their benefit in multiple smaller tranches —for example, if they want  to save or use their 
account to help with budgeting —which incentivizes beneficiaries to cash out their entire benefit at one 
time and  normalizes this behavior . 
The fact that the PFSP authentication and monitoring protocols do not require beneficiaries to use 
program -specific payment infrastructure is a key advantage of the program, as it allows beneficiaries 
to progressively become more and more integrated in pub lic financial services infrastructure as this 
infrastructure becomes more developed in their communities.  
However, the state of PSPs’ current agent networks means that few beneficiaries will be able to take 
advantages of the savings and budgeting possibil ities offered by their accounts unless these agent 
networks are brought closer to beneficiaries’ villages.  (For details of the PFSP strategy on agent network 
expansion, see box X.)   
Financial literacy training is also lacking, to allow beneficiaries to tak e full advantage of their accounts 
and help them see the advantages of not withdrawing their entire benefit immediately in cash. This will 
become more and more relevant as the program matures and agents become more and more 
accessible to beneficiaries.  (For details of the PFSP financial inclusion strategy, see box Y.)  
• GRM  
The PFSP GRM was operational before the first transfer was made to the pilot group of 5000 
households. Over the three -month period following the first payment, 2072 official complaints wer e 
filed, of which 97 per cent were successfully resolved. All the received complaints pertained to the 
payment mechanism, with delays in opening of mobile money accounts (59  percent ), delays in receiving 
the transfer to the account (31  percent ), and blocke d SIM cards due to incorrect PIN entry (9  percent ) 
being the principle reasons for filing a complaint. Most of these difficulties were due to logistical 
problems stemming from setting up an entirely new payment mechanism, including some delays on 16 the PSP s ide. The fact that all complaints related to the payment mechanism and not, for example, to 
targeting, is likely to do the fact that the GRM had not yet been adequately publicized within the wider 
community, and so only program beneficiaries were aware of the possibility to file a grievance. 
Concerning the channel used to make complaints, most  official grievances were recorded though the 
dedicated complaints hotline (whose number was printed on the back of the program ID card). 
However, many beneficiaries, especially those who do not speak French, did not place the call 
themselves, instead asking a community leader or local social worker to make the call on their behalf.  
This experience shows that the GRM is fully operational. The large volume of complaints  shows that a 
large proportion of households were able to express themselves through one of the various available 
grievance channels, and the 71 per cent resolution rate within four weeks shows that the system 
worked efficiently to redress many of benefici aries’ grievances. Compared to international experience, 
where GRMs have often been added to SPL programs as an afterthought if they are included at all, this 
be a very positive performance for a pilot GRM of a greenfield SPL program.  
Lessons Learned from  Global Experience  
International experience shows the positive effects of promoting financial inclusion, where having a 
financial account increases individual savings, female empowerment, consumption and productive 
investment of entrepreneurs, and income f or the poor, particularly among women.13  “Mobile finance ” 
is an umbrella term that describes the how mobile phones can be used to perform tasks that have 
traditionally only been able to be done through personal accounts in the formal banking sector account  
or through services such as Western Union. Some of these tasks include mobile cash transfers, direct -
to-vendor payments, as well as a broad range of banking services, such as account -based savings, credit 
or transaction products.  
Kenya has used digital m echanisms to extend social protection coverage to the informal sector at scale.  
The case of Kenya is interesting because of its reliance on a new platform to collect contributions and 
promote savings through mobile phones.  In March 2007, M -PESA was launc hed by Kenya’s largest 
cellular network operator, Safaricom, which is partly owned by London -based Vodafone. The project 
was largely funded by donors from the financial services sector. Since its inception, M -PESA has 
witnessed an incredibly fast adoption rate and now boasts near 50  percent  market penetration. As of 
the end of December 2016, M -PESA served almost 29.5 million active customers through a network of 
more than 287,400 agents. It is important to mention that a large portion of M -PESA users have 
previously been excluded from the formal financial service sector.  
Through partnerships with local cellular providers, M -PESA has grown to other markets internationally 
including as Tanzania, Afghanistan, South Africa, India, Romania, Albania, Mozambique, Lesotho, and 
Egypt. Also, in a recent development, through a new pa rtnership, Kenyan users of M -PESA will be able 
to transfer money directly to any Western Union location worldwide. In terms of services, the platform 
can fill the needs satisfied by many traditional banking services. Using their mobile phone, users can 
benefit from many services, including  send money ; withdraw ing cash at licensed M -PESA agents (many 
of whom are retailers who also sell SIM cards, airtime and other products);  buying airtime;  buying goods 
and services through licensed vendors;  paying bills, including paying contributions to NSSF;  saving 
money and r equest ing lo ans, through licensed products with partnering banking institutions.  
All individuals who use M -PESA must have register for the service from a registered agent using their 
National  ID (card or passport) and mobile device. To add cash into their mobile wallet, users deposit 
cash at an agent shop. The same is to true for withdrawals.  The organization business model operates 
on transaction fees that vary based on amount of transaction  and type of transfer (to M -PESA user, to 
                                                           
13 Deléchat, et al. 2018. “What Is Driving Women ’s Financial Inclusion Across Countries? ” IMF Working Paper WP/18/38,  
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. See also: Aportela 1999; Ashraf and others, 2010; Dupas and Robinson 2009; 
Swamy 2013.  17 unregistered users, and cash withdrawals). Registered businesses who allow users to pay bills through 
M-PESA cover the full transaction fee (1.5  percent  per transaction).  
Recently the NSSF in Kenya has partnered w ith a digital provider  to fully adopt a cashless payment 
system, both for contributions and withdrawals, erasing the need to visit an NSSF office. Going forward, 
employers with more than 20 employees will now be able to make their staff contributions throu gh M -
PESA.  It is worth noting, while M -PESA dominates the market of mobile money subscriptions, (66  
percent  of the total number of subscribers as of 2017), there are  at least three  other smaller mobile 
money platforms with  over ten  million users  collectiv ely. 
In addition, the  NHIF (National Hospital Insurance Fund) has partnered with a leading 
telecommunication company in Kenya to provide the informal sector an easier way to pay 
contributions. The fund stopped cash transactions aiming to reduce utilization  rates to NHIF services. 
It is important to mention that since NHIF started using mobile money to collect contributions, travel 
time and long lines to be registered/to pay contributions has been reduced given that, one of the main 
problems that the informa l sector had, were the penalty fees (5 times the monthly contribution14) 
payed once a member default. Members no longer worry about not being able to pay contributions on 
time, in fact M -PESA allows individuals to contribute on behalf of others too.  
It is i mportant to note that, although NHIF in Kenya is mandatory for the formal sector, NHIF is voluntary 
for the informal sector. Therefore, healthcare coverage is still low in general, but due to M -PESA the 
informal sector grew significantly between 2009 and 2 017. Mobile payments made contributions 
easier, safer, and quicker. It also reduced workload on the NHIF staff.  A study15 shows that out of 60 
emergency bills, 36 are paid though M -PESA, fast access to cash leads to fast access to healthcare. 
These reporte d bills were not only linked directly to hospital bills, but to the transportation an individual 
need to get to the health facility. In addition to that, patients can access preventive care through NHIF 
easier using M -PESA and by going to preventive care p atients would seek emergency care less.  
In addition to that, it is interesting to explore the central connectivity that using M -PESA offer. NHIF’s 
network interconnection gives access to the members, customers, and stakeholder to the system, no 
matter how  far. A member could contribute while out of town and the transaction would be displayed 
in all NHIF branches. An interesting part is not only in the display of the transaction itself, but in the 
information a member submits to the system. Information is t ransferred then to a data center this is 
how it becomes accessible to all branches.  Consequently, NHIF witnessed important growth over  the 
last five years .  Overall membership has grown  from 2.8M in 2010 to 5.2M in 2015 .  Membership in the 
informal sector  has reached 1.7M  as of 2015, from around 530,000 in 2010 to 1.7 M , and a s of 2015, 
with an increase in monthly revenues to NHIF from  M-PESA . 
Overall, Mobile Money has effectively supported  expand ing coverage to  the informal sector . Its key  
advantages include its  ability to lower opportunity costs in registration and payment (time saved, ease 
of services), imp rove access to health care, and in the case of health insurance, reduce out -of-pocket 
payments for vulnerable workers.   
 
 
 
                                                           
14 Case Study: Kenya National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) Premium Collection for the Informal Sector - USAID 
https://www.hfgproject.org/wp -content/uploads/2014/06/14 -1022 -HFG -Mobile -Money -Case -Study -NHIF -mpesa.pdf  
15 Stuart, G. Ph.D., Cohen. M., Ph.D. - Cash In, Cash Out Kenya: The Role of M­PESA in the Lives of Low -Income People 
http://www.fsassessment.umd.edu/publications/pdfs/cash_in_cash_out_kenya.pdf  
 18 V. RECOMMENDA TIONS  
This note demonstrates that Côte d’Ivoire has successfully  gradual ly scale -up of digital financial 
inclusion through mobile money accounts for social protection beneficiaries through  an innovative 
public -private partnership.16  This approach has supported the Government’s efforts in developing a 
new productive social safety net national program, including livelihoods support and tools for 
supporting social protection service delivery a s a system  since 201517 18.  As of  March 2018 , 50,000 
beneficiary households (approximately 600,000 individuals) have been receiving targeted cash 
transfers as of March 2018, exceeding the original target of 35,000 households, and reaching three 
percent of t he poor. The program  has also supported a new mobile money account platform for 
delivering cash transfers and economic inclusion activities to boost earnings among beneficiaries, 
largely subsistence farmers.  
An important aspect of the program is its relia nce on  a social registry information system , housing  
socioeconomic information on 164,000 households (800,000 individuals, or three percent of the 
national population) located in 16 regions across a total of over 882 villages, coordinated with the 
national  pension funds and universal health insurance program.  This system includes an identification 
mechanism , which will be enhanced through coordination with the unique biometric identification 
system project  launched in 201919 with  the National Identification Office.  
In the future , given the pension system capitalizes on multiple payment channels, the productive safety 
nets program  likewise aims to develop a competitive process for including more than one payment 
service provider, where possible. Quality improvement will focus on areas such as payment 
reconciliation (that is, reporting arrangements and quality assurance regarding payments credited to 
beneficiary accounts versus withdrawn), coordinating with other government agencies  involved in e -
government -to-person payments, notably the two national pension funds and tax administration.  
More specifically, detailed recommendations for improving  social protection payment mechanisms , 
notably of the  productive safety net program, in the short, medium and long term are summarized in 
Table 4. 
Interoperability, choice and quality -based competition  
In the short term, if SPL programs wish to give beneficiaries different options for their PSP, programs 
will have to either process bulk payments separately for each PSP or go through an aggregator. The 
eventual emergence of a sector -wide interoperable switch will simplify this process for SPL programs 
and eventually allow them to be truly PSP agnostic.  
However, it is not clear that SPL programs in Côte d’Ivoire should aspire to offer this kind of choice. 
Giving SPL program beneficiaries a wide array of choice  of PSP is considered best practice, and is 
common in more mature SPL environments, with that rationale that this choice both allows 
beneficiaries to choose the service that is best suited to their needs while also encouraging competition 
among PSPs. In le ss-mature payment environment such as Côte d’Ivoire, however —where financial 
infrastructure is not fully developed, especially in rural areas —this “choice” may be a false one if there 
is no appropriate provider in beneficiaries’ localities for them to choo se from.  
                                                           
16 IFC-World Bank. 2018. “Granting Access: Leveraging Social Payments to Expand Digital Financial Inclusion in Côte D’ivoire.” 
Field Note No. 11, World Bank Group, Washington, DC.   
17 World Ban (2015). Project Appraisal Document for Côte d’Ivoire Productive Social Safety Net Project.  Washington, DC: 
World Bank.  
18 World Bank (2019).  Project Appraisal Document for Côte d’Ivoire Social Protection and Economic Inclusion Project 
(Additional Financing to Productive Social Safety Net Project).  Washington, DC: World Bank.  
19World Bank  (2019). Project Appraisal Document: West Africa Unique Identification for Re gional Integration and Inclusion 
(WURI) Program (including Côte d’Ivoire), P161329 . Washington, DC: World Bank.  19 Monitoring and Accountability  
It is important that contracts with PSPs offering digital payments should explicitly require a) individual 
reporting on transfers, and b) that all transactions be individually reconciled before the PSP’s fees are 
paid. Annex B contains a sample reporting framework to be annexed to a contract with a PSP.  
Grievance Redress  
While the overall design of the PFSP GRM is in line with international best practices, the program will 
want to continue to make improvements to ensure that the GRM is efficient enough to keep pace with 
the growth of the program during scale -up. In particular, the PFPS should formalize the roles of local 
leaders in the GRM and training relative actors in their responsibilities (vill age committees, local 
political leaders, local social workers, etc.); make grievance processing more efficient (digitization of 
complaints database, coding of complaints to allow for priority treatment of certain complaint types, 
standardization of communi cation with beneficiaries on expected delays and on complaint resolution); 
continued awareness raising with beneficiaries on possible grievance channels; opening the complaints 
system to non -beneficiaries of the PFSP (allowing complaints on program targeti ng, etc.); and 
reinforcing the capacity of the GRM call center, including implementation of a toll -free complaints 
hotline, and support for the most common local languages.  
Conclusion  
Overall, it may be wise in the short and medium term for SPL programs to  focus on developing 
partnerships with a small number of high -potential PSPs, to collaborate with them on the development 
of the financial infrastructure —networks of agents and cash points —that will pay dividends for SPL 
program delivery down the road.  
 20 Table 4 Recommendations for Evolution of the PFSP Payment Delivery Mechanism  
  Short term  Medium term  Long term  
 
Cost of Access  Subsidize the cost of and assist beneficiaries in acquiring a 
national ID card (for those who do not have one).  
Work with PSP to facilitate provision of a low -value, relaxed -
KYC account to PFSP beneficiaries.  Work with ONI on a system to give PFSP beneficiaries national ID cards en 
masse.  
Liaise with relevant stakeholders to clarify regulation on low -value accounts at 
regulatory level and seek a potential program -level exception to KYC 
requirements for SIM cards.  Liaise with ONI during rollout of the RNPP such at by 2020 all PFSP 
beneficia ries are systematically and automatically enrolled in the 
national and civil registries as an integral part of PFSP enrolment.  Accessibility  
Appropriateness  Work with current PSP to deploy additional itinerant field 
agents to reduce wait times.  
Work with current PSP to encourage it to expand its agent 
networks to beneficiary localities. (For those localities that 
do not immediately offer agents a viable business case, 
continued reliance on itinerant agents may be necessary in 
the short/medium term.)  
Improve training of beneficiaries on use of payment channel 
and ensure that this training is adapted to the specific needs 
of the PFSP population.  
Improve communication with beneficiaries on the 
parameters of the PFSP. It is important to diversify 
communica tions channels (posters, radio, SMS, robo -calling, 
through community leaders, through social workers, etc.) to 
mitigate the risks of communicating through any one 
channel.  Begin working with other two mobile money operators, giving beneficiaries a 
choice b etween multiple services.  
Work with all PSPs to encourage them to expand their agent networks to 
beneficiary localities. (For those localities that do not immediately offer agents 
a viable business case, continued reliance on itinerant agents may be necess ary 
in the short/medium term.)  
Depending on the conclusions of the evaluation of the pilot phase, consider 
expanding to PSPs not based on mobile, which maybe be more appropriate for 
certain types of beneficiaries (illiterate, elderly, etc.).  Branch out to banks, MFIs and other relevant PSPs for those 
beneficiaries who prefer them.  
Permanent PSP agent networks in beneficiaries’ localities allow 
on-demand withdrawals, reducing wait times to negligible levels.  
Stay abreast of developments in the Ivoirian DFS market and 
integrate mobile -enabled savings -and-loans and insurance 
products and other new innovations that are relevant to PFSP 
beneficiaries as they become available.  
Coordinate with relevant stakeholders/donors in the 
development of a national payment s witch that will allow 
seamless integration of multiple PSPs, delivering maximum 
beneficiary choice.   
Rights and Dignity  Improve communication about GRM and encourage 
beneficiaries to voice complaints.  
Monitor exclusion closely in M&E design and take corrective 
action as necessary. If any beneficiary households are 
unable to access their benefits due to the payment channel 
(no access, unable to use), then corrective action is 
necessary.  Use feedback fro m pilot to review GRM processes and make improvements in 
case -management processes.  
Work with PSP on joint case -management process for payment -related 
complaints, including data sharing on complaints.  
Conduct consultations to ask local communities what ro le they wish to have in 
the GRM and integrate them as appropriate.  Give local communities and meaningful and clearly defined role 
in the GRM. Foster linkage to integrate the GRM with the broader 
justice system. Publish comprehensive GRM manual publicly .  
Reliability  Work with PSP to identify inefficient processes leading to 
payment delays.  
Develop M&E tools to allow payment delays to be tracked 
reliably at the transaction level.  Conduct systematic review of risks leading to payment delays and develop 
mitigating measures to manage these risks.  
Work directly with PSPs to better understand how PFSP payments can be 
leveraged to ensure a viable business case the maximal number of PSP agents. 
For localities where no viable business case exists, contemplate a sub sidy to the 
PSP in the short/medium term.  Ensure regular updating and adaptation of the risk review and 
mitigating measures.  
Working with other stakeholders, work toward build a mobile -
money ecosystem in beneficiary villages, to ensure a clear and 
sustaina ble business case for PSP agents.  Robustness  
Governance  
Work with PSP to improve quality and timeliness of 
transaction -level reporting.  Codify staff roles and responsibilities clearly in a comprehensive operational 
manual and ensure that all staff, includ ing field staff, understand their role.  Integrate PFSP and PSP MIS such that reporting is automatic and 
in real time.  
As program matures, increase independence of internal M&E to 
improve data reliability.  21   Short term  Medium term  Long term   
Security  Develop M&E tools to automatically flag potentially 
fraudulent activity from payment reports and GRM data and  
ensure that PSP agents are also monitored for fraudulent 
activity.  
Reinforce training for beneficiaries on PIN codes, including 
on how (and when) to change them.  When developing PFSP MIS, provide for functionality to automate creation of 
payroll lists, with checks to ensure data quality, and generate a secure file for 
transmission to the PSP.  
Conduct systematic review of risks leading to fraud and d evelop any fraud -
control measures identified as lacking.  
Engage with ONI as a stakeholder to ensure that the new national registry 
facilitates PFSP’s fraud -prevention needs (ability to remove duplicate 
beneficiaries based on biometric data, etc.).  Integrat e PFDP and PSP MIS to enable straight -through payment 
processing.  
Regularly update review of fraud risk and update fraud -control 
measures as appropriate.   
Financial Inclusion  Work with PSPs to expand network of permanent agents to 
beneficiaries’ localities, reducing program reliance on 
itinerant agents.  
Work with PSPs to devise a fee structure whereby 
beneficiaries are not penalized for making multiple, smaller 
withdrawals.  
 Work with all PSPs to encourage them to expand their agent  networks to 
beneficiary localities reducing program reliance on itinerant agents.  
Develop financial -literacy training training for beneficiaries on using their 
accounts as a tool for managing their household budgets, with a special 
emphasis on medium -term savings. Use regular household visits from social 
workers to systematically reinforce key messages from this training as well as 
provide individualized coaching on household budgeting.  
Work with PSPs to offer earmarked - and commitment -savings sub -accoun ts to 
beneficiaries and other relevant budgeting too ls. Incorporate these into the 
training.  Permanent PSP agent networks in beneficiaries’ localities allow 
on-demand withdrawals, reducing wait times to negligible levels.  
As additional financial services b ecome accessible through the 
PSPs used by the PFSP, expand the nature of the financial -literacy 
training to include borrowing, investing, insurance, etc.  
Stay abreast of developments in the Ivoirian DFS market and 
integrate mobile -enabled savings -and-loans  or insurance 
products and other new innovations that are relevant to PFSP 
beneficiaries as they become available.  Integration  
Coordination  Subsidize the cost of and assist beneficiaries in acquiring a 
national ID card (for those who do not have one).  
Identify other programs that deliver payments to similar 
target populations and  begin exploring synergies to 
coordinating payment delivery.  
Coordinate on any internal processes used, for example to 
open accounts or process payments, and share tools 
between programs.  
 Work with ONI on a system to give PFSP beneficiaries national ID cards en 
masse.  
Establish dialogue between all country SPL programs on a shared emergency -
payment system. Even if payments are outsourced to PSPs, emergency 
payments may hav e to be handled internally by the government, leading to 
significant economies of scale to establishing common protocols across 
programs.  
Leverage different SPL programs to improve local digital payment ecosystems. 
If multiple programs can pay into the sam e account —including perhaps non -
SPL payments such as government salaries —then this will only improve PSP 
business models, lowering prices of payments for the government and 
improving the quality of agent networks.  Liaise with ONI during rollout of the nati onal registry such at by 
2020 all PFSP beneficiaries are systematically and automatically 
enrolled in the national and civil registries as an integral part of 
PFSP enrolment.  
All country SPL programs are fully integrated into the national 
population regis try, using its unique identifier and biometric data 
for all identification purposes (including account opening and 
payment authentication).  
Review SPL procurement strategy for PSPs and  try to combine 
multiple programs’ procurements into a single RFP to decrease 
costs.  
Source: World Bank staff compilation.  22 VI. ANNEXES  
A. Fundamental  Performance Indicators for Payment Mechanisms  
 INDICATEUR PAR COMPOSANTE  Mode d'obtention/definition  Unité  PAIEMENT  1-Nombre moyenne de paiement reçu par le 
ménage  Dénombrement sur declaration du ménage et 
vérification des portable (message de 
notification) ménage  Nombre 
(moyenne)  
2-Pourcentage de paiements ayant été effectué 
avec succès  Nombre de transfers  effectués pendant le 
dernier paiement avec succès (selon le 
rapport de l'operateur de paiement) divisé par 
le nombre de bénéficiaires à payer  % 
3-Etat d'avancement du suivi des paiements  Pourcentage de ménages pour lequel la fiche 
de suivi de paiement a bien été soumise par 
les TS après le dernier paiement  % 
4-Delai de transmission des rapport de l'opérateur 
de paiement  Le temps mis par l'opérateur de paiement 
entre le temps du dépôt  du transfert sur le 
compte du bénéficiaire et la transmission des 
rapport, en jours (Etat de paiement/ 
Reporting) (dernier paiement)  jours  
5-Integralité du rapport de l'opérateur de 
paiement  Pourcentage de ménages bénéficiaires inclus 
dans le rapport de paiement soumis par 
l'operateur de paiement (dernier paiement)  % 
6-Accord entre les données fournies par Orange 
money et le suivi effectué par l'UGP  Pourcentage d'accord entre de deux bases de 
suivi des paiements (fournie par Orange et 
collecté par l'UGP) (dernier paiement)  % 
7-Motif de non retrait du transfert  Pourcentage de ceux qui n'ont pas retiré leur 
dernier paiement  % 
(a)   Volonté de faire une épargne     
(b)   Cas de maladie / invalidité / voyage     
(c)   Manque de liquidité au PDV OM     
(d)   Non informé de la récéption du 
transfert     
(e)   Perte du matériel (portable, puce, etc.)     
(f)   Oublie du code sécret     
(g)   Manque de la carte d'identité     CONDITIONS PREALABLES  
8-Pourcentage de recipiendaires sachant 
manipuler leur portable de manière satisfaisante  Pourcentage de recipiendaires qui arrivent à 
effectuer une transaction simple de manière 
independante  % 
9-Pourcentage de ménage ayant des pièces 
d'identité valides  Il s'agit de l'effectif des bénéficiaires ayant des 
documents d'identité (Carte Nationale 
d'Identité ou attestation d'identité pour les 
nationaux, carte consulaire ou passeport ou 
titre de séjour pour les non nationaux) dont la 
date de v alidité n'est pas encore arrivée  % PLAINTES  10-Pourcentage des ménages bénéficiaires ayant 
porté plainte  Nombre de ménages ayant porté plainte (au 
moins une fois) divisé par le nombre total de 
ménages ayant réçu au moins un paiement  % 
11-Pourcentage des plaintes ayant été resolu  Nombre de plaintes pour lesquelles une 
solution satisfaisante a été proposée au 
bénéficiaire dans le delai prevu divisé par le 
Nombre de plaintes réçus  % 
12-Les types de plainte recurrente/ fréquente  Pourcentage de ceux qui one porté plainte  % 
(a)   Modalité 1      
(b)   Modalité 2      
(c)   …     
Source: Republic of Côte d’Ivoire,  Productive Social Safety Net / Social Protection and Economic I nclusion Project, 
2015 to present . 23 B. Good Practice for M&E of Digital Payments  
Deliverable  Report must include…  Reporting 
frequency  Required remediation measures  
5000 project 
beneficiaries 
successfully 
registered to OM 
service  • Extract from database of 
OM clients (excel/csv), 
showing customer names 
and phone numbers for all 
project beneficiaries  
• For any beneficiaries that 
were not registered 
successfully, an 
explanation of what went 
wrong in each case  Once, at latest 
3 weeks 
before first 
scheduled 
payment  If <99.5% of project beneficiaries are 
registered for OM service, then OM must 
register remaining beneficiaries and 
resubmit report  
Agents are alerted 
to expect higher 
than normal 
demand for cash 
withdrawals and 
have developed a 
credible plan to 
manage their 
liquidity  • Details of communication 
with agents, including date 
of communic ation  
• Summary of the agent’s 
strategy to manage 
liquidity in face of 
increased demand for cash 
withdrawals  No later than 3 
days before 
each 
scheduled 
payment  If not all agents identified by the UGP as 
participating in the PFSP program have 
been communicate d with or not all 
agents have submitted a liquidity -
management strategy, then both must 
occur and the report must be 
resubmitted.  
Transfers made 
successfully and 
on time into 
beneficiary 
accounts  • Transaction statement of 
the PFSP OM account, 
listing all t ransactions in 
and out of this account 
(including all transfers into 
the beneficiary accounts, 
including timestamps, 
beneficiary name, and 
beneficiary ID), including 
any and all failed transfers 
along with their error 
codes  
• For any failed transfers, an 
explanation of what went 
wrong in each case  No later than 5 
days following 
each payment  If transfer failure rate >0.5%, then the 
appropriate remedial actions must be 
taken to ensure delivery of transfer, and 
the report must be resubmitted.  
Beneficiaries who 
wish to make cash 
withdrawals from 
their accounts are 
able to, on 
demand  EITHER  
• Individual customer 
transaction statements 
(excel/csv) for the 
individual customer 
account of each project 
beneficiary, listing all 
transactions (deposits, 
withdrawals and transfers, 
and including timestamps, 
and beneficiary ID) in and 
out of the beneficiary’s 
account  
OR 
• List of all transactions 
(excel/csv) listing all 
transactions (deposits, 
withdrawals and transfers, 
and including timestamps, 
and beneficiary ID) in and 
out of the beneficiary’s 
account  
 Monthly, 
starting no 
later than 30 
days following 
the first 
payment into 
the first 
beneficiary 
account  If the PFSP UGP, in analyzing beneficiary 
complaints delivered through its 
Grievance Redress Mechanism, 
iden tifies geographic zones and/or 
specific agents who are consistently 
unable to meet beneficiaries’ demand 
for cash withdrawals, then it will notify 
OM of the problem agent. In response, 
OM must take at least one of the 
following remedial measures within 10 
days of being notified by the PFSP UGP of 
the problem agent:  
• Assist the existing agent to 
manage liquidity such that the 
agent is able to satisfy 
demand for withdrawals  
• Dispatch a mobile agent to go 
to each beneficiary village in 
this zone, at a fixed time  and 
date, at least once per month, 
until the immobile agent is 
able to satisfy demand for 
withdrawals  24 • Deploy a new agent in this 
zone who is better able to 
address beneficiary demand 
than the existing agent  
 
OM will be required to submit a report 
on all s uch remedial actions taken within 
15 days of receiving notification of the 
problem agent by the UGP. Remedial 
measures shall only be considered 
successful if the number of complaints 
delivered through the GRM drop to 
within 1 standard deviation of the over all 
mean of all agents for the project, as 
calculated by the UGP. If not considered 
successful, then additional remedial 
measures will be required.  
Source: World Bank staff compilation.   25 C. Good Practice for GRMs  
Good Practice  Description  Example Programs20 
Multiple entry 
points  The GRM should not limit complainants to a 
single point of entry for expressing their 
grievances. As an example, a GRM might 
allow complainants to file grievances either 
with local project staff or via a telephone 
hotline. This approach helps ensure that PAPs 
have recourse to a grievance channel that is 
appropriate to their needs. It also helps avoid 
conflicts of interest in cases of corruption or 
malfeasance: if the corrupt actors are 
implicated in the GRM, then they may ha ve an 
interest in preventing the complaint from 
being registered.  • Philippines  
• India —Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty 
Reduction Project (TNEPRP)  
• Upper Cisokan Pumped Hydroelectrical Power 
Project  
• (Indonesia)  
• Tanzania: Zanzibar Urban Services Project  
• Lake  Victoria Phase II, APL 2  
• Indonesia: Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage  
• China: Hubei Yiba Highway Project  
• Vietnam: Trung Son Hydro  
• Azerbaijan: Highway 3  
• Kazakhstan: South West Roads Project  
• Kyrgyz Republic: National Road Rehabilitation (Osh 
transport)  
• Colombia: Rio Bogota Environment Infrastructure  
• Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management  
• India: Vishnugad Hydropower  
• India: National Ganga River Basin Project  
 
Make use of 
existing social 
structures  Various programs have tried to create 
project -specific  complaint channels, for 
example using SMS, only to discover that 
PAPs preferred to complain directly to the 
same local community leadership structures 
that they were used to communicating with. 
Programs should make an effort to 
incorporate these local lea ders in the 
program GRM.  • India —Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty 
Reduction Project (TNEPRP)  
• Hubei Yiba Highway Project (China)  
• Tanzania: Zanzibar Urban Services Project  
• Lake Victoria Phase II, APL 2  
Allow for 
anonymous 
complaints  In certain cases, a PAP might wish to file a 
grievance anonymously, and the GRM should 
accommodate this wish. This is especially 
relevant in sensitive programs where the PAP 
fear reprisal or retaliation for complaining, for 
example if there are ethnic tens ions at play.  • Kyrgyz Republic: National Road Rehabilitation 
(Osh transport)  
• Kazakhstan SW Road Project  
• Azerbaijan Highway 3  
• China: Hubei Yiba Highway Project  
• India —Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty 
Reduction Project (TNEPRP)  
• India: Second Madhya Pradesh District Poverty 
Initiatives  
Ability to file 
complaints in 
local languages  It is important to ensure that PAPs can 
express grievances in the language they are 
most comfortable with. If the local context 
makes central management of complaints in 
all local languages impractical, then local 
leaders and project staff can often be 
employed as intermediaries.  • Pakistan –Flood Emergency Cash Transfer Project  
• Kazakhstan SW Road Project  
Accessible 
communication  Since the vulnerable groups targeted by many 
SP programs may not be fully literate or 
conversant in the national language, it is 
important that the communication strategy 
for the GRM and the options for filing a 
complaint take into account this limitation.  
For example, text -based communication can 
be eschewed in favor of illustrations or local -
language radio broadcasts.  • India —Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty 
Reduction Project (TNEPRP)  
• Uganda: Electricity Sector Development Project  
• Indonesia: Upper Cisoka n Pumped Storage  
• China: Hubei Yiba Highway Project  
• Vietnam: Trung Son Hydro  
• Azerbaijan: Highway 3  
• Kazakhstan: South West Roads Project  
• Kyrgyz Republic: National Road Rehabilitation 
(Osh transport)  
• Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management  
• India: Vishnugad Hydropower  
                                                           
20 Marie Brown (2014), “Global Review of Grievance Redress Mechanisms in World Bank Projects,” World Bank Group.  26 Good Practice  Description  Example Programs20 
• India: National Ganga River Basin Project  
• India: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor  
• Pakistan: Floods Emergency Cash Transfer Project  
Issuance of a 
case number  Each complaint should be assigned a case 
number that can be used by both the program 
staff and the complainant to track progress 
toward resolution.  • Philippines  
• India —Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty 
Reduction Project (TNEPRP)  
• Tanzania: Zanzibar Urban Se rvices Project  
• Indonesia: Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage  
• Lao PDR: Nam Theun 2 Hydropower  
• China: Hubei Yiba Highway Project  
• Vietnam: Trung Son Hydro  
• Azerbaijan: Highway 3  
• Kazakhstan: South West Roads Project  
• Kyrgyz Republic: National Road Rehabilitation 
(Osh transport)  
• Colombia: Rio Bogota Environment Infrastructure  
• Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management  
• India: Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP)  
• India: Vishnugad Hydropower  
• India: National Ganga River Basin Project  
• India: Tamil Nadu Empowerment Project  
• India: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor  
• Pakistan: Floods Emergency Cash Transfer Project  
Categorization 
and routing of 
grievances  Complaints should be categorized with 
routing codes in order to enable more 
efficient processing. For example, complaints 
that can be resolved quickly by low -level 
program staff could be in one category, while 
complaints that require input from high -level 
program staff or take more time to process 
can be considered separately. Categorizing 
complaints not only enables more efficient 
processing, but can also permit better 
communication with PAPs about wait times, 
as different types of complaints likely take 
different amounts of time to process.  • Kazakhstan SW Road Project  
• Pakistan Flood Emergency Cash Transfer Project  
• Uganda: Electricity Sector Development Project  
• Indonesia: Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage  
• Vietnam: Trung Son Hydro  
• India: National Ganga River Basin  Project  
• India: Vishnugad Hydropower  
• India: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor  
• Pakistan: Floods Emergency Cash Transfer Project  
Written 
confirmations  All PAPs should receive a written confirmation 
that their complaint has been received. This 
written record important even for illiterate 
PAPs. This confirmation should include the 
case number as well as the anticipated 
treatment delays. For example, an automated 
SMS could be sent to the PAP once the 
complaint had been recorded into the 
complaint tracking system. Once the case is 
closed, its resolution should also be 
communicated in writing (in addition to other 
communication mechanisms that are more 
suitable to illiterate PAPs).  • Kazakhstan: South West Roads Project  
• China: Hubei Yiba Highway Projec t 
• India: National Ganga River Basin Project  
• India: Vishnugad Hydropower  
• India: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor  
• Pakistan: Floods Emergency Cash Transfer Project  
Transparency 
about expected 
delays  PAPs should understand the anticipated wait 
time before their complaint resolved. 
Categorizing complaints according to wait 
times at entry into the GRM can help facilitate 
this communication.  • Philippines  
• India —Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty 
Reduction Project (TNEPRP)  
• India: National Ganga River Basin Project  
• India: Vishnugad Hydropower  
• Kazakhstan: South West Roads Project  
• Kyrgyz Republic: National Road Rehabilitation 
(Osh transport)  
• Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management  
• Colombia: Rio Bogota Environment Infrastructure  
• Turkey: ECSEE APL#6  
• Azerbaijan: Highway 3  27 Good Practice  Description  Example Programs20 
• China: Hubei Yiba Highway Project  
• Vietnam: Trung Son Hydro  
• Indonesia: Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage  
• Tanzania: Zanzibar Urban Services Project  
Training of all 
actors  Everyone implicated i n the GRM should be 
trained in their role and how it fits into the 
overall GRM. This training should not be 
limited to program staff, but also any 
contractors involved in the GRM (such as the 
PSP) as well as other actors (community 
leaders, etc.).  • Nigeria  
• Philippines  
Electronic data 
management  In order to allow complaints to be tracked and 
processed effectively, they should be 
managed —at least once they reach a certain 
level —in a GRM tracking database. Data entry 
can be performed either centrally or in the 
field, using tablets equipped with an 
electronic complaint form.  • Philippines  
• India —Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty 
Reduction Project (TNEPRP)  
• Tanzania: Zanzibar Urban Services Project  
• Indonesia: Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage  
• Lao PDR: Nam Theun 2 Hydr opower  
• China: Hubei Yiba Highway Project  
• Vietnam: Trung Son Hydro  
• Azerbaijan: Highway 3  
• Kazakhstan: South West Roads Project  
• Kyrgyz Republic: National Road Rehabilitation 
(Osh transport)  
• Colombia: Rio Bogota Environment Infrastructure  
• Southern West Bank So lid Waste Management  
• India: Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP)  
• India: Vishnugad Hydropower  
• India: National Ganga River Basin Project  
• India: Tamil Nadu Empowerment Project  
• India: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor  
• Pakistan: Floods Emergency Cash Transfer  Project  
Source: World Bank staff compilation.   28 D. Example  Survey Instrument for Payment Monitoring – PFSP  
A. Information générale  
Rapport à  Intitulé  Modalité (réponse)  
 Identifiant de l’enquêteur   
Enquêteur  Nom, prénoms de l’enquêteur   
 Date de l’entretien   
 Région   
 Village   
Ménage  Identifiant du ménage   
 Nom, prénoms du chef de ménage   
 Nom, prénoms du récipiendaire   
Récipiendaire  Numéro de téléphone (sur lequel il reçoit le transfert)   
 Genre du récipiendaire  Masculin |__|    Féminin|__|  
 
B. FICHE DE SUIVI DES PAIEMENTS  
Intitulé  Modalité (réponse)  
1-Statut du bénéficiaire  Transfert reçu|__| Transfert non reçu|__|  
1.1 Si transfert non reçu, pour quel motif  ? 1-Transfert non effectué  
2-Carte SIM égarée ou bloquée  
3-Pas de réception de notification  
4-Autre  
Si autre, à préciser  
1.2 Si transfert reçu, montant notifié au récipiendaire   
1.3 Si transfert reçu, date de réception de la notification   
1.4 Si transfert reçu, le récipiendaire a -t-il effectué un retrait  ? Oui |__| Non|__|  
1.4.2. Si oui  : Combien le récipiendaire a -t-il souhaité retirer  ?  
1.4.3. Si oui  : Le récipiendaire a -t-il pu retirer le montant souhaité  ? Oui |__| Non|__|  
1.4.1 Si oui  : Date de retrait   
1.4.4 Si non  : Quels en sont les motifs  ? 
 
 1-Volonté de faire une épargne  
2-Incapacité à effectuer les retraits  
2.1 cas de maladie/Invalidité/voyage  
2.2 Indisponibilité de l’agent au point de vente 
(liquidité)  
2.3 Service de mauvaise qualité au point de vente  
2.4 Problème de réseau  
2.5 Problème d’identification/authentification  
2.6 Récipiendaire non informé  
2.7 Perte du matériel  29 2.8 Non maitrise du service Orange money  
2.9 Difficulté avec le code secret  
2.10 Ne veut pas payer des frais de transaction 
élevés  
2.11 Autre problème avec Orange money.  
       Précisez  :………………………………….  
 
1.5.1 Le récipiendaire a -t-il consulté son solde avant l’opération de 
retrait  ? Oui |__| Non|__|  
1.5.2 Le récipiendaire a -t-il consulté son solde après l’opération de 
retrait  ? Oui |_ _| Non|__|  
2.1. A quelle date le récipiendaire pense -t-il recevoir le paiement suivant  ?  
2.2. Quel doit être le montant de ce paiement  ?  
2.3. Le récipiendaire aurait -il eu besoin de l’appui d’une tierce personne 
pour effectuer l’utilisation du service Orange money  Oui |__| Non|__|  
2.4. Le récipiendaire maitrise -t-il l’utilisation du portable (administration 
de teste de capacité de manipulation)  Oui |__| Non|__|  
3.1 Avez -vous connaissance de la helpline/mécanisme de gestion des  
réclamations  ?  
3.2 Savez -vous comment l’utiliser  ?  
3.3. Souhaiteriez -vous enregistrer une réclamation maintenant  ? Oui |__| Non|__|  
        Si oui  : Ouvrez la fiche d’enregistrement des plaintes   
Source: Republic of Côte d’Ivoire,  Productive Social Safety Net / Social Protection and Economic I nclusion 
Project.   30 E. Example  Grievance Form  – PFSP  
 
 
 
(continued)  
FICHE D’ENREGISTREMENT DES PLAINTES  
 
A- REFERENCE GEOGRAPHIQUE  
 
PLAINTE N°………du ………………20………  
REGION  :……………………………………………………………… ……………………………………  
DEPARTEMENT  :…………………………………………………… ………………………………………  
SOUS -PREFECTURE  : ……………………………  LOCALITE / VILLAGE  : ……………....... ..........  
NIVEAU DE TRAITEMENT  :  
□  Comité Villageois (CV)   □Travailleur Social    □UGP  
 
B- IDENTIFICATION DU PLAIGNANT  
 
NOM  : …………………… ………………… .   PRENOMS  : ……………………………………………………….  
SEXE  :  □ Masculin   □ Feminin  
LIEU DE RESIDENCE  : …………………………… ……………………………………………………………  
 
CONTACT  (Tél)  : ……………………………… ……………………………………………………………… ……. 
STATUT                           □ Bénéficiaire                               □ Non bénéficiaire  
Si bénéficiaire , N° d’Identifiant  : …………………………………………………..  
Si Non bénéficiaire  :       □ Lien avec un bénéficiaire          □ Pas de lien avec un bénéficiaire  
Si « NON » préciser  Nom et Prénoms du bé néficiaire  : ……………………………………… …………..  
 
MOTIF DE LA PLA INTE  : 
 
 CIBLAGE DES MENAGES  
□ Exclusion d’un ménage dans le processus    
□ Inclusion d’un ménage dans le processus   
□ Omission d’un ménage  dans le processus   
□ Autre   à préciser  :……………………………………  
……………………………….........................................  
……………………………………………………………..  
 IDENTIFICATION DE MENAGES ELIGIBLES  
□ Exclusion du ménage dans le processus    
□ Inclusion d’un ménage dans le processus   
□ Omission du ménage  dans le processus   
□ Omission du récipiendaire du ménage  
□ Omission du suppléant  dans le processus   
□ Autre   à préciser  :…………………………… ………  
……………………………….........................................  
……………………………………………………………..  
 31  
Source: Republic of Côte d’Ivoire,  Productive Social Safety Net / Social Protection and Economic I nclusion Project, 
2015 to present.   
PAIEMENT DU BENEFICIAIRE  
□ Exclusion du bénéficiaire  
□ Inclusion du bénéficiaire   
□ Omission du bénéficiaire  
□ Corruption  
□ Non perception du transféré   
□ Non perception du montant total à transférer  
□ Non reversement du moins perçu du moi précèdent   
□ Retard  dans le transfert   
□ Mode de paiement non adapté  
□ Absence de point de paiement /de structure de paiement   
□ Retard de paiement du point de vente  
□ Retard des agents de paiement  
□ Eloignement du point de paiement par rapport à la localité  
 □ Refus de paiement par le point de vente  
□ Espace non propice au paiement  
□ Intimidation  des agents de paiement  
□ perte/vol de la carte SIM  
 □ Oublie/perte du mot de pass  
□ Décès du récipiendaire du ménage  
 □ Décès du suppléant du ménage  
□ Difficulté à manipuler le terminal/potable  
□ Manque de couverture réseau mobile du prestataire  
□ Autre  à préciser  :……………………………………  
………………………………................ .........................  
……………………………………………………………..  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description sommaire de la plainte  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  MESURES D’ACCOMPAGNEMENT  
□ Stigmatisation  
□ Absence des agents de mise en œuvre des MA 
□ Manque d’intrants -matériel -équipement  
□ Retard  des agents de mise en œuvre des MA  
□ Non-respect du calendrier proposé   
□ Manque de courtoisie des agents  
□ Non-respect  des programmes et modules  
□ Manque  de suivi des bénéficiaires  -MA  
□ Lourdeur  dans le processus de traitement des plaintes   
□ Autre  à préciser  :……………………………………  
……………………………….........................................  
……………………………………………………………..  AUTRES  
□ Stigmatisation  
□ Fraude sur l’identité   
□ Conflit intercommunautaire  
□ Conflit entre bénéficiaires  
□ Disfonctionnement du CV   
□ Disfonctionnement du Comité Communal  
□ Disfonctionnement du Comité Régional  
□ Inégalement  de traitement des bénéficiaires  
□ Manque de courtoisie des agents de paiement  /MA  
□ Négligence constatée dans le traitement des plaintes   
□ Lourdeur  dans le processus de traitement des plaintes   
□ Autre  à préciser  :……………………………………  
……………………………….........................................  
……………………………………………………………..  
 32 F. ISPA Payment Assessment Tool Overview  
 
Source: Interagency Social Protection Assessment  partner organizations , World Bank; http://www.ISPATools.org .  
 
  
33  
 
  
