 
 Development Informatics  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Development Informatics working paper series discusses the broad issues 
surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, information systems, and 
information and communication technologies in the process of socio -economic 
development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 80  
 
Data Gathering and Justice in 
the Urban Informal Sector: 
Views from the Frontline  
 
TERRY GIBSON  
 
2019  
 
Published in collaboration with, and with the 
financial support of, the University of Manchester’s 
Sustainable Consumption Institute  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published 
by: Centre for Development Informatics  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdi@manchester.ac.uk  Web: http://www.cdi.manchester.ac. uk 
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/   
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Background  ................................ ................................ ..............................  3 
C. Methods  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
D. Findings  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 10 
D1.  IMPLEMENTATION AND  DEVELOPMENT OF THE ‘VIEWS FROM THE FRONTLINE ’ PROGRAMME . 10 
D2.  DEVELOPMENT OF THE FRONTLINE PROGRAMME  ................................ ..........................  13 
D3.  APPLICATIONS AND IMPACT OF FRONTLINE ................................ ................................ ... 15 
D4.  RETURN TO VIEWS FROM THE FRONTLINE  ................................ ................................ .... 19 
E. Discussion and Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ..... 21 
E1. RECOMMENDATIONS  ................................ ................................ ................................  24 
 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  25 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 27 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 27 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
1 
 Data Gathering and Justice in the Urban 
Informal Sector: Views from the Frontline  
 
 
 Terry Gibson  
Inventing -futures.org  
  
2019  
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
This case considers the challenges faced by civil society organisa tions (CSOs) in gathering 
and applying data in urban informal contexts. Given that one billion people are estimated to 
live in such contexts globally and that the number continues to grow it is clearly important 
to build understanding of these localities; understanding which CSOs have found difficult to 
acquire. The specific case is the development of participatory data gathering and knowledge 
creation programmes – ‘Views from the Frontline’ ( VFL), ‘Action at the Frontline’ (AFL) and 
‘Frontline’  – by the Global Network for Disaster Redu ction and application of that 
knowledge to influence practice in informal urban contexts.  
 
It challenges tactical  approaches which assume that knowledge will necessarily lead to 
effective action, highlighting the barriers faced in the VFL, AFL and Frontlin e programmes. It 
therefore investigates structura l, distributive and instrumental aspects of data justice, 
highlighting the necessity for a nuanced and strategic  understanding which takes account of 
power structures, if knowledge is to support effective so cial transformation. The discussion 
and findings contribute to the developing understanding of data justice and apply this 
specifically to the activity of CSOs in attempting to engage in informal urban contexts. They 
highlight the role of ‘small data’ gath ering and application as having both process  benefits  
through the engagement of participants, and impact  benefits through increased visibility 
and voice for informal urban populations . 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
The focus of this study is the challenges for civil society organisations  (CSOs)  – both large 
international and small local – in acquiring data and acting in urban informal contexts. David 
Satterthwaite sets the scene:  
“Consider the difficulties facing any international agency wanting to improve 
condi tions in informal settlements. There is usually no data on who lives there and on 
the deficiencies in provision for water, sanitation, health care, schools, emergency 
services and much else besides. Most residents have no title to the land they occupy 
and their right to be there is often contested. Official household surveys do not 
provide data on informal settlements; they only collect data for a national sample. 
Census data, if collected in informal settlements, is not available at ward, sub -ward 
or stree t level so does not fill the information gap.  There are usually no maps and 
often no street names. Professionals may worry about their safety – or in large 
informal settlements about getting lost”  (Satterthwaite, 2018)  
 
Oxfam GB recognised these challenge s in their ‘Getting Ready for The Century Of The City: 
2013 -2016 Urban Framework Report’  which noted a ‘bias against urban’ within the 
organisation. It acknowledged limited investment in urban programming:  
“urbanisation of poverty and suffering is a missing  story within Oxfam. It is very 
optimistically estimated that 10% of Oxfam GB’s non -emergency funds are directed 
towards urban programmes ” (Oxfam, 2012,  p1) 
 
A workshop of 40 senior international non -governmental organisation ( INGO ) 
representatives noted:  
“Many INGOs, more comfortable in rural settings, have not begun to adapt their 
poverty reduction strategies to the rura l-urban demographic shift under way in 
developing countries, much less integrate a response to these new developments. 
This is another lea ding edge for the work ahead ” (Moser et al , 2007, p20)  
 
Several initiatives have addressed the need for data from urban informal contexts. For 
example Desinventar gathers risk knowledge from mixed sources including newspaper and 
other media reports publish ed locally (Desinventar, undated). Slum/Shack Dwellers 
International (SDI) operates in over 7000 informal slum areas in 200 cities, using local 
enumerators to gather data populating its ‘Know Your City’ database ( SDI, undated).  
 
This paper’s  study focuses on the ‘Views from the Frontline’ (VFL). ‘Action at the Frontline’ 
(AFL) and ‘Frontline’ data gathering programmes conducted by the Global Network for 
Disaster Reduction (GNDR), which also engaged  local enumerators, gathering data from 
local respondents (V iews from the Frontline, 2019).  GNDR emerged in 2007  as a network of 
local level  civil society organi sations  collaborating on data gathering and campaigning in 
relation to  disaster risk re duction. Its data gathering programme s, established in 2009, 
recorde d perceptions of risk at community level across communities in 48 low and low -
middle income countries ; with the ability to  disaggregate  data, for example as here  to foc us 
on urban informal contexts. As discussed within the paper, d uring iterations of the 
programme, data gathering shaped to external frameworks and priorities gave way to data 
gathering framed by respondents’ own priorities, which enhanced its ability to develop Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
3 
 understanding of dynamic informal urban contexts by reducing the filtering of 
pres uppositions about such localities.  
 
The programmes assume that acquiring knowledge of these formerly opaque contexts will 
provide a basis for appropriate action, directly by civil society organisations and indirectly 
through advocacy addressed at other relevant institutions. The case demonstrates 
instrumental benefits of the programme s through a dual impact at local, wider subnational 
and national levels and also reflects critically on limitations of tactical approaches based on 
the maxim ‘sunshine is the b est disinfectant’ (Fox, 2015). It foregrounds questions of power 
and its ability to bar or refashion knowledge. In terms of the data justice model this case 
study considers ways that gathering and application of data in urban informal contexts may 
be under taken justly or unjustly in relation to those contributing the data. In particular the 
focus is on structural (do interests and power in wider society support fair outcomes) and 
distributive (who gets what) data justice (Heeks and Shekhar, 2019 ). Its findi ngs also 
discover inst rumental data justice effects – in other words fair use of data, resulting in 
positive impacts for those who contribute data – as a notable aspect of th ese programme s is 
the initially undervalued role of small data looped back at loca l level, which was seen to lead 
to enhanced social agency in urban contexts such as Delhi, India; Limbe City, Cameroon and 
Kathmandu, Nepal, whereas the big data aspect directed at institutional contexts proved 
more problematic.  
 
The paper proceeds through  the background, which considers earlier means of applying 
data in social development and outlines a framework for considering the effects of different 
forms of knowledge and power on such applications. It continues with discussion of the 
qualitative metho ds used to gather and analyse the data forming the case study, and 
explores findings from this data, considering the effects of the VFL, AFL and Frontline 
methods at local and other scales. The discussion and conclusions explore the contribution 
of this ca se study to understanding the role of data gathering methods in informing CSO 
roles in informal urban contexts and consider these through a data justice lens.  
 
 
B. Background  
 
This case focuses on the data just ice implications of gathering data locally to support 
advocacy for social development, focusing on urban informal contexts. These are areas of 
cities fed by inward economic migration and other forms of internal displacement and 
characterised by lack of registration, lack of rights to accom modation, in formal economic 
activity, rapid unmanaged growth, poverty and consequent vulnerability. These 
characteristics mean data and actionable knowledge are difficult to secure.  Yet, at present, 
we understand relatively little about methods for CSOs  to acquire act ionable data 
concerning urban informal contexts. There has also been  limited analysis of data gathering 
methods in such contexts and limited work on considering such actions through the lens of 
data justice, asking whether data which is gathered is used se nsitively and ethically to the 
benefit of its contributors.  This case study seeks to address some of these lacunae.  
 
Data, in the broadest sense, has been gathered locally to support social development in 
many ways, predating digital and social media techn ologies. Much of this work was Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
4 
 considered under the umbrella of ‘Communications for Development ’ where media 
included print, audio, radio, photography, film and video. Taking as an example the 
application of film and video, groundbreaking work was conducte d between 1968 and 1970 
by Donald Snowden and colleagues with the Fogo Islanders of Newfoundland (becoming 
known as the ‘Fogo Process’) to document and share experiences of indiv iduals’ lives and 
bring this material before government to advocate for change  and support (Quarry and 
Ramirez, 2009, p72 -78). What drew attention to the project was the intention to bring, with 
relative transparency, l ocal knowledge to other scales.  
 
Many other projects drew on this initiative, capitalising on increasingly accessible 
technology so that whereas Snowden’s project used 16mm film with associated costs and 
complexities of processing, editing etc, a participative project undertaken by Braden (2003) 
on behalf of ActionAid using mini digital cameras and laptops was able to bring the medium 
closer to the participants. The process was similar to Snowden’s in that the local conditions 
of villagers in rural Malawi were documented and then presented regionally to political 
leaders. As with the Fogo process this work raise d questions concerning the participation of 
those contributing knowledge. Braden (2003, p36) reflected that:  
“Methodologies of participation (RRA, PRA, PLA1) are routinely used but the outputs 
are seldom debated and analysed by either participating communi ties or facilitating 
development workers. Rather they play a token role in the credo of participatory 
development, or, at best they offer fieldworkers some background information, and, 
in the case of ranking, some way of offering a semblance of democrat ic choice and 
decision -making.”  
 
A wide range of participatory methods of the types referred to by Braden are deployed by 
CSOs at local level ( see for example the collection of  community risk assessment 
methodolo gies (Provention, undated)).  Typically results are held locally and not aggregated. 
Braden’s concern about the application of data gathered in this way echoed an increasing 
groundswell of concern about the nature of participation in development, highlighting the 
tendency for supposed participation to b ecome a performance to validate pre -programmed 
interventions. The conference and associated collection ‘Participation: the New Tyranny?’ 
(Cooke and Kothari, 2001) explored this problem in some detail, predating questions of data 
justice in relation to hand ling of digital data gathered from local participants.  
 
A large scale approach to participatory data collection aggregated into a global report 
foregrounded further questions about the acquisition and application of local level data. 
‘Voices of the Poor’ ( Narayan, 2000) was a large scale study which looked through the local 
end of the telescope, aggregating 78 participatory as sessments from 47 countries to 
combine a total of 40,000 voices, analysed qualitatively to inform policy via the platform of 
the Worl d Development Report 2000/2001. Two research studies were conducted on this 
project, McGee and Brock (2001) consider the Voices of the Poor case, comparing it with an 
Oxfam initiative, and find ing in both that policy is formulated on the basis of the agenc y of 
policy actors, only peripherally informed by the technical data gathered. Brock et al  (2001) 
move on to consider power, knowledge and the nature of political spaces in the framing of 
                                                      
1 Three widely used appraisal methods: RRA is rapid rural appraisal, PRA is participatory rural appraisal, and 
PLA is participatory learning and action.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
5 
 poverty policy. The study focuses in on the nature of political spac es in which dominant 
narratives are either reinforced or disputed, drawing on earlier work by Gaventa to suggest 
that ‘invited spaces ’ opened by powerful institutions are able to reinforce dominant 
narratives, reflecting McGee and Brock’s finding that poli tical rather than technical 
perspectives shape poverty reduction policy. They also identify more ‘autonomous spaces ’ 
created from below where experiential narratives such as those gathered participatively 
may be heard and may shape policy and action. The o verall message is that simply gathering 
and analysing data is not sufficient to influence and shape policy. Such data can only achieve 
influence where the y run in synchrony  with the dynamics of power or, if not, where those  
dynamics of power are addressed.  
 
Analysis of the effects of participative processes and their application in gathering and 
aggregating local data has highlighted similar issues to those emerging from more recent 
analyses of data gathering initiatives drawing on the data justice framework ; for example in 
Heeks and Shekhar ( 2019 ), which discussed four pro -equity data initiatives  gathering data 
from marginalised urban contexts . Issues include barriers to ‘instrumental data justice’, 
‘distributive  data justice’  and ‘structural data justice ’2 resulting from the exerci se of power 
in political spaces. This therefore sets  the scene for consideration of the case of ‘Views from 
the Frontline’  and the other GNDR programmes  that were  intended to gather and aggregate 
local data in order to influence n ational and international policy. The case will demonstrate 
a range of challenges to CSOs in achieving policy influence at different scales.  It highlights 
that tactical approaches reflected in the  ‘sunshine is the best disinfectant’  maxim are 
insufficient.  The case study aims to investigate a gap in understanding of the role of data in 
informing policy and action in urban informal contexts, considering more strategic 
approaches to its application and in doing so identifying the role of ‘small data’.  
 
The fr amework used as a basis for analysis is a power/knowledge matrix (Gibson, 2019) 
(Figure 1), which draws on Gaventa’s idea of political spaces articulated in Brock et al  (2001) 
and in his ‘power cube’ (Gaventa, 2005). This forms the basis of the ‘power’ axi s of the cube:  
 Closed spaces  are easily understood as functioning behind closed doors, where those 
holding political power are able to make decisions without reference to other 
stakeholders.  
 Invited spaces  are those in which a range of stakeholders are abl e to participate. 
However in such places the powerful host still has control of who speaks and who is 
silent, what weight is put on different contributions and what conclusions are drawn 
from the process, so the power of the invited participants is often e xtremely limited . 
 Created spaces  are those not constrained or controlled by powerful actors but 
established by a range of stakeholders through drawing together partnerships and 
collaborations, therefore allowing them to make significant contributions and t o 
shape outcomes.  
 
The knowledge axis  reflects findings from McGee and Brock’s (2001) study and investigation 
of the nature and relevance of situated, scientific and political knowledge (Gibson, 2019 ). 
                                                      
2 Defined, respectively, as “ fairness in  the results of data being used” (instrumental), “ the (in)equality of data -
related outcomes ” (distributive) and “t he degree to which the interests and power in wider society support 
fair outcomes ” of handling, use and  impacts of data (structural) (Heeks and Shekhar, 2019, p995).  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
6 
  Situated/Local knowledge  is that which is held by indi viduals and socially, based on 
experience. Such knowledge is contextual and specific, and often not formalised but 
shared verbally.  
 Scientific/Technical knowledge  is the result of formal knowledge production methods 
in educational, scientific and technical  institutions. It is often regarded as having 
greater weight than situated/local knowledge.  
 Political/Institutional knowledge  is actionable knowledge often informing policy and 
action which results from the political interpretation of scientific/technical 
knowledge and to a much lesser extent situated/local knowledge. In many contexts 
this has greater weight and influence than other forms of knowledge.  
 
The matrix identifies two extremes:  
 At top left , knowledge is defined institutionally, through interpreta tion of 
scientific/technical and situated/local knowledge in line with institutional priorities, 
and this is applied in closed spaces to impose preferred political priorities. Local 
actors therefore make very limited contributions of knowledge and are shut  out of 
decision -making processes.  
 At bottom right , socially created and applied knowledge is that which is derived 
primarily from situated/local sources and which is applied in created spaces in which 
a range of stakeholders have power and influence. They  are therefore able to bring 
such knowledge to bear to shape outcomes in line with their concerns and priorities.  
These two extremes contrast the institutional imposition of power and manipulation of 
knowledge with social creation and application of knowle dge. The shading of the matrix 
implies a spectrum of applications of knowledge and power in different contexts.  
 
The framework is employed to investigate barriers within the CSO community to achieving 
the different forms of  data justice, particularly in th e poorly understood arena of informal 
urban communities.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
7 
  
Figure 1: Power/ knowledge ma trix 
 
The matrix identifies different kinds of space where knowledge and action interface, with 
differing power relations. Concerning the power axis invited spaces are more seductive to 
social actors than are closed, as they offer the appearance of participation, though as the 
framework highlights this appearance is typically illusory as the powerful hosts shape 
involvement and outcomes. Gaventa suggests that engaging wi th formal politics by 
invitation into spaces controlled by institutions does not confer power but co -opts the 
participants within the existing system. He therefore suggests that power relationships are 
only disrupted in ‘created spaces’ which step outside current structures and confer agency 
on participants.  The knowledge axis acknowledges the privileging of political/institutional 
knowledge over situated/loc al knowledge which, though undervalued, is critical given the 
increasing recognition – for example i n the capabilities approach  (Sen, 1999)  – that 
development depends on context -specific and multi -dimensional understanding.  
 
The dimensions in the power/knowl edge matrix can be related to those highlighted by 
Heeks and Renken (2018) in their discussion of structural data justice (Figure 2):  
 
Framework  Knowledge/Data  Spaces/Structures  
Power/Knowledge Matrix  Political  Situated  Closed  Created  
Structural  Data Justic e Big data  Small data  Structure  Agency  
Figure 2: Comparing  power/know ledge matrix and structural data justice  
 
Attempts to affect structural and distributive aspects of data justice are seen, according to 
this schema, as requiring shifts in the matrix between the upper left and lower right zones, 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
8 
 which signify transition from large institut ionally controlled datasets and analyses controlled  
by those power structures to ‘small data’3 accessed locally and supporting agency ( agency = 
power to, structure = powe r over) (see Figure 3).  
 
 
Figure 3: Power/ knowledge matrix including structural dat a justice dimensions  
 
C. Methods  
 
The method adopted in analysing the case is  action res earch, from a participant observer 
perspective. The author was a co -director of GNDR and the project leader  from 2008 -2016   
(with continuing ad hoc involvements) on development and deployment of the  three 
programmes mentioned earlier  and considered in this case study : 
 ‘Views from the Frontline’ used a questionnaire method to gather local perceptions 
of progress in disaster risk reduction.   It was initially conducted t hree times: in 2009, 
2011 and 2013.  Another VFL was then undertaken in 2019.  
 ‘Action at the Frontline’ added a local level participatory process for communities to 
interpret data, identify and undertake actions , and was undertaken between 2011 
and 2015.  
 ‘Frontline’ was a further development which strengthened local level knowledge 
gathering and application of data for local action ; from 2013 to 2017.  
 
The author conducted doctoral research 2008 -2011 (Gibson, 2012) on the network and its 
programmes concurre ntly with his tenure, creating a space for formalised critical reflection 
                                                      
3 Small data is used here to describe datasets gathered locally which are unlikely to be sufficient in scale for 
quantitative statistical analysis but are sufficient in either quantitative or q ualitative terms to be drivers for 
local usage through dialogue and negotiation.  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
9 
 on action. His approach is rooted in the thinking of  Freire, who se ‘participative action 
rese arch ’ was based on social particip ation in action and reflection:  
“. . . reflection – true reflection – leads to action. On the other hand, when the 
situation calls for action, that action will constitute an authentic praxis only if its 
consequences become the object of critical reflection. ” (Freire, 1970 , p48) 
 
Related approaches include ‘action scien ce’ (Argyris and Schon, 1989) and ‘co-operative 
inquiry ’ (Heron, 1 996).  All have at their heart close engagement with the action scene allied 
to individual and corporate critical reflection on action. Therefore they are likely to lead to 
informed adaptation of the action, following the principle of the Kolb (1984) cycle of 
experiential learning, as well as generating research outputs. This was the case as will be 
seen in the evolution of the programme s under consideration.  
 
GNDR, establish ed in 2007, had a very small secretariat of two staff, including the author. 
Lacking accumulated bureaucracy it had considerable flexibility to perform real collaborative 
experiments in pursuing its goals. The research interests of the author were understo od by 
the network secretariat and membersh ip, creating opportunities for ‘ member check ’ (Yin, 
2003) on provisional conclusions reached by the researcher.  Management of the role 
therefore applied an integrated ‘reflective practitioner’ approach (Schon, 1983 ), while 
collaboration with other members of GNDR reflec ted the principle of Heron’s co -operative 
enquiry (Heron, 1996).  
 
The case draws on six types of data gathered through the action research:  
 
1. Background and context:  archive and historical sources prim arily from the network 
and from the UN agency  responsible for implementing the  International Strategy for 
Disaster Reduction  (UNISDR , now the UN office for Disaster Risk Reduction: UNDRR).  
 
2. Qualitative data on network interactions : email correspondence ; online discussions ; 
surveys and questionn aires ; GNDR reports and presentations . 
 
3. Network praxis : data from the three VFLs conducted in 2009, 2011 and 2013 , the 
AFLs from 2011 -2015 and Frontline 2013 -2017 ; learning reviews undertaken on VFL 
in 2009 and 2011; records of GNDR global workshops held in 2009 and 2013.  
 
4. Observational data and reflection : personal records and narrative ; research 
doctorate and subsequent research papers . 
 
5. Structured collaboration : through co -production and critical discussion w ith a group 
of small NGO leaders , creation  of case studies of local knowledge gathering and 
action, compiled in a journal specia l issue (Gibson and Norton,  2019) and a dedicated 
website ( www.drr2dev.com ). 
 
6. Field work : in the  Philippines, meeting with CSO representatives and CSO networks 
(2019) who had been involved with the GNDR programmes, in order to provide  
insights and updates on the Philippines material considered in this case study.  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
10 
 D. Findings  
 
In this section, s evera l phases of implementation of VFL, AFL and Frontline are examined 
and related to the power/knowledge matrix as a means of investigating the contribution of 
the case to understanding the application of data by CSOs in urban informal contexts 
through a data justice lens. The initial implementation of the VFL programme is described, 
showing the challenges in applying data for desired impact and in line with local 
expectations which led to the further development of AFL and Frontline. Applications of 
Frontline in three specific urban informal contexts are discussed, along with more general 
outcomes locally, nationally and internationally. Further structural challenges are 
considered, leading to another revision of the programme in 2019 . 
 
D1. Implementation and Development of the ‘Views from the Frontline’ 
Programme  
 
GNDR was established with a goal of influencing disaster risk redu ction frameworks 
established by UNISDR. The Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) spanned 2005 -2015, 
followed by the Sendai Framework for Action (SFA). GNDR had a stated intention to roll out 
a local level assessment of progress focussed on implementation of th e HFA. This bottom up 
assessment would complement the top down attempt by the UN to monitor 
implementation of the HFA (Gibson and Wisner, 2016). GNDR’s  method employed a 
questionnaire with approximately 40 questions related to the five priorities of the HF A, with 
responses score d on a five point Likert scale.  
 
Versions were created for community, CSO and local government respondents. GNDR 
member organisations organised, mobilised and conducted the surveys in 2009 based on 
training by the network. 5290 respo nses were gathered from the respondent groups  and a 
further 2035 from women’s  and children ’s groups. 48 countries in Africa, Asia and the 
Americas were covered. Data were analysed to produce a range of summary charts which 
were included in a report present ed to the UNISDR biennial conference monitoring progress 
of the framework. The purpose of doing so was advocacy, so the focus was on key messages 
drawn from the data . Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
11 
  
Figure 4: A breakdown of different responses to HFA progress  showing ‘fading -out’ of 
perceptions of progress from national level  to communities ‘at -risk’4 
 
For example, Figure 4 was used to support the contention that experience of the impact of 
the disast er reduction framework was greatly reduced at local level compared with national 
level reporting. It also specifically emphasised the particularly negative perception of 
women, highlighted in red. The report attracted a lot of attention and coverage, effec tively 
presenting a body of data to underpin the key messages. The then head of UNISDR said of it:  
“Thanks to that report there is now a face, a recognition and an understanding of 
what you represent. Not because you are NGOs or civil society but through what 
you have done. The work you have done and you’ve put that forward. My feeling 
is that you have done something quite remarkable through that work.”  
(Margareta Wahlstrom: UN Assistant Secretary for Disaster Risk Reduction, 
speaking at Global Workshop 27  January 2010. In Gibson, 2012, p157)  
 
However it became clear that the messages and language put forward by the network, 
including the terms ‘Views from the Frontline’ and ‘Local Action’  were rapidly appropriated 
by UNISDR, who in the preparatory material  for the following progress conference said:  
“The Global Assessment Report 2011 recognizes local perspectives and 
incorporates “ Views from the Frontline” from civil society organizations. But, to 
what extent do our interventions lead to improved condition s in the places where 
the vulnerable live and work? Are all our programs and policies targeted enough 
at supporting local action and building on local assets? How can we accelerate 
finance and increase investment in local action ? What do we need to do to make 
this happen?” (Extract from second announcement of UN Global Platform for 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 17 November 2010. UNISDR, 2011. In Gibson, 2012, 
p177. Emphasis  added .) 
                                                      
4 GAR is the Global Assessment Report of progress in implementation of the UN Disaster Risk Reduction 
frameworks, which is published biennially. The assessment of progress in the chart associated with GAR is 
based on self -assessment by responsible ministries within national governments.  
Likert scale rating of 
perceptions of progress from  
1=very poor to 5=very good  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
12 
  
This appropriation might have been regarded a success if it led t o demonst rable change in 
policy and practice . However , the chair’s statement at the conclusion of the 2011 
conference did not ind icate any such change in policy;  the messages appeared, rather, to 
have been absorbed within the established policy formulation s. 
 
Views from the Frontline was conducted using a similar format and methodology in 2011, 
with increased participation of 20,000 respondents in 69 countries, and in 2013, with 21,500 
respondents in 57 countries. However learning reviews conducted with par ticipating 
member organisations revealed disquiet about the value of the process (GNDR, 2012). The 
term “extractive” was used, and one org anisation asked how the circle of returning the 
information for us e by the people who provided it (what would later be  seen as a ‘small 
data’ approach)  could be completed. These responses highlighted a practical concern about 
the direct usefulness of the exercise to the respondents. Responses to the VFL surveys were 
markedly homogeneous leading to the suggestion that resp ondents did  not have access to 
information to assess the questions being posed. It was recognised in discussions within 
GNDR that the method elicited local views on the HFA framework, but did not allow local 
articulation of experience and knowledge. A local level  respondent said of similar surveys 
that they asked “what do you think about our framework?” rather than “what do you 
think?” . This and other feedback prompted an assessment and redesign of the programme, 
based on local participative risk mappin g, with the intention of emphasising local knowledge 
and creating outputs which would also have local relevance.  
 
The Views from the Frontline programme had aimed to engage in closed and invited spaces 
such as UN conferences, offering in relative terms ‘big’ data related to the institutional 
knowledge contained in the UN frameworks, created through political negotiati on by 
signatory countries. It is thus located in the top left of the power/knowledge matrix ( see 
Figure 5) . 
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
13 
  
Figure 5: Views from the Frontline positioning in power/knowledge mat rix 
 
 
As with the assessment of uptake of knowledge from the ‘Voices of the Poor’ survey (McGee 
and Brock, 2001 ), political priorities were overlaid on the findings and as a consequence 
their influence on policy and implementation  was slight. Structural data (in)justice was at 
play here as the system within which GNDR attempted to s ecure influence was structurally 
unreceptive to challenges to its policy orthodoxy, and was able to utilise aspects of its 
assemblage such a control of spaces for discourse and control of language to maintain 
stasis. Alongside the structural challenge ther e was an internal challenge as the membership 
questioned the distributive  and instrumental  data justice of the programme, complaining 
that it was extractive and did not have direct local benefits.  
 
External and internal challenges to the programme prompted  assessment and redesign. The 
secretariat suggested this should be based on local participative risk mapping, an activity 
with a long pedigree in supporting community participation and action. It would have the  
intention of emphasising local knowledge and creating outputs which would also have local 
relevance.  
 
D2. Development of the Frontline Programme  
 
The format, titled ‘Frontline’ , which emerged from development work by the network 
secretariat and initial piloting of the programme in Peru in 2013 wa s conceptually related to 
local level participatory assessments discussed earlier. It differed in three ways. Firstly it was 
highly simplified, reducing the scale of training of the enumerators to enable it to be widely 
deployed. Secondly the consultation,  based on a structured conversation leading to the 
respondent nominating their highest priority threats, consequences, actions and barriers, 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
14 
 allowed free text responses so that respondents could express their own insights rather 
than responding to a questi onnaire. Qualitative analysis coded the free text responses in 
order to aggregate them. Thirdly the prioritisation process allowed data to be aggregated at 
local level (for local application) and also at subnational, national and international level. 
These  design aspects met the requirements identified in learning reviews for a process 
which allowed local knowledge to be gathered, allowed that knowledge to be used locally, 
but which also provided a larger -scale analysis to be used in national and internatio nal 
advocacy.  
 
Figure 6, below, contrasts the epistemic focus of the Frontline programme with that of 
Views from the Frontline, showing that Views from the Frontline ( blue) is driven by an 
extern al framing, whereas Frontline (o range) is driven by local per ceptions and knowledge.  
 
 
 
Figure 6: Contrasting the epistemic focus of ‘Views from the Frontline’ and ‘Frontline’  
 
As a further effort to ensure local relevance of the Frontline programme , a companion 
programme, ‘Action at the Frontline’ provided a frame work for community consul tations, 
action planning and implementation based on the locally analysed Frontline data. At other 
scales the data was analysed and then visualised using a ‘Tableau’ interactive online 
visualisation platform (Figure 7) which allowed the data to be sliced and diced by locality, 
risk zones, and by particular threats, consequences, actions and barriers5. 
 
                                                      
5 The Frontline tableau interactive data platform can be accessed at https://gndr.org/tableau . 
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
15 
  
Figure 7: The Frontline tableau interactive data platform  
 
 
D3. Applications and Impact of Frontline  
 
Data gathering and application in informal urba n contexts in East Delhi, India  
 
Case studies and anecdotal evidence indicate that the application of data locally through 
community consultation and action were valued by the local NGOs involved in the 
programme. The implementa tion of the programme in India is used to illustrate this. It was 
focused on Assam, Bihar, East Delhi, Odi sha, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand;  localities 
selected to represent a range of risk zones. The analysis and report (SEEDS, 2016) 
aggregated data to indi cate priorities in different risk zones. Figure 8 contrasts the threats 
prioritised by respondents in rural and urban risk zones:  
 
 
Figure 8: Urban and  rural priori ty threats according to Frontline India  
 
In line with findings from the 21 countries involved in the programme, risk profiles were 
found to be very  context specific, which in itself underscored an important message 
addressed to institutional actors above moving from large scale towards local, context 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
16 
 specific actions in implementing disast er reduction policy. The report provided further detail 
on each zone. Findings f or East Delhi stated:  
“Waste and water pollution, alcoholism, crime (again mainly women 
respondents) and infrastructural damage were identified as the greatest threats. 
Violenc e (physical, domestic, sexual, child abuse); blocked roads from garbage 
and rain; psychosocial impacts; and lack of clean drinking water were some of the 
direct consequences adding to the threats. The primary barriers perceived were 
lack of community’s com mitment; followed by the fear of reprisals (both within 
the community and with concerned authorities), unplanned urbanization: 
clustered shacks next to highways or on the streets without clear drainage system 
and highly limited spatial scope, poor san itation and hygiene and poverty”  
(SEEDS, 2016 , p21) 
 
Data gathering and analysis in East Delhi underpinned and reinforced local action which 
included establishing community associations, one of whose actions was local level data 
gathering using a mobile phone app to document and report local hazards such as garbage 
accumulations and unsaf e electric cabling  (Gupta et al , 2019). Generation and application of 
data in this way addressed a particular political challenge experienced in informal urban 
communities, whe re the lack of registration and voting rights amongst such populations 
makes them a low priority in the eyes of local political leaders. The campaigning and 
advocacy leverage created by making the limited services provided in urban informal areas 
more clea rly visible in the public eye through gathering and aggregating data – naming and 
shaming – provoked greater action on the part of the local government (pers.comm. Gupta, 
2017)  
 
Data gathering and application in informal urban contexts in Limbe City,  Camer oon 
 
Frontline’s focus on accessing local knowledge and experience directly, rather than 
consulting respondents in relation to an external framework enabled it to provide specific 
contextual understandings of complex social contexts in urban informal settl ements. The 
Frontline data gathering and analysis process was applied in Limbe City, Cameroon. A 
coastal city exposed to climate related disasters and also vulnerable to eruptio ns from 
nearby Mount Cameroon, t he levels of poverty in informal areas of the c ity led to a range of 
other more pressing disaster impacts. These were revealed in the responses gathered 
through structured interviews.  
 
Aggregated responses revealed the highest priority threats faced by the local population: 
seasonal flooding, coastal e rosion, fire, landslide and poverty . In one low -lying area, Lower 
Motowo h, discussion of these findings led to agreed community actions to address clogging 
of the main watercourse because of poorly managed waste.  Actions combined clearing the 
watercourse and promoting better waste management. Initial disinterest from local 
government and resistance from some community members were influenced by the visible 
actions and the resulting reclamation of low -lying land wh ich was now habitable and led 
eventually to greater community participation and government support. The process of data 
gathering and presentation therefore triggered an iterative process engagin g both 
community and government  (Wong and Aka, 2019)  
 Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
17 
 Data gathering and application in informal urban contexts in Metro Manila, the 
Philippines  
 
One of the world’s mega -cities, Metro Manila has a population of over 21 million an d is 
growing rapidly. Within sight  of the city’s skyscrapers many settlers have moved in to urban 
informal areas along the city’s waterways, living in cramped, hazardous, often temporary 
accommodation. Due to their informality , estimates of the scale of this population are 
approximate, ranging from 104,000 families (CDP, 2015a) to one milli on people (pers. 
comm. Lorna Victoria, CDP, 2019)6. 
 
The city government put forward mass relocation of populations as a resolution of the 
problems faced by these residents. However the proposed locations are relatively remote 
from the city, dislocating pe ople from their communities and creating huge problems in 
either commuting back into their workplaces or securing other livelihoods. Residents have 
therefore resisted this strategy.  
 
The Action at the Frontline local level  data gathering process identified a range of threats 
faced by residents and also highlighted their interlocking nature  (CDP, 2015a) : 
 Disaster:  flood, fire, earthquake, garbage  
 Economic: lack of jobs, difficulty in finding a job, vices due to lack of econo mic 
activities  
 Peace and order: youth riot, use and selling of illegal drugs  
 Social cohesion:  gossip, fights  
 Housing and relocation:  landlessness  
 
These findings were played back to meetings which included community members and also 
representatives of loca l organisations and local government. These meetings were the 
starting point for developing a community plan to effectively and efficiently reduce the 
threats. A field visit by the author in 2019 including meetings with CDP revealed that 
progress is slow, suggesting further iterations of such data gathering and dialogue processes 
are needed.  
 
Overall impacts of the pilot programme  
 
Frontline implementation and associated local ‘Action at the Frontline’ case studies during 
three pilot phases of Frontline were conducted in 30 countries in Latin America, Asia, Africa 
and the Caribbean. The last of these phases, spanning 15 countries, was linked with local 
‘Action at the Frontline’ in 11 countries. Outcomes at local and national level are 
summarised below:  
 
Locally  the case studies of action based on the local analysis of Frontline data indicate that 
this locally co -created knowledge was applied to inform and motivate local action. Cases in 
India, Cameroon and the Philippines have been detailed above.  In Indon esia local priorities 
for action contrasted with institutional perceptions leading to a focus on livelihoods based 
on strengthening tourism as a means of reducing illegal activity which created risk. In 
                                                      
6 CDP is the Centre for Disaster Preparedness, a national NGO based in Manila, the Philippines.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
18 
 Kiribati the activity led to establishment of multi -stakeholder part nerships capable of 
organising m angrove restoration and other risk reduction activities. In Malawi a respondent 
cited the benefits of action focused on local priorities as a con trast to the more usual 
project -based activities defined by exte rnal funders. The overall assessment of the cases 
was that they stimulated local level collaborations based on local priorities.  
 
Regionally  the Frontline report in India (SEEDS, 2016 ) was used as a basis for multi -
stakeholder consultations . In the Philipp ines the programme produced detailed reports in 
six regions which were presented nationally (CDP, 2015) and also  triggered regional 
collaborations for action, notably in Carles region where a substantial multi -stakeholder 
collaboration was developed to dri ve development in the region (Molina, 2019).  
 
Nationally  some evidence was recorded of impacts of the data. During these pilot phases 
respondents reported using aggregated data to influence government policy for risk 
reduction in Chile, Columbia, Kiribati and Paraguay  (Gibson and Wisner, 2016). In Indonesia 
the participating CSOs reported that presentation of Frontline data and reports at the 
national platform (PLANAS) and the National Disaster Management Agency had led to 
inputs to the nationa l and regional disaster risk reduction p olicy (YEU, 2015).  
 
Assessing this phase of the programme in relation to the  power/knowled ge matrix suggests 
that focus had shifted to the bottom right hand corner, where situated knowledge was 
engaging in created spaces ( see Figure 9).  
 
 
Figure 9: Frontline positioning in  power/knowledge m atrix  
 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
19 
 This was ‘small’ data gathered, analysed and used locally (though also aggregated into  larger 
databases for national/international use) and its local application was in contexts where 
participants had some agency, and indeed sometimes increased their agency through cycles 
of action. In some case studies the uptake of data drove a cycle of increasing local 
participation and emerging engagement with other actors such as loc al and national 
government, engaging in invited spaces – those where the hosts normally exerted control 
over proceedings and outcomes – and in scientific/technical discourse – where 
situated/local knowledge is often discounted,  as illustrated in F igure 9. Engagement in these 
spaces appeared to occur disruptively, through ‘legitimate subversion’ rather than within 
accepted institutional framings as capabilities and confidence of local consortia grew 
iteratively (Gibson et al  2019). Thus this local level appl ication of small data appeared to 
achieve a higher degree of structural data justice than the previous programme, through co -
creating a space or structure in line with local interests and priorities. It met the network 
members’ requests for distributive da ta justice  by providing greater resources for 
marginalised groups . And the case studies during the pilot implementation offer examples 
of instrumental data justice , with data stimulating  actions  and hence impacts  in line with 
local priorities.  
 
D4. Return to Views from the Frontline  
 
Evidence of the pilot phases of the Frontline programme were therefore that it met the 
network members’ request for a data gathering exercise that had local level application, and 
there was some evidence that it was also used a t national scale to influence policy. The 
programme was intended to be implemented more widely after the pilot phases. However 
this phase stalled. Although the GNDR B oard and CEO had requested its development , they 
struggled to understand the approach, fee ling more comfortable with the questionnaire 
based survey . Thus,  after internal deliberations GNDR set out to design a new programme, 
taking the original name Views f rom the Frontline (GNDR, 2019).  
 
This reflected the desire within the secretariat to be di rectly assessing the UN Sendai 
Framework for Action, as the earlier Views from the Frontline programmes had done, and 
the desire of potential funders to support such an action. However demand from the 
network’s membership led to the new programme retaining  the local level component. 
Therefore this programme, being initially deployed at larg e scale in 50 countries over a 
three -year period, has at its heart the earlier questionnaire style exercise, aimed a t 
conducting a complementary assessment of the UN Disa ster Reduction framework, and also 
in this iteration the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate 
Change. Alongside this assessment it includes the Frontline -style local level prioritisation 
exercise, aimed at capturing local knowle dge and using it as a basis for local action.  
 
A pilot exercise for this new approach conducted in the Philippines with 2535 respondents 
analysed findings from the two elements of the survey (CDP, 2018). It showed that distinct 
risk priorities were identif ied in different localities and risk zones, and linked these to 
options for local action and to particular barriers to be considered. As with the earlier 
Frontline programmes the data gathered locally was actionable. The main finding of the 
questionnaire s tyle assessment was of a consistent gulf between local community and local 
government perceptions of progress on all issues considered, with local government Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
20 
 consistently positive and communities consistently negative about progress. This reiterated 
findin gs from earlier Views from the Frontline surveys, but raised the question of the utility 
of this finding, due to the barrier of institutional resistance experienced previously.  
 
The intention  in the new programme appears to be to locate the project within two zones in 
the power/knowledge matrix  (see Figure 10).  
 
 
Figure 10: Locating Views from the Frontline 2019 in the power/knowledge ma trix 
 
The inclusion of the local level consultations, local knowledge generation and action 
(similarly to Frontline) is located at bottom right, in created spaces where agency can be 
exercised on the basis of situated knowledge . The questionnaire element, intended to 
assess the UN Disaster Reduction framework and also the Sustainable Development G oals 
and Paris Agreement on  Climate  Change, does not have any design elements addressing the 
challenges faced by the earlier and similar Views fr om the Frontline project. Howev er while 
the programme may not achieve impact at international/national level it may be 
strategically neces sary to include this element to maintain organisational credibility and 
funding. It may be that such a pragmatic approach recognises the limitations of structural 
data justice, therefore including an element previously found ineffective but which is 
nevert heless necessary to allow the other elements of the programme to proceed, in order 
to secure distributive  and instrumental data justice.  
 
 
  
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
21 
 E. Discussion and Conclusions  
 
This case focuses attention on civil soc iety organisations as creators and users of data, and 
directs attention specifically to urban informal contexts, which it is suggested have been 
poorly understood b y civil society or ganisations as well as by  other  institutional actors. 
Whilst the programmes considered in this study are not exclusive ly devoted to urban 
informal contexts it shows that the local level methodology, ‘Frontline’ , is able to gather 
data explicating very specific contexts, including urban informal, through its open -ended 
qualitative metho d, contrasting with a framework -drive n questionnaire approach such as 
that used in Views from the Frontline. There was a transition during the course of the 
programme from an international to a local focus in the application of data. In the first 
iteration the destination was international an d institutional. In the second iteration the 
destination was local, the data looped back to its contributors  as per the tenets of the small 
data approach . The contrast is illustrated in Figure 11.  
 
 
Figure 11: Contrasting emphasis of Frontline and Views f rom the Frontline  
 
The third iteration, as discussed, includes both local and global elements.  
 
The challenges in achieving institutional influence in the Views from the Frontline 
programme echo those highlighted by McGee and Brock (2001) and by Brock et al (2001) in 
their assessments of the large scale ‘Voices of the Poor’ programme. In both cases structural 
data justice – ‘power over’ – is in play. As Fox (2015) discusses, tactical approaches are 
insufficient to achieve influence in these closed institutio nal spaces. The  power/knowledge 
matrix reflects the dominance of ‘political knowledge’ over technical and scientific 
considerations and over the even less privileged place of situated knowledge created locally. 
In both cases attempts to insert local perspe ctives and knowledge into the inst itutional 
discourse have proved ineffective.  
 
In terms of the  disaster red uction discourse Gaillard (2019) challenges an institutional 
hegemony which imposes an orientalist view of disasters in the prevailing institutional  
discourse on the topic, therefore failing to hear voices or views from the frontline. He 
Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
22 
 argues for the importance of local researchers analysing local disasters using local 
epistemologies, suggesting therefore that it is impossible to bridge a dominant w estern 
epistemological perspective with that prevailing locally. This is an extreme position but  it 
does echo the disjunction between community and government perceptions reporte d by 
Views from the Frontline (F igure 4) and in the later Views from the Front line pilot (CDP, 
2018). Therefore more strategic applications of data gathering and application must be 
considered, as Fox also argues.  
 
GNDR’s work in piloting the Frontline programme, dealing with small data in created spaces, 
is located by t he power/kno wledge  matrix  in contexts where greater agency is available 
and/or can be accumulated in the sequence represented below:  
 
Small data  local social visibility  stimulus for social action  social agency  
 
As such this reveals a strategic approach to applic ation of data for development. However 
this initiative reveals an organisational challenge which can also attach  to Gaillard’s critique 
of institutional hegemony, as GNDR has faced pre ssure internally and externally – related to 
organisational credibility and fun ding – to return to the former survey format. This has led 
to pragmatic trade -offs in which the questionnaire assessment of several global frameworks 
has been reinstated, now complemented by the local level data gathering and application 
process. It  remains to be seen whether the increased complexity of the resulting 
programme can be sustained. Piloting has demonstrated that the complexity of the dual 
approach creates  an additional workload. App -based data recording is being developed to 
reduce this load, so accommodating the politically pragmatic dual approach has come at a 
cost (pers.comm. VFL project manager, June 2019).  
 
Conclusions: CSOs  
 
The case offers several messages to CSOs considering data gathering and application:  
 
1. The challenges of engag ing in institutional spaces, where political considerations 
outweigh technical and scientific, must be understood.  
2. Tactical approaches – sunshine is the best disinfectant – are likely to fail and more 
strategic approaches should be considered.  
3. Application of small data in local contexts creates significant opportunities to 
contribute to change processes as this data can inform understanding of complex 
contexts such as urban informal settlements and form a valuable part of iterative 
processes of action and r eflection, incrementally increasing ability to influence local 
institutions through strategies such as ‘legitimate subversion’.  
4. Working strategically may entail, as in the case of the Views from the Frontline 2019 
iteration, undertaking activities to maintain organisational stature even though these 
may not be intrinsically effective. That this is the case reflects a reality of structural 
data justice in systems with dominant and powerful actors.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
23 
 Conclusions: Data justice model  
 
Structural data just ice 
 
The case has highlighted aspects of structural data justice and injustice regarding the 
application of data gathered through the VFL, AFL and Frontline programmes. It suggests  
that the imposition of power on knowledge, limiting the impact of data and analysis on 
policy, necessitates a pragmatically strategic approach which has resulted, in the final 
iteration of VFL in 2019, in parallel approaches intended to engage in the two extremities 
reflected in the power/ knowledge matrix – institutionally create d and controlled knowledge 
and socially created and applied knowledge. The case can further be seen to suggest that 
managing structural data justice is a dynamic rather than a static process, requiring 
iteratively strategic approaches to ensuring structura l data justice.  
 
Distributive data justice  
 
The case has shown that even in socially and ethically motivated applications of social data , 
distributive data justice can be neglected. In the case under consideration it was feedback 
from network members that highlighted this issue, demonstrating a need to act critically 
and reflectively in the handling of data, rather than assuming an ‘end jus tifies the means’ 
approach.  
 
Instrumental data justice  
 
Iterative learning by GNDR during the implementation period of VFL, AFL and Frontline 
highlights unanticipated instrumental benefits of these programmes. The call from CSOs, 
representing communities, for direct local application of the programme led to the ‘small 
data’ aspect being emphasised, and this in turn led to both ‘process’ and ‘outcome’ benefits 
from this small data aspect of the programme. Illustrated in the cases from East Delhi, 
Limbe City and Metro Manila, the process led to instrumental benefits of local engagement, 
dialogue and collaboration which in turn strengthened local action. There were outcome 
benefits of influence on local government.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
24 
 E1. Recommendations  
 
This case study, focus ing on gathering data locally and applying it both locally and remotely, 
highlights the dominance of structural data justice issues and the need to work strategically 
rather than tactically:  
 
Data to influence institutional discourse  
 
As regards practice i t focuses on such activities undertaken by civil soc iety actors and 
recommends caution in conducting data gathering activities designed to influence 
institutional policy, recognising the ability of institutions to subjugate such data to their pre -
existing discourses.  
 
Data to support local collaboration and action  
 
It highlights the potential of small data gathering activities integrating with local uptake and 
action, not only in local community mobilisation but in incremental engagement with 
institutions at local level.  
 
Data to enhance understanding of complex urban informal contexts  
 
It shows that in complex contexts such as urban informal settlements such local knowledge 
creation is valuable in achieving local contextual understanding, addressing the deficit in 
such understanding felt by organisations such as INGOs.  
 
Pragmatic organisational strategies to address structural data ( in)justice  
 
It also highlights, given the challenges of structural data justice, the necessity to consider 
such activities w ithin a wider framing which pragmatically considers organisational 
sustainability given the low value placed institutionally on local, situated knowledge.  
 
Further research  
 
As regards research the case suggests that the dynamics of data justice and injust ice in local 
data gathering and application are of interest. The case tangentially mentioned another 
local data initiative in East Delhi based on a smartphone app . The expanding range of 
technologies able to support local data gathering, analysis and appli cation should also be 
considered, situated within the nuanced understanding of structural data justice 
emphasised by the  power/know ledge matrix.  Finally the role of that model in enhancing the 
understanding of the structural data justice element of the dat a justice m odel may be 
considered, investi gating whether it illuminates Heeks and Renken’s emphasis on the 
importance of structural data justice.  
 
 
  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
25 
 References  
 
Argyris, C . & Schon, D. (1989) Participatory action research and action science compared, a 
commentary . American Behavioural Scientist , 32.5, 612-623 
Braden, S. (2003) Participation – A Promise Unfulfilled? Building Alliance between People 
and Government: Action Research for Participatory Representation . Chronic Poverty 
Researc h Centre (CPRC), Manchester, UK. 
http://www.chronicpoverty.org/uploads/publication_files/CP_2003_Braden.pdf   
Brock, K. , Cornwall, A . & Gaventa, J. (2001) Power, Know ledge And Political Spaces In The 
Framing Of Poverty Policy , Working Paper 143. IDS. Brighton, UK. 
https://www.ids.ac.uk/publications/ power -knowledge -and-political -spaces -in-the-
framing -of-poverty -policy/   
Cooke, B . & Kothari, U. (eds) (2001) Participation: the new Tyranny?  Zed Books, London, UK.  
CDP. (2015) Frontline : Turning Community Views Into Action 2015 National Report . 
Philippines . CDP,  Manila, The Philippines. 
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/s7doh7gx3cy7eo3/AADsRtb0mXp78WMLpS7mONlGa/Fr o
ntline/OFDA/FL2015 -16%20Philippines%20National%20Report.pdf?dl=1   
CDP. (2015a) Everyday Risk: Action at the Frontline in Metro Manila, The Philippines . CDP,  
Manila,  The Philippines. https://www.dropbox.com/sh/s7doh7gx3cy7eo3/AAB -
LRsPQ0p -tg5Pk -
MJBug4a/AFL/PHILIPPINES%20AFL%20Case%20Study%2 0_%20Final%20Urban.pdf?dl=0   
CDP. (2018) Presentations of Findings: Views from the Frontline Pilot . CDP,  Manila,  The 
Philippines.  
Desinventar (u ndated) What is Desinventar?  Desinventar,  Cali, Colombia . 
https://www.desinventar.org/en/   
Fox, J.A. (2015). Social accountability. World Development , 72, 346 -361 
Freire, P. (1970) Pedagogy of the Oppressed.  Penguin, London . 
Gaillard, J. (2019), Disaster studies inside out. Disasters , 43,  S7-S17 
Gaventa, J. (2005) Reflections On The Use Of The Power Cube Approach For Analysing The 
Spaces, Places And Dynamics Of Civil Society Participation And Engagement . MFP Breed 
Network, the Netherlands.  http://www.partos.nl/uploaded_files/13 -CSP-Gaventa -
paper.pdf   
Gibson, T. (2012) Horizontal Learning and Social Media in an International Development 
Network.  Doctoral Thesis, University of Manchester, UK . 
Gibson, T. (2019) Making Aid Age ncies Work: Reconnecting INGOs with the People They 
Serve . Emerald Publishing , Bingley,  UK 
Gibson, T., & Wisner, B. (2016). “Let’s talk about you . . .”: Opening space for local 
experience, action and learning in disaster risk reduction. Disaster Preventio n and 
Management , 25.5 , 664 -684 
Gibson, T. , Aka, F. , Aretaake, R. , Bari, S. , Chantry, G. , Gupta, M. , Molina, J. , Norton, J. , 
Parajuli, B. , Rahmawati, H.  & Shresha, N. (2019) Local voices an d action: concluding 
discussion.  Disaster Prevention and Management , 28.1, 126 -142 
Gibson, T & Norton, N. (2019) Disaster prevention: doing it differently by rethinking the 
nature o f knowledge and learning, Special Issue.  Disaster Prevention and Management , 
28.1  
GNDR . (2012) Learning Review , internal document.  Global Network for Disaster Reduction, 
London, UK.  Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
26 
 GNDR . (2019 ) Views from the Frontline 2019  Global Network for Disaster Reduction, 
London, UK. https://www.gndr.org/programmes/vfl.html   
Gupta, M. , Talankar, P.  & Chavda, S. (2019) Citizens o f Delhi lead resilience action. Disaster 
Prevention and Management , 28.1, 69-75 
Heeks, R . & Renken, J. (2018). Data justice for development. Information Development , 34.1 , 
90-102 
Heeks, R. & Shekhar, S. (2019) Datafication, development and marginalised urban 
communities: an applied data justice framework . Information, Communication & Society , 
22.7, 992 -1011  
Heron, J. (1996) Co-Operative Inquiry: Research Into The Human Condition . Sage, London, 
UK. 
Kolb, D. (1984 ) Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and 
Development . Prentice -Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ . 
McGee, R . & Brock, K. (2001) From Poverty Assessment To Policy Change: Processes, Actors 
And Data , Working Paper 133. IDS, Brighton, UK. 
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/   
Molina, J.G. (2019) Advancing small island resilience and inclusive development through a 
convergence strategy in Carles, Philippine s. Disaster Prevention and Management , 28.1, 
33-41 
Moser, C. , Sparr, P. & Pickett, J. (2007) Cutting -Edge Development Issues for INGOs. 
Applications of an Asset Accumulation Approach , Asset Debate Paper 1 . Brookings 
Institute , Washington, DC. 
https://www.brookings.edu/wpcontent/uploads/2016/06/200707INGO_moser.pdf   
Narayan, D. (2000) Voices Of The Poor: Can Anyone Hear Us?  Oxford Unive rsity Press for the 
World Bank, Oxford, UK.  
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/131441468779067441/pdf/multi0page.pd
f  
Oxfam. (2012) Getting Ready for The Century Of The City: 2013 -2016 Urb an Framework 
Report . Oxfam . Oxford, UK. https://policy -practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/getting -
ready -for-the-century -of-the-city-oxfam -gbs-urban -framework -20132016 -337115   
Provention . (undated) Community Risk Assessment Methodologies and Case Studies . 
Provention Consortium. http://www.proventionconsortium.net/?pageid=43   
Quarry, W . & Ramirez, R . (2009) Communications For Another Development . Zed Books.  
London , UK.  
Satterthwaite , D. (2018) Is urban development too complicated for u s?. IIED Blog , 17 May. 
https://www.iied.org/urban -development -too-complicated -for-us  
Schon, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner . Basic Books , New York, NY. 
SDI. (undated) The Know Your City Campaign . SDI, Cape Town, South Africa . 
http://knowyourcity.info/explore -our-data/   
SEEDS. (2016) India Country Report: Frontline Year 1. Global Network for Disaster Reduction, 
Londo n, UK.  https://www.gndr.org/images/newsite/events -documents/2016 -frontline -
national -workshops/FRONTLINE_INDIA_ COUNTRY_REPORT_2015 -16.pdf   
Sen, A. (1999) Development as Freedom . Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.  
UNISDR . (2011)  Preparatory Statement For GPDRR 2011 . United Nations Office for Disaster 
Risk Reduction, Geneva, Switzerland.   Manchester Centre for Development Inform atics Working Paper 80  
27 
 Views from the Frontline . (2019) Last Phases of the VFL Pilot Implementation . Global 
Network for Disaster Reduction, L ondon, UK . https://www.gndr.org/news/item/1906 -
last-phases -of-the-vfl-pilot -implementation.html   
Wong, G . & Aka, F. (2019) Enhancing resilience against floods in the Lower Motowoh 
commu nity, Limbe, Southwest Cameroon.  Disaster Prevention and Management , 28.1, 
76-83 
YEU. (2015) Understanding Disasters Risks from the L ocal Perspective. Country report: 
Indonesia. Survey from the Frontline Report  2015 . Global Network for Disaster 
Reduction, L ondon, UK . 
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/s7doh7gx3cy7eo3/AACO4OPzspVe3iXEqYaR0xTBa/Frontli
ne/OFDA/FL2015 -16%20Indonesia%2 0National%20Report.pdf?dl=1   
Yin, R. (2003). Case Study Research Design and Methods , 3rd edn. Sage, Thousand Oaks. C A. 
 
Acknowledgements  
The “ Urban Data, Inequality and Justice in the Global South ” case studies form part of a 
Senior Research Fellowship fun ded by  the University of Manchester’s Sustainable 
Consumption Institute  with additional financial support from  Canada’s International 
Development Research Centre . 
 
About  the Author  
Terry Gibson travelled extensively filming aid and humanitarian work in villages, towns and 
cities around the world before becoming Operations Di rector of an international network of 
over 800 small NGOs. He developed and led a major research pr ogramme at the network, 
which consulted over 100,000 people facing everyday disasters, and combined this with 
research at the University of Manchester.  He continues to research and write on these 
topics as an independent researcher.  
 