 
126 
 Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS 
platform for real -time COVID -19 contact tracing in Ghana  
 
Seth Kwaku Afagbedzi1, Alex Barimah Owusu2*, Isaac Newton Kissiedu2, Mary Amoako - Coleman3, 
Delia Akosua Bandoh4, Charles Lwanga Noora4, Ben Emunah Aikins2, Richmond Takyi Hinneh2, 
Benedict Calys -Tagoe5, Keziah Laurencia Malm6, Ernest Kenu4 
Abstract   
This study reviewed the design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS 
application, using collector for ArcGIS and survey 123 for ArcGIS platforms for COVID -19 
contact tracing in Ghana during the lockdown. The study assessed whether cases sp read by 
physical neighborhood contacts, defined by a 2km buffer of initial known 60 cases location. 
The application was deployed on the android tablet, which was used by field workers. 
Application Post -deployment  review shows that from 30th March to 4th April 2020, 828 samples 
were collected with 34 confirmed cases, of which 61% occurred outside the 2km buffer. From 
1-30 April 2020, 8,748 individuals with 16,087 contacts were tested within the physical 
neighbourhoods, 2.4% turned positive. Similarly, 7,501 individuals with 17,071 contacts were 
tested outside the physical neighbourhoods with 4.3% positives.  Results suggest that more 
infections occurred outside the case’s physical neighbourhoods possibly due to; (1) existence 
of unknown cases prior to lockdow n; (2) cases were moving outside their physical 
neighborhood and infecting others; (3) panic movements of cases within the 3 days window 
between announcement and enforcement of lockdown; (4) movement of cases into the country 
through unapproved routes.  Ne w cases were identified outside the lockdown areas, which 
could not be explained. This study raises questions about (1) the understanding of the mode of 
spread of the virus (2) the implementation of the lockdown, including the geographic coverage 
and timin g. It is recommended that future decisions on contact tracing and lockdown should 
be guided by an understanding of the disease geography.   
 
Keywords: Mobile geospatial technology, Novel Coronavirus 2019, Contact Tracing, COVID -19 in 
Ghana, Relational Geodatabase, GIS  
1University of Ghana, Department of Biostatistics  2University of Ghana, Department of Geography and Resource Development  
*Corresponding Author. Email: owusuba@yahoo.com  3Department of Epidemiology, N MIMR,  University of Ghana  
4Department of Epidemiology and Disease Control, School of Public Health, University of Ghana  5Department of Community 
Health, University of Ghana Medical School  6National Malaria Control Programme, Gh ana Health Service, Accra, Ghana  
 
Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 1 26-146 
https://dx.doi.org/10.4314/gjg.v13i1.7  
 Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
127 
 Background  
The Novel Coronavirus 2019 (COVID -19) also known as severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV -2) has become the biggest pandemic the world has witnessed since 
the 1918 Flu (Spanish Flu) pandemic which infected approximately a quarter of the  world’s 
population and left between 17 and 50 million dead ( AS, 2020 ). The disease has devastated the 
whole world by killing over 500,000 people as at the end of June 2020 ( WHO, 2020 ), disrupted 
supply chains, caused lockdown of countries and cites, groun ded many flights the world over 
and brought the global economy to a halt (Ritchie e. al., 2020).  All over the world, governments 
are implementing various fiscal measures to mitigate the adverse effect and provide relief for 
businesses and households (ILO,  2020). The pandemic is expected to have a significant adverse 
impact on the global economy, which is estimated to be over $3 trillion (Chaturvedi, 2020). 
Countries are in dilemma to re -open their economies amid soaring new infections and deaths.  
Due to l imited knowledge and understanding of COVID -19, the global approach was organized 
in two ways; (a) medium to long term efforts which were geared toward developing vaccines 
since COVID -19 has no known cure (Chatham House, 2020); (b) the short -term strategie s, 
which were focused on prevention of the spread through early detection, diagnosis, prompt 
contact tracing and isolation to extinguish the spread of infections. The short -term effort 
requires answering questions relating to the location of infected perso ns; i.e. where is the virus? 
Where is it spreading to, and where is one likely to contract the virus? Identifying the exact 
location of COVID -19 patients and contacts, monitoring and tracking their movements, and 
isolating them,  minimizes the need to impos e lockdowns involving mobility restrictions or 
business closures (Torhonen et. al, 2020). The short -term effort required timely and accurate 
data, which is spatially referenced and temporally current.  
The need for spatially referenced and temporally curre nt data to manage and control the spread 
of the COVID -19 pandemic highlighted the necessity for the geospatial community to support 
the national response efforts to curb the imminent public health threat brought about by this 
disease (Malgorzata and Pomfre t, 2020). In the past, the geospatial industry has assisted during 
times of crises and disasters by improving relief and reintegration efforts (Herold and Sawada, 
2012; Nkansah, 2020). With the advent of the coronavirus, the geospatial community is in the 
frontline providing data for monitoring and tracking the spread of the virus, continually 
bringing up -to-date data on the number of people infected and providing real -time information 
(Torhonen et. al., 2020). The geospatial community in Korea made use of Big Data, including Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 128 GPS tracking data from cars and phones, transactions and credit card, CCTV footage, travel 
histories, and artificial intelligence to identify high -priority cases and track the routes of 
infected individuals (Chung and Hoon, 2020). Cente r for Systems Science and Engineering 
(CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) with support from ESRI and other partners 
developed COVID -19 dashboard which monitors the ongoing COVID -19 globally by reporting 
on key indicators such as; the number of confirm ed cases, deaths, recoveries and active cases 
by countries and globally (GHS, 2020). China has adopted several technologies including the 
COVID -19 status rating and monitoring app that present a QR code on the user’s mobile 
phones. The app requires users t o register with basic information - name, national identity card 
number, phone number, and home address.  Other information on the app quizzes users on 
health status and travel history, and asks them to identify any close contacts diagnosed with the 
virus.  A green QR code grants unrestricted movement, a yellow code required seven days of 
quarantine and a red meant 14 days of quarantine (Xu and Chandler, 2020).  
As the pandemic surges on, governments and health authorities all over the world are relying 
on me asures that are characteristically spatial such as quarantining, contact tracing, isolating 
and social distancing.  While people are working and studying at home, decision -makers were 
exploring ways to circumnavigate the burdens of needing to prevent more infection, while also 
looking to relax restrictions and reopen the economy. Geospatial technologies are needed to 
enhance these processes promptly. Ghana’s geospatial industry has equally contributed to the 
development and deployment of location -based mobi le geospatial applications in combating 
the COVID -19 pandemic.  
Ghana’s fight against the pandemic, including control and management, has been directed from 
the presidency due to the seriousness of the disease and the urgent attention that it needed. 
Figur e 1 shows Ghana’s COVID -19 Governance Structure. The all -embracing governance and 
coordination of the National Covid -19 response start from the President of the Republic of 
Ghana. The Minister for Health chairs the National Technical Coordinating Committee  
(NTCC) at the ministerial level, which comprises representatives from all stakeholder 
ministries and relevant agencies to ensure a multi -sectoral approach and response. The NTCC 
provides the Technical policy direction and implementation of decisions made by the Inter -
Ministerial group. The Ministry of Health and Ghana Health Service collaborate with other 
COVID -19 related task teams including the Operation COVID -19 Safety Taskforce. A 
decentralized approach to implementation from the National to Regional, District and 
Subdistrict levels is adopted to combat the pandemic.  Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
129 
  
 
Figure 1: Ghana’s COVID -19 Governance Structure  
Source: National Strategic COVID -19 response plan, 2020 -2021 – Ghana  
 
The surveillance task team included monitors, contact tracers, epidemiologist, data managers 
and geospatial scientists. The geospatial team from the School of Public Health and the Remote 
Sensing and Geographic Information Systems Laboratory (RSGIS Lab) of  the Department of 
Geography and Resource Development, – University of Ghana developed an  integrated 
multiple geospatial application to support both the contact tracing and the enhanced contact 
tracing strategies adopted by Ghana during the early stages of the pandemic.  With the enhanced 
contact tracing, a 2 km radius buffer zone (referred to  as physical neighbourhood) was created 
around each of the initial COVID -19 cases and all household that fell within the buffered zone 
were screened for COVID -19 including the actual contacts to cases. This buffer was to make 
sure that every possible case that might be missed by the main contact -tracing list was captured 
to prevent the community spread of the virus.  This mobile geospatial technology was one of 
the technologies used in the early stages in monitoring and tracking the spread of the disease 
in Ghana. Additionally, using collector for ArcGIS and survey 123 for  ArcGIS platforms, a 
relational geodatabase was designed and deployed on mobile phones and tablets for contact 
tracing and enhanced contact tracing to provide spatially reference data in re al-time to address 
Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 130 the question of the whereabouts of the virus. The above two applications provided backend 
relational geodatabase and frontend customization that allowed data collection, storage, data 
query, and manipulation and visualization on dashboar ds to support field operations, laboratory 
testing of samples and official decision making on COVID -19 in Ghana ( Guitierrez et al. , 
2007) .  
The primary aim of this paper is to review and demonstrate the relational geodatabase design 
and deployment for proa ctive spatial tracking of the spread of the virus and provision of real -
time information  for timeous decision making by the managers of the pandemic in Ghana.  The 
propositions that guided the relational geodatabase design and deployment are:  
Null Hypothes is 1: that Covid -19 will spread only by physical neighbourhood contacts during 
the lockdown period.  
Alternate Hypothesis 2: that Covid -19 will not spread only by physical neighbourhood contacts 
during the lockdown period.  
These hypotheses were made at the  time of designing and deploying the integrated multiple 
geospatial application  when there were 60 known cases of COVID -19 in Ghana, which was on 
the 27th day of March 2020 (GHS, 2020). In addition, four (4) days after the government of 
Ghana announced COV ID-19 restriction measures, which included the closure of the country’s 
external borders and lockdown of the two main metropolitan areas: The Greater Accra 
Metropolitan Area (GAMA), the Greater Kumasi Metropolitan Area (GKMA), and the 
contiguous districts.  With the lockdown, the country instituted limited mobility within the 
lockdown zone (Nkansah, 2020). Also, international borders of the country were closed and 
given that the cases in Ghana were all imported, the expectation was that cases will spread fro m 
the detected cases in their neighbourhoods (defined by 2km Euclidean distance from case point 
location i.e. house or residence) and grow spatially outward (Nkansah, 2020). The 2km distance 
was based on the standard routine activity range of an average Gh anaian in residential 
neighbourhoods. In addition, within the 2km walking neighbourhoods, lockdown enforcing 
agencies were not questioning people. However, people who moved outside the walking 
neighbourhoods and start driving were questioned by COVID -19 re strictions enforcing 
agencies on their movement.  The null hypothesis was tested against the alternative that the 
spread may not necessarily be physical neighbourhood contact. There may be other physical 
contacts engineered by socio -economic and political movements, even under the lockdown. 
Similarly, there may be other cases that were not detected, that could spread the virus. Also, it Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
131 
 was likely that some importation may have occurred through illegal border crossing during the 
lockdown which might have no t been detected.  
 
Methods  
Study Setting  
This study is based on Ghana’s initial approach to managing the COVID -19 pandemic. On 12th 
March 2020, Ghana recorded the first two COVID -19 cases.  The two index cases of COVID -
19 were confirmed in Accra on the same day and by 27th of March 2020, there were 60 
confirmed cases and 3 deaths  (GHS, 2020). These cases were concentrated in GAMA and 
GKMA, which were referred to as COVID -19 hotspots. Figure 2 is the map of Ghana showing 
GKMA and GAMA inset. GAMA and GKMA  cover several municipalities and metropolis 
including AMA and KMA respectively. On 27th March 2020, the Government of Ghana (GoG) 
decided to partially lockdown the two metropolitan areas. AMA is the National capital and 
largest city in the Greater Accra R egion, with a population of more than 2 million people ( ILO, 
2020 ). It houses the only international airport in Ghana, the Kotoka International Airport. As a 
result, AMA is the first and last point of call for all visitors and residents who travel in and o ut 
of Ghana. AMA is the administrative, economic, and educational capital of Ghana. The city 
contains the head offices of all the large banks and trading firms, the insurance agencies, the 
utility corporations, the general post office, the large open marke ts to which most of the food 
supply comes, and the Accra Central Library. AMA is a modern city with some of the best 
hotels, beaches and public places that attract many tourists making it most likely a COVID -19 
transit city.  
GKMA is the second metropolita n area identified with the initial COVID -19 cases and was 
therefore, affected by the lockdown. KMA (Kumasi) is the second -largest city in Ghana and is 
the most populous city in GKMA. The metropolis is the most populous in Ghana with an 
estimated population  of over 2 million residents. The city of Kumasi is the hub of Ghanaian 
cultural heritage, which attract thousands of both domestic and foreign tourists yearly. The city 
has the most vibrant domestic travel activities by both air and road, hence its positi on as a high 
COVID -19 risk city.  Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 132  
 
Figure 2: Map of Ghana with GAMA and GKMA Insets and location of the initial 60 COVID 
19 Cases Source: Author 2020  
 
Design and deployment of the relational geodatabase on the mobile GIS 
system  
The design and deployment of the mobile GIS with its relational tables were supported by the 
ArcGIS online platform. The ArcGIS online platform is part of the ESRI geospatial cloud 
system, which enables mobile and remote connection to people, groups, locations, and data 
using interactive maps (ESRI, 2020a). The system is embedded with smart, data -driven and 
analytical tools that support the delivery of real -time and near real -time location intelligence. 
The basic required resources included human expertise, geographically  referenced data, and 
organization including operational protocols, hardware and software. COVID -19 data capture 
and management were under the surveillance task per the governance structure. The 
development and deployment of the geodatabase for COVID -19 ma nagement involved GIS 
and application, development experts. The GIS and application development experts developed 
the backend and relational databases. The team customized the interface of the application and 
set up the connectivity. Twenty Field Epidemiol ogists were trained on the use of the 
application. The Field Epidemiologists served as field coordinators and supervisors during the 
Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
133 
 contact tracing and enhanced contact tracing. These coordinators play a supervisory role and 
liaise between the application  development team, Senior Field Epidemiologist and the 
fieldworkers. The direct users of the application (fieldworkers) included selected Disease 
Control Officers, Public Health Officers, Field Technical Officers, Community Health Nurses, 
Laboratory Scient ists and Lab Technicians. In all, over 200 field workers were deployed. The 
fieldworkers collected samples and location information from cases and contacts, to populate 
the database and map the absolute location of the patient. The Application Development Team 
(GIS Team) provided training for the coordinators and the coordinators trained the 
fieldworkers. The fieldworkers also report feedbacks through the coordinators. The GIS Team 
also trained the Laboratory Staff who test the samples and record the result s into the 
application. The test results were visualized on Regional Directors Dashboard and Decision 
Makers Dashboard. The Decision Makers Dashboard is solely a decision -making platform 
headed by the National Coordinator of the COVID -19 Programme appointe d by the president.  
The spatially referenced data used included google map and google image that provided the 
spatial reference including building footprints to help capture the absolute location of the 
patient. Similarly, the design and deployment followed COVID -19 protocols developed by 
Ghana Health Services (GHS) and the Ghana COVID -19 Monitoring Team. The protocol 
involved the use of case -based investigation form, protection of an individual’s identity and 
protection of privacy and wor kers safety. The hardware required included laptops, cloud 
storage space, connectivity and workspace, which were provided by the University of Ghana, 
and tablets provided by the Malaria Control Program. Finally, the software used included 
ArcGIS Pro Deskto p, ArcGIS Online, and Collector for ArcGIS and Survey 123 for ArcGIS, 
provided by the Remote Sensing and GIS Applications Laboratory, Department of Geography 
and Resource Development, University of Ghana, Legon. These hardware and software 
provided the com plete mobile GIS system with intelligence that supported Ghana’s COVID -
19 monitoring. The resultant ArcGIS geodatabase is a collection of geographic datasets as well 
as attribute information of various types held in a common file system (ESRI, 2020b; ESRI,  
2020a). The geodatabase can be accessed using ArcGIS online, ArcMap and ArcCatalog as 
well as ArcGIS Pro . 
 
 
 Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 134 Development of the backend relational geodatabase  
The development of the backend geodatabase (the geodatabase and related tables that form the 
basis of this application) was informed by the need to identify individual cases and their 
contacts through contact tracing and enhanced contact tracing. The backend development was 
also to enhance automation, visualization and analytics of  test results. It i s against this 
background that the principle of a relational database was used in customizing and 
standardizing the backend geodatabase, which made data accessibility and management 
relatively easier. The design utilized two database principles: relate and  relationship classes. 
The related principle as created in the layer file provided a system in which when a case or 
household is selected in a layer, its related cases or individuals (contacts) are easily identified 
in the layer or related records in a non -spatial table ( Boden, 2018 ). Practically, the principle 
means that when a case is identified, using the ID field, the contacts are captured as related 
tables (case and related contact). The system also used a relationship class where COVID -19 
cases were c aptured as objects in the geodatabase. This relationship class design enables smart 
behaviour in visualizing test results on the output side, which is the decision -makers and 
regional directors’ dashboard, in Ghana’s context. Both the relate and relationsh ip classes rely 
on the principle of cardinality. Cardinality in GIS describes how records in a table or two 
different tables are related to one another. Cardinality  builds one -to-one, one -to-many, many -
to-one, or many -to-many relationships in the database (Boden, 2018). The database contained 
COVID -19 cases locations and a non -spatial table (attribute) that stores the attribute data about 
the COVID -19 cases based on a case -based investigation form from GHS. A relate was created 
between the layer and the non -spatial table, which has a many -to-one (contacts to the patient) 
cardinality because every case has multiple persons serving as contacts. Relate is based on the 
ID field (EPI ID). The system did not focus on many -to-many (case to contact and contact to 
contact) because not all contacts become cases. Again, most people do not remember others 
they meet daily unless something remarkable happens that day. Relationship classes gave the 
ability to visualize data easily. With relationship class, design rules were  set up to link field 
samples to testing labs, dashboards and analytics. When field workers go to the field and they 
take a sample for testing, the samples are tagged with QR codes and recorded into the online 
geodatabase.  These samples were taken from ca ses, contacts of cases and individuals. The 
testing laboratories assess the database online after receiving the samples by scanning the QR 
code on the sample bottle to identify and authenticate the sample before testing is done. When 
test result fields in the database are populated with values, the system automatically colour -Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
135 
 codes those fields, changes the symbology of the map and update the dashboards. The 
dashboards are the outputs for decision -makers by providing up to date data on the pandemic 
with bet ter data visualization. The colour -coding was classified as; red (positive), blue 
(negative), green (sample yet to be tested) and black as inconclusive (which means the sample 
needs to be retaken). The embedded analytics then recalculates and updates the n umber of 
positives from regions and districts and displays the results numerically. Similarly, the sample 
count is also updated when a new record is taken from the field to monitor the activities of field 
workers.  
For the Covid -19 enhanced contact tracing, field teams were required to sample residents who 
can be located within a 2 km radius of an existing case. The absolute location of the house is 
recorded using the collector for ArcGIS, which works and submits data directly into the 
geodatabase. S ince a house may host more than one person, a related database table was created 
to contain all other information from the members of that particular household. To avoid each 
household individual having a spatial representation (point), a relationship was created between 
a table that represented household individuals and the spatial data that represented the 
household itself. A foreign key was used to initiate many -to-one relations to make it possible 
for the spatial and attribute information to communicate  effectively in such a way that a click 
on the spatial data points to all other members (individuals) belonging to the spatial data 
(Household) from the relation table.  
The Use of the system for an enhanced contact tracing on the field  
The application was deployed on android tablets, which were carried by the fieldworkers to the 
field to map cases and their contacts. Besides, using the ArcGIS collector application, 
fieldworkers were able to see the initial 60 cases shown as red points with 2 km buffer rings  
around them. With the current location on the ground showing on the application interface, 
fieldworkers have a fair idea of where they were standing on the map and were able to move 
within the target zone. Due to internet instability, fieldworks were able  to download and work 
offline and once data collection is done, all information was synced to the database.  
Evaluation of the database output  
The design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile geospatial technology, as used 
in Ghana’s COVID -19 management, is seen as a system designed to capture, store, manipulate, 
analyze, manage, and present all types of geographical data. Geographic  data consist of both Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 136 spatial and attribute data. The completed system had two sides: the data capture (which includes 
the sample taking activities in the field) and the laboratory testing activities on one side, and 
the output side (which consists of two dashboards i.e., one for the regional and district directors 
of health and the other for the National COVID -19 Management Center).  
At the onset, Ghana identified the need for contact tracing and surveillance for tracking the 
virus in real -time or near rea l-time. The contact tracing was later upgraded to enhanced contact 
tracing. Enhanced contact tracing was defined by the COVID -19 management team and was 
employed in this study as part of the Ghana COVID -19 management protocol as  ‘an advanced 
form of contac t tracing, which deals with the testing of samples from residents within a certain 
specified area of an already confirmed case, to get ahead of the spread of the virus and also 
aid in containing the spread of the virus.’  While contact tracing focuses on in dividuals who 
have had contacts with COVID -19 patients, enhanced contact tracing focuses on individuals 
who live within a defined physical contact space of 2km from a known COVID -19 patient 
location. The contact tracing and enhanced contact tracing activit ies, as implemented in Ghana 
called for the usage of GIS -based technology to map all cases, their contacts and their 
residential location as well as households within some distance of identified cases. This was 
essential to allow a n immediate visualization  of the extent and magnitude of the public health 
problem and plan national scale intervention strategies (Hay, et. al. 2013 ; Fortunati , 2016 ). 
The advantage of using the relational geodatabase is that it is publishable and could be used on 
other ArcGIS re lated platform for data collection, which in this case was the Collector for 
ArcGIS and survey 123 for ArcGIS. The geodatabase, which was created within ArcGIS Pro 
was then published onto ArcGIS online for further configuration to suit the need of the proj ect.  
The structure of the relational database that allowed contact tracing is shown in Figure 2. The 
use of multiple ID fields allowed individuals identified in the database as Head of Household 
(HH), linked to their respective contacts. From Figure 3, Mr  John Johnson is captured as HH 
and he will still appear in the related records, he may not necessarily be a case. In contact 
tracing, he is a contact to a case. He has his contacts, which were captured as related records. 
When contacts become positive, th ey also generate new contacts, yet they keep their link with 
their primary contact. The use of multiple ID fields and linkage of HH to contacts and case 
contacts to related contacts becomes relevant to case decision -makers and field technicians for 
testing  of contacts, monitoring of contacts and their related contacts, for follow -ups and early 
detection and isolation.  Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
137 
  
Figure 3: Overview of the Collector for ArcGIS and the backend related database  
Source: Author 2020  
 
Since the application was used for two main purposes, namely: contact tracing and enhanced 
contact tracing, it is important to clarify that HH may be a case or contact for a case for contact 
tracing purposes. However, HH may or may not be a case nor a contact of a c ase if the 
application is being used for enhanced contact tracing. The use of contact tracing and enhanced 
contact tracing were premised on the objective of being ahead of the spread of the virus. 
Individual’s location and attributes were captured irrespec tive of what the possible outcome 
may be (conversion to the case or not). In addition, when individuals are sampled and mapped 
as HH, they are identified in the database as a related table and therefore become individual 
contacts themselves since a set is a subset of itself. Mapping samples such as HH means that 
when counting samples taken with the app, HH is not counted to avoid double counting. This 
approach was useful in the identification of cases and contacts to cases within the database. 
The approach also allowed add -ons when new contacts are identified. Within the database, a 
search is done based on Case -based ID and connected individual ID and these two help in 
identifying all contacts to HH. Figure 4 depicts contact tracing using a contact tree as 
implemented in the relational database model.  
Mr. John Johnson  Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 138  
Figure 4: Contact Tracing and Community Case Tracking Relational Tables  
Source: Author 2020  
 
Before the launching of the application, fieldworkers had taken samples within some selected 
communities. Each metropolitan and municipality developed their Epi ID, which uses 15 
alphanumeric characters beginning with three (3) letter country code (GHA), t hree (3) letter 
region code (GAR), three -letter Municipality of Metropolitan code (AMA) and six (6) digit 
case unique number.  
A review of the relational geodatabase application shows that by 4th April 2020, barely four (4) 
days after deployment, 828 sampl es had been collected using the application. The test results 
indicated that 34 new cases were found. Out of the 34 cases, 61% occurred outside the 2km 
buffer, which shows the spread of infections beyond physical neighbourhood contact, i.e. 
rejection of th e Null hypothesis: that Covid -19 will spread only by physical neighbourhood 
contacts during the lockdown period. The above results suggest that cases did not necessarily 
spread through physical community contact only. Several reasons may have contributed t o this 
result. It is possible, that there were more cases than the original known 60 cases within the 
country, which were not known as of the time of the lockdown. Besides, infected individuals 
might have travelled outside their communities.  Figure 5 show s the 60 initial cases in red dots 
with its 2km buffer, defining the physical neighbourhood contact space. Cases during the first 
Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
139 
 few days of the lockdown are green and occurred either within or outside physical contact 
space.  
 
Figure 5: COVID -19 Cases in GAMA 5 days after lockdown  
Source: Author 2020  
 
The contact tracing was then augmented with the enhanced contact tracing activity using both 
the Collector for ArcGIS and Survey 123 for ArcGIS applications. By April 30th 2020, a  total 
number of 8,748 individuals identified and mapped as head of households (HH) in the database 
were sampled as possible community contacts. These heads of households had 16,087 contacts 
linked to them as related individuals. It is important to note th at these HH and their related 
contacts were not necessarily cases from the start. This was Ghana’s approach, which sought 
to move ahead of the spread of the virus, by providing important baseline estimates of the 
pandemic, detecting and isolating infected individuals before the virus spreads to others and 
targeting resource allocation ( GHS, 2020; Pigott  et. al., 2015 ). After testing the 8,748 
individuals, 388 (2.4%) turned out to be positive. From the initial observation that 61% of 
infections occurred outside physical neighbourhood contacts, attention was shifted from 
sampling within the 2km buffer, which is then defined as physical neighbourhood contacts to 
locations outside the case community and around the new cases outside the community. Th is 
spatial attention shift was informed by the suspicion that interactions are probably taking place 
at a wider GAMA community than the neighbourhood. In total 7,501 HH were sampled and 
they had 17,071 individuals as contacts, among which 741 (4.3%) came o ut positive. This result 
Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 140 means that while attention was being drawn to within community spread at the initial stage, 
more infections were taking place between communities. The above finding underscores  the 
direction of transmission, outbreak tracking and r isk mapping  as some of the key importance 
of geospatial technology application in infectious disease surveillance such as COVID 19 
(Pigott  et. al., 2015; Saran et. al.,2020 ).  
Figure 6 is the map of Ghana showing the lockdown areas and location of COVID -19 cases as 
of 30th April, 2020 when the lockdown was lifted. It was observed that even with the enhanced 
contact tracing at lockdown areas, cases were reported outside the areas. The purpose of the 
lockdown was to prevent cases from spreading to other regio ns and keep the cases within the 
infected communities in the lockdown area. The data from the enhanced contact tracing found 
that over 60% of new infections occurred within the lockdown areas but outside the initially 
infected communities.  The distribution  of cases before and after the lockdown in GAMA is shown in 
Table 1.  
Table 1: COVID -19 Cases before and at the end of Lockdown (Source: Author 2020 ) 
Metropolitan /Municipality  Areas  Cases Before 
Lockdown  Cases at the end 
of lockdown  Area in 
Square KM  
Adenta Municipal  5 17 79 
Ledzokuku Municipal  1 16 30 
La Dade -Kotopon  5 29 37 
La-Nkwantanang -Madina  3 26 72 
Ga East  2 54 87 
Ayawaso West  10 61 33 
Ga South Municipal  0 2 181 
Ga West Municipal  0 13 178 
Ga Central Municipal  0 31 50 
Tema West Municipal  4 15 46 
Ashaiman Municipal  2 15 19 
Kpone Katamanso  1 18 244 
Ablekuma Central Municipal  1 191 14 
Korle Klottey Municipal  3 14 10 
Ablekuma North Municipal  1 71 30 
Ayawaso North Municipal  0 128 5 
Ayawaso East Municipal  3 113 6 
Okaikwei North Municipal  0 34 23 
Ga North Municipal  3 25 127 
Weija Gbawe Municipal  3 38 166 
Krowor Municipal  0 19 19 
Tema Metropolitan  0 26 43 
Ablekuma West Municipal  1 85 13 
Ayawaso Central Municipal  0 112 2 
Accra Metropolis  0 91 6 
 Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
141 
 At the beginning of the lockdown, Ayawaso West, a typical high -class residential 
neighbourhood, had the highest number of cases (10 people were positive) followed by La 
Dadekotopon and Adenta (5 each) and Tema West (4). Interestingly all these metropolitan areas 
are high -income residential areas. At the end of the lockdown, Ablekuma Central, Ayawaso 
Central, Ayawaso North and Ayawaso East were the leading metropolitan areas. Surprisingly 
all these four (4) Metro areas are low -income residential areas where people must work daily 
to feed themselves and their families. In addition, the new leading areas were areas where 
police had challenges enforcing lockdown and social distancing. Figure 6 visualizes the spatial 
distribution of cases in Ghana with an inset of the t wo-lockdown areas: GAMA and GKMA.  
The study found that whiles GAMA and GKMA were locked down resulting in control of the 
spread of the virus; infections were taking place in other areas, which were not locked down. 
Again, with the enhanced contact tracing,  efforts were made to track the virus and be ahead of 
the virus by looking for local community (physical contact space) contacts, yet infections were 
beyond the local community contacts defined. This finding suggests that the nature of the virus 
and the ob served large number of asymptomatic cases in the country made it impossible to 
track cases before the lockdown when the geospatial technology was not in use. Perhaps the 
limited mobility allowed during the lockdown may have played a role in why cases sprea d to 
other places without known cases before the lockdown.  
On the output side of the application, we realized the value of the design and deployment of 
the relational geodatabase on mobile geospatial applications for contact tracing activities in 
terms of  the testing laboratories communication with fieldworkers and decision -makers in real -
time. The laboratories accessed the database and used the application for planning staff 
schedule before samples were received. The samples were scanned and recorded usin g the 
application. Upon completion of the test, the database is updated with test results, which 
automatically updates and symbolizes the visualization dashboard with the test results. The 
dashboard is an interactive map that locates and tallies confirmed cases, recoveries and deaths. 
The virus infection progress details were shown by graphs. Viewers can see the day and time 
of the most recent data update and data sources ( Boulos and Geraghty, 2020 ). This approach 
was very useful in improving contact tracin g, community targeting, communication and 
decision -making.  Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 142  
Figure 6: Map of Ghana showing the lockdown areas and location of cases as of 30th April, 2020  
Source: Author 2020  
 
The applications allowed rapid response to communities with new outbreaks. The applications 
also helped in understanding and monitoring the geographic spread and modification of 
approach to responding to COVID -19 pandemic more appropriately than would have been 
traditionally ( Boulos and Geraghty, 2020 ; ESRI, 2020c ). Th e application provided real -time 
reporting and communication between field workers, testing laboratories, regional health 
directorates and national -level decision -makers.  
 
Conclusion and Recommendation  
Ghana’s approach in managing COVID -19 was motivated by  the desire to be ahead of the 
spread of the virus through early detection, effective contact tracing and case isolation to stop 
the spread of the virus to other locations in the country. This approach formed the basis of the 
lockdown, the contact and enha nced contact tracing activities. However, these approaches were 
initiated without a clearer understanding of the country’s COVID -19 status in terms of 
geographically referenced data on cases, case characteristics and spread. The development of 
the relation al geodatabase, which runs on mobile geospatial applications, was to help 
implement the planned strategy. The mobile geospatial applications, which were developed 
Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
143 
 included the collector for ArcGIS and Survey 123 for ArcGIS to enable field workers to collec t 
samples and to map the location of the cases and samples taken for real -time reporting. These 
applications also allowed the integration of bar code systems for easy access and entry of data. 
The relational geodatabase on geospatial applications also allo wed the development of a 
Laboratory portal for the testing labs to access field records, enter test results, and communicate 
results to regional directors for case management. Two dashboards, the decision -makers 
dashboard and regional directors’ dashboard were created. Regional directors were able to 
show the location of cases within their respective regions on daily bases for quick action. The 
Decision Makers’ dashboard on the other hand allowed decision -makers, e.g., to 
comprehensively have a national vie w of cases. The dashboard for Decision Makers shows the 
district and regional breakdown of cases, the spatial pattern of cases and the temporal pattern 
of spread.  
In addition, the design of the relational database for contact tracing and surveillance supp orted 
the early understanding that cases were not spreading necessarily from the location of the 
known case outward. This observation meant that the alternative proposition might better 
explain the COVD -19 situation. Many reasons could have possibly contri buted to this 
observation; that: 1) some unknown cases existed in the country before the lockdown; 2) some 
individuals were positive and were moving and spreading infections to other locations in the 
country where there were no known cases; 3) It is also p ossible that several positive individuals 
entered the country through unapproved routes. This third argument is being made against the 
background that the lockdown occurred in areas with known cases and that importation of cases 
ceased with the closure of the country’s international borders. This conclusion is supported by 
the fact that new cases were reported in regions not known to have reported COVID -19 cases 
such as; the Upper East Region, the Upper West region, Eastern region, Savannah region, Oti 
and Volta regions and the Central region. The COVID -19 monitoring team used this mobile 
GIS application to map 10 reported cases in the northern region of Ghana and they were 
identified as imported cases that used unapproved routes in entering the country. Ano ther 
possible argument was that the time lag between the announcement and enforcement of the 
lockdown led to ‘panic’ travel outside the lockdown area. This panic travel could have spread 
the virus to places, hitherto, were not considered COVID -19 endemic.  
The study observed that COVID -19 cases started from high -income residential areas and 
spread to low -income neighbourhoods. Interestingly, cases from low -income neighbourhoods Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 144 could not be linked to specific case (s) from high -income neighbourhood, as peopl e could not 
remember their contacts and sources of infection. This made it difficult to explain the infection 
sources, types and patterns for specific action to either reduce or stop the spread. It was 
therefore not surprising that experts explained the re asons for ending the lockdown as 
economically motivated. In low -income neighbourhoods, social distancing was not observed; 
masks were in limited use and above all people worked daily for survival even under lockdown 
conditions.  
Based on these findings from a relational geodatabase, this study makes the following 
observations that Ghana’s approach to managing COVID -19 would have slowed the spread of 
the virus at the onset if the lockdown were instituted nationwide. There should have been a 
total lockdown with no movement allowed. Stringent measures were needed to prevent the 
importation into the country through unapproved routes. However, the counter -arguments 
raised against the total lockdown of the entire country with a complete restriction on 
movements were that the economic and social cost would have been unbearable given the 
economic situation and the spatial organization of the country.  
The study has demonstrated the usefulness of relational geodatabase for contact tracing, real -
time Spatio -temporal monitoring of COVID -19 and communication between field workers, 
testing labs and regional and national level decision -makers. Future works may focus on 1) the 
design and deployment of relational geodatabase that assesses many to many relations as this 
work focused entirely on many -to-one relations. 2) Design and deployment of an integration 
case and logistics management information in the relational geodatabase for a comprehensive 
one-stop-shop geospatial system for disease control.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 13 (1), 2021 pages 126 -146 
145 
 References  
AS. (2020). Coronavirus: what have been the worst pandemics and epidemics in history? 
Available at: ttps://en.as.com/en/2020/04/18/other_sports/1587167182_422066.html. 
Accessed: July 9, 2020.  
Boden, S.  (2018). Relates and Relationship Classes Ex plained. Available at: 
https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/wp -content/uploads/2018/11/relates -
relationship -classes -explained.pdf . Acce ssed: July 17, 2020.  
Boulos, M.N.K., & Geraghty, E.M. (2020). Geographical tracking and mapping of coronavirus 
disease COVID -19/severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS -CoV -2) 
epidemic and associated events around the world: how 21st century G IS technologies 
are supporting the global fight against outbreaks and epidemics.  Int J Health 
Geography . 2020 Mar 11;19(1):8.  doi: 10.1186/s12942 -020-00202 -8. 
Chatham House. (2020). The Hurdles to Developing a COVID -19 Vaccine: Why International 
Cooperation is Needed.  Available 
at:https://www.chathamhouse.org/expert/comment/hurdles -developing -covid -19-
vaccine -why-international -cooperation -
needed?gclid=Cj0KCQjwo6D4BRDgARIsAA6uN1 -
tCU6fRdeamg49mma9ai2RZ_zQwbon_gYyzeSp -
iK16rQ_LvbtMbEaAlUrEALw_wcB .  Accessed: J uly 10, 2020.  
Chaturvedi, A.  (2020).  Coronavirus: Geospatial industry pitches in to help combat pandemic . 
Available at:  https://www.geospatialworld.net/blogs/initiatives -by-geospatial -
companies -to-curb-coronavirus/. Accessed: July 03, 2020.  
Chung, D., & Hoon, S. S. (2020). Korea’s response to COVID -19: Early lessons in tackling 
the pandemic. Available at: https://blogs.worldbank.org/eastasiapacific/koreas -
response -covid -19-early -lessons -tackling -pandemic. Accessed: July 04, 2020.  
ESRI. (2020a). ArcGIS  Pr o. Available at: https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro -
app/help/data/geodatabases/overview/what -is-a-geodatabase -
.htm#:~:text=At%20its%20most%20basic%20level,%2C%20PostgreSQL%2C%20or
%20IBM%20DB2.&text=But%20a%20geodatabase%20is%20more%20than%20a%2
0collection%20of%20datasets.  Accessed: July 17, 2020.  
ESRI. (2020b). COVID -19. Maps, solutions, and resources for response and reopening. 
Available at: https://www.esri.com/en -us/covid -19/overview . Accessed: July 17, 2020.  
ESRI. (2020c). COVID -19 CDC Supports State Dashboard to Better Monitor cases and 
capacity.  https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/blog/covid -19-cdc-supports -state-
dashboards -to-better -monitor -cases -and-capacity/  Access ed: July 19, 2020.  
Fortunati , R. (2016). Mapping Ebola to prepare for future outbreaks. IHME Measuringwhat 
matters . Retrieved from http://www.health data.org/acti ng-data/mapping -ebola -
prepare -future -outbreaks . Accessed: July 19, 2020.  
GHS. (2020). Situation Update, Confirmed COVID -19 Cases In Ghana As At 27 March 2020, 
19:00 Hr. Available at: https://ghanahealthservice.org/covid19/archive.php. Accessed: 
July 15, 20 20. Design and deployment of relational geodatabase on mobile GIS platform for real -time COVID -19 
 146 Hay, S.I., Battle, K.E., Pigott, D.M., Smith, D.L., Moyes, C.L., Bhatt, S., Brownstein, J.S., 
Collier, N., Myers, M.F., George, D.B., & Gething, P.W. (2013). Global mapping of 
infectious disease.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biolo gical 
Sciences , 368(1614), p.20120250.  
Herold, S., & Sawada, M. C. (2012). A review of geospatial information technology for natural 
disaster management in developing countries.  International Journal of Applied 
Geospatial Research (IJAGR) , 3(2), 24-62. 
ILO. (2020). COVID -19 and the world of work - Country policy responses. Available at: 
https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/coronavirus/country -responses/lang --en/index.htm. 
Accessed: July 9, 2020.  
Malgorzata, D., & Pomfret, D. K.  (2020). Geospatial in formation management in the time of 
COVID -19. Available at https://www.geospatialworld.net/blogs/geospatial -
information -management -in-the-time-of-covid -19/. Accessed: July 03, 2020.  
Nkansah, M. A. (2020). [Case Study] Ghana’s multifarious response to COVID -19: Through 
a citizen’s lens. Available at: https://www.ingsa.org/covidtag/covid -19-
commentary/asantewah -nkansah -ghana/.  Accessed: July 15, 2020.  
Pigott, D.M., Howes, R.E., Wiebe, A., Battle, K.E., Golding, N., Gething, P.W., Dowell, S.F., 
Farag, T.H., G arcia, A.J., Kimball, A.M., & Krause, L.K. (2015). Prioritising infectious 
disease mapping.  PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases , 9(6), p.e0003756  
Ritchie, H., Ortiz -Ospina, E., Beltekian, D., Mathieu, E., Hasell, J., Macdonald, B.,  Giattino, 
C., Roser, M., Yunits, van Woerden, E., Gavrilov, D.,  Bergel, M., Ahmad, S., &  
Crawford, J. (2020). Policy Responses to the Coronavirus Pandemic. Available a t: 
https://ourworldindata.org/policy -responses -covid . Accessed: July 9, 2020.  
Saran, S., Singh, P., Kumar, V., & Chauhan, P. (2020). Review of Geospatial Technology for 
Infectious Disease Su rveillance: Use Case on COVID -19. Journal of the Indian Society 
of Remote Sensing , pp.1 -18. 
Torhonen, M. K., Antos, E. S, Dongkyu, K., & Alvaro B. F. (2020). The role of geospatial 
information in confronting COVID -19 – Learning from Korea. Available 
at:htt ps://blogs.worldbank.org/eastasiapacific/role -geospatial -information -
confronting -covid -19-learning -korea. Accesses: July 04, 2020.  
US Census Bureau, (2015). Basics on Geodatabases. Available at: 
http://ggim.un.org/meetings/2015 -ISGI -Jordan/documents/Sessio n%203 -
Geodatabases.pdf. Accessed: July 15, 2020.  
WHO. (2020). Coronavirus Disease (COVID -19) Dashboard. Available at 
https://covid19.who.int/?gclid=CjwKCAjwi_b3BRAGEiwAemPNU389V27iQ9nbQ1
bGjRge8qW1sBBhDYGrZO1UbKltTSHoMXdH0Ke35RoCWngQAvD_BwE  July 
02, 2020. Accessed: July 2020.  
Xu, E. N., & Chandler, C. (2020). When red is unlucky: What we can learn from China’scolour -
coded apps for tracking the coronavirus outbr eak. Available at: 
https://fortune.com/2020/04/20/china -coronavirus -tracking -apps-color -codes -covid -
19-alibaba -tencent -baidu/ . Access ed: July 04, 2020.