sustainability
Article
Digital Gap in Universities and Challenges for
Quality Education: A Diagnostic Study in Mexico
and Spain
Guillermo Rodr íguez-Abitia1, Sandra Mart ínez-P érez2
, Maria Soledad Ramirez-Montoya3
and Edgar Lopez-Caudana4,*
1General Direction of Computing and Information and Communications Technologies, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de M éxico, 58089 Mexico City, Mexico; grdrz@unam.mx
2Department of Didactics and Educational Organization, Faculty of Education, University of Barcelona,
08035 Barcelona, Spain; smartinezperez@ub.edu
3Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Humanities and Education, 64849 Monterrey, Mexico;
solramirez@tec.mx
4Tecnologico de Monterrey, School of Engineering and Sciences, 14380 Mexico City, Mexico
*Correspondence: edlopez@tec.mx
Received: 1 October 2020; Accepted: 26 October 2020; Published: 31 October 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: The United Nations (UN) identiﬁes four key elements as agents for change and for
addressing societal challenges: education, research, innovation and leadership. The use of technology,
from a pedagogical and organizational point of view, in higher education institutions has brought
about new challenges. The integration of them in the teaching–learning processes has experienced a
great evolution, giving way to a digital transformation and the acquisition of new skills and knowledge,
thus pointing towards quality education within the framework of sustainable development objectives.
This document aims to describe and analyze the ways in which seven higher education institutions,
three in Spain and four in Mexico, have taken up the challenge of adopting technologies and applying
them to the educational process. To this end, in-depth interviews and direct observations were carried
out. The results point to three dimensions: technological, pedagogical and organizational, which shed
light on the di erent factors that inﬂuence the choice and availability of the use of technologies.
The results indicate that contextual factors play a determinant role in the ability of an institution to
proﬁt from technologies to aid the educational process and guarantee its quality.
Keywords: digital gap; higher education; ICT; education quality; SDG; educational innovation
1. Introduction
Technological advances have led to a major digital transformation. The process of integration and
use of technologies in educational institutions has been complex and has been accompanied by great
changes, according to the singularities of each context. Factors such as training, digital teaching skills,
student knowledge and abilities, accessibility, infrastructure and educational policies, among other
aspects, mark the investment and incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs),
in these organizations. Despite the progress made, everything points to the education objectives not
being met by 2030. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) cover a wide range of possibilities
and complex social, educational, economic and environmental challenges [ 1]. None of them make
speciﬁc reference to ICT, although they do recognize the importance of the di usion of ICTs in
reducing the digital gap and developing knowledge societies. SDG framework includes seven ICT
indicators covering six targets of goals 4 (ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote
lifelong learning opportunities for all), 5 (achieve gender equality and empower all women and
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9069; doi:10.3390 /su12219069 www.mdpi.com /journal /sustainabilitySustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 2 of 14
girls), 9 ( build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster
innovation) and 17 (strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for
Sustainable Development). Focusing on Objective 4, it identiﬁes three key points: 4.4: proportion of
youth /adults with ICT skills, by type of skills; 4.a.1.b.: proportion of schools with access to the Internet
for pedagogical purposes; and 4.a.1.c.: proportion of schools with access to computers for pedagogical
purposes [ 2]. According to the UN, there are four key elements to help society meet these challenges:
education, research, innovation and leadership [ 3]. Universities, as the social fabric, play a fundamental
role in achieving the strategic objectives of sustainable development in general and quality education
in particular.
In order to promote a transformative change based on a new development model, it is necessary
for the academic community to encourage other ways of learning, of understanding training and of
interacting and living with technologies. Both professionals and students need to acquire certain
digital and social skills in order to become agents of change in which, through higher education
based on sustainable development, they can apply ICT to promote learning [ 4]. Therefore, it is essential
to: (a) engage on the path towards the e ective use of ICT, in line with the educational objectives
and strategies of the institutions; (b) create scenarios in which ICT can be used in the teaching and
learning processes.
Our aim is to describe and analyze the ways in which seven higher education institutions, three in
Spain and four in Mexico, have taken up the challenge of adopting ICTs and applying them to the
educational process, in order to shed light on the di erent factors that inﬂuence the choice and
availability of the use of ICTs for quality, sustainable and equitable education. To this end, we present
the background that guided our research and describe our multi-stage methodology, as well as a
description of the tools developed and how the data were analyzed.
In addition, we present the interpretation and discussion of the results of the data collected,
providing the possible implications of the use of ICT in higher education institutions, with the purpose
of shedding light on the di erences in ICT application and leverage for education, based on contextual
ones. Finally, we address the limitations of the study and suggest directions for future research.
Theoretical Background
Education plays an important role in the growth, inclusion and innovation of a society. It promotes
active, self-regulating, empathetic, ﬂexible and critical thinking citizenship [ 5]. A society, known as the
Society 5.0, is focused on people whose aim is to use technologies to create a better future, with changes in
mentality, economy and geopolitics [ 6]. A “super-intelligent” society, which, as Keidanren describes [ 5],
requires social evolution, and ethical implications and acceptance by all concerned. In order to do this,
the current system needs to break down certain walls: (a) that of the administrations, with national
strategies based on the Internet of Things and a “think tank” function; (b) the legal system, in which
administrative digitalization is promoted; (c) that of technologies, a constant search for the formation of
the “knowledge foundation”, cybersecurity, emerging technologies and the existence of a commitment
to research and development; and (d) that of human resources, as with educational reforms and digital
transformations, it is necessary to provide and expand human resources with digital skills that lead us
to quality education.
COVID-19 has altered our lifestyles and changed the way we understand education. Advances in
technology (artiﬁcial intelligence, robotics, the Internet of Things, cloud computing, etc.) are giving
rise to a digital transformation in the way we live, relate, work, train and learn, centred on Education
4.0, the result of the fourth industrial revolution [ 7,8]. These advances are also having an impact on
the acquisition of skills and knowledge—in formal, non-formal and informal education—in three
major areas, as indicated by the LifeComp competency framework [ 9]: personal, social and learning to
learn. Therefore, technologies are playing an increasingly important role in the various areas of life,
making competences rapidly obsolete, and leading people to acquire new, more ﬂexible and lifelong
learning competences; at the same time, this invites us to update the existing ones. These digitalSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 3 of 14
technologies, in turn, are also seen as a means of: facilitating and improving learning; facing new
challenges and opportunities; and learning to learn throughout life, individually and in society [ 10,11].
All of these transformations were already reﬂected in the 2020 Horizon Report [ 12]. In it, we ﬁnd
ﬁve major trends that mark the way in which the context itself is conceived: social, technological,
economic, higher education and political. These trends combine in four scenarios that shape the
teaching–learning processes: growth, limitation, collapse and transformation [ 12]. If we focus on the
binomial higher education and technology, under the social, economic and political parameters,
we can see that the use of technology continues to be more technical and curriculum centred,
rather than practical and critical; it is seen as a catalyst for professional development to facilitate
the use of technology in pedagogy [ 13]. To break with this theoretical–technical position, it is
important that institutions consider three essential axes: the technological, the pedagogical and
the organizational. Each of these is related to a perspective on how technologies are conceived:
the technological one with information and communication technologies (ICTs), the pedagogical
one linked to learning, digital competences , educational innovation and knowledge technologies
(LKTs), and the organizational one with organizational and collaborative management technologies
(OCTs) [ 14,15]. The combination of the three axes with their respective perspectives gives way to the use
of technologies from an approach of empowerment and participation (EPT) (Figure 1), which allows
us to face complex life situations and to develop competences that help us to successfully manage all
the challenges that arise [16].
Figure 1. Dimensions in digital higher education.
This socio-educational overview leads us to look at educational digital agendas, speciﬁcally those of
Europe and Latin America, as they are the objects of our study. These agendas are committed to o ering
quality, excellent and equitable education for all, with the right to adequate training and constant
updating and to o ering new opportunities and social challenges: ﬂexibility, creativity, innovation,
digital competences and improvement in learning processes [ 17–20]. To this end, dierent action plans
have been drawn up, consisting of three guiding principles with their corresponding measures:
(a) Improving the use of digital technologies in the teaching and learning processes: better Wi-Fi
connections in schools, use of self-assessment tools and digitally certiﬁed diplomas.
(b) Acquiring and developing digital skills to support the digital transformation: creation of
a platform in higher institutions to improve teaching–learning processes; development of
scientiﬁc digital skills—open science; cyber security in education; and training in digital skills
and entrepreneurship.
(c) Improving education systems on the basis of research, innovation and good practices that help to
build a digital culture (digital literacy, digital competences, inclusion and citizenship).
On the basis of these actions, teachers must acquire the digital skills necessary not only for their
personal lives but also for their professional lives in order to be able to participate in the presentSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 4 of 14
digital society, which increasingly requires speciﬁc skills necessary for innovation in teaching and
learning [ 21]. For this reason, universities, as scenarios in the socio-educational network for the creation
and dissemination of knowledge, are fundamental not only for social–digital transformation, but also
for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). These institutions are perceived
as an opportunity to provide future generations with the knowledge and skills necessary to face the
dierent global challenges [ 22]. To this end, Agenda 2030 calls for a radical change, and changing
curricula and changing education are essential elements to produce knowledge in line with current
and future changes and challenges and to establish the basis for a fair, inclusive and egalitarian digital
society [ 23]. Therefore, on the one hand, a “new” pedagogy is required that provides students with
key competences: systemic and critical thinking, anticipation, regulation, strategy, transdisciplinary
collaboration, creativity, self-awareness and problem solving [ 24,25], because “becoming digitally
competent is essential if young people are to be able to participate e ectively in a digitalized society and
economy; not addressing these skills risks exacerbating the digital divide and perpetuating existing
inequalities” [ 26] (p. 38). On the other hand, there is a need for operational policies and an integrative
and interdisciplinary approach to sustainability development at the university level [27,28].
2. Materials and Methods
Our research was based on direct observations and in-depth interviews of key players at seven
universities, with three from Spain and four from Mexico. A Spain–Mexico comparison is valuable
to contrast two national contexts that, in spite of sharing common cultural values and background,
dier greatly both in their level of socio-economic development and in the size of the digital gap.
The selection of universities was also made to reﬂect the current higher education composition and
situation for each of the countries. In Spain, public higher education is the main player, relegating the
level of impact of private universities to a minimum. For that reason, it was decided to include
one very large university and two mid-sized ones with di erent orientations. In the case of Mexico,
private education accounts for one fourth of enrolment. Thus, three public institutions and one private
institution were chosen. Variability amongst the public ones was provided by choosing them according
to dierent geographical locations and sizes.
An observation and interview guide was adapted from a previously developed one [ 29] to capture
all relevant information of the use and practise of information, organizational and learning technologies.
The interview guide included 30 open questions, divided into six sections: institutional planning,
institutional usage of ICTs, institutional programs for ICT usage, faculty digital skills and ICT usage,
students’ digital skills and educational resources. Since they were semi-structured, it was possible to
deviate from the guide to explore further a particular element during the discussion, when considered
important by the interviewer. The interviews were recorded and transcribed, and the information
provided was veriﬁed by direct onsite observations, and codiﬁed afterwards according to certain
pre-deﬁned parameters of interpretation that allowed for suitable classiﬁcation of the information
collected. The observations were classiﬁed in one of ﬁve possible categories:
 Information and communication technology appropriation strategic commitment.
 Information and communication technology infrastructure access.
 Digital skills building for faculty.
 Learning and knowledge technology integration in the curricula.
 Organization and collaboration technology appropriation.
The ﬁrst two categories were intended to measure the level of inclusion of an ICT strategy in
the strategic plan of the universities under study, including a suitable allotment of resources for its
execution, and the real digital inclusion realized. The third and fourth categories were intended
to measure the level of readiness that an institution reached to successfully apply learning and
communication technologies in the teaching and learning processes. Lastly, the ﬁfth category was
created to reﬂect how well the use of information technologies is applied to fully enrich the educationalSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 5 of 14
process by adding collaborative functions, as well as proper organizational functionalities to manage
collaborative learning. These three dimensions involve an evolutionary process, where initial stages
are to some extent requirements for the next ones, until an ideal state of technology leverage is attained.
A rubric was then applied to determine the level to which each university had made progress
in each one of the three technological dimensions, as indicators of their path towards complete
digital transformation.
Finally, a three-dimensional dispersion chart was drawn to graphically observe the positioning of
each of the universities to facilitate comparisons amongst cases, and these were developed to draw our
ﬁnal conclusions.
3. Results
We now describe the results for each of the components of our methodology.
3.1. Deﬁnition of Dimensions and Their Components
From the above-described adapted instrument [ 29], a series of indicators was selected to reﬂect
the nature of each of the dimensions in the rubric, as described below.
3.1.1. Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs)
To capture the level of ICT strategic commitment and access, indicators included the presence of
a plan to include technology in both academic and administrative activities, along with appropriate
performance measures. The existence of an organizational unit, responsible for the integration of ICTs
in the teaching process, followed an established plan, or at least some initiatives for that purpose.
The presence and scope of online education was also considered. As for access, aspects like wireless and
wired connectivity, classroom equipment availability, spaces for the use and borrowing of computers
by faculty and students, ICT services and support and provision activities were included.
3.1.2. Learning and Knowledge Technologies (LKTs)
With regard to LKT appropriation and readiness, it was ﬁrst important to look for mechanisms in
place to develop digital skills in faculty, such as formal training programs and domain diagnostics,
coordinated and supported by a particular organizational unit with that purpose. It was also observed
whether there was support for the basic use of learning management systems, and a complementary
oer of blended and online education options. Finally, it was important to evaluate how extensively
the use of LKT was intentionally included in the curricula of the programs in each institution.
3.1.3. Organization and Collaboration Technologies (OCTs)
For the last dimension, OCT appropriation, the focus was on more sophisticated use of
learning management systems, so that they would not only be containers of content for a particular
class, but actual tools for the students and faculty members to collaborate in knowledge building
activities, with appropriate management for tasks ranging from assignments and evaluation to proﬁle
identiﬁcation and learning personalization. Additionally, other initiatives related to the development
of open educational resources by faculty members and their display in institutional repositories were
assessed. For this dimension, it was also important to identify an o cial organizational unit in charge
of making these initiatives happen.
3.2. Field Study
Universities were classified into four size categories: small (up to 5000 students), medium (between 5001
and 10,000 students), large (from 10,001 to 50,000 students) and very large (more than 50,000 students).
For the purpose of this study, only three categories were included to better observe contrasting features.
Table 1 shows the characteristics of the universities chosen for the study. As mentioned before, it wasSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 6 of 14
intended that the higher education environments were correctly represented based on their nature in
each country. Three Spanish and four Mexican universities were included.
Table 1. Universities included in the study.
University Community /State Country Size Funding
Spanish University 1 (SU1) Cataluña Spain Very large Public
Spanish University 2 (SU2) Madrid Spain Large Public
Spanish University 3 (SU3) Madrid Spain Large Public
Mexican University 1 (MU1) M éxico City Mexico Very large Public
Mexican University 2 (MU2) Chiapas Mexico Large Public
Mexican University 3 (MU3) Quintana Roo Mexico Small Public
Mexican University 4 (MU4) Nuevo Leon Mexico Very large Private
After performing the site visit and in-depth interviews with key players (at least the person
responsible for ICT services, the person in charge of the academic planning, one faculty member and
the person responsible for faculty development), a rubric was applied to determine the level of maturity
for each on the categories and dimensions in the study. The rubric was based on ﬁve levels: absent,
incipient, medium, integrated and consolidated. We now discuss the results for each university.
3.2.1. Spanish University 1
With more than 65,000 students, SU1 is one of the leading educational institutions in Spain.
It follows the general guidelines that the government of Cataluña has provided for all higher
education institutions, where the level of digitization of services is comprehensive, and there are
several organizational units that directly a ect the ICT strategy in the university: the Institute of
Education Sciences, the Center for Learning and Research Resources, a Department of Infrastructure
and the Inter-University Group for Teachers’ Formation. Together, they guarantee the access to
ICT infrastructure, as well as to a Moodle-based virtual campus and appropriate mentoring for the
academic application of ICTs. There is connectivity in all areas of the di erent campuses, and all
classrooms are well equipped. Software licensing is regular and standardized, and provided freely to
all community members.
Faculty training is o ered in face-to-face, hybrid and online modalities, and it is based on the needs
of each academic unit within the university to cover didactics, specialized software tools and the use of
ICTs for education, including informational skills. The university also o ers special degrees for new
faculty, and the application of ICTs in the classroom is followed up. The university creates an instance
in Moodle for each class, but usage is voluntary for professors. The learning management system
(LMS) application is divided into three categories according to its aim: regular classes, faculty training
and continued education. On the downside, professors use the LMS tools as closed content repositories,
and they do not provide digital skills for faculty nor students, for the most part.
Professors share best practices in the application of ICTs for education through a web portal
made for that purpose. Additionally, they have repositories for LKT tools, as well as banks of images,
educational video channels, massive open online courses (MOOCs) and teaching and research content
that may aid faculty in creating educational resources, which can be published in the university’s
repository, and then shared with the rest of Cataluña. Collaboration is fostered and supported.
3.2.2. Spanish University 2
The use of an LMS at this 20,000-student university is not mandatory, since they perceive themselves
as a face-to-face university. They have promoted its use with moderate success to overcome resistance
to change. Access to computers and appropriate connectivity is not a concern, since infrastructure is
appropriate. It is normal for all students and faculty have their own computers and they prefer to useSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 7 of 14
them than those of the university. The university provides IT support and a video recording studio.
Videoconferencing facilities are available but not frequently used.
As in SU1, there is an Institute for Education Science, in charge of providing professors with
courses to learn about the use of ICTs for their classes, and didactics in general. This is done by faculty
members who are assigned work hours to train and help with LMS spaces. Course o erings are
published each month, and complemented with materials in the form of videos and tutorials. There is
a program for faculty innovation where projects are presented and approved on an individual basis,
though with a limited budget. The main LMS is Blackboard, used at di erent levels by 80% of the
faculty. Integration of ICTs in the curriculum is limited to one subject, common to all programs, but it
is believed that it does not provide all the skills needed by the students.
Despite the apparent broad use of the LMS and the ample provision of software tools, there is no
measure of the level of sophistication to which faculty and students engage in collaborative learning
and work ﬂows through technology. It is clear, however, that all academic services are well integrated
with technology to help the organizational needs for academic management.
3.2.3. Spanish University 3
This multi-campus 20,000-student university di ers from SU2 with regard to its approach to
technology for education, as it commonly leads projects related to that matter in an association called
the Spanish Universities Rectors’ Conference. The importance is given to technology well beyond
access and su cient infrastructure. Since 2011, the university has counted on a speciﬁc organizational
unit to promote educational innovation mediated by technology, as well as be in charge of the strategy
for faculty training and the development of educational resources. For the latter, they encourage
professors to get involved and provide help through what they call pedagogic coordinators. The use
of Moodle is mandatory, at least as a content repository and grade reporting tool. The university
provides appropriate connectivity and computer infrastructure, as well as videoconferencing support.
The purchase of hardware and software is centralized and properly regulated.
The university provides professors with tools to develop courses and repositories for them, and for
supplementary content. It also provides support for video recording, production and post-production,
so that elaborate material can be obtained, beyond simply recording a lesson, and focusing on short
and attractive ones. There is a teacher formation plan that seeks to take advantage of the fact that their
faculty body is quite young on average. Yet, this has not been completely implemented.
The university encourages collaboration through cloud services and tools, sharing documents
and spaces for interaction. It also integrates academic platforms in a very comprehensive way for
administrative processes, so that work can be quite transparent for professors. As an added value,
the university provides an analytics service to professors for all their classes, so that they can better
adjust their methods.
3.2.4. Mexican University 1
The Institutional Development Plan of the main university in Mexico recognizes the urgent need
to integrate ICTs into the educational processes to help better serve its 360,000 students. This plan aims
at increasing the coverage and quality of data centers, networking and cloud services. Additionally,
it targets the development of digital skills, and the university’s readiness for blended and online
learning models. This need became crucial as a result of the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
This brought consequences even for its organizational structure, where areas were combined to better
approach the educational innovation needs. The computer and networking infrastructure is extensive,
but far from enough. As opposed to universities in Spain, a great majority of the community members
do not possess a computer for their exclusive use, or suitable connectivity at home. Software licenses
are negotiated centrally, and they are o ered freely to students and professors.
Digital skills are formed in professors by many programs and organizational instances. Most of
them are general programs and are not dedicated exclusively to ICT matters. Nonetheless, there is oneSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 8 of 14
that is, diagnosing the level of ICT domain both for students and professors, and providing the latter
with a series of courses to meet their needs. They also o er mentoring and didactic help. Even though
taking courses is mandatory for faculty members, this is not exclusive for ICT skills, so not everybody
chooses to follow this course path. Most academic programs include at least one course related to ICTs,
but integration as part of the learning process is normally absent.
There is more than one LMS platform at the university. Moodle is the most common one, and its
use has spread, but normally just to store content and assign a few activities. Videoconferencing
tools are also available for faculty members. However, the intention of capitalizing on technology for
collaboration in academic life is relegated to some isolated initiatives. Additionally, administrative and
academic processes are highly unintegrated. This is made worse by the high level of autonomy that
each academic unit holds. Thus, trying to standardize services and technologies is quite a di cult task.
3.2.5. Mexican University 2
This 20,000-student university, the main one in its state, has a strategic plan that recognizes ICTs as
horizontal and cross-sectional catalysts for attaining organizational objectives, providing some stimuli
for faculty work and training in this subject matter. There have been some strong e orts to provide
appropriate computer and connectivity infrastructure to the whole of the university community,
but there is still considerable work to do. Home access is even more complicated than for MU1, due to
its location in one of the most economically depressed states of the country, and the highly rural and
multi-ethnic composition of its population. Infrastructure improvement projects are generally limited
by restricted budgets.
There have been some e orts to develop digital and didactic skills in the faculty, but with
limited results. Courses are generally o ered for didactics, which then incorporate some ICT content.
The university provides support for Moodle, and it is partially used by faculty, though there is a fully
online modality in the academic o ering.
Regardless of the ﬂaws, the university uses technologies to collaborate on curriculum design and
revisions, and it supports faculty in the use of video tutorials, microprocessors, transmedia narratives
and other alternatives for course innovation. Administrative processes have a limited degree of
integration through technology.
3.2.6. Mexican University 3
This small and fairly recently created university, serving close to 4000 students, has a development
plan that recognizes the strategic role of ICTs in quality education. Nonetheless, it does not include
measurement mechanisms nor intermediate goals. It does not count on a ﬁxed budget, but operates
with funds subject to approval, with no guarantee for continuity. Educational strategies are traditional
and controlled centrally by a speciﬁc unit, restraining innovation. It has a pertinent but insu cient
computing and networking infrastructure. Having the ﬁnancial system as it is, it cannot commit to
long-term projects. It does not provide institutional support for educational technologies.
Faculty training needs are not formally identiﬁed, but a program supported by existing faculty
members is in place. Software tool availability is limited to what exists in the laboratories, and there
are no commercial agreements with vendors.
As for the integration of ICT in the curricula, the university does not have any initiative to do
so. Furthermore, the only technologies it has available are a digital library and a media classroom.
Collaboration supported by technology is absent. Administrative processes are moderately automated
and run well enough.
3.2.7. Mexican University 4
With over 90,000 students, this private institution is one of the pioneers in education innovation,
and in the use of ICTs for improving the teaching and learning processes. Its current educational model
is strong in innovative didactic approaches, as well as in the intense use of ICTs. This is recognizedSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 9 of 14
at all managerial levels, and an excellent infrastructure is in place, as well as the associated support
services. Unlike its public counterparts, its students are ﬁnancially strong, and most have at least
two devices at home for their exclusive use. Many years ago, this university made it mandatory for
students to acquire a laptop, or guarantee access to one, so that all courses could run in a blended
learning environment, implemented in Blackboard, becoming this company’s largest client worldwide.
They are currently moving to Canvas. It also provides institutional incentives to faculty members for
projects about innovation in education.
Faculty training programs are extensive, and the requirements depend on the path of each
professor, since they can be categorized di erently. Each professor has a whole program to undertake
as a requirement to continue. Once this has been fulﬁlled, they need to take at least 40 h of training per
year. A great proportion of the courses o ered are related to ICTs. Each campus has an Educational
Innovation Center, in charge of deﬁning and designing the training o erings. ICTs and LKTs are
extensively integrated into the curriculum to potentiate the learning process.
The use of ICTs certainly promotes interaction and collaboration. The university intensively
promotes the development and use of educational resources, and it has one of the largest repositories
as well. It takes advantage of learning analytics, since all the administrative and academic systems are
integrated nationwide. Academic work groups are also supported by technology, provided that the
university system has campuses distributed across the nation.
3.3. Data Analysis
Based on the rubric, numeric scores were assigned to each category and dimension, and to each
university. The scores ranged from 1 to 5, 1 being the lowest level of maturity, named “absent”, and 5
the highest level, named “consolidated”. A comparative score graph is presented to illustrate the state
of the universities in the study, as shown in Figure 2, and a gap analysis graph in Figure 3.
From Figure 2, it is clear that scores for Spanish universities rank higher on average than those of
their Mexican counterparts, with the exception of the private one. Infrastructure and organizational
technology do not seem to be a matter of concern. However, there is a clear variation in the level of
usage of LKTs. On the other hand, Mexican universities show relatively low scores in ICTs and OCTs.
It may be inferred that, regardless of the lack of base technology, there are initiatives to proﬁt from
LKTs that are widespread in their communities.
Figure 2. Scores by dimension and university.Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 10 of 14
Figure 3. Dispersion chart of university scores in the three dimensions.
From the information provided in Figure 2, the least advanced situation seems to be that of MU3,
and the best one for MU4. However, this does not reﬂect a good or bad result. It may be an indicator
that a newly created university is using alternative ways of o ering quality education, despite its
administrative restrictions. The one thing that is certain is that the results are clearly polarized
in Mexico.
Finally, a dispersion graph, shown in Figure 3, was created to visually map the maturity of each
university in a three-dimensional ﬁeld, and to provide an integrated view of the position of each
institution overall.
The graphs shown allow for making a comparison regarding the selected items. Even when the
responses show an established rubric result, and it could be thought that it is a qualitative approach, it is
relevant to point out that the universities indicated clearly answered the same questions, which makes
it possible to compare the state of each university. This provides an opportunity for identifying
opportunity areas that may aid school administrators to put in place actions that improve their
technological application to strengthen the educational process, with regard to all three dimensions.
4. Discussion
The assessment of the institutions presents very di erent panoramas in the di erent universities
and, especially in Mexico (a country of great contrasts), there are very varied realities, even among
the same public schools, which is why this section of the article will not be framed by a comparative
analysis, but rather by the location of challenges, in general, to locate the opportunities within the
framework of Sustainable Development Goal 4 and Society 5.0.
The results indicate that the incorporation of technologies in higher education, in the broadest
sense (ICT, LKT and OCT), has meant a supposed digital transformation, some challenges (social,
formative, political and economic) and “globalization” on the part of the universities that increasingly
seek scenarios for all based on quality and equitable education [ 7,8,28,30]. The universities involved
in this research have a strategic plan for the integration of ICT, linked to public policies in the local
or national education system. These universities give faculties and higher institutions a certain
amount of autonomy in planning, acquiring and responding to ICT needs. It can be seen that the
large universities have ICT support units for educational purposes. In Spain, the three universities
have a very similar model and are now involved in inter-institutional projects [ 17]. On the contrary,
in Mexico , and depending on the region and state, there are very considerable variations according to
the nature of each university [ 19,20]. The results also indicate that the interoperability and e ciency
of the administrative systems, the use of networks and the implementation of virtual platforms not
only help the technological dimension, but also the pedagogical and organizational dimensions of
the institutions.
The assessment presented by the seven universities leads us to reﬂect on the training and
infrastructure that higher education institutions receive, and provides us with insights to redesign
an increasingly socio-economic, sustainable and inclusive system, driven by three dimensions:
technological, pedagogical and organizational. The combination of these three dimensions, in physicalSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 11 of 14
and cyber physical spaces, gives rise to an approach to technologies based on empowerment and
participation (EPT). This set of scenarios helps us move from the fourth industrial revolution to
so-called Society 5.0, the “super-intelligent” society, with the aim of adapting to the challenges and
needs of the moment, and reformulating the relationship between technologies and society and the
relationship between individuals and society mediated by technologies [ 31], where the ﬁngerprints of
these relationships remain [32].
In relation to the teaching–learning processes, the importance of the pedagogical dimension,
teacher training and the acquisition of certain digital skills are clearly considered in all seven universities
as elements for quality education. In Mexico, this is observed in the existing plans for updating
disciplinary and technological knowledge, which vary only according to the resources available to
support development and training programs. However, in Spain, the results point to the use of
technologies at the initial levels, and the need to acquire digital competences in the various learning
processes [9,10,17,21].
However. It is clear that all institutions, regardless of their location, seek the same transformational
objectives, that is, to increase their ability to proﬁt from a rich implementation of ICTs, LKTs and
OCTs. Nonetheless, the results suggest that the ability to reach such an objective is subject to severe
contextual restrictions. Universities in Spain, and their community members, have enough resources
to make it happen. Their level of maturity seems to be a function of culture, priorities and will. Thus,
the apparent lag for SU2 is not a function of ﬁnancial or infrastructure restrictions, but a result of
a culture that supports the voluntary use of technologies, rather than imposing a university-wide
policy enforcement.
Dierences among Spanish universities do not seem to be signiﬁcant, compared to their Mexican
public counterparts. The latter seem to be severely constrained by lack of funding, or ﬁnancial allotment
procedures that do not prioritize spending on ICTs nor allow for the continuity of an ICT implementation
and display project. This is further negatively a ected by the lack of infrastructure in the country,
and the precarious ﬁnancial situation of their community members. A recent analysis, done by MU1
due to the COVID-19 pandemic, determined that close to 20% of its population ( that is, approximately
72,000 students) lack either connectivity or a computing device at home. This is a major challenge
when planning on blended or online environments that require alternative measures. Furthermore,
other universities are located in more rural environments, making it reasonable to assume the situation
may be worse.
The particular case of the main private university in Mexico (MU4) that is included in the study,
and that appears to have a perfect score, should also be treated carefully. Even when all standards are
met, as a result of a well-planned education and technology strategy, there is no perfect ﬁnal product,
nor a guarantee that an appropriate approximation to quality education has been reached. There is a
need to clearly analyze the impact of applying technologies on the students, so that real knowledge
and skill development can be assessed.
The relevance of access to ICTs and their application for pedagogical purposes is not questionable
to foster a quality education and promote the development of the knowledge society. However, it is also
noticeable that attaining such goals can be challenging, especially in environments and communities
that face harsh economic conditions and severe infrastructure shortages. This is in addition to potential
cultural barriers, and administrative obstacles, that result from unfavorable governmental policies,
in agreement with SDG 4 [ 1]. Finding creative ways to overcome such challenges is paramount for
those disadvantaged educational institutions so that they can evolve and reduce the digital gap.
The problem becomes more complex when it is understood that it spans beyond the institutional
domain, being a ected by social and economic constraints.
5. Conclusions
The integration and use of technologies in education systems in general, and in teaching
processes in particular, is not happening as the digital and 2030 agendas suggest, as researchSustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 12 of 14
shows. Infrastructure, digital equipment, training, organization and management of technologies,
together with the non-acquisition of certain digital technologies, are key elements that persist in the
society of the fourth industrial revolution. This phenomenon, coined by Schwab [ 6], aects all spheres
of life. Therefore, the education system is not immune to it, and it is considered necessary to train
more interconnected, globalized people in ﬂexible and changing contexts, with skills and competences
to adapt to society in the digital age and, in turn, ensure quality and inclusive education. To create a
sustainable society and contribute to a true digital transformation, people need knowledge and skills to
achieve this under an education for sustainable development approach. In this sense, higher education,
as has been pointed out in our research, requires educational, technological and political changes with
an ethical commitment to reach the agreements of Agenda 2030 [20,23].
Although there have been extensive studies on the integration of ICT in higher education, most of
them address technologies from a technological rather than a pedagogical and organizational point of
view. One of the strengths of this work is that the three perspectives—technological, pedagogical and
organizational—intersect, as they are inseparable and necessary to consider and evolve the level of ICT
integration to a higher level of maturity. Higher education institutions have speciﬁcities that should
not be ignored. These speciﬁcities become even more important when considering the great variety of
objectives and cultures that exist in the universe of educational institutions.
After the assessment presented here, the challenge of COVID-19 arrived at the universities.
The doubts about the possible adoption of new technologies in the training processes in
educational institutions were automatically dispelled as a result of the new reality that conditioned
people to establish interactions remotely. People who resisted the use of new technological
supports (mobile phones , tablets, computers, platforms, online education), advances in technology
(artiﬁcial intelligence , robotics, the Internet of Things, cloud computing, etc.) and who were unaware
of didactic strategies mediated by technologies from educational software saw how the barriers that
prevented this approach quickly vanished to adapt to the new educational panorama, as a result of the
eects of COVID-19.
The phrase popularized in the United States, thinking outside the box /out of the box, or the
conceptualization of de Bono’s lateral thinking [ 33], acquired weight in the face of the need to seek
solutions, without following traditional logical guidelines, and to acquire alternative instances of
resolution by avoiding preconceived ideas. The challenge now is to capitalize on this forced reality,
to encourage the processes of adoption of new technologies, but the focus is not only the acquisition of
the technological infrastructure, but is, fundamentally, the training of teachers, administrators and
directors so that the remote act of communication is transformed into educational teaching strategies.
This will result in collaboration networks that better ﬁt the needs of the digital society.
Evidently, this study has plenty of elements that can be improved and need further elaboration.
First, SDG 4 implies much more than technological applications. It includes issues like gender equality
and empowerment, lifelong learning opportunities, innovation promotion and global partnerships.
These issues should be addressed to complement the ﬁndings. Additionally, the analysis should
be extended to more individuals for each institution, and more institutions in several countries to
examine commonalities and di erences that could help in planning a digital education agenda. Finally,
the instrument can always be modiﬁed and improved. All these elements represent opportunities
for future research. This paper is an invitation to continue studying the relationship between the
dimensions, with a view to reducing the digital gap to support training in universities and to meet the
challenges of the Society 5.0.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.R.-A. and S.M.-P .; Formal analysis, M.S.R.-M., G.R.-A., S.M.-P .
and E.L.-C .; Funding acquisition, M.S.R.-M., G.R.-A. and E.L.-C.; Investigation, G.R.-A. and S.M.-P .; Methodology,
G.R.-A.; Project administration, G.R.-A.; Validation, M.S.R.-M., G.R.-A., S.M.-P . and E.L.-C.; Writing—original
draft, M.S.R.-M., G.R.-A., S.M.-P . and E.L.-C.; Writing—review and editing, M.S.R.-M., G.R.-A., S.M.-P . and E.L.-C.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of Fideicomiso SEP-UNAM and Writing
Lab, TecLabs, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico, in the production of this work.Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 13 of 14
Acknowledgments: To the teachers and managers and institutions involved.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Global University Network for Innovation. Approaches to SDG 17 Partnerships for the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) ; GUNi: Barcelona, Spain, 2018.
2. General Assembly. Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017. 71 /313. Work of the Statistical
Commission Pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ; United Nation: New York, NY, USA,
2017; pp. 1–25.
3. UNESCO. Educaci ón 2030. Declaraci ón Incheon ; UNESCO: Par ís, France, 2016.
4. Elfert, M. Lifelong learning in Sustainable Development Goal 4: What does it mean for UNESCO’s rights-based
approach to adult learning and education? Int. Rev. Educ. 2019 ,65, 537–556. [CrossRef]
5. European Commission /EACEA /Eurydice. Teaching Careers in Europe: Access, Progression and Support.
Eurydice Report ; Publications O ce of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2018. [CrossRef]
6. Keidanren. Society 5.0. Co-Creating the Future ; Keidanren Policy & Action: Tokyo, Japan, 2018.
7. Schwab, K. The Fourth Industrial Revolution ; Crown Business: New York, NY, USA, 2016.
8. Joyanes, L. Industria 4.0. La Cuarta Revoluci ón Industrial ; Alfaomega-Marcombo: Mexico City, Mexico, 2018.
9. Sala, A.; Punie, Y.; Garkov, V .; Cabrera Giraldez, M. LifeComp: The European Framework for Personal, Social and
Learning to Learn Key Competence ; Publications O ce of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2020; JRC120911.
[CrossRef]
10. European Commission /EACEA /Eurydice. Digital Education at School in Europe ; Eurydice Report; Publications
Oce of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2019. [CrossRef]
11. Romero-Rodr íguez, J.M.; Ram írez-Montoya, M.S.; Aznar-D íaz, I.; Hinojo-Lucena, J. Social appropriation of
knowledge as a key factor for local development and open Innovation: A Systematic Review. J. Open Innov.
Technol. Mark. Complex. 2020 ,6, 44. [CrossRef]
12. Brown, M.; McCormack, M.; Reeves, J.; Brooks, C.; Grajek, S.; Alexander, B.; Bali, M.; Bulger, S.R.; Dark, S.;
Engelbert, N.; et al. 2020 EDUCAUSE Horizon Report, Teaching and Learning Edition ; EDUCAUSE: Louisville,
CO, USA, 2020.
13. Melki, A.; Nicolas, M.; Khairallah, M.; Adra, O. Information and communications technology use as a catalyst
for the professional development: Perceptions of tertiary level faculty. Int. J. Educ. Dev. Using Inf. Commun.
Technol. (IJEDICT) 2017 ,13, 128–144.
14. Ramírez-Montoya, M.S.; Lugo-Ocando, J. Systematic review of mixed methods in the framework of
educational innovation. Comunicar 2020 ,65, 9–20. [CrossRef]
15. Romero-Rodr íguez, L.M.; Ram írez-Montoya, M.S.; Valenzuela, J.R. Incidence of digital competences in the
completion rates of MOOCs. Case study on Energy Sustainability courses. IEEE Trans. Educ. 2020 , 1–7.
[CrossRef]
16. OECD. OECD Skills Strategy 2019: Skills to Shape a Better Future ; OECD Publishing: Paris, France, 2019.
[CrossRef]
17. Romero-Rodr íguez, L.M.; Ram írez-Montoya, M.S.; Aguaded, I. Determining Factors in MOOCs Completion
Rates: Application Test in Energy Sustainability Courses. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2893. [CrossRef]
18. European Comission. Digital Education Action Plan (2018–2020) ; Publications O ce of the European Union:
Luxembourg, 2018.
19. Ithurburu. Políticas Digitales en Los Sistemas Educativos de Am érica Latina (2013–2018). Estado del Arte de la
Investigaci ón a la Pol ítica [Digital Policies in Latin American Education Systems (2013–2018). State of the Art from
Research to Policy] ; IIPE-UNESCO: Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2019.
20. Maldonado, C.; Marinho, M.L.; Robles, C. Inclusi ón y cohesi ón en el marco de la Agenda 2030 para el
Desarrollo Sostenible: Claves para un desarrollo social inclusivo en Am érica Latina [Inclusion and Cohesion in
the Framework of the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development: Keys to Inclusive Social Development in Latin
America] ; Comisi ón Econ ómica para Am érica Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL): Santiago, Chile, 2020.
21. Alonso-Garc ía, S.; Aznar-D íaz, I.; C áceres-Reche, M.P .; Trujillo-Torres, J.M.; Romero-Rodr íguez, J.M.
Systematic Review of Good Teaching Practices with ICT in Spanish Higher Education. Trends and
Challenges for Sustainability. Sustainability 2019 ,11, 7150. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9069 14 of 14
22. Ramírez-Montoya, M.S. Challenges for Open Education with Educational Innovation: A Systematic Literature
Review. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 7053. [CrossRef]
23. UNESCO. Goal Dialogue on ICT and Education Innovation–Towards Sustainable Development Goal for Education
(SDG4) ; Russian Federation: Moscow, Russia, 2019.
24. Institute of Education Technology. Innovating Pedagogy 2020. Exploring New Forms of Teaching, Learning and
Assessment, to Guide Educators and Policymakers ; The Open University: London, UK, 2020.
25. The Higher Education Sustainability Initiative (HESI). Raising and Mapping Awareness of the Global Goals.
Report to the High.-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development ; United Nation: New York, NY, USA, 2019.
26. OECD. How’s Life in the Digital Age? Opportunities and Risks of the Digital Transformation for People’s Well-Being ;
OECD Publishing: Paris, France, 2019. [CrossRef]
27. Filho, W.L.; Jim, Y.C.; Londero, L.; Veiga, L.; Miranda, U.; Caeiro, S.; Rejane da Rosa, L. Identifying and
overcoming obstacles to the implementation of sustainable development at universities. J. Integr. Environ. Sci.
2017 ,14, 93–108. [CrossRef]
28. Global University Network for Innovation. Humanities and Higher Education: Synergies between Science,
Technology and Humanities ; Higher Education in the World 7; GUNi: Barcelona, Spain, 2019.
29. Kriscautzky-Laxague, M.; Mart ínez-S ánchez, M.E.; Rodr íguez-Abitia, G. Desarrollo de un Instrumento para
Medir el Aprovechamiento de las TIC y las TAC en las Instituciones de Educaci ón Superior‘ [Development
of an Instrument to Measure ICT and LKT Proﬁting in Higher Education Institutions]. In Horizonte Educativo:
Una Mirada al Futuro de las Profesiones y la Educaci ón (Volume 1) ; Chan-N úñez, M.E., Mateos-Morf ín, L.R., Eds.;
Sistema de Educaci ón Virtual de la Universidad de Guadalajara: Guadalajara, Mexico, 2019; pp. 227–252.
30. UNESCO. UNESCO Science Report: Towards 2030 ; UNESCO Publishing: Paris, France, 2015.
31. Hitachi-UTokyo Laboratory (H-UTokyo Lab). Society 5.0. A People-Centric Super-Smart Society ; Springer:
Singapore, 2020. [CrossRef]
32. Buitrago-Ropero, M.E.; Ram írez-Montoya, M.S.; Chiappe Laverde, A. Digital footprints (2005–2019):
A systematic mapping of studies in education. Interact. Learn. Environ. 2020 . [CrossRef]
33. De Bono, E.; Zimbalist, E. Lateral Thinking ; Penguin: London, UK, 1979; pp. 1–32.
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
aliations.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).