Article
Digital connectivity at the
upstream end of value chains:
A dynamic perspective on
smartphone adoptionamongst horticulturalsmallholders in Kenya
Gideon Hartmann
Institute of Geography, University of Cologne, Germany
Gilbert Nduru
School of Natural Resources and Environmental Studies, Karatina
University, Kenya
Peter Dannenberg
Institute of Geography, University of Cologne, Germany
Abstract
Driven by the rapid adoption of Internet-based technologies amongst producers in the Global
South, the question of how and whether global value chain arrangements are reconfigured
remains open to debate. This article addresses the changing practices of export-oriented small-holders accompanying the transition from simple phone towards smartphone use. Our dynamic
approach compares cross-sectional survey data from 2013 and 2017 to answer to what extent
Kenyan smallholders have adopted the Internet, which digital practices in relation to agriculturalvalue chains they use and how this affects the inter-firm coordination between smallholders and
subsequent actors. Smartphones have gained broad importance for smallholders as they are used
for digital practices in value chains. Contrary to the debated dark sides of Internet connectivity,we can however not confirm sweeping digital control or value appropriation by lead firms. So far,
long-established, analogue practices widely persist in arrangements between smallholders and
exporters. Nevertheless, smartphones are used to nurture multilateral knowledge networks ofunprecedented reach and size and further allow for incipient experiments with marketing
Corresponding author:
Gideon Hartmann, Institute of Geography, University of Cologne, Germany.
Email: g.hartmann@uni-koeln.deCompetition & Change
0(0) 1–23
!The Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/1024529420914483
journals.sagepub.com/home/cch
strategies on digital marketing platforms devoted to domestic markets. We argue that these
practices resemble strategic niche seeking that has to be interpreted in relation to captive
export arrangements. With qualitatively and quantitatively increasing options to access andshare knowledge and to market commodities, the Internet can serve to navigate the multiplicity
of chain alternatives (domestic production, informal export production). Such niches should be
considered as creating leverage against the take it or leave it deal of captive export production.
Keywords
Digital connectivity, information and communication technology, Internet, smartphones, agricul-
ture, value chains, Kenya
Introduction
‘Can the Internet reboot Africa?’ This headline in The Guardian (2016) hints to hopes thatthe Internet could be a stepping stone to leapfrog some of the most pressing challenges in
economic development in Africa. It enqueues to a line of thought that has gained wide-spread momentum in the media, politics, and research community and has led to a debate
on the implications of digital connectivity. Since, (digital) connectivity ‘[ ...] is seen as some-
thing that “wants”, “makes” and “does”, rather than as grounded relationships betweenpeople, places and processes’ (Graham et al., 2015), the proliferation of information and
communication technology (ICT) is discussed controversially with respect to its promises
and impact. Under the terminology ‘ICT for development’ (ICT4D), policy papers anddevelopment agendas, in particular, tend to envision and promote a transformative poten-
tial for the development of economies that lag far behind in terms of connectivity (Fuchs
and Horak, 2008). The most common argument for such aspirations is that the broad
dissemination of ICTs and especially the Internet can foster inclusive growth by reconﬁgur-
ing economic processes towards increasing domestic and international competitiveness and,consequently, enable greater value appropriation for industries in the global South
(Friederici et al., 2017).
This narrative of ICT being a panacea for economic development is however, widely
challenged as being inconclusive and characterized by ‘technological determinism’
(Friederici et al., 2017). More sceptical positions highlight the uneven impact of digitalconnectivity (Carmody, 2012) and question a far-reaching transformation of global produc-
tion regimes, power asymmetries and socio-economic disparities in favour of producers
from the global South (Etzo and Collender, 2010; Heeks, 2017). Although producers are
increasingly digitally connected, they remain thinly integrated. This implies that despite
using ICTs for face-to-face, real-time activities, more sophisticated, digitally automatedtasks are not pursued (Murphy and Carmody, 2015). Accordingly, thin integration usually
cannot signiﬁcantly reconﬁgure the relationship between producers and the global economy
(Murphy and Carmody, 2015).
Positions that are most opposed to the optimistic narrative go even further by theorizing
theDark Sides of ICT4D (Unwin, 2017). Referring mainly to Internet-based connectivity, it
is argued that increased ICT diffusion merely enhances inequalities in an unequal world,2 Competition & Change 0(0)which – in value chain terminology – implies that lead ﬁrms and buyers from the global
North can extend their power, whilst dismantling the agency of workers and producers inthe global South.
The ﬁerce debate on digital connectivity is also reﬂected by the large strand of literature
speciﬁcally addressing the impact on (smallholder) agriculture in African countries.
Remarkably however – and this is the departing point for this work – most scholars base
their argumentation on evidence on simple phone-based ICT use, whereas Internet connec-tivity is often excluded from the analysis or adumbrated when researching agricultural valuechains at the producer level (e.g. Baumu ¨ller, 2013; Krone et al., 2015; Nakasone et al., 2014;
Wyche and Steinﬁeld, 2016). Due to the relative novelty of widespread Internet adoption
amongst micro-sized ﬁrms in the global South, this is not surprising. However, with increas-ing Internet availability and decreasing connection costs, the spectrum of ICT artefacts and,
thus, digital practices has widened substantially. With emergent digital technologies and
practices amongst African smallholders, producers become, however, accessible for digitalmodes of monitoring, controlling and conclusively Internet-based governance by lead ﬁrmsto a so far unprecedented extent. For both dynamics, the emergence of digital practices
amongst producers as well as the extent of digital coordination and control by lead ﬁrms,
current empirical evidence is scarce. We, therefore, contribute to ‘updating’ the ICT4Ddebate based on the example of Kenyan smallholders participating in export-oriented
value chains for horticultural produce. By comparing two consecutive surveys covering a
period from 2013 to 2017, we establish a dynamic perspective on the evolution and theimpact of Internet adoption to discuss the following three research questions: to what extentdid Kenyan smallholders adopt the Internet? Which digital practices in relation to agricul-
tural value chains do smallholders apply? And lastly, how does increased Internet use
amongst smallholders affect inter-ﬁrm coordination at the upstream level of agriculturalvalue chains?
This work is divided into ﬁve sections. After the introduction, we connect the literature
on horticultural value chains and digital connectivity both conceptually and empirically byintroducing the general structure of export-oriented chain arrangements in Kenya and then
summarizing the changes discussed that accompany the adoption of smartphones. We con-
tinue by describing our case study and our methodological approach before we present theresults that follow the structure of the three research questions. Finally, the discussion and
conclusion section serve to discuss and summarize the results and link them to the general
ICT debate.
Horticultural value chains and digital connectivity in Kenya
Global value chain (GVC) integration of horticultural smallholders is usually highly depen-dent on international lead ﬁrms (e.g. EU retailers) and their regional turnkey suppliers(exporters) (Dolan and Humphrey, 2000; Humphrey, 2008; Ouma, 2010). Using their inter-
national networks, their market proximity and their expertise on standardization and cer-
tiﬁcation measures, they are pivotal gatekeepers for smallholders intending to produce forconsumer-driven GVCs (Pelupessy and Van Kempen, 2005). Whilst GVC integration comeswith the beneﬁt of extended, potential high-value markets, it is, however, shaped by strong
power asymmetries. As visually described in the seminal theorization on GVC governance
by Gerefﬁ et al. (2005), GVCs can articulate in captive governance forms with high degreesof explicit coordination and power asymmetries when three key conditions apply: highHartmann et al. 3complexities of knowledge transfers, high abilities to codify these and low capabilities in the
supply base. In Kenyan export-oriented horticulture, this is especially the case at the inter-
face between producers and turnkey suppliers: here, stringent product and process standards
(particularly GlobalGAP) and their certiﬁcation lead to high complexities of information
and knowledge transfers (Asfaw et al., 2010). Lead ﬁrms and their subsidiaries can, however,
use their economies of scale and a set of transaction cost-reducing measures such as farmergroup-oriented trainings and production-pooling as well as standardized input toolkits to
simplify and reduce the costs of the transactions (Humphrey, 2008). Further, related to low
capabilities and capacities in the supply base, many smallholders cannot access exportmarkets independently and are in parallel, easy to replace (Kariuki, 2014). Thus, GVC
integration usually closely resembles the typology of captive governance for smallholders:
lead ﬁrms and their turnkey suppliers can widely govern under which circumstances(requirements, production model), by whom (which smallholders) and for what (price)
production takes place. Smallholders are, consequently, confronted with a non-negotiable
take it or leave it deal.
Whilst such highly standardized and captive modes of GVCs for horticultural production
have received particular attention, Dannenberg and Nduru (2013) further identiﬁed trading
practices used to circumvent formal standardization processes. Here, intermediaries(brokers) facilitate commodity ﬂows around standardized certiﬁcation schemes.
Smallholders who are able to independently produce high-grade products that can easily
be mixed with certiﬁed products can, therefore, indirectly access GVCs through intermediar-ies via arm’s length market-based exchanges. Hence, the GVC integration of smallholders
must not necessarily be highly standardized by contract-based governance structures but can
also be shaped by more ﬂexible and informal arrangements with a market-based character.A prerequisite for such intermediated GVC integration is the capacity and capability of
smallholders to cultivate high-grade produce and also navigate – or coordinate – along the
marketing pathways necessary to informally access GVCs.
In contrast to export-oriented and captive chain arrangements, regional value chains
(RVCs) in Kenyan horticulture are predominantly characterized by market-based gover-
nance structures. Oriented towards domestic markets, most horticultural RVCs in Kenyaare not in line with the GVC concept outlined by Gerefﬁ et al. (2005) per se as they lack the
territorial decoupling or international vertical disintegration (Krishnan, 2018). Nevertheless,
they play a signiﬁcant role for domestic producers and consumers and are analysed usingcommon value chain concepts (cf. Barrientos et al., 2016). Contrary to captive GVCs but
similarly to intermediated GVCs, farmers participating in RVCs do not have to comply with
standardized, captive structures. Here, the interaction with buyers usually occurs on anarm’s length basis (Krishnan, 2018). Accordingly, most RVCs are deﬁned by constantly
changing competitive market conditions between farmers, intermediaries (brokers, traders)
and direct buyers.
Summarizing these three different value chain forms in Kenyan horticulture, it is impor-
tant to note the multiplicity of chain options for smallholders. Farmers rarely integrate in
one chain, but alternate for strategic or opportunistic reasons between different chainarrangements, thus often producing for domestic and export-oriented markets in parallel
(Barrientos et al., 2016; Krishnan, 2018). For smallholders, this complex and highly com-
petitive setting implies a wide and dynamic set of production and marketing practices.Success – or even potential success – in one chain alternative can, consequently, imply
increased opportunity costs for the remaining alternatives. This observation is not only4 Competition & Change 0(0)based on Krishnan’s (2018) detailed work on strategic diversiﬁcation processes but also
emerged also as a recurring discussion point during the case study presented in this
paper: standardized, captive GVC integration is certainly not the ultimate goal for every
smallholder. Rather, in the case of given conditions of knowing how to produce for which
market and being able to coordinate such market activities, smallholders establish their
niche(s) along the value chain options they assess to be best suited to them.
The multiplicity of chain logics as well as the opportunity to alternate between different
chain forms emanates into a necessary consideration of producer agency and bargaining
power to ﬁnalize this section. Bargaining power, as a crucial resource to negotiate how
different chain actors interact, can increase when chain actors have reasonable alternatives
(e.g. other chain options) and the capacities and capabilities to use these (see Dallas et al.,
2019). Viable alternatives to one chain option can consequently create leverage to negotiate
better terms for producers or indirectly drive less viable alternatives to improve conditions
for producers. Both logics, direct bargaining for better terms as well as the rather indirect
adaptation to opportunity costs created by alternative chain options can thus force lead
ﬁrms to allow for higher value capture and/or better labour conditions. In sum, where there
are viable alternatives for producers, they can better negotiate the terms of their global
integration.
Smallholder practices in value chains and increasing connectivity
With the widespread use of mobile phones1(texting and calling) amongst African small-
holders, a comprehensive spectrum of academic work has contributed to the ICT4D debate
(see Aker et al., 2016). These contributions can be roughly summarized based on two major
domains with relevance for this article. First, changing connectivity affects what andhow
knowledge is transferred. Second, increasing connectivity is discussed to reconﬁgure how
coordination at the interface of different chain segments takes place.
Knowledge flows and mobile phones
Agricultural production systems are heavily dependent on knowledge created, shared andsourced inter- and intra-regionally (Delgado, 1999; Jensen, 2010). In value chain terminol-
ogy, agricultural knowledge can be differentiated into two major categories based on their
directional characteristics: horizontal and vertical knowledge ﬂows transmit different
knowledge through different scales.
Particularly in export-oriented chains, vertical knowledge ﬂows carry knowledge that
transcends regional scales and value chain hierarchies. This interregional knowledge can
aggregate critical expertise for farming methods which have a scientiﬁc or consumer-
oriented background (e.g. inputs, varieties or standards) and is seen as a major driver of
upgrading potential for producers (Humphrey and Schmitz, 2002; Saliola and Zanfei, 2009).
Lead ﬁrms can, therefore, govern ‘formal’ upgrading processes by controlling which knowl-
edge is transferred to whom (Bolwig et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2012).
In Kenyan horticultural GVCs, vertical knowledge transfers most explicitly occur
through buyer-driven product and process standards (e.g. GlobalGAP). Based on the for-
malized agreements between smallholders and exporters, smallholders are closely guided by
technical staff in adhering to strict guidelines on production methods and product qualityHartmann et al. 5(Kariuki, 2014; Ouma, 2010). Vertical ﬂows of external knowledge necessary for export
production are, therefore, most commonly discussed as exclusive to captive GVCs.
Complementarily, horizontal knowledge ﬂows relate to knowledge that is shared on an
inter-ﬁrm, intra-regional base between producers. Such local knowledge is often highlyspecialized to the regional context and particularly shaped by practice and experience(Mtega et al., 2013). In horticultural value chains, this can, for instance, compilecontext-speciﬁc experiences on how to optimize the cultivation process, but also generalinsights into market conditions such as prices, demands, politics and so on. The relevanceof horizontal inter-ﬁrm knowledge exchanges is highly emphasized by the cluster literature(Giuliani and Bell, 2005; Morgan, 1997). They are theorized as an endogenous driver ofupgrading processes as well as a mode to foster collective capacity and action (Giulianiet al., 2005). For horticultural production in Kenya, Krishnan and Foster (2018) supportthe importance of such horizontal knowledge exchanges. Comparing formal, top-downinnovations enabled by GVC integration with informal innovations based on local spill-overs, they found a substantial ‘range of small-scale, adaptive practices that have evolvedlocally’ and constituted frugal upgrading tendencies. Similarly, Dannenberg andNduru (2015) highlighted the importance of local networks and ‘coopetition’ to strengthenhorizontal networks amongst Kenyan horticulturalists. Horizontal knowledge ﬂows inregional production systems shaped by a multiplicity of GVC and RVC forms, therefore,on the one hand, directly foster the exchange of local knowledge, whilst, on theother hand, translate and diffuse external knowledge beyond the relational barriers ofcaptive GVCs.
Drawing from evidence on phone use in agricultural value chains, vertical and horizontal
ﬂows are affected differently. For vertical knowledge ﬂows, phone-based communication ispredominantly used by farmers to organize different knowledge and information sources(e.g. agreeing on meetings, conﬁrming whether the contact can provide the required knowl-edge). It rarely serves for substantial knowledge transfer itself (Krone and Dannenberg,2018). Furthermore, there is no clear evidence for the substantial creation of new contacts toalternative knowledge sources. Farmers usually use phones to nurture established, personalconnections. As a result, phone-based communication is mainly supplemental to intra-chainknowledge transfers. This seems to apply to GVCs as well as to RVCs (Krone andDannenberg, 2018).
For horizontal knowledge transfers, phones are used intensively to consult with other
farmers. However, the transfer of horizontal knowledge is again limited insofar that tacitknowledge is difﬁcult to transfer and that calls and texts are technologically limited tobilateral interactions (Krone and Dannenberg, 2018; Krone et al., 2015). Thus, face-to-face interactions remain crucial to transfer and collectively create knowledge amongst farm-ers (Baumu ¨ller, 2015; Lwoga et al., 2011). In summary, hitherto evidence on phone-based
connectivity amongst smallholders, therefore, certainly indicates an increase in the efﬁciencyof organizing knowledge transfers, without substantially changing what knowledge can be
accessed from whom (see also Lwoga and Chigona, 2017).
Value chain coordination and mobile phones
Apart from practices related to knowledge transfers, ICTs have further been explored
regarding their effects on practices of coordinating the marketing process in value chains.6 Competition & Change 0(0)As especially in rural markets, coordination between producers and buyers tends to be
complex and associated with high transaction costs (Barrett, 2008; Chamberlin and
Jayne, 2013), phone-based coordination is discussed as alleviating some of these obstacles
in agricultural value chains. Several studies argue that transaction costs can be reduced by
simplifying the communication between business partners, thus reducing logistic costs or
supporting the identiﬁcation of markets (Aker, 2010; Molony, 2009; Muto and Yamano,
2009). Moreover, the general market efﬁciency in producer regions is discussed with regard
to its improvement with phone usage. For instance, Aker (2010) showed that phone adop-tion in Niger led to lower grain price dispersion and explains this by reduced search costs
and a greater number of accessible markets in more connected regions. Market efﬁciency is
further increased by the practice of using mobile (text-based) payment services. Drawing
from panel data in Uganda, Sekabira and Qaim (2017) derive that mobile money usage can
extend the variety of business partners and, thus, lead to more marketing opportunities.
Whilst a myriad of similar studies conﬁrms ICT-based decreases in transaction costs and
better market efﬁciency (e.g. Chalemba, 2017; Jensen, 2010; Kirui et al., 2013), the effects on
agency and power for ‘better connected smallholders’ have been addressed less and with
more diffuse results. Referring to Ponte and Ewert (2009) and their notion of upgrading invalue chains as ‘getting a better deal’, the question arises how producers can appropriate
more value by using phones. So far, two interlinked topics mainly address this question:
disintermediation and bargaining power. The idea of disintermediation is to ‘cut the middle-
men’ (Mann et al., 2014), by directly linking with downstream actors in the chain (e.g.
exporters) and, consequently, increase their bargaining position. In this sense, the potential
to disintermediate or, more generally, to have alternative marketing options is related to
individual bargaining power. So far, the evidence on phone-driven disintermediation and
increased bargaining power is, however, thin. Although Okello et al. (2010) ﬁnd some dis-
intermediation practices for the phone-based DrumNet project in Kenya, studies up until
now often draw from exceptional cases with high NGO involvement.
Apparently, the outlined phone-based practices and their associated beneﬁts for small-
holders predominantly apply to RVCs or informal GVCs with a market-based character.
The effect of mobile phones on captive value chains is covered less broadly. Delineating theinteractions between phone adoption and different value chain forms in Kenyan horticul-
ture, Krone et al. (2018) could, however, identify quite uneven interlinkages. Although they
agree on the beneﬁts for smallholders integrated in market-based chains, they could not ﬁnd
considerable changes to the coordination of captive GVCs. According to their work, the
formalized and standardized practices between exporting ﬁrms and smallholders widely
remain unaffected by phone adoption.
Phone-based practices, thus, mostly result in rather imminent effects on how knowledge
ﬂows and value chain coordination can shift with increasing connectivity. Some of the
explanations for this outcome resemble what Murphy and Carmody (2015) theorize as
thintegration and, therefore, positive for producers in general terms, but doing little to
prevent the structural trend of the devaluation of goods and services provided by African
producers. According to the authors, the structural embeddedness of African production
systems is conclusively not simply overridden by increased connectivity but rather requiressubstantial changes also in ‘non-ICT-speciﬁc structures and power relations that limit
Africa’s ability to participate in the global economy’ (Murphy et al., 2014: 264).Hartmann et al. 7The shift towards smartphones amongst smallholders
The shift from phone-based towards Internet-based practices has spurred new hopes and big
visions for technology-induced leapfrogging processes (Friederici et al., 2017). Particularlywith regard to smallholder farmers, knowledge ﬂows – vertically and horizontally – arediscussed as being enriched and intensiﬁed in terms of their reach, the complexity of theknowledge and the mode of their transfer. Drawing from her insights on phone-basedextension and marketing services in Kenya, Baumu ¨ller (2015) suggests that digitally inte-
grated farmers will access a wide variety of media, such as video, images and long texts, anddraw from external, international knowledge sources online. In line with such expectations,various online services have been developed offering digital extension to farmers in recentyears (e.g. Gandhi, 2016; Karubanga et al., 2016). Furthermore, ‘large virtual networks of
farmers that span across countries and borders [ ...]’ (Baumu ¨ller, 2015: 50) and exchange
knowledge between farmers on a multilateral basis are discussed. These bright expectationsof digitally enhanced knowledge ﬂows nurture the hope for emancipation from establishedvertical knowledge sources (Duncombe, 2018).
The Internet’s technological advances are further associated with a reformulation of the
logics under which conditions value chains are coordinated and monitored. For instance,GSMA, the most important representative of mobile network operators worldwide, pro-motes the digitization of ‘the last mile in value chains’ (GSMA, 2018). Particularly for GVCarrangements, they recommend not only the digital implementation of information servicesbut also of ﬁnancial transactions as well as product and farm tracking. This set of solutionsis supposed to ‘[ ...] allow lead ﬁrms to address a wide array of business challenges and
increase farmer loyalty, operational efﬁciency, and real-time visibility in the last mile’, whilstincreasing transparency and decreasing transaction costs for farmers. Moreover, the emer-gence of digital markets is expected to transform marketing logics. Farmers could use digitalmarketing platforms as digital middlemen, where trust is built via images of produce, the
tracking of produce and user ratings (cf. Macharia, 2013).
These various imaginations of digital connectivity – we have only illustrated a selection of
an emerging activity ﬁeld – feed into the larger debate on the idea of a digital ‘technologicalﬁx’ in agriculture (Heeks and Krishna, 2016; Rosner, 2004). Here, the idea that the ‘transferof established technologies from the West to developing countries’ (Fejerskov, 2017: 947)
serves as a ‘leveler in the global economy’ (Ojo, 2018: 2) have rendered the global South as a
‘laboratory of technological experimentation’ in recent years (Ojo, 2018). Dubbed as ‘smartagriculture’, ‘AgTech’ or ‘digital farming’ development practitioners, philanthropists andmultinational (agri-) businesses increasingly roll out their technological solutions in thislaboratory (cf. Conway et al., 2016).
More critical perspectives draw from other connectivity debates in alluding to the pitfalls
of Internet connectivity (cf. the reference to African port infrastructure by Ouma et al.(2019) or the comparison of railway and ﬁbre optic cable construction in East Africa byGraham et al. (2015)). A major conjuncture in this debate lies in the understanding thattechnology and connectivity is not neutral per se (Ouma et al., 2019). This becomes partic-ularly relevant with the pivotal question about ‘who controls the digital’ (Foster et al.,2018). As elaborated by Mann (2018: 3) in her work on the ‘Big Data Revolution inDevelopment’, Internet adoption opens a so far unprecedented conduit for data extractionunder the regime of the ‘data custodians of Africa’s emerging economies’. She argues thatdata sourced from initially altruistic development programmes are increasingly becoming8 Competition & Change 0(0)commercialized and used as a resource to exert power. This power can be exerted directly
and indirectly. Most directly, tracking tools that connect and interfere with farmer practices
can enable lead ﬁrms to trace products as well as the performance of individual producers.
Digital supply chain management tools are increasingly used in logistics (Lee and Whang,
2000) as well as some segments of food value chains (Gardner et al., 2019; Pigini and Conti,
2017). It is, therefore, argued that such modes of direct digital control might reconﬁgureGVCs to be more ﬂexible and, thus, strengthen lead ﬁrms’ capacities in managing value
chains to their beneﬁt. For instance, Foster et al. (2018) show that particularly the mid- and
down-stream segments of GVCs beneﬁtted from increasing data ﬂows in tea value chains inEast Africa. For processing, exporting and importing companies, digital data became piv-
otal to trace logistics as well as process and product standards. Consequently, Internet
connectivity is generally adding value to the tea value chain. Looking however at teaproducers in such chains, the authors could not ﬁnd any remarkable impact of Internet
access. Smallholders could not use digital data strategically since they did not know ‘where
to look’ and further claimed that subsequent chain actors ‘were not sharing access to keyinformation systems’ (Foster et al., 2018).
These results indicate that the added value is captured elsewhere (mid- and down-stream)
but not at the producer level. They further hint to the rather indirect – from the producer’sperspective opaque or even invisible – modes of digital control exerted on data streams in
other chain segments or meta-data (cf. Aitken, 2017, who illustrates that today all data are
credit data, thus even making the unbanked visible and governable through powerful algo-rithms). Depending on access to and ownership of (meta) data on economic and non-
economic digital activities, lead ﬁrms could, therefore, access these data streams not only
to react and understand consumer trends (Mann, 2018) but also to exploit producers underthe conditions of a ‘divide in data-driven knowledge’ (Unwin, 2017: 166). The emergence of
digital tools and practices in the agricultural sector of the ‘laboratory global South’ is,
therefore, quite contested. Although there is agreement that the digitization of practicesat the upstream end of value chains can generally add value, it is still unclear as to whether
this added value can be appropriated at the producer segment or if smallholders might
become even more marginalized. Hence, the incipient debate on the impacts of Internet-based ICT at the upstream end of value chains, therefore, rests between optimistic hopes for
a technological ﬁx vis-a `-vis reserved scepticism and clear warnings about increasing digital
power and control by those who deﬁne how and for whom the digital works.
Concluding our literature review, we must foremost register the complexity and interplay
of different value chain forms which need to be navigated by smallholders. Crucial for this
navigation is the access to speciﬁc knowledge as well as the capacities and capabilities tocoordinate marketing activities. The extensive evidence on phone-based practices indicates
varying effects on ICT-based practices for different chain arrangements without referring to
a transformational impact. With the ongoing adoption of smartphones and, thus, the shifttowards Internet-based connectivity, a reconﬁguration of established practices and the
emergence of new practices amongst producers is, however, expected and attached to
high hopes and cautious scepticism. Here, Ojo (2018: 2) sees ‘a dearth of research’ thatprovides ‘practical understanding of ICTs as a set of economic practices in African con-
texts’. Therefore, in the following section, we put a perspective on the shift towards smart-
phones by answering to what extent smallholders adopted the Internet, which digitalpractices in relation to value chains they apply, and lastly, how this affects the inter-ﬁrm
coordination at the upstream end of value chains. The illustration of our conceptualHartmann et al. 9framework (Figure 1) summarizes the different digital practices in value chains that are
discussed in relation to quantitatively and qualitatively increasing ICT usage.
Case study: Smartphone adoption around Mt Kenya
In the last few years, Kenya’s broadband Internet has been massively modernized and has
become affordable for the broader public (Graham and Mann, 2013; Graham et al., 2015).
As indicated in Table 1, Kenya has undergone stark growth in mobile ICT diffusion with the
increasing relevance of mobile Internet which goes hand in hand with decreasing costs for
ICT devices and data usage (World Bank, 2011). This makes Kenya a vanguard of Internet
adoption in sub-Saharan Africa.2
Smallholder farming in Kenya is far advanced in terms of commercialization and export
orientation (Muriithi and Matz, 2015). Particularly, the selected case study region around
Mt Kenya is known for the integration of smallholders in GVCs. Due to favourable agro-
climatic conditions and decent infrastructure to the export gateway Nairobi, smallholders
are pervasively able to produce horticultural produce for regional export ﬁrms (cf.
Dannenberg and Nduru, 2013; Dolan and Humphrey, 2000; Humphrey, 2008; Mith €ofer
et al., 2008; Ouma, 2010; Ulrich, 2014).
Both features, the advanced export chain integration and the latest proliferation of
mobile Internet in Kenya, justify the assumption that Kenya might take a pioneering role
in terms of Internet adoption and the interplay with the GVC integration of smallholders.
Figure 1. Conceptual framework for digital practices in value chains (authors’ design).10 Competition & Change 0(0)Therefore, we selected this research area, as it seemed speciﬁcally suitable to derive some of
the trajectories of increasing digital connectivity.
Methods, data and analysis
This article draws from a two-wave cross-sectional survey with smallholders. Both surveywaves from mid-2013 and late-2017 followed the same cluster sampling approach (Bernard,
2006) targeting 10 sites around Mt Kenya
3that have similar agro-climatic conditions and
socio-economic structures. Our selection criteria for interviewed farmers were: (a) cultivat-
ing horticultural produce, (b) export-oriented production and (c) cultivating on up to two
hectares. For each farm, we interviewed the household member who was primarily respon-
sible for production and marketing. Apparently, a longitudinal/panel survey framework
would have been a much more robust methodological framework. However, since the
ﬁrst survey in 2013 was initially not designed to be repeated later, it was not possible to
revisit the same sample.
Our initial survey from mid-2013 includes n¼192, the follow-up survey from late-2017
n¼248 smallholders. As tested for in Table 2, the major characteristics of both surveys’
Table 1. Development of mobile telephony and data subscriptions in Kenya since 2013 (data:
Communications Commission of Kenya 2013, 2018).
June 2013 September 2017 T rend
Mobile subscriptions (texts, calls) 29,849,000 41,028,000 þ38%
Mobile data subscriptions (Internet) 12,340,000 30,891,000 þ150%
Population in Kenya 43,693,000 47,251,000 þ9%
Table 2. Characteristics of sampled farmers in 2013 and 2017 (data: survey 2013, 2017).
Survey 2013 ( N¼192) Survey 2017 ( N¼248)
Chi-square
statistic N % N %
Gender of farm manager
Male 117 62 154 62 0.012Female 73 38 94 38
Age (years)
18–40 71 37 112 45 2.98*41þ 121 63 136 55
Education
Prim. school and lower 98 51 114 54 0.39Sec. school and higher 94 49 134 46
Income horticulture (monthly)
Low (<¼15k KES) 136 73 159 68 1.48
High (>15k KES) 50 27 76 32
Export chain integration
Captive 126 66 178 72 1.92Market based 66 34 70 28
*P<0.1.Hartmann et al. 11samples do not deviate substantially with regard to socio-economic characteristics such as
gender, education, farm income and export chain models do not differ to a signiﬁcant
degree. Therefore, we argue that our chosen methodology led to a data set as reasonable
and reliable as possible under these conditions and sufﬁcient for basic comparative analysis.
For analysis, we ﬁrst compare both surveys to juxtapose the current ICT-usage types with
the situation in 2013. The second step of analysis aims at delineating the digital practices of
smallholders in relation to their value chain integration. For the examination of these
practices, we differentiate between ICT-based practices relevant for vertical and horizontalknowledge ﬂows as well as market coordination. Both layers of analysis are based on a basicstatistical apparatus of descriptive and comparative research methods (frequency tables,Chi-square).
Case study results
Internet adoption around Mt Kenya. Our data conﬁrm the rapid adoption of Internet-based ICT
amongst smallholders. Since 2013, Internet users have increased from 7% to 30% (Table 3).
This growth has even surpassed the rise of mobile data subscriptions during the same periodin Kenya (see also Table 1). It shows that the surveyed smallholders are quickly catching upto nationwide connectivity rates. This trend is further reﬂected by device ownership. Simple
phone use has almost reached a point of full saturation (93–99%) and smartphone owner-
ship is increasingly common (14–37%). Although some farmers own computers (6% in2017) or use public computers ( <1% in 2017), smartphones are the most important devices
to access the Internet (Table 3). This dynamic can be further derived from isolated 2017data. Interviewees were asked to estimate how long they had been using the respective ICT
type. Two phases of ICT adoption can be traced back when cleaning the data for demo-
graphic effects. A ﬁrst phase of massive phone adoption is long ﬁnished, whereas adoptionof the Internet can be considered as being in a stage of increasing digital connectivity(Figure 2).
Internet-based practices in value chains. Since a considerable number of the sampled smallhold-
ers are connected to the Internet today, the 2017 data can provide descriptive insights on thedigital practices amongst early adopters. Starting with the different Internet-based services
Table 3. Mobile ICT adoption 2013–2017 (data: survey 2013, 2017).
Survey 2013 ( N¼192) Survey 2017 ( N¼248)
Chi-square N % N %
ICT usage
No ICT 13 7 3 1 41.68***Call–text 165 86 170 69Call–text–Internet 14 7 75
Ownership mobile ICT device
No device 13 7 3 1 33.83***Simple phone 152 79 154 62Smartphone 27 14 91 37
***P<0.01.12 Competition & Change 0(0)that are used on smartphones, a clear delineation between private and business use cases is
evident. Despite the prevailing private purposes, all surveyed services are, however, used for
agriculture at least to some extent (Figure 3). The highest importance is given to means of
knowledge access: by number, web searches for agricultural knowledge are the most used
services (59%). Moreover, messenger services such as WhatsApp and Telegram (37%),
social networks such as Facebook (36%) as well as mailing (11%) are used to share knowl-edge and/or coordinate business activities. Lastly, e-banking
4(37%), farming apps (17%)
and electronic tracking tools ( <1%) are services related to digital value chain practices.
0510152025
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 20150%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
YearAdopters Phone (n) Adopters Internet (n) Phone users (%) Internet users (%)
Figure 2. Adoption of phone-based and Internet-based ICT around Mt Kenya ( N¼248, data: survey 2017).
95% 95%
45%
27%48%
36% 37% 37%
15%11%59%
17%
1%
0%20%40%60%80%100%
Social
NetworkMessenger E-Banking Online
ShoppingMail Web Search
(agr.
knowledge)Farming App E-Tracking
Private Purpose Agricultural Purpose
Figure 3. Internet services regularly used for private and/or agricultural purposes by those farmers who
are connected to the Internet ( N¼75, data: survey 2017).Hartmann et al. 13For each of the outlined services, interviewees were asked to describe qualitatively how,
for what and in relation to whom these services were used. We categorized these descriptions
in order to derive Internet-based practices with regard to accessing and sharing knowledge
as well as coordinating with business partners.
Knowledge flows: Vertical diversification and horizontal networks. The majority of Internet users in
2017 (64%) stated they consult digital sources for agricultural knowledge online (see
Table 4). Farmers strategically search for speciﬁc agricultural knowledge on private webportals or apps (e.g. Mkulima Young ,FarmLINK Kenya and Infonet biovision), govern-
mental information sites or e-extension services (e.g. NAFIS
5andKEPHIS6), and national
or international input suppliers (e.g. KenyaSeed and Syngenta ). These sources have in
common that they are free of charge and easily accessible whilst being limited to a uni-
directional, top-down knowledge transfer. Informal discussions framing the survey process
showed that farmers value the opportunity to access knowledge online which is usually onlyaccessible ‘in time’ or without a certain effort as it is bound to a distinct circle of intra-chainknowledge sources (e.g. export ﬁrms). Therefore, drawing from digital knowledge sources isseen as a supplemental or alternative practice to access external knowledge that goes beyond
the knowledge which can be accessed within captive GVCs or is diffused through subsequent
horizontal ﬂows.
For horizontal knowledge transfers, calling and texting remain crucial for inter-ﬁrm
interaction. Whilst in 2013, roughly half of all phone users (54%) stated they regularlycall or text other farmers, the importance of bilateral, call- or text-based interaction further
increased: 76% of the 2017 interviewees call or text other farmers to consult about agricul-
tural topics.
7Emphasizing Internet-based horizontal knowledge transfers, today, applica-
tions such as mailing, messenger services or social networks are also widely used for bilateralinteraction from farmer to farmer (53%). This interaction evolved as an alternative practiceof horizontal knowledge exchanges and extends the former phone-based communicationwith different technological advances such as sharing data (pictures, videos and links).
Table 4. Classification of digital practices amongst Internet users in 2017
(N¼75; data: survey 2017).
Digital value chain practices N %
Vertical knowledge transfers 48 64
Web search 44 59Farming App 13 17
Horizontal knowledge transfers 40 53
Bilateral only (farmer to farmer) 7 9
Bilateral and multilateral (farmer networks) 33 44
Market coordination 43 57
Coordination with buyers 24 32
Digital marketing platforms 18 24Formal platforms only 8 11Informal platforms only 7 9Formal and informal platforms 3 414 Competition & Change 0(0)Whilst this is unsurprising, the major novelty is certainly the emergence of digitally enabled
multilateral knowledge networks. Multilateral communication channels are accessed by the
clear majority of Internet users, who stated they use the smartphone to share knowledge and
experience with other farmers and people from ‘the region’ (Table 4). Farmers particularlyconnect via group chats (Messenger services such as WhatsApp and Telegram), and some-times chat groups in social networks. Whilst some of these groups link a small circle of local
farmers or serve as platform to coordinate established farming groups (e.g. self-help groups
or producer cooperatives), other groups have distinct foci on certain products (e.g. Frenchbeans farming group, horticultural crops group and dairy group) or regions (e.g. Star Rays
Agrinfo – Nyeri ). The largest groups connect thousands of farmers all across Kenya. For
instance, the Telegram-group Farmers þ254 connects /C243100 members. This group is used to
identify pests and diseases and discuss their treatment, evaluate the general status of culti-vated plants, request where and for what prices speciﬁc inputs and varieties are availableand further to market produce. Regardless of size and reach, the emergence of a multilateral
component in horizontal knowledge networks means substantial changes in relation to prior
phone-based practices of exchanging knowledge horizontally. The major limitations ofphone-based practices to access and especially share local knowledge (bilateral communi-cation, limited reach and condition of established contacts) are not only remedied in theorybut evidently used and appreciated by a solid share of smallholders today.
Value chain coordination: Digital coordination and digital markets. Common modes of market coor-
dination in value chains are also affected to some degree. More than half of the Internet
users (57%) use digital modes to coordinate. About one-third (32%) coordinate marketing
processes by bilateral communication with buyers via messenger services, mails or socialnetworks (Table 4). Such bilateral coordination usually includes negotiations about priceand quantity, the mode of transport and agreement on payment formalities. When investi-
gating coordination in different chains in detail, the Internet’s implications for intra-chain
Table 5. ICT -based coordination in value chains (data: survey 2017).
ICT -based coordinationDirect buyers
(market-based, RVC)Intermediaries
(market-based,RVC and GVC)Exporting firm
(captive, GVC)
Selling to ...(n¼248) 108 179 178
Phone-based coordination
Phone users selling to ...(n¼245) 107 177 175
Coordinated via phone ... 95 (89%) 165 (93%) 114 (65%)
Calls 94 (88%) 155 (88%) 113 (65%)T exts 31 (29%) 42 (24%) 49 (28%)Mobile payment (M-Pesa) 52 (49%) 109 (62%) –
Internet-based coordination
Internet users selling to ...(n¼75) 35 54 55
Coordinated via Internet 10 (29%) 15 (28%) 20 (36%)Mail 1 ( <1%) – 2 ( <1%)
Messenger 10 (29%) 14 (26%) 7 (13%)Social network 2 (1%) 8 (15%) 1 ( <1%)
Electronic bank transfer – – 16 (29%)Hartmann et al. 15coordination become more visual. Table 5 differentiates the coordination with direct buyers,
intermediaries and exporting lead ﬁrms. Apparently, the use of simple phones remains themajor mode to coordinate with business partners. Especially, for market-based interactions
with direct buyers (89% of phone users) and intermediaries (93%), calling and sometimes
texting serves to arrange transactions which is also the case for interactions with exporters –although to a lower extent (65%).
The Internet, however, has little relevance so far. Although roughly a third (29%) of the
Internet users in captive chains stated they use e-banking to receive and check payments,there is certainly no ample evidence of Internet-based coordination in captive GVCs. Thefew respondents who stated they use messengers (13%), mail or social networks (both <1%)
to coordinate with exporters merely did so since they knew individual staff members rather
than because of obligatory conditions set by exporters. Considering the discussion on theimplementation of instruments to directly track and document smallholder activities andperformances, our data further do not uphold evidence of these trends for the currentsituation (Figure 3). Although payments are increasingly organized via e-banking services,captive GVC integration does not require smallholders to connect digitally and be tracked(so far).
In market-based chains, Internet-based coordination is much more common and to some
extent valued as a practice to decrease transaction costs as well as increase market reach.Some respondents stated that they prefer Internet-based coordination with direct buyers andintermediaries for the opportunity to send pictures before meeting and even before harvest-ing to bargain and agree on deals online, thus making some meetings obsolete. Nevertheless,in general, also for market-based chains, Internet-based coordination is so far not the pre-dominant practice.
Lastly, the emergence of incipient practices of digital marketing is not yet dominant but
rather remarkable. Roughly 24% of Internet users participate on digital marketing plat-forms in order to sell some of their produce online or search for speciﬁc inputs such as seedsor machinery (Table 4). Respondents stated they access formal market platforms (15%),such as the popular Kenyan e-commerce platforms Jumia ,OLX or – fully devoted to agri-
cultural products – MkulimaYoung andM-Farm. Simultaneously, some smallholders prac-
tice less formalized marketing strategies (13%) using social networks such as Facebook andmessenger-based group chats to advertise, sell or buy products mainly to their network of
established online contacts. However, most interviewees evaluated both formal and informal
digital markets as being ‘underdeveloped’ and rarely leading to an actual deal. Indeed,rather than selling via digital platforms, the opportunity to ﬁnd inputs, which are notavailable on local markets, are often seen as the main motivation of some smallholders tobrowse markets digitally (e.g. mushroom cultivation equipment, rare plant breeds andmachinery). Whilst digital markets remain immature, our results indicate that formal andinformal digital markets address solely the marketization of domestic products so far. Wecould not identify any digital marketing practices with clear export-oriented intention.
Discussion
How can the case study be embedded in the broader context of the connectivity debate? Thisﬁnal section aims to pigeonhole our results by discussing the ﬁndings alongside our intro-
ductory research questions.16 Competition & Change 0(0)First, referring to the evolution and extent of Internet adoption in the research area, our
study can clearly document the rapid shift towards smartphone use and, thus, Internet-
based connectivity amongst smallholders. This is not unexpected; however, due to our
dynamic approach, our results trace back the speed and extent of the two phases of
phone and smartphone adoption. We will most likely see similar developments in similar
producer regions sooner or later.
Second, and contrary to the case study on digital practices in value chains by Foster et al.
(2018), our data highlight that, amongst the ﬁrst Internet users, digital practices with agri-
cultural relevance have widely manifested in a region exceptional for its widespread exportintegration of smallholders. These practices are characterized by their different implications
for value chain integration especially with respect to process upgrading (Humphrey and
Schmitz, 2002). Today, a solid share of Internet users accesses agricultural knowledgeonline, thus broadening the variety of established vertical knowledge sources.
Simultaneously, inter-ﬁrm cooperation is to some degree extended by digital multilateral
knowledge transfers between farmers. The diversiﬁcation of vertical knowledge transfers, aswell as the emergence of multilateral digital networks amongst farmers, means an unprec-
edented practice compared to simple phone use for the question of what knowledge can be
accessed from whom andhow. Since our data show that farmers indeed use Internet-based
sources as alternatives to support their agricultural activities, this certainly resembles eman-
cipation from established gatekeepers of knowledge to some extent. Farmers no longer
necessarily solely rely on direct (through captive chain integration) or indirect (throughhorizontal, inter-ﬁrm spillovers) sources of knowledge but can – and do – supplementarily
access and share agricultural knowledge and experience online.
In addition to these knowledge-oriented, digital practices, smallholders have further
adopted some initial practices affecting how they can coordinate and navigate the market
– or in our case, different value chain options. Here, the results are however less clear and
best discussed in relation to inter-ﬁrm coordination as addressed with our third researchquestion.
From a ‘smallholder’s perspective’, inter-ﬁrm coordination is affected with increasing
Internet adoption by varying degree. As stated in our introductory literature review, thedebate on digital connectivity in GVC is polarized between optimistic expectations about
the Internet breaking entrenched power asymmetries and dark scenarios of digitally fostered
control and increased extraction of labour and/or value. Here, our case study can add someimportant observations. Generally, in captive GVC arrangements, ﬁrm-to-ﬁrm coordination
between smallholders and subsequent chain actors does not occur through digital tools and
practices. We neither found tools to generate value (e.g. reduction of transaction costs) norto exert direct, digital control (e.g. tracking of practices and performance, measures to
simplify switching between producers). Long-established modes of governing GVCs at the
interface of producers and exporters widely remain ofﬂine. Therefore, digitally driven addi-tion of value as well as its appropriation in the favour of lead ﬁrms does not seem to occur at
the chain’s upstream end at this stage of Internet adoption.
This lack of ‘digital’ and all its implications for captive GVCs does, however, to no extent
diminish the relevance of understanding value creation and value appropriation (through
digital control) along the full spectrum of GVCs. Rather, it extends the question of ifby
where andby whom . These questions are more likely to be answered when also exploring
indirect, less tangible measures at the mid- and down-stream level of GVCs as exempliﬁed
by Foster et al. (2018). Moreover, albeit these ﬁndings, the current condition might changeHartmann et al. 17quite quickly when digital integration becomes a compulsory requirement for smallholders.
Hitherto non-existence of direct digital coordination and control might, therefore, just be amatter of time and shifting lead ﬁrm imperatives.
The case study further indicates trends that are at ﬁrst sight disconnected from captive
GVC arrangements. Whether it is for RVC or for intermediated GVC arrangements, a solid
share of the interviewees engages in digital practices on a continuum of incipient experi-
mentation up to daily routine not only to upgrade their production processes through newknowledge sources or channels, but also via new modes of coordinating inter-ﬁrm
transactions.
Especially in RVCs, digital marketing platforms are not only available; they are evidently
also used by some smallholders. Although it remains open to what extent such platforms can
scale up, digital marketing practices enable farmers to experiment with the disintermediationof middlemen and widen their ﬁeld of potential buyers. Such changes directly feed into thenotion of functional upgrading from the value chain literature in letting smallholders partly
take over the functions of intermediaries (Humphrey and Schmitz, 2002). For further work,
it will be important to see how digital markets are used and (re-)made as the questionremains not only if, but where (in a relational value chain manner) and by whom digital
markets are accessed and controlled. Here, research on digital intermediation in other
sectors, such as the business process outsourcing industry (Graham et al., 2017; Mannet al., 2014) or with uber in the transport sector (Rekhviashvili and Sgibnev, 2018), shows
that initial beneﬁts for workers and producers can quickly lead digital re-intermediations
and, thus, value appropriation by platforms, as soon as they and become obligatory ratherthan optional.
Inter-ﬁrm coordination via digital practices, therefore, occurs and impacts differently
depending on the type of chain that they are devoted to. Relating to Krishnan (2018) andBarrientos et al.’s (2016) arguments on diversiﬁcation options under multiple chain forms,
these impacts should, however, not be looked at in an isolated manner. We argue that the
extended and simpliﬁed alternatives (in RVCs and intermediated GVCs) have to be inter-preted with regard to their interrelated opportunity costs. Digitally enabled upgrading tra-
jectories for producers in one chain arrangement simultaneously challenge its alternatives by
creating agency for the negotiation whether and under which conditions chain integrationtakes place elsewhere. Likewise, digitally driven downgrading trajectories in one chain alter-
native do not only affect this alternative itself, but can also induce a general race to the
bottom as well. Here, our study suggests quite promising effects in the form of niches thatare occupied by some smallholders in order to increase their agency in market-based inter-actions, but also (indirectly) the negotiation about the take it or leave it deal, that is captive
GVC participation. These niches should however not be interpreted over-optimistically as a
digital miracle. Merely, they represent a snapshot of the gradual process towards a future ofdigital connectivity, that is still open and remains contested along on the one hand, the
social strata of producers and, on the other hand, different chain actors.
Conclusion
Our dynamic perspective on export-oriented, horticultural smallholders highlights the rapid
shift towards the use of the Internet amongst smallholders producing for agricultural valuechains. Our case study shows that smartphones are more than an artefact of social inter-
action and entertainment and used for so far unprecedented digital practices of accessing18 Competition & Change 0(0)vertical knowledge ﬂows, horizontal knowledge networks, and incipient digital markets
amongst smallholder farmers. These practices can be linked to intrinsic process and func-
tional upgrading opportunities. Particularly in market-based value chain options (RVCs
and intermediated GVCs), some users access alternative knowledge channels and marketing
practices to identify and use production and marketing trends. Other than often suggested in
the debate about digital governance in value chains, we ﬁnd, however, no evidence for lead
ﬁrm driven, direct exertion of digital control in captive GVC arrangements. Rather, long-
established analogue practices of governing the upstream end of captive GVCs persist
widely. Despite these unchanged logics of captive GVC coordination, our work, therefore,
indicates the potential for some smallholders to digitally navigate the complex nexus of
multiple value chain options, thus creating leverage for the negotiation whether to integrate
in captive GVCs or choose alternative production and marketing arrangements.
Acknowledgements
We want to thank Madlen Krone for her generous advice and support. Further, we are grateful for the
insightful comments from reviewers and the editorial team on earlier drafts.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/orpublication of this article: This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG)
[DA1128/4 -1].
ORCID iD
Gideon Hartmann https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4362-4772
Notes
1. Due to the rarity of landline phone connections in rural Africa, we refer to the term ‘phone’ as
simple mobile devices used for calling and texting, thus deliberately excluding landline phones.
‘Smartphone’ is used for all mobile devices that allow Internet use in addition to calling and texting.
2. According to the Global Mobile Engagement Index (GSMA, 2017), Kenya is ranked second
amongst sub-Saharan African countries.
3. The samples were evenly distributed amongst Nyeri, Kirinyaga, Tharaka-Nithi and Meru county.4. This includes smartphone-based banking apps to organize bank accounts and excludes text-based
mobile payment services such as M-Pesa or Airtel Money.
5. The National Farmers Information Service (NAFIS) is a public extension service offering farmers
technical support online and via calls and texts.
6. The Kenya Plant Health Inspectorate Service (KEPHIS) is a platform to assure quality of agricul-
tural inputs and produce. It recommends crop and inputs on a region-speciﬁc basis and tracks pestsand diseases in Kenya.
7. This descriptive data are not presented in the paper’s tables but drawn from the cross-sectional
surveys 2013 and 2017.Hartmann et al. 19References
Aitken R (2017) ‘All data is credit data’: Constituting the unbanked. Competition & Change 21(4):
274–300.
Aker JC (2010) Information from markets near and far: Mobile phones and agricultural markets in
Niger. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3): 46–59.
Aker JC, Ghosh I and Burrell J (2016) The promise (and pitfalls) of ICT for agriculture initiatives.
Agricultural Economics 47(S1): 35–48.
Asfaw S, Mith €ofer D and Waibel H (2010) What impact are EU supermarket standards having on
developing countries’ export of high-value horticultural products? Evidence from Kenya. Journal of
International Food & Agribusiness Marketing 22(3–4): 252–276.
Barrett CB (2008) Smallholder market participation: Concepts and evidence from eastern and south-
ern Africa. Food Policy 33(4): 299–317.
Barrientos S, Knorringa P, Evers B, et al. (2016) Shifting regional dynamics of global value chains:
Implications for economic and social upgrading in African horticulture. Environment and Planning
A: Economy and Space 48(7): 1266–1283.
Baumu ¨ller H (2013) Enhancing smallholder market participation through mobile phone-enabled serv-
ices: The case of M-farm in Kenya. In: Horbach M (ed) INFORMATIK 2013 – Informatik ange-
passt an Mensch, Organisation und Umwelt . Bonn: Gesellschaft fu ¨r Informatik e.V., pp.1730–1738.
Baumu ¨ller H (2015) Agricultural innovation and service delivery through mobile phones: Analyses in
Kenya . Dissertation – unpublished, Universit €ats- und Landesbibliothek, Bonn.
Bernard RH (2006) Research Methods in Anthropology . Oxford: AltaMira Press.
Bolwig S, Ponte S, Du Toit A, et al. (2010) Integrating poverty and environmental concerns into value-
chain analysis: A conceptual framework. Development Policy Review 28(2): 173–194.
Carmody P (2012) The informationalization of poverty in Africa? Mobile phones and economic struc-
ture. Information Technologies & International Development 8(3): 1–17.
Chalemba LE (2017) Incorporation of telecommunications technologies into agricultural market
information systems: A comparative analysis of Ghana and Tanzania. The Electronic Journal of
Information Systems in Developing Countries 79(1): 1–15.
Chamberlin J and Jayne T (2013) Unpacking the meaning of ‘market access’: Evidence from rural
Kenya. World Development 41: 245–264.
Conway G, Dryden S and Annan K (2016) African Farmers in the Digital Age . Foreign Affairs. Rome:
FAO.
Dannenberg P and Nduru G (2013) Practices in international value chains: The case of the Kenyan
fruit and vegetable chain beyond the exclusion debate. Tijdschrift Voor Economische en Sociale
Geograﬁe 104: 41–56.
Dannenberg P and Nduru G (2015) Regional linkages in the Kenyan horticultural industry. In:
Dannenberg P and Kulke E (eds) Economic Development in Rural Areas: Functional and
Multifunctional Approaches . Farnham: Ashgate, pp. 15–33.
Dallas MP, Ponte S and Sturgeon T (2019) Power in global value chains. Review of International
Political Economy 26(4): 666–694.
Delgado C (1999) Sources of growth in smallholder agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa: The role of
vertical integration of smallholders with processors and marketers of high value-added items.
Agrekon 38(SI): 165–189.
Dolan C and Humphrey J (2000) Governance and trade in fresh vegetables: The impact of UK
supermarkets on the African horticulture industry. Journal of Development Studies 37(2): 147–176.
Duncombe R (2018) Mobile for Agriculture (m4Agric) services: Evidence from East Africa. In:
Duncombe R (ed.) Digital Technologies for Agricultural and Rural Development in the Global
South . Boston: CABI, pp. 104–110.
Etzo S and Collender G (2010) The mobile phone ‘revolution’ in Africa: Rhetoric or reality? African
Affairs 109(437): 659–668.20 Competition & Change 0(0)Fejerskov AM (2017) The new technopolitics of development and the global south as a laboratory of
technological experimentation. Science, Technology, & Human Values 42(5): 947–968.
Foster C, Graham M, Mann L, et al. (2018) Digital control in value chains: Challenges of connectivity
for East African ﬁrms. Economic Geography 94(1): 68–86.
Friederici N, Ojanper €a S and Graham M (2017) The impact of connectivity in Africa: Grand visions
and the mirage of inclusive digital development. The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in
Developing Countries 79(1): 1–20.
Fuchs C and Horak E (2008) Africa and the digital divide. Telematics and Informatics 25(2): 99–116.
Gandhi R (2016) Building community at a global scale –Using video to improve extension and create
farmer networks. In: Conway G, Dryden S and Annan K (ed.) African Farmers in the Digital Age .
Foreign Affairs. Rome: FAO, pp. 128–134.
Gardner T, Benzie M, B €orner J, et al. (2019) Transparency and sustainability in global commodity
supply chains. World Development 121: 163–177.
Gerefﬁ G, Humphrey J and Sturgeon T (2005) The governance of global value chains. Review of
International Political Economy 12(1): 78–104.
Giuliani E and Bell M (2005) The micro-determinants of meso-level learning and innovation: Evidence
from a Chilean wine cluster. Research Policy 34(1): 47–68.
Giuliani E, Pietrobelli C and Rabellotti R (2005) Upgrading in global value chains: Lessons from Latin
American clusters. World Development 33(4): 549–573.
Graham M, Andersen C and Mann L (2015) Geographical imagination and technological connectivity
in East Africa. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 40(3): 334–349.
Graham M, Lehdonvirta V, Wood A, et al. (2017) The Risks and Rewards of Online Gig Work at the
Global Margins . Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute.
Graham M and Mann L (2013) Imagining a silicon savannah? Technological and conceptual connec-
tivity in Kenya’s BPO and software development sectors. The Electronic Journal of Information
Systems in Developing Countries 56(1): 1–19.
GSMA (2017) GMEI 2017—Global Mobile Engagement Index . London: GSMA Intelligence.
GSMA (2018) Opportunities in agricultural value chain digitisation—Learnings from Ghana.
Available at: https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Opportunities-in-agricultural-value-chain-digitisation-Learnings-from-Ghana.pdf (accessed 25
February 2019).
Heeks R (2017) Information and Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D) . New York:
Routledge.
Heeks R and Krishna S (2016) ICTs and hope for development: A theoretical framework. The
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries 77(1): 1–19.
Humphrey J (2008) Private standards, small farmers and donor policy: EUREPGAP in Kenya. In:
Brighton Working Paper Series 308. University of Sussex: Brighton.
Humphrey J and Schmitz H (2002) How does insertion in global value chains affect upgrading in
industrial clusters? Regional Studies 36(9): 1017–1027.
Jensen RT (2010) Information, efﬁciency, and welfare in agricultural markets. Agricultural Economics
41: 203–216.
Kariuki IM (2014) Transition to certiﬁcation schemes and implications for market access: GlobalGAP
perspectives in Kenya. Agricultural Sciences 5(12): 1100–1111.
Karubanga G, Kibwika P, Okry F, et al. (2016) Empowering farmers to learn and innovate through
integration of video-mediated and face-to-face extension approaches: The case of rice farmers in
Uganda. Cogent Food & Agriculture 2(1): 1274944.
Kirui OK, Okello JJ, Nyikal RA, et al. (2013) Impact of mobile phone-based money transfer services
in agriculture: Evidence from Kenya. International Journal of ICT Research and Development in
Africa 52: 141–162.
Krishnan A (2018) The origin and expansion of regional value chains: The case of Kenyan horticul-
ture. Global Networks 18(2): 238–263.Hartmann et al. 21Krishnan A and Foster C (2018) A quantitative approach to innovation in agricultural value chains:
Evidence from Kenyan horticulture. The European Journal of Development Research 30(1):
108–135.
Krone M and Dannenberg P (2018) A spatial perspective on access to knowledge and mobile phone
use—Examples from Tanzanian farmers. Tijdschrift Voor Economische en Sociale Geograﬁe 109:
613–628.
Krone M, Dannenberg P and Graham M (2018) Development or divide? Information and commu-
nication technologies in commercial small-scale farming in East Africa. In: Graham M (ed.) Digital
Economies at Global Margins . Cambridge: The MIT Press, pp. 79–101.
Krone M, Dannenberg P and Nduru G (2015) The use of modern information and communication
technologies in smallholder agriculture Examples from Kenya and Tanzania. Information
Development 32: 1503–1502.
Lee HL and Whang S (2000) Information sharing in a supply chain. International Journal of
Manufacturing Technology and Management 20(3–4): 79–93.
Lee J, Gerefﬁ G and Beauvais J (2012) Global value chains and agrifood standards: Challenges and
possibilities for smallholders in developing countries. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109(31): 12326–12331.
Lwoga ET and Chigona W (2017) Characteristics and factors that differentiate Internet users and non-
users as information seekers: The case of rural women in Tanzania. Information Development 33(5):
447–462.
Lwoga ET, Stilwell C and Ngulube P (2011) Access and use of agricultural information and knowledge
in Tanzania. Library Review 60(5): 383–395.
Macharia J (2013) M-Farm and iCow: The world of appy agriculture: Notes from the cutting edge.
Rhodes Journalism Review 2013: 102–103.
Mann L (2018) Left to other peoples’ devices? A political economy perspective on the big data rev-
olution in development. Development and Change 49(1): 3–36.
Mann L, Graham M and Friederici N (2014) The internet and business process outsourcing in East
Africa: Value chains and connectivity-based enterprises in Kenya and Rwanda. Available at:https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/archive/downloads/publications/The_Internet_and_Business_Process_Outsourcing_in_East_Africa.pdf (accessed 25 February 2019).
Mith €ofer D, Nang’ole E and Asfaw S (2008) Smallholder access to the export market: The case of
vegetables in Kenya. Outlook on Agriculture 37(3): 203–211.
Molony T (2009) Carving a niche: ICT, social capital, and trust in the shift from personal to imper-
sonal trading in Tanzania. Information Technology for Development 15(4): 283–301.
Morgan K (1997) The learning region: Institutions, innovation and regional renewal. Regional Studies
31(SI): 491–503.
Mtega WP, Dulle F and Benard R (2013) Understanding the knowledge sharing process among rural
communities in Tanzania: A review of selected studies. Knowledge Management & E-Learning 5:
205–217.
Muriithi BW and Matz JA (2015) Welfare effects of vegetable commercialization: Evidence from
smallholder producers in Kenya. Food Policy 50: 80–91.
Murphy JT and Carmody P (2015) Africa’s Information Revolution: Technical Regimes and Production
Networks in South Africa and Tanzania . Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Murphy JT, Carmody P and Surborg B (2014) Industrial transformation or business as usual?
Information and communication technologies and Africa’s place in the global information econo-my.Review of African Political Economy 41(140): 264–283.
Muto M and Yamano T (2009) The impact of mobile phone coverage expansion on market partic-
ipation: Panel data evidence from Uganda. World Development 37(12): 1887–1896.
Nakasone E, Torero M and Minten B (2014) The power of information: The ICT revolution in
agricultural development. Annual Review of Resource Economics 6(1): 533–550.22 Competition & Change 0(0)Ojo T (2018) Political Economy of ICT4D and Africa. In: Servaes J (ed.) Handbook of Communication
for Development and Social Change . Singapore: Springer, pp. 1–14.
Okello JJ, Ofwona-Adera E, Mbatia OL, et al. (2010) Using ICT to integrate smallholder farmers into
agricultural value Chain: The case of DrumNet project in Kenya. International Journal of ICT
Research and Development in Africa 1(1): 23–37.
Ouma S (2010) Global standards, local realities: Private agrifood governance and the restructuring of
the Kenyan horticulture industry. Economic Geography 86(2): 197–222.
Ouma S, Stenmanns J and Verne J (2019) African economies: Simply connect? Problematizing the
discourse on connectivity in logistics and communication. In: Graham M (ed.) Digital Economies at
Global Margins . Boston: MIT Press, pp. 341–363.
Pelupessy W and Van Kempen L (2005) The impact of increased consumer-orientation in global agri-
food chains on smallholders in developing countries. Competition & Change 9(4): 357–381.
Pigini D and Conti M (2017) NFC-based traceability in the food chain. Sustainability 9(10): 1910.
Ponte S and Ewert J (2009) Which way is “up” in upgrading? Trajectories of change in the value chain
for South African wine. World Development 37(10): 1637–1650.
Rekhviashvili L and Sgibnev W (2018) Uber, Marshrutkas and socially (dis-)embedded mobilities. The
Journal of Transport History 39(1): 72–91.
Rosner L (2004) The Technological Fix: How People Use Technology to Create and Solve Problems .
New York: Routledge.
Saliola F and Zanfei A (2009) Multinational ﬁrms, global value chains and the organization of knowl-
edge transfer. Research Policy 38(2): 369–381.
Sekabira H and Qaim M (2017) Mobile money, agricultural marketing, and off-farm income in
Uganda. Agricultural Economics 48(5): 597–611.
The Guardian (2016) Can the internet reboot Africa? Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/
world/2016/jul/25/can-the-internet-reboot-africa (accessed 25 February 2019).
Ulrich A (2014) Export-oriented horticultural production in Laikipia, Kenya: Assessing the implica-
tions for rural livelihoods. Sustainability 6(1): 336–347.
Unwin T (2017) Reclaiming Information and Communication Technologies for Development . Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
World Bank (2011) Broadband in Kenya—Build It and They Will Come . Washington, DC: World
Bank.
Wyche S and Steinﬁeld C (2016) Why don’t farmers use cell phones to access market prices?
Technology affordances and barriers to market information services adoption in rural Kenya.Information Technology for Development 22(2): 320–333.Hartmann et al. 23