SEPTEMBER 2020Digitization of Agribusiness  
Payments in Africa
Building a Ramp for Farmers’ Financial Inclusion  
and Participation in a Digital Economy
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized© 2020 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW  
Washington DC 20433  
Telephone: 202-473-1000  
Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,  
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of  
The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,  
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment  
on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or  
acceptance of such boundaries.
RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of  
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long  
as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to  
World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;  
fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.CONTENTS
Acknowledgments iii
Abbreviations and Acronyms iv
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY V
1. INTRODUCTION 1
2. FINDINGS AND INSIGHTS FROM THE GLOBAL FINDEX SURVEYS 4
3. FINDINGS AND INSIGHTS FROM THE AFRICA AGRIBUSINESS PAYMENTS SURVEY 8
4. OPPORTUNITY, CHALLENGES, AND RECOMMENDATIONS 14
5. CONCLUSION 20
APPENDIX A: REFERENCES 22
APPENDIX B: AGRIBUSINESSES THAT PARTICIPATED IN THE AAPS 25
APPENDIX C: AFRICA AGRIBUSINESS PAYMENTS SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE 26
LIST OF FIGURES AND BOXES
Figure 2.1 Individuals Receiving Payments for Sale of Agricultural Products in the Past Year (%) 4
Figure 2.2 Agricultural-Payment Channels (% among Agricultural-Payment Recipients) 4
Figure 2.3 Saving and Borrowing (%) 5
Figure 2.4 Use of Formal Financial Institutions among Agricultural-Payment Recipients Who Save or Borrow (%) 5
Figure 2.5 Agricultural Payments Channels, by countries in SSA (%) 6
Figure 2.6 Decrease in Agricultural Payments through Cash Only across SSA Countries between 2014 and 2017 7
Figure 3.1 Firms behind the Data 8
Figure 3.2 Commodities Procured 9
Figure 3.3 Digital Farmer Payments by Agribusinesses (%) 10
Figure 3.4 Digital Payment Withdrawal Channels (%) 10
Figure 3.5 Agribusiness Firms Reporting at Least Some Digitization of Payments to Farmers (%) 13
Figure 4.1 Key Challenges with Digitizing Agribusiness Payments to Farmers                14
Figure 5.1 Digitization of Agribusiness Payments to Farmers: A Schematic Representation 21
  iiiBox 1: KTDA: A Producer Organization-Driven Model of Digitization 11
Box 2: VegPro and TruTrade: The Full Converts 12
Box 3: Olam: Ecosystem Challenges to Digitizing Agribusiness Farmer Payments 15
Box 4: Kyagalanyi Coffee, Uganda: Importance of Alignment of Government Policy to  
           Facilitate Digital Payments 16
Box 5: AB InBev: Blockchain-based Agribusiness Payments to Farmers 18  iiiACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was prepared by Ajai Nair, Senior Financial 
Sector Specialist, and Minita Varghese, Financial Sector 
Consultant, under the guidance of Mahesh Uttamchandani, 
Practice Manager. Minita Varghese also implemented the 
Africa Agribusiness Payments Survey, the supply-side  
survey of agribusinesses in Africa, that was used to collect 
data and insights from select major global, regional, and 
national agribusinesses operating in Africa. 
Leora Klapper, Lead Economist, and Dorothe Singer, 
Senior Economist, provided guidance and inputs on the 
demand-side analysis that leveraged the Global Findex 
data. Christopher Ian Brett, Lead Agribusiness Specialist; 
Panos Varangis, Global Lead, Agriculture Finance; and 
Harish Natarajan, Lead Financial Sector Specialist,  
provided guidance and inputs on the supply-side survey, 
analysis, and recommendations. Additional inputs were 
provided by Emilio Hernandez, Senior Financial Sector 
Specialist, and Max Mattern, Financial Sector Specialist. 
Charles Hagner copyedited, Aichin Lim Jones designed, 
and Framing Plus Studio provided production services of 
the report.
The authors acknowledge the contribution of the agribusi-
ness firms that responded to the survey and shared confi-
dential data. We would particularly like to thank firms that 
agreed to be included in the report as case studies and to 
Katie Hoard, Global Director, Agricultural Innovation and 
Sustainability, AB Inbev; Siddharth Satpute, Programme 
Director, Digital Olam; Jenny Rouquette, CEO, TruTrade; 
Atul Patel, Senior Outgrowers Manager, VegPro; Alfred 
Njagi, Operations Director, and Simeon Rugutt, Financial 
Controller, Kenya Tea Development Agency; and Anish Jain, Chief Treasury Officer and Head of Corporate Com-
munications and Marketing, ETG, for sharing information 
and insights. Our gratitude is also due to International 
Finance Corporation colleagues Esra Diker-Yilmaz, Senior 
Investment Officer; Anup Jagwani, Manager; Meritxell 
Martinez, Operations Officer; Ernest Bethe, Principal 
Operations Officer; Vengai Chigudu, Senior Investment 
Officer; Matthew S. Leonard, Operations Officer; and 
Beza Hailu, Operations Officer, and to Panos Loukos, 
Senior Insights Manager, GSMA’s Agritech program, for 
making introductions to several firms that participated in 
the survey. 
Parmesh Shah, Lead Rural Development Specialist; Hans 
Dellien, Senior Operations Officer; Juan Buchenau, Senior 
Financial Sector Specialist; and Ahmed Faragallah, Senior 
Financial Sector Specialist, provided peer-review inputs. 
Additional review inputs were provided by Diego Arias 
Carballo, Lead Agricultural Economist; Julian Lampietti, 
Practice Manager; Gerhardus Koch Coetzee, Lead Finan-
cial Sector Specialist; Jamie Anderson, Senior Financial 
Sector Specialist; Ivan Daniel Mortimer Schutts, Senior 
Operations Specialist; Delia Buisi Dean, Consultant; 
Anneke Fermont, Regional Sustainability Manager,  
Kyagalanyi Coffee Ltd.; and, Daniele Tricarico, Insights 
Director, GSMA Agritech Program.  
Lastly, this report could not have been produced without 
generous financial support from the Financial Inclusion 
Support Framework program funded by the Government 
of the Netherlands and the Bill and Melinda Gates  
Foundation. iv  ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAPS Africa Agribusiness Payments Survey
CICO cash in, cash out
DFS digital financial services
KTDA Kenya Tea Development Agency
NBFI non-bank financial institution
PSP payment service provider
SACCO savings and credit cooperative organization
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa
All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report presents the rationale for digitization of agri-
business payments in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), assesses 
the current status of digitization, and identifies key actions 
that governments, agribusinesses, and development part-
ners can take to help accelerate digitization.
Agriculture employs over half the population in SSA, yet 
most farmers in the region do not have access to formal 
financial services. The 2017 Global Findex survey finds 
that among individuals in SSA who report receiving pay-
ments for sale of agricultural goods, fewer than one in six 
reports receiving the payment through an account, and 
among those who report saving and borrowing, only one 
in four saves at a formal financial institution, and only one 
in five borrows from a formal financial institution. 
Farmers, agribusinesses, and the rural economy stand to 
gain from increased digitization of agribusiness payments. 
Digitization can advance financial inclusion of farmers  
and thereby help them smooth consumption, make  
productivity-enhancing investments, and better manage 
their vulnerability to shocks through improved access to 
savings, credit, and insurance products. For agribusiness 
firms, digital payments can help improve not only effi-
ciency but also transparency by bringing better visibility to 
how and when farmers are paid, thereby enabling them to 
comply better with their commitments to sustainability. 
Lastly, regular digital payments from agribusinesses can 
benefit the rural economy more broadly by strengthening 
the rural digital financial services (DFS) ecosystem through 
improving the business viability of DFS agents, encourag-
ing merchants to accept digital payments, and enabling 
more e-money usage for local payments. 
Our analysis of Global Findex 2017 data shows that while 
average levels of digitization in SSA is lower than in other 
regions of the world, variation is wide between countries. 
Over 30 percent of recipients of agricultural payments 
  vreported receiving such payments into an account in 
Ghana, Kenya, Uganda, and Zambia. In contrast, in Ethio-
pia and Madagascar, two countries with the largest share 
of individuals who report receiving agricultural payments, 
virtually all recipients indicated receiving such payments 
in cash. 
Our analysis suggests that access to mobile money 
accounts is a key driver of digitization of agricultural  
payments. In Kenya and Ghana, 37 percent of  
agricultural-payment recipients receive payments into a 
mobile money account; in Uganda and Zambia, this share 
is 28 percent and 27 percent, respectively. These coun-
tries are among those with the highest uptake of mobile 
money: the share of adults with a mobile money account 
is 73 percent in Kenya, 51 percent in Uganda, 39 percent 
in Ghana, and 28 percent in Zambia. 
Our survey of select agribusinesses active in SSA sug-
gests that while most agribusinesses are making efforts 
to digitize their payments to farmers, the levels of digiti-
zation are still relatively low. The survey included 
responses from 29 global, regional, and national agribusi-
nesses operating in more than 17 countries in SSA. While 
nearly four-fifths of the firms reported making at least 
some digital payments to farmers, only one-fifth reported 
that most of the farmers in their supply chains are paid 
Digitization potential:  
$6 billion
Potential # of farmers to benefit:  
17.8 million farmers$vi  digitally. Most of the surveyed agribusinesses recognize 
the opportunity and report having initiatives to increase 
digital payments to farmers. We estimate the digitization 
potential among the firms responding to the survey at 
over $6 billion and potentially benefitting nearly 18 mil-
lion farmers. 
Lastly, our analysis also shows that digitization of agricul-
tural payments can be a driver to expand financial inclu-
sion of farmers.  The 2017 Global Findex survey finds that 
among agricultural-payment recipients in SSA receiving 
payments into an account, 20 percent report opening 
their first account to receive an agricultural payment. Veg-
pro, one of the AAPS respondents who only pay farmers 
digitally, reports that  it has also facilitated access to credit 
at preferred interest rates for around a quarter of their cli-
ents (Box 2).  And Inbev, another AAPS respondent which 
partners with BanQu, a blockchain-based platform, 
reports that one of its subsidiaries in Uganda is piloting the delivery of weather-based crop insurance through the 
platform (Box 5).
There are, however, several challenges to accelerating 
digitization of agribusiness payments to farmers. In many 
countries, these include foundational challenges, such as 
limited connectivity, poor digital literacy, and a weak reg-
ulatory environment for digital payments, and proximate 
challenges, such as limited availability of cash-in, cash-out 
points and opportunities to use e-money. Thus, a rapid 
expansion of digitization of agricultural payments would 
require strengthening the foundational drivers of the 
national digital economy and the ecosystem for rural DFS 
as well as actions targeted at agricultural payments — 
both agribusiness procurement payments as well as agri-
cultural inputs payments. The figure below presents a 
schematic representation of the multipronged effort 
needed to accelerate digitization of agricultural payments 
and the benefits that could flow from these efforts. 
Digitial platforms, Rural
DFS ecosystem
Agricultural inputs
payments
Digital financial
services - savings,
credit and insurance
Other merc hant
payments
Digitial infrastructur e
Digital skillsFarmerAgribusiness
procurement
payments  viiWe make the following recommendations to support efforts to digitize agricultural payments in SSA:
• Governments should strengthen the foundations of their national digital economy and the enabling  
environments for agritech, fintech, and e-commerce: These actions are critical since improvements in these 
areas make it more feasible for agribusinesses to digitize their payments to farmers and increase farmers’ 
ability to use digital payments.
• Governments should also take targeted actions to strengthen the rural DFS ecosystem: Targeted actions are 
needed to strengthen the rural DFS ecosystem since rural areas face specific challenges related to their  
geography. These include actions to increase the density of CICO (cash-in-cash-out) agents in rural areas and 
increase the opportunity for rural residents to use e-money. The former would make it easier and less costly 
for farmers and others residing in rural areas to convert e-money to cash and vice versa and the latter would 
reduce the need to make these conversions. 
• Agribusinesses need to build an industry consensus on the value of digital payments to farmers as a key 
driver of achieving their sustainability goals: While there is consensus on the need to advance sustainability, 
there is limited attention so far on the strong linkage between sustainability goals and the value of digital 
payments to farmers. 
• Agribusinesses should strengthen partnerships with payment service providers (PSPs) and better leverage 
the opportunity presented by the fintech revolution: Partnerships can be a win-win opportunity for PSPs, 
fintechs, and agribusinesses. Digitization of agribusiness payments presents a large revenue opportunity for 
PSPs, agribusinesses can negotiate better pricing structures for bulk payments, and fintechs can play a key 
role in building a bridge between the two.
• Development finance partners should support targeted initiatives on agricultural-payments digitization:  
Development partners can play an impactful role in facilitating scaled-up support for agricultural payments 
digitization. The report highlights two projects supported by the World Bank with components on digitiza-
tion of agriculture payments. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has reinforced the urgency of 
digitizing payments to avoid disruptions to the supply 
chain and maintain economic activity. The ongoing crisis 
provides additional impetus to accelerate the pace of  digitization of agribusiness payments to allow firms and 
farmers to stay resilient, maintain the supply of food and 
other agricultural commodities, and combat the negative 
shocks to income caused by the pandemic.Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  1
1. INTRODUCTION
Background
This report aims to present the rationale for digitization 
of agribusiness payments in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), 
assess the current status of digitization using demand- 
and supply-side data, and identify key actions that can 
help accelerate digitization. The report draws on an  
analysis of financial-inclusion data from the Global Findex 
database, a survey administered to select agribusinesses 
active in SSA (henceforth referred to as the Africa Agri-
business Payments Survey, or AAPS), and case studies of 
select agribusinesses that responded to this survey. The 
Findex data analysis leverages questions in the survey that 
identify whether the respondent had received payment 
against the sale of an agricultural good; how the payment 
was received — in cash or through a digital means, 
defined to include an account at a bank or non-bank 
financial institution, mobile money account, or a card — 
and, if an account holder, whether the account was 
opened to receive an agricultural payment. The AAPS was 
administered to purposefully selected agribusinesses 
active in SSA, with either a regional or national scope. 
Some firms were added to the survey since they were 
known to have an active digitization program, but this was 
not a requirement for inclusion in the survey. 
The broad coverage of the Global Findex survey and 
AAPS allows a regional and cross-country assessment of 
the status of agricultural-payment digitization in SSA. The 
Global Findex survey data covers 27 countries in SSA, 
spanning different income levels. (See section 2 for full list 
of countries.) The AAPS reflects responses from 29 agri-
businesses operating in more than 17 countries in SSA and 
includes firms with a global, regional, and national foot-
print. (See appendix B for the full list of firms.) 
While the Global Findex and AAPS permit a data-driven 
assessment of agricultural-payment digitization in SSA, 
they have some key limitations. The analysis of Global 
Findex data focuses on respondents who report receiving 
payments, in cash or digitally, against the sale of agricul-
tural goods. While these respondents are a good proxy 
for farmers who market at least some portion of their  
produce and represent a significant share of the farming 
population, they are not representative of all farmers in 
the region. Further, since the survey is not focused on 
these respondents, it results in a limited sample of agricul-
tural-payment recipients and does not allow disaggre-
gated analysis for gender or specific value chains. Similarly, while the AAPS has a broad coverage, it is not representa-
tive of all agribusinesses in SSA, and hence the findings 
presented are also not representative of all agribusinesses 
active in SSA. Finally, payments received by farmers for 
local sales, government payments to farmers, and pay-
ments by farmers for purchase of agricultural inputs and 
farm workers are beyond the scope of this report.
The report is organized in five sections. The rest of this 
section presents the rationale for digitization of agribusi-
ness payments in SSA. The next section provides demand-
side data and insights based on Global Findex data, while 
section 3 provides supply-side data and insights from a 
survey of 29 major global, regional, and national agribusi-
nesses. Section 4 highlights the digitization opportunity in 
agribusiness payments in SSA, discusses the challenges to 
digitization, and identifies key actions that stakeholders 
can take to help accelerate agricultural-payments digitiza-
tion. Finally, section 5 summarizes the report’s key findings 
and proposes additional research and other actions that 
can help operationalize the recommended actions.  
Why Digitize Agribusiness Payments to Farmers? 
Financial inclusion is key to inclusive growth, and access 
to a transaction account is the critical first step. There is 
now global consensus that financial inclusion of individuals 
and enterprises is critical to inclusive growth and  
poverty reduction.1 Transaction accounts are defined as 
accounts (including e-money or prepaid accounts) held 
with banks or other authorized or regulated payment ser -
vice providers (PSPs) that can be used to make and receive 
payments and to store value (CPMI and World Bank 
Group 2016). Financial inclusion allows individuals and 
enterprises to transact, save, borrow, and insure — all of 
which are factors that contribute to inclusive growth and 
poverty reduction. 
In SSA, agriculture plays a significant role in income  
generation, growth, and poverty reduction. Agriculture 
contributes 15.6 percent of the gross domestic product, 
and approximately 54.6 percent of the population in the 
region is employed in the agriculture sector.2 The food 
market in the region was valued at $300 billion in 2017 
and may be worth nearly $1 trillion by 2030 (AGRA 2017). 
1. https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialinclusion/brief/
achieving-universal-financial-access-by-2020
2. Agriculture sector consists of activities in agriculture, hunting, 
foresting and fishing. 2018 World Development Indicators, 
World Bank, https://databank.worldbank.org/
source/2?series=SL.AGR.EMPL.ZS&country=.2  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
However, while evidence is strong regarding the impact of 
agriculture growth on poverty reduction, agriculture-  
sector growth remains low, and levels of poverty remain 
high in many countries in the region.3 These factors, 
together with emerging consensus on the linkages 
between financial inclusion, inclusive growth, and poverty 
reduction, suggests that financial inclusion of farmers is 
critical for agriculture-sector growth and thereby for accel-
erating poverty reduction in the region. 
Yet most farmers in the region do not have access to  
formal financial services. The 2017 Global Findex survey 
finds that among individuals in SSA who report receiving 
agricultural payments, a good proxy for farmers who are 
selling at least some portion of their produce in the mar -
ket, fewer than one in six reports receiving an agricultural 
payment through an account.4 And among those in this 
population segment who report saving and borrowing, 
only one in four farmers saves at a formal financial  
institution, and only one in five farmers borrows from a 
formal financial institution. Most rely on saving in kind or 
cash at home or depending on family and friends or  
informal service providers such as savings groups, savings 
collectors, and money lenders. The access and usage  
levels are likely to be much lower if all farmers and farm 
workers are included.5 This lack of access to formal finan-
cial services has severe financial implications. When faced 
with a bad harvest or significant livestock loss, farmers 
bear the entire financial risk of such a loss since they lack 
access to financial tools that could help them manage 
these risks (Klapper et al. 2019). Reliance on informal pro-
viders can be quite costly and risky, not only putting the 
safety of savings at risk but also limiting access to credit 
and insurance. 
Agricultural output value chains present an untapped 
opportunity to drive financial inclusion of farmers. Eighty 
percent of Africa’s food consumption is through purchases by urban and rural consumers (AGRA 2019). These include 
large enterprises as well as micro, small, and medium-scale 
enterprises that play a significant role in the post-farmgate 
supply chain, from logistics and processing to distribution 
and retail. These businesses already provide a significant 
share of the credit needs of the farming sector, but since 
this financing is primarily aimed at meeting agricultural 
needs, the non-agricultural financial-service needs of the 
farmers remain unaddressed. Furthermore, since the data 
on financing provided by these agribusinesses often 
remains proprietary and is not reported to credit bureaus, 
it limits the ability of other providers to use this data to 
provide financial services to farmers.6 
Digitization of payments by agribusinesses to farmers 
can act as the ramp to broader financial inclusion and 
better use of these accounts. Digitization of payments 
refers to a payment being made electronically into a 
“transaction account.”7 Digitization of agribusiness pay-
ments can be a driver of expanding access to transaction 
accounts for farmers. According to 2017 Global Findex, 
13 percent of account owners globally reported having 
opened their first account to receive private-sector wages, 
government payments, or payments for the sale of agri-
cultural goods. And among agricultural-payment recipi-
ents in SSA receiving payments into an account, 20 
percent report opening their first account to receive an 
agricultural payment (Demirgüç-Kunt et al. 2018). For 
those already having an account, receiving payments for 
sale of their produce into these accounts offers the oppor -
tunity to use these accounts better (Better Than Cash  
Alliance 2018). 
For farmers, digitization of agricultural procurement pay-
ments has numerous benefits. It can ensure timely and 
safe payments, increase savings, and contribute to increas -
ing agricultural productivity. In Rwanda, the digitization of 
payments from tea factories to small-holder tea producers 
reduced the time from delivery of tea leaves to payment 
from 5 to 15 days to a maximum of three days (Nair, Ono, 
and Mapfumo 2018). In Malawi, farmers who were offered 3. GDP growth originating in agriculture is estimated to induce 
income growth among the poorest 40 percent at levels three 
times larger than growth originating in the rest of the 
economy (de Janvry and Sadoulet 2009). Average poverty in 
the region was 41.4 percent, according to the latest data 
available for 2015. World Bank, Poverty and Equity Data 
Portal, http://povertydata.worldbank.org/poverty/region/SSF .
4. The term farmers is used to include all agriculture-sector pro-
ducers, including individuals producing livestock and involved 
in marine fishing and aquaculture. 
5. National surveys of smallholder households in Mozambique, 
Uganda, Tanzania, Côte d’Ivoire, Nigeria, and Bangladesh by 
the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) find that 
the proportion receiving payment into an account is less than 
2 percent (Anderson and Sobol 2018).6.  ISF Advisors and the Rural and Agricultural Finance Learning 
Lab estimate that that value-chain actors, typically agribusi-
nesses, supply approximately $30 billion of farmers’ financing 
needs out of a total estimated demand of $240 billion in 
agricultural and non-agricultural finance (ISF Advisors and 
Mastercard Foundation 2019).
7. As previously defined, a transaction account refers to any 
account that allows the user to transact and to store value. 
These include bank accounts and accounts of other authorized 
PSPs, such as mobile money providers and specialized provid-
ers, such as B-Kash in Bangladesh or Zoona in Zambia. Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  3
direct deposit into savings accounts for crop-sale proceeds 
and took this option saved more in the months immedi-
ately before the next agricultural planting season and 
increased both spending on agricultural inputs and crop 
values in that season (Brune et al. 2016).8 Receiving digital 
payments empowers farmers to have better control over 
their income. It reduces travel time and transaction costs 
to collect their payments, and having a transaction account 
allows farmers to make other transactions such as utility 
payments, school fees, and person-to-business payments 
through digital channels. The transaction history that 
farmers accumulate can provide a basis for formal finan-
cial service providers to assess creditworthiness, opening 
an avenue to formal credit, insurance, and savings prod-
ucts that equip them to deal with income shocks and 
smooth consumption, thus improving overall well-being. 
For agribusinesses, digitizing procurement payments can 
improve efficiency, transparency, and traceability. Cash 
payments can be risky and costly, and manual reconcilia-
tion of payments is a lengthy process that is prone to 
errors. The Better Than Cash Alliance estimates that mak-
ing cocoa payments to farmers in cash costs Ghana’s 
licensed buying companies nearly 3.6 percent of their rev-
enues, and that the cost for their agents is nearly 15 per -
cent of their revenues (BTCA and World Cocoa Foundation 
2020a).9 Digital payments not only support operational 
efficiencies by reducing the cost of payments but also 
allow agribusinesses to make more transparent transac-
tions. It allows agribusinesses to trace procurement down-
stream to the farmer, allowing them to gain trust among consumers and ensure implementation of ethical procure-
ment practices, thus bolstering their reputation and 
reducing reputational risk. Further, registration of farmers 
for digitization of payments can also be an opportunity to 
assess the demand for value-added services such as agri-
culture-advisory services and to provide such services if 
there is a business case to do so.   
Lastly, digitization of agribusiness payments can play a 
key role in supporting the rural digital financial services 
(DFS) ecosystem. A key obstacle to financial inclusion in 
rural areas is insufficient demand for DFS agents and  
limited digital payments to merchants, making the rural 
agent and merchant business unprofitable. By increasing 
the transaction volumes necessary to support rural DFS 
expansion, digitization of agribusiness payments can gen-
erate business for both rural DFS agents who offer cash-in, 
cash-out (CICO) services and DFS merchants who accept 
digital payments, thus expanding the CICO network and 
opportunities to use e-money, respectively (GSMA 2018a). 
Notwithstanding the multiple benefits discussed above, 
current levels of digitization of agricultural payments are 
low, reflecting the many challenges that digitization  
initiatives need to address. These challenges relate to 
basic infrastructural constraints, such as limited outreach 
of formal financial institutions in rural areas and inade-
quate mobile connectivity necessary for delivery of mobile 
money services, as well as constraints associated with the 
overall ecosystem for rural DFS. These challenges are  
discussed in more detail in section 4.
8. In addition, Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson 2011 found 
substantially increased fertilizer consumption in Kenya (over 
50 percent) when farmers are offered the opportunity during 
harvest time to buy fertilizer vouchers for a subsequent 
season. This mechanism can be seen as equivalent to a 
commitment savings mechanism. 
9. The bulk of the costs to licensed buying companies is interest 
costs incurred on cash advances received from the Cocoa 
Board, but the costs also include salaries for additional staff 
needed to manage cash payments. The primary cost for the 
agents is the loss of cash due to theft and cost of transport. 4  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
2. FINDINGS AND INSIGHTS FROM THE 
GLOBAL FINDEX SURVEYS
The Global Findex database enables cross-regional and 
cross-country comparison of financial inclusion of individ-
uals who report receiving agricultural payments. In addi-
tion to asking respondents about financial inclusion, the 
2014 and 2017 Global Findex surveys also asked whether 
they had received any payments for the sale of agricultural 
products in the past 12 months and whether they received 
payments in cash or through one of the four identified 
digital channels.10 Taken together with financial-inclusion 
indicators, the response to this question allows an estima-
tion of the scale of current digitization and an indicative 
estimation of potential opportunity for digitization of agri-
cultural payments among this segment of the population. 
Individuals who report receiving payments for sale of agri-
cultural products are a good proxy for farmers who sell at 
least some portion of their produce in the market and, hence, a natural target for digitization initiatives. While 
this population segment is much smaller than the propor -
tion of the population employed in agriculture, it rep-
resents a natural target for digitization since respondents 
receive at least some payments on sale of agricultural 
commodities.11 This section discusses some salient findings. 
In 2017, nearly one-third of adults in SSA reported having 
received agricultural payments, and most receive these 
payments in cash only. As can be seen in figure 2.1., SSA 
has the largest proportion of adults who report receiving 
agricultural payments (30 percent), which is about twice the 
average for developing economies and equivalent to 
around 140 million adults.12 As figure 2.2 shows, less than 
15 percent reported receiving an agricultural payment 
through an account. The majority of the agricultural-pay-
ment recipients in all four regions report receiving their pay-
ments in cash only, but this proportion is highest in SSA. 
10. 2017 Findex defines persons who received agriculture 
payments as “respondents who report personally receiving 
money from any source for the sale of agricultural products, 
crops, produce, or livestock in the past 12 months.” 
Although, as defined, the category could also include 
respondents who trade in agricultural products, the 
proportion of such respondents is estimated to be marginal. 
The digital channels identified were accounts at a bank, a 
non-bank financial institution, mobile money account, and 
card. 11. As previously mentioned, over half of the total population 
(54.6 percent) in SSA is estimated to be employed in the 
agriculture sector. This includes all farmers, including 
subsistence farmers who are not selling any production to 
the market, and those who are working for farmers but do 
not themselves farm. 
12. The proportion of respondents who report receiving agricul-
ture payments is much lower in the Latin America and the 
Caribbean Region and the Middle East and North Africa 
Region — 5 and 6 percent, respectively — and hence not 
included in this analysis.All regional aggregates exclude high income countries. SSA - Sub 
Saharan Africa, EAP - East Asia and Pacific, ECA - Europe and Central 
Asia, SAR - South Asia RegionFIGURE 2.1: Individuals Receiving Payments for 
Sale of Agricultural Products in the Past Year (%)FIGURE 2.2: Agricultural-Payment Channels  
(% among Agricultural-Payment Recipients)
All regional aggregates exclude high income countries. SSA - Sub 
Saharan Africa, EAP - East Asia and Pacific, ECA - Europe and Central 
Asia, SAR - South Asia RegionSSA30
EAP16
ECA11
SAR15
ECA EAP SSA SAR
In cash Into an account15
8519
8126
7421
79Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  5
Agricultural-payment recipients also report very low 
usage of formal financial institutions for saving and bor -
rowing, although they save and borrow more than the 
rest of the population. As figure 2.3 shows, individuals 
receiving agricultural payments report having saved and 
borrowed more in the past year than other adults. On 
average, 66 percent of individuals in SSA receiving  
agricultural payments reported having saved money in 
the past 12 months, compared to 50 percent of adults in 
the region who do not receive such payments. Similarly,  56 percent of adults receiving agricultural payments 
reported having borrowed money in the past 12 months, 
compared to 40 percent of adult who do not receive such 
payments. These differentials are not surprising since 
income from agriculture is often lumpy and highly vulner -
able to shocks, but as figure 2.4 shows, only a small pro-
portion rely on formal financial institutions to save or 
borrow: only 17 percent saved and 10 percent borrowed 
from formal financial institution. 
FIGURE 2.3: Saving and Borrowing (%)
Source: Global Findex (2017).FIGURE 2.4: Use of Formal Financial Institutions 
among Agricultural-Payment Recipients (%)
In a for mal financial institution   OthersSaving Borrowing83
1790
10
Saved money -
farmersSaved money - 
othersBorrowed money - 
farmersBorrowed money - 
others66
5056
40
While the proportion of the population receiving agricul-
tural payments and those receiving payments in cash 
only is higher in SSA than in other regions, there are  
significant differences between countries (figure 2.5).  
Over 50 percent of adults in Ethiopia, Madagascar, and 
Uganda reported receiving agricultural payments, while 
less than 10 percent in South Africa and Botswana 
reported doing so.13 Among recipients of agricultural  payments, over 30 percent reported receiving such  
payments into an account in Ghana, Kenya, Uganda, and 
Zambia. In contrast, virtually all recipients in Ethiopia and 
Madagascar, two of the countries with the largest share of 
adults who report receiving agricultural payments, indi-
cated receiving such payments in cash. These differences 
are likely to be driven by the differences in the national 
and rural ecosystems for DFS.
13. The percentage of respondents reporting receiving 
agricultural payments in Botswana and South Africa is 8 
percent and 3 percent, respectively. Given the low share, 
Findex does not disaggregate this data by payments 
received into an account or in cash.6  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
FIGURE 2.5: Agricultural Payments Channels, by countries in SSA (%)
Source: Global Findex (2017).Into an account In cash onlyBenin
Burkina Faso
Camer oon
Chad
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Cote d’lvoir e
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
20% 0% 40% 60%Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  7
Access to mobile money accounts seems to be a key 
driver of the levels of digitization of agricultural  
payments. Among the countries with the largest share of 
adults receiving agricultural payments into an account, 
most receive the payment into a mobile money account. 
In Kenya and Ghana, 37 percent of agricultural-payment 
recipients receive payments into a mobile money account. 
In Uganda and Zambia, 28 percent and 27 percent, 
respectively, receive such payments into a mobile money 
account.14 These countries are also among those with the 
highest uptake of mobile money: the share of adults with 
a mobile money account is 73 percent in Kenya, 51 per -
cent in Uganda, 39 percent in Ghana, and 28 percent  
in Zambia. While still high, the proportion of individuals in SSA 
receiving agricultural payments through cash only has 
decreased regionwide and in most countries. Among 
those receiving agricultural payments, the regional  
average for those who received payments only in cash 
decreased to 81 percent in 2017 compared to 85 percent 
in 2014. The scale of change has varied across countries; 
some countries show a much larger magnitude of change 
compared to others. For example, among agricultural-  
payment recipients in Ghana and Uganda, those receiving 
their payment in cash decreased from 90 to 49 percent 
and from 85 to 65 percent, respectively.15
FIGURE 2.6: Decrease in Agricultural Payments through Cash Only across SSA Countries between 2014 
and 2017  
14. The share receiving payments into an account at a financial 
institution is 15 percent, 18 percent, 7 percent, and  
22 percent, respectively. Respondents can report receiving 
agricultural payments in multiple ways, and receiving 
payments into an account at a financial institution and 
receiving payments through a mobile phone are not  
mutually exclusive categories.15. Additional country-level work is necessary to explain or 
confirm the magnitude of these changes and the increase in 
those reporting receiving payments in cash only in Ethiopia 
(by a large margin) and in Nigeria.0%10%20%30%40%60%
50%70%
Benin
Burkina FasoCameroonChad
Congo, Dem, Rep.
Cote d’lvoireEthiopiaGabon
GhanaGuinea Kenya
MadagascarMalawiMali
MauritaniaNamibiaNigerNigeria Rwanda Senegal
Sierra LeoneTanzaniaTogoUganda Zambia
Zimbabwe
2014 2017
Source: Global Findex (2017).8  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
3. FINDINGS AND INSIGHTS FROM THE 
AFRICA AGRIBUSINESS PAYMENTS 
SURVEY
To complement the demand-side findings from Findex 
with supply-side data and insights, the AAPS was admin-
istered to select global, regional, and national agribusi-
nesses active in SSA. The survey focused on agribusiness 
payments since such payments are estimated to be more 
widespread than other formal payment flows to farmers in 
SSA.16 While agribusiness payments are a relatively small 
proportion of all agricultural payments received by farm-
ers, they are the most feasible entry point for digitizing 
payment flows. Agribusiness payments through formal 
value chains are a first point of digitization because they 
can provide the transactional volumes to support a sus-
tainable network of CICO agents, have predictable pay-
ment streams, and involve fewer players (GSMA 2020a). The AAPS aimed to collect information from agribusi-
nesses on their agri-commodity procurement in SSA, 
existing levels and channels of digital payments, and  
current and planned efforts to digitize payments. The 
survey was administered to 45 firms, and 29 agribusiness 
responded to the survey. These included 16 firms that 
operate globally or regionally and have operations in  
several African countries and 13 firms that operate at a 
national level (figure 3.1). The respondents included firms 
that are primarily supply-chain companies and those that 
are primarily processors.17 The survey was a first of its kind 
and, as a result, should be seen as a pilot that can be 
expanded upon in potential future rounds. This section 
discusses the key findings and insights from the survey.
Agribusinesses procure a wide range of commodities in 
SSA, and several million farmers are involved in their 
commodity supply chains. Figure 3.2 shows the range of 
FIGURE 3.1: Firms Behind the Data
16. A few countries in SSA have government programs for 
procuring agricultural commodities to maintain food-security 
reserves, but they are generally small in terms of the number 
of farmers from whom the procurement is made. Some 
countries have agricultural input-subsidy programs, but most 
of these subsidies are in-kind subsidies, where farmers 
receive inputs rather than cash. Even in the case of input-  
subsidy programs where digitization has been attempted, 
farmers receive e-vouchers that can be used to redeem 
inputs from input dealers, and the payment for the inputs 
are made by the government to the input dealers.17. Supply-chain companies typically procure produce either 
directly or indirectly from farmers or intermediaries. The 
produce is then sold to processors and other firms. 
Processors are those firms that are engaged in processing 
the produce and preparing it for the consumer market. Some 
processors also procure from directly from farmers.
Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  9
FIGURE 3.2: Commodities Procured
Source: AAPS 2019.commodities procured by the surveyed firms: six firms 
reported procuring cocoa, five reported procuring coffee, 
and four firms each reported procuring maize and fruits 
and vegetables; the rest of the commodities are procured 
by three or fewer firms. They procure commodities pro-
duced by an estimated 19.4 million farmers; this is approx-
imately 14 percent of the estimated 140 million individuals 
reporting receiving payments for sale of agricultural prod-
ucts as per Global Findex 2017. The combined value of 
commodities procured is approximately $7 billion. The 
bulk of the value of commodities procured is reported by 
a few firms; the median reported value of procurement 
over the past fiscal year is $30 million. The firms use  
multiple models of procurement, but a surprisingly large 
proportion (62 percent) report procuring at least some 
portion of their procurement directly from farmers. Just 
over half (52 percent) report procuring through buying 
agents, and 41 percent report procuring through  
producer organizations. Most firms procure commodities 
from farmers through a combination of procurement 
channels. 
A majority of the firms make at least some farmer pay-
ments digitally, but the proportion of digital payments 
remains low for most firms (figure 3.3). While nearly four-
fifth of the firms (79 percent) reported making at least 
some digital payments to farmers, nearly half (45 percent) 
pay only a small share (less than 10 percent) of their  
farmers digitally. However, over 20 percent of the firms reported that a majority of the farmers in their supply 
chains are paid digitally, and three firms reported that all 
farmers in their supply chains are paid digitally. In response 
to the question on key constraints to digitization,  
one-third of firms reported the lack of digital channels, 
particularly limited network coverage, as a top reason for 
not having digitized payments or for having done so only  
partially.
Three firms reported having fully or nearly fully digitized 
their payments to farmers. These include the Kenya Tea 
Development Agency (KTDA) and VegPro, which oper -
ate only in Kenya, and TruTrade, which operates in Kenya 
and Uganda. Among the respondents, KTDA reports the 
largest number of farmers that are being paid digitally, 
while VegPro and TruTrade pay all farmers in their supply 
chain digitally. Box 1 presents the case of KTDA, and box 
2 presents the VegPro and TruTrade cases. KTDA’s digiti-
zation success seems to be driven by multiple factors: 
the well-organized sector, the wide savings and credit 
cooperative organization (SACCO) network in Kenya and 
its indirect access to the national payments system 
(through the Cooperative Bank of Kenya), and KTDA’s 
partnership with Citi Bank. VegPro and TruTrade, rela -
tively new organizations that have much smaller numbers 
of farmers in their supply chains, report having opted to 
go for full digitization since benefits outweighed costs 
right from the beginning. 
CoffeeCocoaMaize
Fruits &
vegetables SoybeanCotton
TeaSesame
WheatLivestock
& dairy Othe r
RicePigeon 
peaCashew Shea
butter Beans CassavaBarley
Gum
arabic
SorghumSunﬂowerSweet
potato
Fodder10  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
While bank branches, surprisingly, remain the main point 
of withdrawal, several firms also report the use of agents 
and e-wallets by farmers. As figure 3.4 shows, nearly half 
of the firms report that farmers use bank branches to with-
draw their payments, and just over one-third of firms 
report that farmers use agents. About a quarter report 
that farmers use non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs), 
and 17 percent report that farmers use e-wallets to with-
draw payments made to them. Discussions with a subset FIGURE 3.3: Digital Farmer Payments by Agribusinesses (%)
FIGURE 3.4: Digital Payment Withdrawal Channels (%)  Estimated shar e of fir ms making digital payments
No digital payments at all Less than 10% Between 10-30%   Between 30-50%    Mor e than 50%Estimated shar e of far mers
21 7945
17 314
Source: AAPS 2019.
48
2434
17
Bank branch NBF branch Agent E-wallet
Source: AAPS 2019.of the firms, however, suggest that most firms do not have 
clear visibility on the withdrawal channel used by farmers 
since one payment channel can allow multiple withdrawal 
channels. For example, payment into a bank account 
could be withdrawn through a bank branch or a bank 
agent, or it could be used for making an electronic  
payment using an e-wallet, or, in cases where mobile and 
bank accounts are linked, payments can be withdrawn 
from a mobile money agent.Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  11
BOX 1
KTDA: A Producer Organization-Driven Model of Digitization 
The Kenya Tea Development Agency (KTDA) is a holding company owned by 54 tea factory companies, which 
are in turn owned by 600,000 tea producers in Kenya. Over 90 percent of them are small-scale farmers operat-
ing farms less than one acre. Nonetheless, Kenya is a major player in the global tea value chain, providing 13 
percent of global tea exports. KTDA Management Services, a subsidiary of KTDA, manages all payments to the 
farmers. Farmers are paid an initial payment every month and a final payment annually, after closing of accounts. 
Over the past five years, total producer payments have ranged between $609 million and $459  
million. Almost all farmers are paid electronically; approximately 40 percent of the payments are made through 
individual bank accounts, and 60 percent of payments go through accounts in SACCOs. A small proportion of 
farmers who are unbanked (approximately 2.4 percent) are paid in cash by the local SACCOs, as per payment 
information provided by the factory company affiliated with those farmers. 
KTDA started digitizing its payments following its privatization in 2000. The process accelerated rapidly in 2007, 
when KTDA engaged the services of Citi Bank to manage its producer payments. The extent of digitization has 
increased rapidly over the past five years. During this period, KTDA reduced the number of producers being paid 
in cash from 100,000 to about 12,000. KTDA expects to digitize its producer payments fully by the end of 2020. 
The figure below shows the process flow used by Citi Bank’s Mass Pay platform to process KTDA’s payments. 
Payments made by electronic funds transfer (EFT) are processed within one day, while payments made by real-
time gross settlement (RTGS) are processed on the same day. This means that all farmers paid through bank 
accounts receive their payments within one or two working days at the latest. It takes an additional day for 
producers paid through SACCO accounts to receive their payments since the payment platform does not pay 
farmer accounts directly; rather, it makes a payment into the SACCO account, and the SACCO makes the  
transfer to each farmer’s account (based on payroll information sent by KTDA). 
While KTDA does not have definitive information on the relative proportions of withdrawal channels used by the 
producers, it reports that all channels are likely being used since nearly all banks and SACCOs are linked to 
e-money accounts — provided by either banks or mobile money providers — and funds in most SACCO accounts 
can be withdrawn from any automated-teller machine in the country. KTDA is also piloting direct payments to 
farmer’s mobile money accounts but identifies the daily limit on payments into an e-money account as a limitation. 
Source: Alfred Njagi, Operations Director, KTDA, and Simeon Rugutt, Financial Controller, KTDA, personal communication. Uploads payr oll list
KTDABank account: Payment is made
directly to far mer’s account via 
Citi Pay
SACCO account: Payment is made 
to the SACCO via Citi Pay , following
which SACCO transfers r equir ed
funds to individual far mer accountsTransfers r equir ed
amount into Citi
Bank account< 1 million KSH: EFT which takes
2 days and costs 7 KSH
> 1 million KSH: RTGS thr ough
which final payment to far mer is
completed on the same day and
costs 15 KSHCiti Pay
Farmer40%
60%12  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
BOX 2
VegPro and TruTrade: The Full Converts 
TruTrade is a market intermediary that operates in Kenya and Uganda and works with around 3,700 small-
holder farmers and 25 buyers. It aims to formalize value-chain transactions and improve efficiency through a 
bespoke online and mobile-enabled trading and payment platform providing Market Connect Service to 
farmers and Source Connect Service to buyers. The platform enables efficient supply-chain management, 
price discovery, the tracking of produce from collection to delivery, and digital payments from buyers to  
farmers. TruTrade pays 100 percent of its farmers digitally.
TruTrade uses an agent-based model whereby agents recruited by TruTrade are its primary mode of  
interaction with farmers. Farmers bring their produce to collection points managed by a growing network of 
agents. The produce is checked for quality and, if of acceptable quality, weighed using calibrated scales. 
Then a purchase offer is made by the agents. If the offer is accepted, the agent triggers a payment directly 
from TruTrade to the farmer’s mobile money account or bank account. Agents also register the supplier- 
farmers on the TruTrade app. As a market intermediary, TruTrade then manages the aggregation from differ -
ent agents, transaction logistics, and delivery to the final buyer. After buyer payment is received and all  
figures are finalized, TruTrade takes a commission fee for service provided.
Over 90 percent of payments to farmers are made using mobile money; the rest go through bank accounts. 
For farmers that are unbanked but willing to sell through TruTrade, the company provides support opening 
a bank or mobile money account. To reduce the cost of mobile money payments for farmers, TruTrade covers 
the transaction and withdrawal fees that would otherwise be incurred by the farmer. The farmer typically 
receives the payment due with an additional top-up for the withdrawal fee that would be charged when the 
farmer withdraws payment. TruTrade pays the transaction fees directly to the mobile network operator or 
aggregator. The company estimates these costs are around 1.6 percent of its total payments to farmers in 
Kenya due to the relatively low fees and absence of taxes. In contrast, they are around 2.2 percent in Uganda 
due to the tax on mobile money payments (initially 2 percent but since reduced to 0.5 percent). Nonetheless, 
TruTrade estimates that its willingness to pay withdrawal and transaction fees has been instrumental in per -
suading its supplier-farmers to accept being paid digitally. Most importantly, TruTrade reports that the addi-
tional costs are offset by the reduced costs and risks associated with cash payment. 
VegPro is one of the largest producers and exporters of fresh produce from Kenya. It operates using an out-
grower model whereby it contracts farmers with irrigation facilities to produce vegetables for it. It currently 
works with around 5,000 farmers organized in six out-grower schemes. The company provides inputs on 
credit and agronomic advice to the farmers through their agricultural extension staff. 
VegPro also enters into annual contracts with their out-growers that commit it to procuring produce from the 
contracted farmers at pre-agreed prices. VegPro started digitizing payments to farmers in 2016 and has since 
transitioned to paying all its farmers digitally. It pays primarily through banks and SACCOs and currently 
works with multiple banks and SACCOs. All farmers need to have a bank or SACCO account in order to 
begin a contract with VegPro, and it supports farmers with the account-opening process. 
VegPro handles its payments by periodically instructing its primary bank to make transfers to the various 
financial institutions in which the out-growers have accounts along with a list of account details for the farm-
ers who have accounts at that institution. Payments are made on either a weekly or fortnightly basis, and the 
average amount paid to farmers ranges from $100 to $200 per week during the season and cumulatively 
ranges between $4,000 and $5,000 per year per out-grower. 
VegPro has also been successful in leveraging its relationships with financial institutions to reduce the  
minimum deposit requirements and withdrawal fee amounts for farmers who have a contract with them. 
Moreover, it has also been able to facilitate access to credit from these financial institutions for around  
one-fourth of their clients at preferred interest rates for purchasing equipment or other inputs. 
Source: Jenny Rouquette, CEO, TruTrade, and Atul Patel, Senior Outgrowers Manager, VegPro, personal communication.Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  13
Not surprisingly, firms report high levels of digitization in 
countries with higher levels of overall financial inclusion.  
Figure 3.5 shows countries with the largest proportion of 
firms reporting digitization of payments to farmers.18 
South Africa, Kenya, Uganda, and Ghana are also among 
countries in SSA with the highest levels of financial  
inclusion. As per the 2017 Global Findex, 69 percent of 
individuals in South Africa have an account; in Kenya, this 
proportion is 82 percent, while in Uganda, it is 59 percent. 
The 2017 Global Findex similarly reveals that Kenya and 
Uganda also have the highest proportion of agricultural-  
payment recipients who report receiving their payment 
into an account: 46 percent and 32 percent, respectively. Almost all firms report corporate initiatives to increase or 
implement digital payments. Over 90 percent of firms 
report having a corporate initiative to increase digital  
payments to farmers, and over half of these firms report a 
high level of priority for these initiatives. Among these, 
the cumulative investment by 24 firms is $48 million, with 
a median investment of $180,000.19 The large proportion 
of firms reporting having digitization initiatives and the 
substantial volume of financial resources planned to be 
invested to support these initiatives suggest that most 
firms recognize the benefit of digital payments and are 
willing to make the necessary financial investments to 
move from cash to digital payments. 
FIGURE 3.5: Agribusiness Firms Reporting At Least Some Digitization of Payments to Farmers (%)
Source: AAPS 2019.
18. Only countries where at least three firms responded to the 
survey were included for this analysis.19. In addition, one respondent firm, which estimated 100,000 
farmers in its supply chain, reported a planned investment of 
$100 million over the next three years. This is not included in 
the cumulative planned investment reported, since the scale 
of investment reported is an outlier compared to the 
amounts reported by the other firms.10 0 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100Uganda
South Africa
Kenya
Ghana
Cote d’lvoir e
Mali50
40
33100
100
10014  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
4. OPPORTUNITY, CHALLENGES, AND  
RECOMMENDATIONS
The Opportunity
GSMA estimates the global value of cash-based busi-
ness-to-person agricultural payments in 2021 to be $392 
billion and expects this to grow to $491 billion by 2025 
(GSMA 2020a). These represent estimates of the value of 
transactions that can potentially be digitized. GSMA 
arrives at this figure by using the estimated proportion of 
agricultural procurements that use formal procurement 
channels and the estimated proportion of these procure-
ments that are being made in cash. Formal procurement 
is defined as purchase from farmers by agribusinesses, 
government, non-government organizations, coopera-
tives, and other farmer organizations. The bulk of formal 
procurement is estimated to be from farmers by agribusi-
nesses, either directly or indirectly (through agents or 
farmer organizations). While the bulk of the global value 
of cash-based agribusiness payments is estimated to be in 
Asia, the share of SSA is significant; in 2016, GSMA  
estimated this to reach $64 billion by 2020 (GSMA 2016). 
In Côte d’Ivoire, the value of agricultural payments that 
could be digitized was estimated to be $3.8 billion in 
2017; in Ghana, this was estimated to be $2.2 billion for 
the same year (GSMA 2017, 2018b). The AAPS confirms 
that the digitization opportunity is indeed large even 
when the focus is narrowed to payments to farmers by 
agribusinesses.  The digitization potential among the firms responding 
to the survey is estimated at over $6 billion and poten-
tially benefitting approximately 17.8 million farmers.  
This estimate is based on a total estimate of procure-
ment value of over $7 billion by the responding firms, an 
average current digitization level of 10 percent, and an 
estimate of 19.4 million farmers involved in the supply 
chains of the responding firms. Given that the survey is 
not exhaustive, at both the firm level and the country 
level, the total number of farmers in agribusiness supply 
chains and total volume of agribusiness procurements 
currently not being paid digitally can reasonably be  
estimated to be much higher. This presents a large  
digitization opportunity, both in volume of payments and 
the number of benefitting farmers. 
Challenges
There are several challenges to accelerating digitization of 
agribusiness payments to farmers, however. These include 
both foundational challenges, such as limited connectiv-
ity, poor digital literacy, and a weak regulatory environ-
ment for digital payments, and proximate challenges, 
such as limited availability of CICO points and opportuni-
ties to use e-money. Limited availability of CICO points 
and limited acceptance of digital payments by merchants 
result in farmers having to incur additional costs to travel 
to the nearest CICO point to access or spend e-money 
when needed or to respond to an emergency. Further -
more, transaction and withdrawal costs combined with 
travel costs can be costly relative to the value of the pay-
ments received, further reiterating a preference for cash.  
FIGURE 4.1: Key Challenges with Digitizing Agribusiness Payments to Farmers
KEY CHALLENGES
• Poor network coverage in rural areas
• Low levels of financial inclusion at the country level
• Low digital literacy
• Regulatory limits on transaction value and account size 
• High transaction and withdrawal costs
• Limited access points to formal financial institutions (bank branches, automated-teller machines, SACCO    
   networks, etc.)
• Limited availability of agents
• Insufficient cash liquidity among agents
• Limited acceptance of digital payments by merchantsDigitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  15
As box 3 shows in the case of Olam in Indonesia, these 
challenges constrain efforts of agribusinesses to digitize 
their farmer payments even when there is a corporate 
commitment from agribusinesses to do so. Notwithstand-
ing Olam’s willingness to offset withdrawal fees, few farm-
ers were willing to accept digital payments due to limited 
access to agents and limited opportunities to use 
e-money. The Consultative Group to Assist the Poor has 
documented ecosystem challenges that constrained 
efforts to digitize agribusiness payments to smallholder 
coffee farmers in Uganda (M’Bale, Pillai, and Were 2018). 
The limited availability of CICO agents is further con-
strained by liquidity challenges faced by rural agents, and 
this is often a bigger constraint for larger buyers since they 
are dealing with much larger numbers of farmers who all receive payments at the same time. Addressing this  
challenge requires large buyers to work proactively with 
account issuers to ensure that their access points have 
enough liquidity when payments go out and the demand 
for cash-out increases. 
Recommendations
This section discusses key actions that governments and 
the private sector can take to support the agricultural-  
payments digitization agenda further. It does not discuss 
all actions needed to address the challenges in detail 
since some of these are discussed in detail elsewhere, but 
references are made to these documents.
BOX 3
Olam: Ecosystem Challenges to digitizing agribusiness farmer payments 
Olam is a leading global food and agribusiness supplying food, ingredients feed, and fiber to over 25,000 
customers worldwide. The company’s value chains span over 60 countries, with procurement across Asia, the 
Americas, and Africa. The company estimates that nearly 5 million farmers globally are in its supply chains, 
of which an estimated 2.3 million are in SSA; most are smallholder farmers. 
Digitization of its supply chain is a high priority objective for Olam, which aims to maximize digitization along 
its supply chain to enable the company to deliver a comprehensive suite of sustainability and traceability 
solutions to its customers. Olam operates multiple digital platforms to achieve this objective, including Olam 
Direct, which enables the company to connect directly with farmers to deliver better margins along with 
digitized sales information and digital payments to producers. The platform allows Olam to pay farmers 
through banks and can seamlessly integrate with mobile money providers.
The Olam Direct platform was tested and first rolled out in Indonesia in 2017 and has since been expanded 
to 11 countries, including Ghana. Olam procures produce from over 66,000 farmers through this platform, 
including 3,200 in Africa. Nonetheless, Olam has not been successful in transitioning a significant share of 
producers in this platform to digital payments. Olam reports this to be the case despite its efforts to market 
this platform feature in Indonesia and offering to top up fees for farmers, if they were to receive payments 
digitally. Olam assesses that farmers in Indonesia preferred not to receive digital payments because most 
producers needed cash to meet their daily household needs, and there is limited availability of mobile 
money or banking agents in rural areas. Furthermore, farmers also faced relatively high costs, both direct and 
indirect, to withdraw cash. 
In the short run, Olam plans to continue its payment-digitization efforts for farmers in Indonesia. While still 
limited, penetration of digital payments in Indonesia’s rural communities is expected to be relatively quicker 
in comparison to other regions, due to better access to mobile money or banks and merchant acceptance of 
e-money. Lessons from Indonesia will then be used to find suitable digital-payment solutions for operations 
in Africa and Latin America. 
Source: Olam 2019 and Siddharth Sapute, Programme Director, Digital Olam, personal communication.16  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
4.1 Governments should strengthen their digital-economy 
foundations and the enabling environments for agritech, 
fintech and e-commerce: There is increasing recognition 
of the importance of strengthening the foundations nec-
essary for the growth of Africa’s digital economy. This is 
demonstrated by the African Union’s 2020–30 Digital 
Transformation Strategy and the World Bank’s Digital 
Economy for Africa (DE4A) Initiative. The African Union’s 
strategy identifies digital infrastructure, digital skills, digi-
tal innovation and entrepreneurship, and an enabling pol-
icy and regulatory environment as foundations, and digital 
agriculture and digital trade and financial services as 
among the critical sectors to drive the digital transforma-
tion of the economy (African Union 2020). The World 
Bank’s DE4A initiative has already supported digital-  
economy diagnostics in over 20 countries and has opera-
tions in over 15 countries that support the DE4A initiative; 
additional diagnostics are underway in around 15 coun-
tries, and 29 investment operations are in the pipeline.20 A 
recent World Bank publication identifies four actions that 
governments in SSA can take to help scale up disruptive 
agricultural technologies. These include investing in poli-
cies and platforms for data collection and access from 
public and private sources, developing an e-agriculture 
strategy and an agri-technology start-up policy, and strengthening e-governance systems for all public ser -
vices and resources being administered through ministries 
of agriculture (Kim et al. 2020). Strengthened digital-  
economy foundations and ecosystems for agritech,  
fintech, and e-commerce are critical to help advance the 
digitization of agribusiness payments since improvements 
in all these areas can help make it more feasible for agri-
businesses to digitize their payments to farmers and 
increase farmers’ ability to use digital payments.
In parallel to efforts to strengthen digital-economy foun-
dations and key ecosystems, governments should also 
assess if policies are inadvertently undermining digitiza-
tion efforts. A good case in point is Uganda. As discussed 
in the previous section, Uganda has a higher overall level 
of financial inclusion than most countries in Africa, and all 
firms that are active in Uganda and participated in the sur -
vey reported using digital means to pay at least some of 
the producers in their supply chains. Yet the decision by 
the government to tax mobile money services also made 
digital payments less attractive to farmers and thereby 
harder for agribusiness firms in Uganda to move fully to 
digital payments. Box 4 describes the case of Kyagalanyi 
Coffee, the largest coffee exporter in Uganda. While some 
firms such as TruTrade have persisted with digital  
BOX 4
Kyagalanyi Coffee, Uganda: Importance of Alignment of Government Policy to  
Facilitate Digital Payments
Kyagalanyi is the largest coffee exporter in Uganda and buys conventional coffee across the country. The coffee 
value chain in Uganda is fully liberalized, and coffee is traded through an intrinsic network of agents, middle-
men, and traders. Kyagalanyi procures coffee using multiple procurement channels: (a) through purchases from 
dry mills in Kampala, the capital, that are typically supplied by large traders; (b) through buying agents in vari-
ous parts of the country — all purchases of robusta beans and some purchases of arabica are made this way, 
while most arabica purchases are made from certified promoter farmers who also buy from other farmers; and 
(c) through washing stations and small buying centers where the company purchases from farmers directly. The 
firm estimates that it procures from approximately 21,000 farmers, from whom they buy directly or through 
promoter farmers. 
Given the relatively high level of uptake of mobile money in Uganda, Kyagalanyi invested in setting up a mobile 
money platform to allow mobile money payments to farmers who deliver coffee directly to the washing  
stations. Just when the company switched to mobile money payments, however, the government introduced a 
new tax on mobile money. As a result, a large majority of farmers refused to receive their payments through 
mobile money and insisted on cash. 
Source: Inputs from Anneke Fermont, Regional Sustainability Manager, Kyagalanyi Coffee Ltd., and M’Bale, Pillai, and Were 2018.
20. https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/all-africa-digi-
tal-transformation.Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  17
payments notwithstanding the higher costs, partly driven 
by the taxes, it is likely that such taxes have dissuaded 
several others from moving to digital payments. 
4.2 Governments should take targeted actions to 
strengthen the rural DFS ecosystem: While strengthening 
the national digital-economy foundations and key ecosys-
tems is critical, targeted actions are also needed to 
strengthen the rural DFS ecosystem, since rural areas face 
specific challenges related to their geography. These 
actions fall into two broad categories: one relating to 
increasing the density of CICO points in rural areas, and 
another that relates to increasing the opportunity for rural 
residents to use e-money. While the first set of actions 
would make it easier and less costly for farmers and others 
residing in rural areas to convert e-money to cash and vice 
versa, the second would reduce the need to make these 
conversions. The Consultative Group to Assist the Poor’s 
technical guide for strengthening the agent network rec-
ommends several steps that policy makers and regulators 
can take to achieve this objective (Hernandez 2019). 
Among others, recommendations for policy makers 
include (a) allowing social payments and fiscal payments 
to be made through CICO agent networks that are shared 
with other financial and non-financial providers; (b) when 
fiscally feasible, using direct and time-bound subsidies to 
reduce agent start-up costs in previously unserved rural 
areas; and (c) simplifying requirements to become a DFS 
agent. Recommendations made for regulators include (a) 
taking a risk-based approach to regulating CICO agent 
networks; (b) developing a strategy for agent interopera-
bility to enable customers to perform DFS transactions 
between multiple providers using the most accessible 
CICO agent; and (c) avoiding dictating fees or price caps 
for CICO transactions to ensure that market prices reflect 
provider costs. 
4.3 Agribusinesses need to build an industry consensus 
on the value of digital payments to farmers as a key 
driver of achieving their sustainability goals. There is 
already a consensus within the food and agribusiness 
industry on the need to advance sustainability in the 
industry. This is demonstrated by the sustainability com-
mitments made by agribusinesses, the increasing number 
of firms that have “chief sustainability officers,” and par -
ticipation in initiatives such as the Consumer Goods 
Forum and the Business for Social Responsibility. How-
ever, there is limited understanding of the strong linkage 
between the sustainability goals and the value of digital 
payments to farmers. While the rural context presents 
larger challenges to digitization, sustainability initiatives in 
the agribusiness sector can learn from initiatives in other 
sectors, such as the garment and fast-moving consumer goods industries, to build an industry consensus on the 
need to move toward digitization of agribusiness pay-
ments to farmers. The United Nations Capital Develop-
ment Fund’s Better Than Cash Alliance documents several 
successful cases of “last mile” payments digitization in 
private-sector supply chains and has built an alliance of 
companies working toward advancing digital payments 
(BTCA 2018). Its experience shows that, while this is a 
challenging endeavor, it is indeed possible to make signif-
icant gains over a relatively short period. In 2018, building 
on its previous efforts and achievements in this area, Gap 
Inc. announced a goal for all its Tier 1 suppliers (approxi-
mately 800 factories in about 30 countries) to fully transi-
tion from a cash-based system to digital payments by 
2020. In 2018, 80 percent of its factories were already 
making digital payments.21 
4.4 Agribusinesses should strengthen partnerships with 
PSPs and better leverage the opportunity presented by 
the fintech revolution: Several agribusinesses already 
partner with PSPs to deliver digital payments to farmers 
effectively and efficiently. The KTDA case (box 1) is an 
early example of a partnership between a multinational 
bank and a farmers organization to advance digital pay-
ments to farmers. Cargill has partnered with MTN in 
Ghana to ensure that MTN’s mobile money agents have 
enough liquidity during the period when it makes the bulk 
of its payments to farmers (GSMA 2018a). Partnerships 
can be a win-win opportunity for PSPs and agribusinesses. 
GSMA’s Agritech toolkit for digitization of agricultural 
value chains presents the business case for mobile money 
providers and agribusinesses to invest in “last mile” digi-
tization (GSMA 2020b). Mastercard sets out a broader 
case for partnerships between financial service providers 
and firms in the real sector (Mastercard 2019).22
For PSPs, digitization of agribusiness payments presents a 
large revenue opportunity. GSMA estimates the revenue 
opportunity in SSA for mobile money providers to be 
$214 million in 2021 (GSMA 2020a). For agribusinesses, 
partnerships can help negotiate better pricing structures 
for bulk payments. The ability of agribusinesses to pay full 
or part of the transaction fees makes such partnerships 
particularly attractive for PSPs. The cost of transaction fees 
21. https://www.betterthancash.org/news/media-releases/
gap-inc-sets-new-goal-for-apparel-suppliers-to-pay-gar -
ment-workers-digitally-by-2020
22. The paper highlights opportunities for partnerships between 
financial services providers and contract manufacturers, mass 
transit providers, fast-moving consumer good companies, 
energy providers, and agribusinesses.18  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
is often a disincentive for farmers to accept digital pay-
ments, and the willingness of companies such as TruTrade 
and Inbev to pay the transaction costs can be instrumental 
in persuading farmers to accept digital payments. The 
TruTrade case (box 2) shows that the cost of such fees as a 
share of the total payment to the farmer can be relatively 
low for agribusinesses. VegPro’s experience (box 2) sug-
gests that even relatively small firms can negotiate lower 
fees for bulk payments. These partnerships can also help 
test innovations that can demonstrate to PSPs the busi-
ness case for innovating on pricing models. For example, 
research by the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor in 
partnership with Olam shows that there is a business case 
for mobile network operators and other PSPs offering 
lower pricing structures for high-frequency face-to-face 
transactions (Hernandez, Riquet, and Sberro 2018). 
Agribusinesses should also consider becoming agents for 
banks or mobile money providers. When allowed by  regulation, larger agribusinesses can become corporate 
agents, while smaller agribusinesses, such as agricultural 
input dealers, can become retail agents. This can poten-
tially be attractive to agribusinesses, since it can offer a 
new revenue stream while also creating the opportunity to 
offer a broader set of additional services to the farmers in 
their supply chains. Agribusinesses with large national 
footprints could significantly advance the digitization of 
farmer payments. Examples of such agribusinesses 
include the large licensed buying companies in Ghana 
that are authorized to procure cocoa, the warehouses  
affiliated with the Ethiopian Commodity Exchange in  
Ethiopia, and large agricultural input dealers in many 
countries. 
Agribusinesses that do not see a business case or find it 
challenging to partner with PSPs directly should explore 
partnerships with fintechs to foster increased digitization 
of agribusiness payments. Box 5 describes the partner -
BOX 5
AB InBev: Blockchain-based Agribusiness Payments to Farmers
A partnership between AB InBev , the world’s largest brewer, and BanQu, a blockchain-based platform, has 
helped AB InBev advance its agenda to digitize farmer payments as part of its 2025 sustainability goal, which 
is to ensure that 100 percent of farmers are properly skilled, connected, and financially empowered. AB 
InBev purchases from over 15,000 smallholder farmers globally, most of whom are in SSA. 
In June 2018, around 2,000 cassava farmers in Zambia began selling their harvests to Zambian Breweries, an 
AB InBev subsidiary, through the platform. In 2019, the platform was rolled out by Nile Breweries Limited, 
another InBev subsidiary, to purchase barley in Uganda and aid in the distribution of seeds and other crop 
inputs for approximately 1,700 barley farmers. BanQu’s platform creates a decentralized digital ledger of 
each transaction for the produce bought on the platform. Instead of cash, each farmer receives a digital 
payment through one of the major mobile money providers in the country. The platform also tracks the vol-
ume of goods delivered, the quality of those goods, and the price paid. Both the agribusiness and farmers 
benefit from increased traceability and transparency in their supply chain. 
In the medium term, AB InBev expects the inclusion of inputs in the platform to better enable the provision 
of credit and other financial services to farmers. Nile Breweries Limited is piloting a new direct-to-farmer 
weather-based crop insurance through start-up partner OKO in conjunction with BanQu. In 2020, Nile Brew-
eries plans to extend the use of the platform to its broader barley program as well as its sorghum program. 
Additionally, in both Zambia and Uganda, beyond tracking the purchase of crops, BanQu also will deploy 
smart contracts to help the breweries and farmers plan for the season. AB InBev also plans to extend the use 
of the platform to its sorghum program in Tanzania in 2020. 
Beyond Africa, AB InBev has implemented the BanQu platform to support its barley program in India and 
plans to deploy the platform in a smallholder cassava program in Brazil in 2020, while continuing to explore 
the use case for the platform in other Latin American supply chains. 
Source: https://www.fastcompany.com/90328012/this-digital-ledger-helps-small-farmers-get-a-fair-deal and inputs from Katie 
Hoard, Global Director, Agricultural Innovation and Sustainability, AB Inbev. Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  19
ship between AB InBev, the world’s largest brewer, and 
BanQu, a fintech based in the United States with opera-
tions in Zambia and Uganda. The partnership with BanQu 
helps reduce AB InBev’s cost of directly making many  
relatively small payments and provides the company with 
the opportunity to provide value-added services. It should 
be noted that the exponential growth of mobile money in 
Zambia in recent years is likely to have been critical in 
making the InBev initiative feasible (World Bank 2020). In 
addition to cost efficiencies, such partnerships with  
fintechs can facilitate the delivery of other livelihood-  
enhancing financial services beyond payments, such as 
digital credit and savings, as well as insurance. The  
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor documents several 
Fintech innovations that have the potential to scale up 
financial inclusion of the unbanked (Murthy et al. 2019). 
4.5 Development finance partners should support  
targeted initiatives on agricultural-payments  
digitization. Given the benefits of agricultural-payments 
digitization to multiple stakeholders — farmers, agribusi-
nesses, and rural economies in general — development 
partners need to scale up support to further this agenda. The World Bank is supporting two projects in SSA with 
components related to digitization of agriculture pay-
ments. The $50 million Benin Rural Transformation Project 
includes a component that supports the digitization of 
agribusiness payments to smallholders through the cre-
ation of a single digital platform linking agribusinesses, 
smallholders, and mobile network operators. In a second 
phase, the platform is also expected to enable traceability 
of smallholder transactions. The $100 million Niger Smart 
Villages for Rural Growth and Digital Inclusion Project sup-
ports (i) the digital registration and onboarding of small-
holders in multifunctional digital centers; (ii) the upgrading 
of agriculture suppliers’ information technology systems 
and the creation of a digital platform that will allow farm-
ers associations to order and purchase inputs and make 
direct payments to their members using a mobile phone; 
and (iii) use data associated with digital agricultural pay-
ments and other alternative data to generate credit 
scores. The project is expected to benefit around two mil-
lion farmers. The International Finance Corporation is also 
scaling up its work in this area by building on its work with 
Cargill in Côte d’Ivoire from 2013 to 2018 (IFC and  
Mastercard Foundation 2018). 20  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
FIGURE 5.1: Digitization of Agribusiness Payments to Farmers: A Schematic Representation5. CONCLUSION
Farmers, agribusinesses, and the rural economy stand to 
gain from increased digitization of agribusiness payments. 
Digitization can advance financial inclusion of farmers and 
thereby help them smooth consumption, make productiv-
ity-enhancing investments, and better manage their vul-
nerability to shocks through improved access to savings, 
credit, and insurance products. For agribusiness firms, 
digital payments can help improve not only efficiency but 
also transparency by bringing better visibility to how and 
when farmers are paid, thereby enabling them to comply 
better with their commitments to sustainability. Lastly, reg-
ular digital payments from agribusinesses can benefit the 
rural economy more broadly by strengthening the rural 
DFS ecosystem by improving the business viability of DFS 
agents, encouraging merchant payment acceptance, and 
enabling more e-money usage for local payments. 
Financial inclusion of farmers is critical if they are to partic-
ipate fully and successfully in a digital economy of the 
future. Digitization of payments by agribusinesses to farm-
ers can act as the ramp to broader financial inclusion by 
enabling access to transaction accounts as well as adding 
value by facilitating better usage of these accounts. Such 
transaction accounts can be used for a range of liveli-
Digitial platforms, Rural
DFS ecosystem
Agricultural inputs
payments
Digital financial
services - savings,
credit and insurance
Other merc hant
payments
Digitial infrastructur e
Digital skillsFarmerAgribusiness
procurement
paymentshood-enhancing purposes that help smooth consumption 
and build assets through credit, saving, and insurance. 
When combined with solutions that enable acceptance of 
digital payments by agricultural input dealers and other 
rural businesses, digitization of agribusiness payments 
can help significantly increase the uptake of agricultur -
al-payments digitization initiatives and strengthen the  
digital economy.
The analysis and recommendations presented in this 
report suggest that while levels of digitization in agricul-
tural payments in SSA are rising (albeit from a very low 
base), much more needs to be done to accelerate the 
pace of digitization. These include actions by govern-
ments to strengthen the foundational drivers of a digital 
economy and the ecosystem for rural DFS, and more spe-
cific actions targeted at agricultural payments; by agri-
businesses to strengthen partnerships with PSPs and 
fintechs; and by development partners to support tar -
geted initiatives on agricultural-payments digitization. 
Figure 5.1 shows a schematic representation of the digiti-
zation opportunity presented by the agribusiness pay-
ments that are currently made in cash, the direct and 
indirect benefits that can flow from digitization of these 
payments, and the challenges that needs to be addressed 
to realize the opportunity.  
Source: AuthorsDigitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  21
Additional country-level analysis, such as those under -
taken by the Better Than Cash Alliance and World Cocoa 
Foundation in Ghana (BTCA and World Cocoa Founda-
tion 2020a, 2020b), by the International Finance Corpora-
tion and Mastercard Foundation in Côte d’Ivoire (IFC and 
Mastercard Foundation, undated), and by GSMA in both 
of these countries (GSMA 2017, 2018a), would be needed 
to better understand the demand- and supply-side con-
straints across specific country contexts and commodity 
value chains, farmers’ preferences, and obstacles for tar -
get population segments, such as women farmers, based 
on which actions can be tailored to the relevant context. The COVID-19 pandemic has only reinforced the urgency 
of this agenda. Digitizing payments has become even 
more pertinent in avoiding disruptions to the supply chain 
and maintaining economic activity. The ongoing crisis pro-
vides additional impetus to accelerate the pace of digiti-
zation of agribusiness payments to allow firms and farmers 
to stay resilient, maintain the supply of food and other 
agricultural commodities, and combat the negative 
shocks to income caused by the pandemic. 22  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
APPENDIX A: REFERENCES
African Union. 2020. The Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa (2020–30). Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. https://au.int/en/
documents/20200518/digital-transformation-strategy-africa-2020-2030.
AGRA (Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa). 2017. Africa Agriculture Status Report 2017: The Business of Small-
holder Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa. Nairobi, Kenya: AGRA. https://agra.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Final-
AASR-2017-Aug-28.pdf.
———. 2019. Africa Agriculture Status Report 2019. https://agra.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/AASR2019-The-
Hidden-Middleweb.pdf.
Anderson, J., and D. Sobol. 2018. Executive Summary: CGAP National Survey of Smallholder Households. Washington, 
DC: Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP). https://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/publications/Execu-
tive-Summary-CGAP-National-Surveys-of-Smallholder-Households-Nov-2018_2.pdf.
Brune, L., X. Giné, J. Goldberg, and D. Yang. 2016. “Facilitating Savings for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence 
from Malawi.” Economic Development and Culture Change 64, no. 2 (January 2016): 187–220.
BTCA (Better Than Cash Alliance). 2017. The Role of Digital Payments in Sustainable Agriculture and Food Security. 
https://www.betterthancash.org/tools-research/reports/the-role-of-digital-payments-in-sustainable-agricul-
ture-and-food-security.
———. 2018. The Future of Supply Chains: Why Companies Are Digitizing Payments. https://www.betterthancash.org/
tools-research/reports/the-future-of-supply-chains-why-companies-are-digitizing-payments.
BTCA and World Cocoa Foundation. 2020a. Digitizing Payments in Ghana’s Cocoa Supply Chain: Four Building Blocks 
for Responsible and Scalable Digitization. https://www.betterthancash.org/tools-research/reports/digitizing-pay-
ments-in-ghanas-cocoa-supply-chain.
———. 2020b. The Hidden Cost of Cash to Ghana’s Cocoa Sector. https://www.betterthancash.org/tools-research/
reports/the-hidden-costs-of-cash-to-ghanas-cocoa-sector .
Cargill. 2017. “For First Time, 10,000 Ghana Cocoa Farmers Able to Receive Premium Payments by Mobile Phone,” 
September 11, 2017. https://www.cargill.com/2017/10000-ghana-cocoa-farmers-able-to-receive-mobile-phone-payment.  
Christen, R. P ., and J. Anderson. 2013. “Segmentation of Smallholder Households: Meeting the Range of Financial 
Needs in Agricultural Families.” Focus Note 85. Washington, DC: CGAP .
CPMI (Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures) and World Bank Group. 2016. Payment Aspects of Financial 
Inclusion (PAFI). Washington, DC: Bank of International Settlements and World Bank Group. https://www.worldbank.
org/en/topic/financialinclusion/brief/pafi-task-force-and-report.
de Janvry, A., and E. Sadoulet. 2009. Agricultural Growth and Poverty Reduction. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/4432.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A., L. Klapper, D. Singer, S. Ansar, and J. Hess. 2018. The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring 
Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson. 2011. “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence 
from Kenya.” American Economic Review 101, no. 6: 2350–90.Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  23
GSMA. 2016. Market Size and Opportunity in Digitizing Payments in Agricultural Value Chains. https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/resources/market-size-and-opportunity-in-digitising-payments-in-agricultural-value-chains/.
———. 2017. Opportunities in Agriculture Value Chain Digitization: Learning from Cote d’Ivoire. https://www.gsma.
com/mobilefordevelopment/resources/opportunities-agricultural-value-chain-digitisation-learnings-cote-divoire/.
———. 2018a. Prerequisites to Digitizing the Agricultural Last Mile: Addressing the Connectivity, Liquidity and Due 
Diligence Challenges. https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/mAgri-Tool-
kit-2018-Prerequsities-to-digitising-the-agricultural-last-mile.pdf.
———. 2018b. Opportunities in Agriculture Value Chain Digitization: Learning from Ghana. https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/resources/opportunities-in-agricultural-value-chain-digitisation-learnings-from-ghana/.
———. 2020a. Digitising Payments in Agricultural Value Chains: The Revenue Opportunity to 2025. https://www.gsma.
com/mobilefordevelopment/resources/digitising-payments-in-agricultural-value-chains-the-revenue-opportuni-
ty-to-2025/.
———. 2020b. The GSMA AgriTech Toolkit for the Digitisation of Agricultural Value Chains. https://www.gsma.com/
mobilefordevelopment/resources/the-gsma-agritech-toolkit-for-the- digitisation-of-agricultural-value-chains/.
Hernandez, E. 2019. Agent Networks at the Last Mile. Washington, DC: CGAP . https://www.cgap.org/research/publica-
tion/agent-networks-last-mile. 
Hernandez E., C. Riquet, and R. Sberro. 2018. “Building Rural Digital Ecosystems, One Small Payment at a Time.” CGAP 
blog, August 28, 2018. https://www.cgap.org/blog/building-rural-digital-ecosystems-one-small-payment-time. 
IFC (International Finance Corporation) and Mastercard Foundation. 2018. Digital Financial Services for Agriculture 
Handbook. https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/region__ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/sub-saharan+af-
rica/resources/dfs-agriculture. 
———. Undated. Opportunities for Digital Financial Services in the Cocoa Value Chain in Côte d’Ivoire: Insights from 
New Data. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/30203.
ISF Advisors and the Mastercard Foundation Rural and Agricultural Finance Learning Lab. 2019. Pathways to Prosperity: 
Rural and Agricultural Finance State of the Sector Report. Washington, DC. https://pathways.raflearning.org/report/
was-the-year-2016-an-inflection-point/.
Kim, J., P . Shah, J. C. Gaskell, A. Prasann, and A. Luthra. 2020. Scaling Up Disruptive Agricultural Technologies in Africa: 
International Development in Focus. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1522-5.
Klapper, L., D. Singer, S. Ansar, and J. Hess. 2019. Financial Risk Management in Agriculture: Analyzing Data from a New 
Module of the Global Findex Database. Policy Research Working Paper 9078. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.  
http://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/544071576074656430/pdf/Financial-Risk-Management-in-Agricul-
ture-Analyzing-Data-from-a-New-Module-of-the-Global-Findex-Database.pdf.
Mastercard. 2019. The Role for Last Mile Partners in Expanding Payments at the Base of the Pyramid. https://www.mas-
tercardcenter.org/insights/digital-economy-last-mile.24  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
Mattern, M. W., and R. M. Ramirez. 2016. “Digitizing Value Chain Finance for Smallholder Farmers.” Focus Note 106. 
Washington, DC: CGAP .
M’Bale, A., R. Pillai, and N. Were. 2018. Digitizing Agricultural Payments: Lessons from Uganda’s Coffee Value Chain. 
CGAP Working Paper, June 2018. Washington, DC: CGAP .
Murthy G., M. Fernandez-Vidal, X. Faz, and R. Barreto. 2019. Fintech and Financial Inclusion: Looking past the Hype and 
Exploring Their Potential. Washington, DC: CGAP . https://www.cgap.org/research/publication/fintechs-and-finan-
cial-inclusion.
Nair, A., T. Ono, and S. Mapfumo. 2018. Rwanda Agriculture Finance Diagnostic. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Olam. 2019. “Digital Olam in the Making.” Olam Insights 1 (May 2019). https://www.olamgroup.com/content/dam/
olamgroup/investor-relations/ir-library/olam-insights/olam-insights-pdfs/Olam_Insight2019_Issue1.pdf.
World Bank. 2020. Accelerating Digital Transformation in Zambia: Digital Economy Diagnostic Report. World Bank, 
Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33806. 
World Bank Group. 2014. The Opportunities of Digitizing Payments: How Digitization of Payments, Transfers, and Remit-
tances Contributes to the G20 Goals of Broad-based Economic Growth. Financial Inclusion, and Women’s Economic 
Empowerment. Washington, DC.Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  25
APPENDIX B: AGRIBUSINESSES THAT PARTICIPATED IN THE AAPS
 Name of Agribusinesses 
1 AB InBev
2 AFEX Commodities Exchange Limited
3 Barry Callebaut
4 BOVIMA (Bonne Viande de Madagascar)
5 Bunge
6 Cargill
7 Country Bird Holdings
8 Ecom
9 Export Trading Group (ETG)
10 FrieslandCampina
11 Interprofession of the maize sector of Mali
12 JFS (Joao Ferreira dos Santos)
13 Kenya Tea Development Agency Holdings Ltd. (KTDA)
14 Kyagalanyi Coffee Ltd / Volcafe Uganda
15 Louis Dreyfus Company
16 Mali Shi
17 Mars Wrigley Confectionary
18 McCormick and Company
19 Meru Central Coffee Cooperative Union Ltd
20 Mukwano Industries (U) Ltd
21 Neumann Kaffee Gruppe (NKG)
22 Olam International
23 Olivado EPZ Limited
24 Produits du Sud
25 Sucden
26 Telcar Cocoa Ltd.
27 TruTrade Ltd
28 Unilever
29 VegPro Kenya Ltd
 26  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa
APPENDIX C: AFRICA AGRIBUSINESS PAYMENTS SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE
1. Agribusiness Information
Name of the company:
2. Respondent Information
Name: 
Title: 
Affiliation: 
Phone Number:
Email:
3. Procurement in Africa. Please provide the following information for the crops you procure in Africa.
Total approximate value 
of procurements last 
fiscal year (in US$ million 
equivalent) (enter data)Estimated Number of 
farmers in the supply 
chain* (in 000s)  
(enter data)Estimated Share of number of 
farmers paid digitally (%) **Estimated Share of 
value of payments to 
farmers paid digitally 
(%) **
• None
• <10%
• 10%-30%
• 30%-50%
• >50%• None
• <10%
• 10%-30%
• 30%-50%
• >50%
*Including farmers in direct procurement programs and farmers from whom procurement is done by suppliers.
**including payments in direct procurement programs as well as procurements through intermediaries. 
4. Countries with highest levels of Digitization of Procurement Payments. Please provide the following information 
for the top 3 country-crop combinations with highest share of procurement payments made through digital  
channels.24  
Commodity CountryFinal 
payer to 
the farmerPayment 
Disbursement 
instrument to 
the farmerIf other 
specify 
(enter 
specification)Primary withdrawal 
channel by the 
farmerIf other specify 
(enter specification)
  • Directly 
by the 
company
• Buying 
agent 
(interme-
diary)
• Farmer 
organi-
zation• Electronic 
voucher
• Credit 
transfer to a 
bank 
account
• Credit 
transfer to  
a NBFI 
account
• Credit 
transfer to 
e-money/
mobile 
money 
account
• Other• Branch of a bank
• Branch of a NBFI
• Agent of a bank
• Agent of a NBFI
• Agent of a 
nonbank 
payment service 
provider
• E-wallet of a bank
• E-wallet of a 
nonbank 
payment service 
provider
• Other
24. This question was modified for national respondents given that they only procure from one countryDigitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa  27
5. Rank the Major Reasons for not having fully digitized payments to farmers.
Ranking ReasonIf other specify
(enter speci fication)
• Farmers prefer cash
• No digital channels to reach majority of farmers;  
limited network coverage
• Low ownership of mobile phones
• Limited financial literacy
• Investment needed from company too high
• Other
1
2  
3  
6. Corporate Strategy on Payments Digitization
Is there a corporate 
initiative to increase or 
implement digital 
payments to farmers in 
Africa?Corporate 
PriorityIf there is a corporate target 
toward digitizing payments 
to the farmers, what % of 
farmers in your supply chain 
are targeted to receive 
digital payments by end 
2020?* (enter data)What investments is the company planning 
to make in the next three years to support 
its digitization efforts? (in US$ million 
equivalent) (enter data)
 • Low
• Medium
• High
*Including farmers in direct procurement programs and farmers from whom procurement is done by suppliers.
7. Payments Digitization - Country Initiatives. Please provide the 3 country-crop combinations that are of  
highest priority to the company.
Commodity CountryWhat % of farmers in the supply chain are expected to 
receive payments digitally by end 2020?*
*Including farmers in direct procurement programs and farmers from whom procurement is done by suppliers.30  Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa