DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES NO. 2018-22DECEMBER 2018
E-Finance in the Philippines: 
Status and Prospects for Digital Financial Inclusion 
The PIDS Discussion Paper Series constitutes studies that are preliminary and subject to further revisions. They are being circulated in a limited number of copies only for 
purposes of soliciting comments and suggestions for further refinements. The studies under the Series are unedited and unreviewed. The views and opinions expressed are those 
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect those of the Institute. Not for quotation without permission from the author(s) and the Institute.
CONTACT US:
RESEARCH INFORMATION DEPARTMENT
Philippine Institute for Development Studies
18th Floor, Three Cyberpod Centris - North Tower 
EDSA corner Quezon Avenue, Quezon City, Philippinespublications@mail.pids.gov.ph
(+632) 372-1291/(+632) 372-1292https://www.pids.gov.phGilberto M. Llanto, Maureen Ane D. Rosellon,
and Ma. Kristina P . OrtizE-Finance in the Philippines:  
Status and Prospects for Digital Financial Inclusion  
 
 
 
 
Gilberto M. Llanto 
Maureen Ane D. Rosellon 
Ma. Kristina P. Ortiz  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHILIPPINE INSTITUTE FOR DEVELOPMENT STUDIES  
 
 
December  2018  
 
 
 
 
 1 
  
 
Abstract  
 
Digital technology applied to banking and financial transactions or e -finance in general has 
made financial services more widely available and affordable to consumers. And with 
appropriate and affordable technologies and applications, the financially excluded and the 
unserved can participate in mainstream banking and finance that will open many opportunities 
for consumption smoothing and investment and earning possibilities. This paper attempts  to 
study the contribution of technology towards financial inclusion in the Philippines  and analyze 
whether  e-finance has enabled the last mile consumers to avail o f financial products and 
services  affordably and conveniently . It uses data from financial inclusion databases, and 
results from a national financial inclusion survey, key informant interviews and focus group discussions with users of a mobile banking application. Electronic money transfers are found to be increasing  in the country, but digital adoption rate, particularly for mobile payments, is 
relatively low especially if compared with countries in the region. The study probes into the 
experience and concerns of digital finance users, and presents r ecommendations to  improve 
provision and use of digital financial products and services.  
 
Keywords : e-finance, digital finance, digital financi al inclusion , mobile banking, electronic 
banking, electronic money, e -money , 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 Table of Contents  
 
1. Introduction  .............................................................................................................. 3 
2. Current global trends in the digital economy  ......................................................... 6 
3. Philippine case of e -finance and e -money  .............................................................. 8 
3.1. Current Trends ........................................................................................................... 8 
3.2. Factors affecting use of e- money  ............................................................................. 12 
3.3. Case study: CARD Bank’s “konek2CARD” mobile application .................................  14 
3.4. Role of the regulator  ................................................................................................ 22 
4. Conclusion and policy recommendation  .............................................................. 24 
 
 
List of Tables 
Table 1. Number of banks authorized by BSP to engage in e- banking operations  ................ 9 
Table 2. Digital Adoption Index of Selected Asian Countries  ............................................... 10 
Table 3. Some indicators on digital financial transactions in selected Asian countries ......... 11 
Table 4.  Electronic money in the Philippines  ....................................................................... 12 
Table 5. Reasons for not transacting with e- money agents  ................................................. 13 
Table 6. Schedule of Fees, konek2CARD  ........................................................................... 19 
 
 
List of Figures  
Figure 1. CARD Bank’s client profile  ................................................................................... 16 
 
 
Annexes …..………………………………………………………………………………………... 28 
 
 
  3 
 E-finance  in the Philippines:  
Status and p rospects for d igital f inancial i nclusion  
 
Gilberto M. Llanto, Maureen An e D. Rosellon, and Ma. Kristina P. Ortiz1 
 
 
1. Introduction    
 
Digital f inancial inclusion, defined as digital access to and use of formal financial services by 
excluded and underserved populations (Lauer and Lyman 2015) has caught worldwide 
attention  because of its great potential in contributing to inclusive  growth and incom e 
inequality. Digital technology applied to banking and financial transactions or e -finance in 
general has made financial services more widely available and affordable to millions of poor 
customers.  This has induced the welcome phenomenon of “poor custome rs moving from 
exclusively cash -based transactions to formal financial services” (Lauer and Lyman 2015, page 
1).  Financial inclusion means bringing all segments of a population irrespective of their 
economic situation to have effective access to a wide range of financial products and services 
(World Bank, BSP, Llanto 2017).  Bourguignon and Klein ( 2008) emphasized the role of lack 
of access to ﬁnance in generating persistent income inequality, as well as slower growth.   
 Because of financial inclusion’s  great potential in contributing to inclusive growth and income 
equality , several  global initiatives to foster it  have been made. G20 leaders established the 
Financial Inclusion Action Plan and the Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion. In 
Southeast Asia, the region’s leaders have made the promotion of financial inclusion a key 
objective under the ASEAN Framewor k on Equitable Economic Development (Yoshino and 
Morgan 2017).    
 
Various global efforts to provide inclusive financial services  seem to indicate the positive 
difference of access to financial services to people’s lives
2. Reviewing various studies on 
financial inclusion, Cull, Ehrbeck and Holle (2014) reported recent evidence based on rigorous 
research methodologies indicating  the potential of inclusive and efficient financial markets to 
improve welfare, reduce transaction costs, spur economic activity, and improve delivery of 
social benefits and innovative private -sector solutions.  These authors made the observation 
that development of inclusive financial systems is  an important element  for economic and 
social progress on the development agenda.  However, notwithstanding those efforts, there still 
are many others, especially millions of poor households , who have remained financially 
excluded  and underserved.  A key indicator of financial inclusion is the percentage of adults 
who have an individual or joint account at a formal financial institution, such as a bank, credit 
union, cooperative, post office, or microfinance institution (MFI), or with a mobile money 
provider.  According to the Global Findex database for 2014, which is based on survey 
interviews, the worldwide average for this measure is 62%, and the total number of adults 
without accounts is about 2.0 billion, down substantially from 2.7 billion in 2011, but still high (Yoshino and Morgan 2017).    
 
In the Philippines, the country’s two successive development plans, namely Philippine 
Development Plan (PDP) 2011- 2016 and 2017 -2022, have  identified financial inclusion as a 
key objective for achieving the  country’s goal  of inclusive growth. The experience of 
Philippine microfinance banks and NGOs in the past two decades  has point ed to the salutary 
                                                           
1 Philippine Insti tute for Development Studies. The authors thank Mr. Arjan  Paulo S.  Salvanera for his research assistance.   
2 Some of these have been documented by the World Bank’s Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP).  4 
 effects on the lower -income groups arising from wider  access to basic finance services 
(deposits, loans, micro- insurance).   The Philippines is considered a pioneer in financial 
inclusion because of its many initiatives and gains in microfinance that are especially focused 
on the underserved, the unserved, a nd the small and medium enterprises (SMEs) .  This has 
emboldened policy makers in pushing for inclusive finance in view of the  sizeable number of 
the population that continues to be financially excluded.  Greater financial inclusion  presents a 
major challenge to policy makers who see it as an effective mechanism for addressing problems 
of growth and income inequality.  
 In line with the PDP s, which was  crafted by the government in consultation with private 
stakeholders, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)
3 is working toward an incl usive financial 
system that is fully responsive to the needs of the domestic economy .  Inclusive finance will 
be achieved t hrough innovative delivery channels and use of technology to reach the financially 
excluded.  The BSP has been very active and consistent in coordinating efforts to expand 
financial inclusion  and has adopted a facilitative regulatory stance toward  microfinance 
initiatives, including e -finance for the financially excluded (Llanto 2017) .   Among other 
initiative s, the BSP has encouraged micro- savings and allowed banks to expand their financial 
footprint through the establishment of micro- banking offices (MBOs) in areas where it may 
not be economically feasible to open a full branch immediately.  About 54% of disbursements are currently done electronically and the National Retail Payments System (NRPS) developed 
by BSP provide s the necessary policy and technology framework for the interoperability
4 of 
mobile money and e -money services offered by different players. Today, policy -makers 
perceive interoperability as an emerging concern in the provision of digital finance since this has implications on the goal toward financial inclusion. In the Philippines, it remains a work in progress for as noted by Arabehety, Chen,  Cook, and McKay (2016) , the interoperability 
arrangements in the country still does not show any clear patter n as o pposed to other countries 
which already have market -wide interoperability  across digital financial service providers.  
 Mainly through the BS P’s efforts in pursuing digital and financial inclusion, the country’s 
global ranking has improved according to the 2016 Financial and Digital Inclusion Project reported by the Brookings Institution in Washington. The Philippines ranked sixth place in 2016, an eight percentage points higher than its rank in 2015.  Likewise, BSP was commended 
for its support to pursue the shift from global use of physical cash to digital transactions.  
Brookings also cited the BSP as a front -runner among central banks in est ablishing a dedicated 
financial inclusion unit for its work on financial inclusion data and reporting and issuance of 
enabling and proportionate regulations.  
 
Digital finance is crucial in attaining the goal of a more inclusive finance.  CGAP has 
underscor ed the high cost of building and operating brick -and-mortar bank branches, their 
expensive maintenance especially in hard -to-reach areas in the interior and uplands and the 
costly travel faced by rural customers to urban areas where financial institutions choose to 
locate their branches
5.   The immediate solution seems to lie in leveraging digital finance to 
deal with the problems of physical (traditional) banking.  As current global experience shows 
digital financial services are a major instrument for financial inclusion .  They are a potent 
instrument for providing the financially excluded (that is, the underserved and the unserved) and SMEs with access to relevant, appropriately designed and affordable financial services.  
                                                           
3 Central Bank of the Philippines.  
4 This paper uses the definition of interoperability provided in  Arabehety, Chen, Cook and McKay (2016) which is, “the  abilit y  
for  mass  market  users  of  DFS  accounts  to  perform  specific  use  case  payment transactions between accounts at different 
providers.”  
5 “Digital Financial Services” http://www.cgap.org/topics/digital -financial -services  [Accessed March 6, 2018].  5 
 Digital financial services (e -finance) have the potential to make a large impact in financial 
inclusion as evidenced by progress in some African and Asian markets.  A ccording to CGAP, 
digital financial services are increasingly being made available to unbanked individuals 
through a va riety of digital channels such as mobile phones, point -of-sale (POS) terminals, 
networks of small -scale agents, payment aggregators6.  CGAP cites estimates from the 2015 
GSMA Global Adoption Survey of more than 400 million people who are linked globally 
through basic mobile payments services, allowing them to send money, pay bills, or purchase 
prepaid electricity with greater ease, affordability and access .  
 
A few studies on financial inclusion ha ve been conducted in the Philippines (Llanto  2015, 
2017; Llanto and Rosellon 2017) but the role of digital technology in financial inclusion has 
not been studied in detail.   There has been very limited information available in the existing 
literatu re that examines the role of e- finance in achieving the objective  of inclusive growth. 
This paper is an attempt to study the contribution of technology towards financial inclusion in 
the country and analy ze how different applications  of e-finance have enabled the last mile 
consumers to avail of conveniently and affordably. This would directly or indirectly reflect the 
effectiveness of the financial institutions efforts to bring -in underprivileged people to the 
mainstream financial system, especially in rural areas.  Thus, this study seeks to determine 
whether e -finance h as made it easier for consumers to avail a full set of basic financial products 
and services such as savings, credit, payments or remittance, and insurance.  Toward this end 
the following questions are raised:   
• What is the current landscape of digital finance in the Philippines?  
• What are the users' perceived advantages and disadvantages in using e -money?  
• What are the challenges, as well as the facilitating factors, in using e- money among 
households?  
• What are the roles of the regulators in the propagation of digital finance in the 
Philippines?  
    
The paper uses financial inclusion statistics from the BSP and the World Bank Global Findex database. It also uses data from the National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion (NBSFI) 2015 undertaken by the BSP , which is the first attempt to measure financial inclusion  in the 
Philippines  in terms of consumer experience and product impact.
7  To complement these data, 
key informant interviews (KII) and focus group discussions (FGD) were conducted with a consumer group, e -money service providers (a rural bank and a fintech company, regulator 
(BSP) and users of e -money (clients of a rural bank)). Using these data sources, the assessment 
in section 3 of the paper provides a comprehensive analysis of the characteristi cs of consumers, 
the determinants of use of e -finance and the overall impact of the product or service on the 
lives of consumers.  
 The paper is organized as follows:  after the Introduction, Section 2 proceeds with a brief 
review of the rise of the digital economy in the world today citing global trends, benefits and 
issues in order to provide context to the discussion of e -finance in this paper.  Section 3  
discusses e -finance and e- money in the Philippines and presents a case study of the use of 
digital te chnology in making financial services a ccessible to low -income groups. The last 
section summarizes the discussion and provides some policy recommendations.   
                                                           
6 Ibid. 
7 The NBSFI is a nationally representative survey of Filipino adults on financial inclusion. It has a sample size of 1,200 adul ts 
covering the areas of NCR, Balance Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. The respondents were selected us ing a multi -stage 
probability sampling and the conduct of the survey was done through face- to-face interviews.  6 
 2. Current global trends in the digital economy  
 
The digital economy has created unprecedented changes in global markets.  In a recent essay, 
Kimura and Chen (2017) pointed out the radical changes that e -commerce has brought to 
modern society, especially in the Asia- Pacific where it has experienced the f astest growth 
worldwide.  P rojected global revenues from cross -border e -commerce are projected to reach  as 
much as US$600 billion in 2018, two times as much as that in 2012.  According to Kimura and 
Chen (2017) , the share of e- commerce in total global reta il sales increased by 12 percentage 
points between 2015 and 2016. By June 2016, the scale of online shoppers in China has reached 448 million and online shopping us age rate has reached 63% (CNNIC  2016). Singapore (60%), 
Malaysia (52%), and Thailand (51%) are among the world’s top markets with the highest online shopping penetration rate as well. Overall, the scale of digital economy in ASEAN is projected to increase by 5.5 t imes by 2025 (Think wit h Google  2017).   In the near future, the Asian 
market will account for nearly 40% of the world total revenues generated by cross  border e -
commerce, making Asia the global epicenter  of e-commerce (BCG, 20 14)
8. 
 Global digital commerce is now estimated to b e over US$1 trillion annually. Cases of e -
commerce platforms which were able to access global markets are perceived in the likes of Amazon, eBay, Alibaba, Flipkart, and Rakuten among others .
9  According to Gartner, Inc. 
(NYSE: IT) e -commerce will drive 125,000 large organizations to launch digital business 
initiatives by 2020, with more than 80% estimated digital revenue increase, and companies that 
are adapting digital technologies will be 26% more profitable than competition.10 
 
The UNCTAD (2017) indica ted that around 100 million people worldwide are employed in the 
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) sector.  The reported growth in global e -
commerce at 57% from US$16 trillion in 2013 to US$25 trillion in 2015 is staggering.  The sector contr ibutes roughly 6.5% to global GDP. From 2010 to 2015, the exports of 
telecommunications, computer and information services increased  by 40%, amounting to 
US$467 billion, and trade in ICT goods was  over US$2 trillion in 2015.  Sales of robots and 
3D printer s was at its highest level and the volume of Internet traffic is expected to grow  66 
times higher in 2019 tha n it was in 2005
11. 
 McKinsey  & Company  (2017) report ed that the Internet today connects about two billion 
people worldwide.  Half of these live in “aspirin g countries” which it defines as “ countries that 
are climbing the developmental ladder quickly, with diverse populations and inarguable economic potentiali ties, countries as varied as Algeria, South Africa, China, Iran, and Mexico” 
(page 1).    It also noted the rapid growth of Internet penetration in the aspiring countries, 
estimated at 25 percent per year for the past five years in the 30 aspiring countries, compared with 5 percent per year in developed countries.  This was basically accomplished  through the 
ubiquitous mobile phones that use mobile technology applications for providing various 
services to the population.  Mobile subscriptions in the se countries have increased from 53 
percent of worldwide mobile subscriptions in 2005 to 73 percent in 2010 (McKinsey & 
Company 2012) .    
 
                                                           
8 As cited in Kimura and Chen (2017).  
9 Data compiled by Madeline Cabauatan in her consultant’s inception report submitted to PIDS, “The Rise of Digital Economy in 
the Philippines: Review of Literature, February 2018 
10 https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3142917 
11 Data compiled by Madeline Cabauatan in her consultant’s inception report submitted to PIDS, “The Rise of Digital Economy in 
the Philippines: Review of Literature, February 2018.  7 
 The McKinsey report indicate d the significant contribution of the Internet in aspiring countries 
at an average 1.9 pe rcent of GDP in aspiring countries, around US$366 billion in 2010.  By 
comparison, the Internet in developed countries contributes an average 3.4 percent of GDP .   In 
absolute terms, McKinsey & Company estimated the economic value generated annually by 
the Internet at US$119 per capita in aspiring countries compared with US$1,488 per capita in 
developed countries.  All these i ndicate the great potential of “robust Internet ecosystems” 
(page 9) in unlocking value and in growing the economies of aspiring countries and the developing countries in general.   
 In the ASEAN, Kimura and Chen (2012) citing a report of McKinsey Global Institute noted 
that nearly 90% of households in Singapore are Internet users.  In 2012, Inte rnet-related 
economy accounted for 4.1% of Malaysian GDP (McKinsey Global Institute 2016). Less -
developed CLMV countries – Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, and Viet Nam –are quickly 
catching up. For instance, the share of Internet users in the total population of  Viet Nam 
increased from 1.3% to 52.7% between 2001 and 2015. The number of Internet users grew at 34.7% in Cambodia and 32.4% in Myanmar every year  (Kimura and Chen 2012).  
 The digital economy is propelling growth across many different countries ; it is c hanging the 
way economic agents such as buyers and sellers interact in the marketplace, and it is creating profound impacts on productivity, creating many growth opportunities even as it offers innovative solutions to age -old problems such as those in providing the financially excluded 
and unserved with access to an array of financial services, including micro -insurance and 
payments system designed for small- scale agents.  There of course are many challenges.  
Moneo (2017) speaks of the continuing emergence  of new technologies, changes in consumer 
habits and as well of threats faced by businesses in different sectors
12.  Among others, he calls 
attention to vast changes in technologies  (e.g., blockchain technologies, biometric 
authentication, quantum computing, etc.), new com petitors  (e.g., in digital finance, fintech 
companies vs large digital banks, large corporations such as Apple, Google and Facebook which will focus on online payme nts and general financial services), new regulations ( e.g., 
payment service directives to stimulate competition, general data protection directives to ensure against fraud), new customers  (e.g., millennials, new digital generation adept with and 
comfortabl e with data) and new business models  (e.g., cashless, completely digital  businesses 
exploiting vast data streams and augmented reality) .  
 In the financial services industry, digital finance has disrupted the industry through many 
significant innovations that address rising consumer expectations about usefulness and 
appropriateness of the product or service, affordability, immediacy and lately inter -operability 
across different financial services providers.  Its impact on the financial services industry is  
unsettling.  From the view of Saal, Starnes, and Rehermann (2017), digital transformation, 
which has upended various industries in the real sector , is now also sweeping the financial 
services industry. Meanwhile fintech firms and other non-bank financial innovators ha ve risen 
to give  stiff competition to traditional brick -and-mortal banks that have been grappling with 
ever increasing capital requirements and other rules imposed by regulators who still smart from 
the unexpected shake -up of the banking indus try in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis.  
FinTechs offer solutions in product areas such as payments, remittances, savings and 
investments, personal financial management, trade and invoice finance, small and medium -
sized enterprises (SMEs), lendi ng, and insurance (Saal, Starnes and Rehermann 2017).   Digital 
finance has also made inroads in emerging economies but there are serious challenges that 
                                                           
 12”7 Challenges for the Global Digital Economy” https://www.bbvadata.com/7- challenges -for-the-global -digital -economy/  
[Accessed March 7, 2018].  8 
 policymakers, financial service providers (banks and non -banks alike) and consumers must 
address (Box 1).  
 
Box 1: Challenges for Banks and FinTech Companies in Emerging Market  
• Low levels of formal financial services (cash dominance in transactions, informal credit and 
savings)  
• Lower income and financial literacy levels (low value transactions, smaller fees, need for user 
education)  
• Underdeveloped technology and venture capital ecosystems (shortage of skilled tech/finance entrepreneurs, small markets, limited revenue potential)  
• Relatively weak infrastructure (underdeveloped payment systems, customer credit data, legal 
enforcement mechanisms for payment obligations, power, telco/Internet coverage).  
Source: Saal, Starnes and Rehermann (2017), International Finance Corporation (201 7) 
 
3. Philippine case of e -finance and e -money     
 
Lauer and Lyman (2015) categorizes financial service providers into four groups based on the party holding the contractual relationship with the customer: (i) a full- service bank offering a 
“basic” or “simp lified” transactional account for payments, transfers, and value storage via 
mobile device or payment card plus point -of-sale (POS) terminal; (ii) a limited -service niche 
bank offering such an account via mobile device or payment card plus POS terminal; (i ii) a 
mobile network operator (MNO) e -money issuer; and (iv) a nonbank non- MNO e -money issuer 
.  Our review of the Philippine case shows that all four categories of financial service providers have implemented and continue to develop e -finance applications  to reach a greater number of  
the population, especially those who have traditionally been financially excluded but who now represents a potentially profitable mass market for these providers.   
 
3.1. Current Trends  
 
Many Filipinos are still unbanked and unserved by formal financial services. According to the 2015 NBSFI, only 43.2 % of adult Filipinos have savings account of which 32.7%  have actual 
savings in banks; meanwhile, of the 47.1% of Filipino adults who have outstanding loans, only 4.4% of it have borrowed from banks while 72.3% resorted to informal sources. This is a clear 
indication  that a great portion of adult Filipinos remains unbanked and tends to rely on informal 
lenders which are unregulated and thus c ould be providers of predatory financial services. This 
situation motivates the introduction of e -finance in the country to reach the unbanked and 
underserved  with appropriate financial products and services . 
 The Philippine central bank, Bangko Sentral ng  Pilipinas (BSP), formulated regulations in the 
year 2000, which allowed local players to offer electronic banking services (Lopez, 2017). The 
pioneer e -wallets, Gcash and Smart Money, were identified to be one of the fruits of these 
regulations by the BSP , in collaboration with the financial services industry, to support digital 
finance.  Since then, banks and non- bank entities have offered e- financial services such as e -
banking (for banks) and e -money applications. Through these channels, the government ai ms 
to reach the unbanked and unserved/underserved population. According to a 2015 report by 
Better than Cash  Alliance ,
13 retail  payments in the Philippines is still largely cash -based  (only 
1% of the 2.5 billion monthly retail payments were done electronically) . The BSP is looking to 
                                                           
13 https://www.betterthancash.org/tools -research/case -studies/country -diagnostic -the-philippines. Better Than Cash Alliance is a 
partnership of governments, companies, and international organizations that accelerates the transition from cash to digital 
payments in order to reduce poverty and drive inclusive growth. It is an implementing partner for the G20 Global Partnership for 
Financial Inclusion, and is based at the UN.  9 
 steer transactions towards electronic fund transfers and payments, and thereby increase share 
of digital transactions from 1% in 2013 to 20% in 2020 (Lopez 2017).    
 A big chunk of e -money transactions, 78.2%, is reportedly done through banks, while the rest 
can be accounted for other e- money issuers or EMIs (non- bank financial institutions and other 
entities).
14 There are 2 non- bank financial institutions and 8 other entities listed as EMIs 
supervised by BSP, as of De cember 2017. As for banks, the BSP reported that as of June 2017, 
there are 70 banks with electronic banking facilities, of which 35 are universal and commercial banks, 24 are thrift banks, and 11 are rural  and cooperative banks (Table 1). About 60% of 
banks with e -banking facilities offer internet banking, whether bank- owned internet facility or 
through BancNet, a Philippine -based interbank network. Mobile banking is offered by 35.7% 
(25) of banks, while mobile apps have been introduced by 21.4% (15). I n terms of e -money 
instruments such as prepaid card, cash card o r remittance card, 40% (28) of the banks with e -
banking are registered as EMIs.   While most of the banks that offer these e -banking and e -money applications are universal and 
commercial banks , there are rural banks that offer mobile banking (1 bank), internet banking 
through BancNet online (4), BancNet cash- out aggregator/acquirer services (6), and e -money 
prepaid card/cash card/remittance card (1).
15   
 
Table 1. Number of banks authorized by BSP to engage in e -banking operations  
As of end -June 2017  
Type of 
Bank  No. of 
Banks 
with 
Electronic 
Banking 
Facilities 
(as 
approved 
by the 
BSP)  No. of Banks with E -Banking and E -Money Applications  
Mobile 
Banking  Phone 
Banking  Internet 
Banking 
(Proprietary)  Internet 
Banking 
thru 
BancNet 
Online  Mobile 
Financial 
Services 
thru 
Mobile 
Apps  BancNet 
POS Cash -
Out 
Aggregator/ 
Acquirer  Electronic 
Money 
Issuers 
(Prepaid 
Card/Cash 
Card/ 
Remittance 
Card)  
Universal 
and 
Commercial 
Banks  35 15 14 32 20 12 5 19 
Universal 
Banks  19 13 13 18 12 9 3 13 
Commercial 
Banks  16 2 1 14 8 3 2 6 
Thrift Banks  24 9 4 10 18 3 4 8 
Rural and 
Cooperative 
Banks  11 1 - - 4 - 6 1 
Total  70 25 18 42 42 15 15 28 
Note: BancNet is  a Philippine -based interbank network . 
Source: Appendix 7, BSP (2017b ) 
 
The Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP) also reported that rural banks have 
been using mobile banking in partnership with third- party entities (RBAP 2014). Many rural 
banks have been offering mobile money -enabled services, e.g. GCash and Smart Money -
                                                           
14 Lopez, M.L., “E -money transactions hit all -time high in 2016”, Business World Online, May 23, 2017.  
15 The figures come from a BSP report with data as of June 2017. Some e- banking and e- money applications, for ins tance, CARD 
Bank’s mobile app, Konek2CARD, may have not been counted.  10 
 enabled ATM card se rvices to their clients. SMS banking is also one mobile banking 
technology that is being offered in the rural banking industry. An RBAP 2014 article indicated 
that the rural banking industry has already processed more than PHP 16 million in mobile money tr ansactions, which involved almost 100 rural banks, their 1,200 branches and other 
banking offices (RBAP 2014).  Non-bank entities have also used financial technology (fintech) to enhance usage of financial 
services.  Fintech firms in the Philippines have established a group called “FintechAlliance.ph”, composed of strategic non- bank, financial technology players.
16 The alliance generally aims to 
promote and support building a sustainable financial ecosystem. One of the members of this alliance is FINTQ and Voyager Innovations, the financial technology unit and digital 
innovations arm, respectively, of PLDT, a big telecommunications company in t he Philippines, 
developed the product called “Lendr.” Lendr uses a mobile technology platform in applying 
and processing any type of loan. Subscribers of the mobiles networks in the Philippines, through their mobile device, are able to make use of a one -stop application/portal showing 
multiple loan products of all partner banks and microfinance institutions and companies, for 
faster, more convenient, dynamic and secure application process. FINTQ also offers 
microinsurance through the KasamaKa Microinsurance  program.  
 
Nonetheless, average technological adoption in the Philippines  has been lagging in comparison 
with other Asian countries. In 2016, the World Bank’s Digital Adoption Index showed that the 
Philippines ’ score was at  0.43 only which falls below that  of the  global average of 0.53 and   
East Asia and the Pacific at 0.50  (Table 2) .  In addition, it can be seen that those with higher 
GDP per capita have higher adoption rate.  
 
Table 2. Digital Adoption Index of Selected Asian Countries  
 2012 GDP 
per capita 
(constant 
2005 US$)  Business  Governments  People  Overall 
DAI 
China  3,866  0.41  0.67  0.77  0.62  
India  1,235  0.25  0.77  0.49  0.50  
Indonesia  1,854  0.35  0.57  0.42  0.45  
Japan  37,595  0.65  0.94  0.84  0.81  
Korea, Rep.  24,566  0.78  0.99  0.89  0.89  
Malaysia  7,374  0.42  0.85  0.80  0.69  
Philippines  1,665  0.35  0.43  0.52  0.43  
Singapore  38,088  0.73  0.97  0.93  0.88  
Thailand  3,426  0.43  0.56  0.65  0.55  
Vietnam  1,078  0.26  0.49  0.62  0.46  
East Asia & Pacific   0.40  0.43  0.63  0.50  
Global average  3,968  0.35  0.52  0.66  0.51  
Source: World Bank’s Digital Adoption Index  
 
 
                                                           
16 “Financial technology firms form industry group”, October 21, 2017. Business World Online. http://bworldonline.com/financial -
technology -firms -form-industry -group/ . 11 
 Table 3 shows the extent of usage of digital financial transactions in the country relative to 
other Asian economies. Data shows that on average, financial account holders in the 
Philippines mostly conduct digital mobile transactions when sending or receiving rem ittances 
and when users have accounts that are connected to a financial institution.   
Table 3. Some indicators on digital financial transactions in selected Asian countries  
 
 Indicators a CN IN ID JP KR MY PH SG TH VN Ave.b 
Made transaction from an 
account at a financial 
institution using a mobile 
phone  19.1  6.1 4.3 5.8 35.5  10.3  9.3 16.7  4.9 9.3 12.1  
Paid utility bills: using a 
mobile phone  1.7 0.5 0.7 0.5 8.9 5.8 0.6 4.8 0.9 0.2 2.5 
Received domestic 
remittances: through a 
mobile phone  6.0 - 0.2 - - 6.9 10.8 8.9 1.2 0.7 5.0 
Sent domestic remittances: 
through a mobile phone  10.1  - 3.6 - - 7.5 16.2 9.9 2.0 0.7 7.1 
Used a mobile phone to pay 
utility bills  1.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 6.0 3.2 0.3 2.5 0.8 0.2 1.5 
Used an account to make a 
transaction through a mobile 
phone  14.3  3.1 1.5 5.6 32.9  7.8 2.5 16.0  3.8 2.7 9.0 
   Note: a % with an account, age 15+ ; bAverage among these 10 countries . 
   Source: World Bank’s 2014 Findex Database  
 
 Financial innovation is not new in the Philippines.   Realizing that the country is one of the 
world’s top home to very high volume of SMS exchange, local telecommunication  companies  
have designed a basic product which addresses the interest of the consumers  (GSMA, 2012) .  
The basic product is only for sending and receiving remittances  but it has helped consumers 
because of a reduction in transaction time and cost. However, m obile -to-mobile payment 
transactions did not pr osper.  This is the reason why these companies introduced an ATM card 
with an account alongside with their mobile account.  This has boosted the figures of Filipinos having an account but not the transactions through mobile account. The  Philippines lags behind 
its neighbors in terms of “us ing an account to make a transaction through a mobile phone” and 
is still being considered as a nation using mostly cash -based transactions . Most of the users 
have to withdraw their cash first before doing their transaction s.  Since 2000, Filipinos have 
been successful in using mobile money, thanks to the rapid adoption of mobile phones from 
3% to 68% in 2012.  SMS -based transaction has been the medium of mobile money. But 
internet speed has stayed stagn ant since then. With this, the country cannot cope with the 
development of financial products globally  (GSMA, 2012) . The binding constraint is the 
inefficient telecommunications services in the country.  Data from the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) indicate that more than 50% of individuals in the Philippines use the internet, specifically, 53.7%  in 2015 and  55.5% in 2016. With the introduction of a 
larger internet bandwidth, financial industry will have  greater room to deve lop and innovate 
their products . 
 12 
 The hope lies in the higher adoption rate exhibited by consumers, which enterprising businesses 
who would dare to embrace the new technologies, can profitably tap on.  However, much of 
the task of developing and improving the digital financial landscape rests on the shoulder of government and business because they have basically the means and the motivation (profits for business; inclusive finance for government) to do it.   As will be discussed in detail later in the paper, early adopters of a digital financia l service (i.e. mobile application of CARD Bank such 
as “k onek2CARD ”) are enthusiastically using the application to make some transaction, 
sending, receiving money and even payments. CARD Bank, a rural microfinance bank,  used 
“social trust” as one of its key success factors in advocating its digital mobile application .  This 
would not have been possible without the support and even encouragement by the regulator (BSP).   
 Philippine internet infrastructure is still a persistent problem in the country . An in ternet 
download speed of  16.1 Mbps for fixed broadband and 12.7 for mobile phones   are way below 
than the global average of  42.7 Mbps  and 22.2 Mbps, respectively  (SpeedTest, 2018) . Internet 
providers are aware of the gravity of the problem, as mentioned by FINTQ, a SMART/PLDT company. Startup companies and traditional companies have the capacity to innovate and cooperate with one another .  In f act, these companies , if they want to, can develop a synergetic 
relationship with th e regulators  toward improving drastically internet service in the country .  A 
combination of positive and negative incentives should be used by the government and the regulators to encourage competitive and responsible behavior in the two major telecommunications service providers in the country.  
 
3.2. Factors  affecting use of e- money  
 E-money transactions  increased, while share of active e- money accounts decreased, as 
indicated by data from the BSP in 2015 and 2016. Particularly, the number and amount of inflow and outflow transactions and number of accounts increased, and e-money cards 
remained steady except for ATM debit cards (Table 4 ). Inflow and outflow transactions in 2016 
are slowly approaching one trillion pesos, amounting to PHP 956.1 billion, which is a 4.3% increase from 2015. The number of registered and active e -wallet accounts also increased by 
21.4% and 8.9% respectively; while an increase in issuances of ATM debit cards of 24.1% was recorded. However, the share of active e -money accounts (among registered accounts) 
decreased from 68.1% to 61.4%, and e -money prepaid cards and credit cards did not increase 
substantially (less than 1%), which suggest that current adoption of digital financial transactions leaves room for  improvement.  
 
Table 4. Electronic money in the Philippines  
 2015  2016  Growth (%)  
Number of Transactions (in millions)     
Inflow  60 67 11.9  
Outflow  267 299 11.9  
Amount of Transaction (in billion pesos)     
Inflow  456.4  477.7  4.7 
Outflow  460.2  478.4  4.0 
Number of E -Money Accounts (in millions)     
Registered e -money accounts (Gcash, Smart Money)  9.4 11.4  21.4  
Active e -money accounts (among registered)  6.4 7 8.9 
Cards (in millions)     13 
  2015  2016  Growth (%)  
Prepaid cards (linked to e -money)*  26 26.1  0.6 
ATM debit cards**  40.9  50.8  24.1  
Credit cards**  8.43  8.4 0.1 
*E-money accounts (excluding Gcash and Smart Money) issued by other E -Money issuers  
**2014 vs 2015  
Source: Financial Inclusion in the Philippines Dashboard, as of Third Quarter 2017, BSP.  
 
 Expanding on the previous  section’s  discussion on concerns referring to the inadequate digital 
infrastructure (i.e. internet speed) and the low digital adoption level in the Philippines, we look 
closely at deterrents  to using digital finance products and services  using a national baseline 
survey on financial inclusion (NBSFI) conducted by the BSP in 2015 (covers Filipino adults 
aged 15 years and above ). The survey covers different access points and providers of financ ial 
products and services, one of which is e -money agents. The portion of the survey referring to 
e-money agents is used here for discussion. 
 Results of the survey indicate that most of the Filipino adults surveyed (59.3%) reported that they do not need t he products and services offered by the e -money agents  (Table 5). E-money 
agents facilitate cash -in and cash- out transactions;
17 hence it is likely that these respondents do 
not conduct these type s of transaction. On the other hand, about 15% said that the products and 
services are not suited to their personal requirements and preferences. There are other access points such as money/cash couriers (one type of remittance agent)  and banks  (for those with 
bank account that has  bank transfer facility ). There could be concerns on the quality of service 
given and preference for the go -to access points/financial service providers . 
 
Meanwhile, 7.2% mentioned that they are not aware of how transactions are done with e -money 
agents.  There are respondents who also reported that they are uncomfortable going to access 
point; they find the products and services are not cheap ; and they do not have/they lack the 
necessary documents required  in the transaction. 
   
Table 5. Reasons for not transacting with e -money agents  
 No. of 
respondents  % 
Products and services offered by the access point are not 
necessary  124 59.3  
Products and services are not suited to personal 
requirements and preferences  31 14.8  
Uncomfortable in going to the access point  10 4.8 
Presence of long lines and long waiting time in the access 
point  2 1 
Products and services are not cheap  8 3.8 
Lack / Absence of n ecessary documents required in 
transacting with the access point  8 3.8 
Lack of trust in the access point  6 2.9 
Lack of awareness in conducting transactions  15 7.2 
                                                           
17 Involves loading value into the mobile money system and then converting it back out again.  14 
  No. of 
respondents  % 
Other people (i.e. relatives) does the transaction for them  5 2.4 
Total  209 100 
Source: 2015 NBSFI, BSP  
 
While these refer to transaction s with e -money agents, the results can be a good reference for 
other digital financial service providers. Consumers have certain preferences and requirements, that if not met, they may continue traditional cash transactions.  Financial inclusion does not 
only refer  acces s, but also  to products and services that are appropriately designed and of good 
quality for them to be relevant and be used. People have different levels of knowledge and experience in the acces s and use of financial services, and may have di fferent preference or 
level of requirements.  
 Lack of awareness on how to transact is also mentioned as a reason for not using a digital service. This result points to the importance of educating consumers on the options available in the market, and provid ing them pertinent information that will allow them to choose which 
option is suitable or more preferable for them.  
 Results also indicate that cost is a factor. Digital financial services may also come with  a fee  
or cost to the consumer . It is therefore worth looking at how these fees and charges compare to 
costs incurred when conducting traditional, cash -based transactions.  Consumers will prefer the 
option that will entail less/lower cost to them.  
 Furthermore,  document and other related requirements are  also identified to discourage  
transacting digitally. This could be referring to identification cards or documents (as the results being discussed refer to e -money agents). How would the poor and low income population who 
may not possess  or have difficulty  securing  ID cards be able to access and use digital financial 
service if such documentations are required. The government is still developing a credit information database, and a national ID system is being discussed. While these plans have not 
been estab lished, the private sector providers can initiate innovations aimed at identifying 
customers. Forward -looking , providers can explore investing for instance in biometric scans.  
 
3.3. Case study: CARD Bank ’s “konek2CARD” mobile application  
 “Konek2CARD ” or “k2c” is a mobile banking application introduced by CARD Bank, a 
microfina nce-oriented rural bank in the Philippines  (Box 2 presents information about the 
bank) . The k2C app, which is installed in smartphones, has the following available services 
accor ding to CARD Bank members  (clients and agents) : 1) cash -in (deposit/savings); 2) cash-
out (withdrawal/loans); 3) cash payment which may be agent -assisted / client -assisted; 4) 
balance inquiry; 5) fund transfer  (accounts within the bank) ; 6) transaction history, and; 7) 
customer service.  
 The succeeding discussion presents the results of the focus  group discussion (FGD) with 
members of the CARD Bank. All of thes e members are registered in k2C. The main objectives 
of the FGD  are to determine the members’ r eceptiveness in using digital financial services, 
usage behavior, challenges and issues, and the likelihood to continue using the k2C. There were 15 
 a total of 37 of FGD participants .18 Most of them have at least 5 years of membership in the 
bank, and opened a  bank  account for savings and loans --mostly for business and school tuition 
(a few opened accounts for insurance) . Most of are at least high school graduates or have 
reached college education and  are married. Majority of the participants are self -employed  (e.g. 
microenterprise owners, vendors) , and acquire their income from their own businesses (more 
details on their profile in Annex A). 
 
Box 2. Background on CARD Bank, Inc.  
 
In 1997, the Center for Agriculture and Rural Development (CARD) Bank, Inc. was f ormally 
established as the CARD, Inc.’s first microfinance- oriented rural bank in the Philippines. It then became 
a member of the CARD Mutually Reinforcing Institutions (MRI) which aims to provide various 
financial and non- financial services (e.g. social d evelopment services) to the poor especially among 
women and families (e.g. children) situated in the countryside. Following this vision, in 2000, the 
CARD Bank allowed its members to become shareholders through the transfer of the members’ 
compulsory savings to the Bank. Today, it continues to grow with 69 micro banking offices (MBOs) 
and 2.29 million clients nationwide of which one million are with loans19 (CARD Bank, 2018). Almost 
75% of CARD Bank’s clients are female, close to 75% are married (or formerly  married), and about 
80% are over 30 years old. Around 56% of the active clients are borrowers. Their loans are mostly 
under microfinance (72.3%), housing (8.7%), and agricultural loans (5.3%); while other loans include 
health, education and calamity loan,  etc. Most of the Bank’s clients are from rural 
municipalities/provinces and areas where most of the poor households are located. For instance, half of 
the ten poorest provinces in 2016 are from the Mindanao area (southernmost island group in the 
Philippin es), which is one of the areas reached by CARD Bank’s services.20 
 
Having been awarded as a “Financial Inclusion Champion” by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas ( Central 
Bank of the Philippines ) for three consecutive years, the CARD Bank perseveres to increase its client 
coverage and bring innovation to its services21.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
18 Originally, the total number of invited participants was 40. However, due to unforeseen circumstances, only 37 participants 
arrived.  
19 https://cardbankph.com/ wp-content/uploads/2017/10/2- CARD- BANK -AR-2016- final.pdf   
20 https://www.philstar.com/headlines/2016/06/27/1597101/da -focus -10-poorest -provinces  
21 Today, the Bank is working for the full implementation of remittances services.  16 
 Figure 1. CARD Bank’s client profile  
 
 
 
Source: CARD Bank, Inc.  
 
3.3.1. The k onek2CARD  or k2C  mobile application 
 
Aside from technologic al upgrade in its operations, CARD Bank has  initiated various 
innovations in its provision of services as early as 2011. The first attempt was called the Mobile 
Financial Services (MFS) which allowed members to conduct financial transactions (e.g. 
balance inquiry, sa vings notification) through the clients’ mobile phones. This makes use of 
SMS / text messages only so non- smartphone users can also access this mobile service. This 
was tested in nine centers across the provinces of Laguna and Quezon. However, despite the overall favorable response, the project was cut short because of issues with the service provider. Improvements were also called for because delays in the notification were later on reported by the users.  
 Borrowers Active Clients
GENDER: 1,843,154    AREAS 1,025,616         1,843,154                
Male 462,022        Baguio 21,509               45,582                      
Female 1,381,132    Bicol 171,619             285,346                    
Ilocos 25,187               34,741                      
AGE BRACKET 1,843,154    La Union 18,409               26,627                      
Below18 925                Laguna 55,163               121,492                    
Age1830 378,977        Marinduque 30,939               63,866                      
Age3140 475,659        Masbate 77,187               141,982                    
Age4150 451,380        Mindanao 78,844               120,891                    
Age51Above 536,213        National Capital Region 56,980               106,375                    
Occidental Mindoro 47,375               86,073                      
CIVIL STATUS 1,843,154    Oriental Mindoro 96,089               179,276                    
Single 431,791        Panay 109,682             210,935                    
Married 1,356,236    Pangasinan 35,710               48,776                      
Widow 44,296           Quezon 146,170             284,219                    
Other 10,831           Tarlac 9,120                 12,903                      
Visayas 45,633               74,070                      
Note: The statistics include only the bank branches that have migrated to their new core banking system. Data as of March 31, 2018.
Microfinance 
Loans , 72.3%Agri Loan , 
5.3%Housing 
Loan , 8.7%SME Loans , 
0.3%Other Loans , 
13.4%Loan Distribution17 
 In September 2017, the CARD Bank rolled out its s econd attempt to digitalize its financial 
services. They called it the “konek2CARD (k2C)” program, which was inspired by the Bank’s 
key success factor: its strong connection to the members. Unlike the MFS, the k2C makes use of mobile data (i.e. internet) w hich allows members to conduct real -time financial transactions 
online. The savings accounts of the members (i.e. “Capital Build Up”) is now connected not only to their ATM accounts, but also to k2C. To date, k2C is the only digital application that is offered by the CARD Bank. Its module may be accessed via all CARD Bank’s ATMs.   The dissemination of the information about the k2C mobile a pplication was done during the 
center meetings.
22 These center meetings are regularly conducted (i.e. weekly / monthly 
depending on the center’s performance) among CARD Bank members in various areas. This gives the members the opportunity to discuss activities and current and future plans, voice out their concerns and issues, report about project status, as well as, develop the members’ 
leadership and management skills. This is headed by officers, i.e. center c hief, secretary and 
treasurer, who are elected by the members themselves. Account Officers (AO) from the Bank 
are also present in these meetings. Every session, the repayment rate is reported to the group thus keeping track of the repayment performance of the center. As emphasized by the officers of the Bank, this mechanism does not only serve as a tracking tool, but more importantly, it helps build and maintain ties wi th its members. Such kind of relationship serves as the Bank’s 
anchor towards greater coverage and service provision.    According to the clients
23, the AOs introduced to them the k2C mobile application and 
demonstrated to each one of them its features and functions (e.g. balance inquiry, savings, loans, payments). They filled out a form and indicated whether they own an android phone or not. Members who owned android phones received notification for them to register to k2C. They noted that it was hassle -free since the AOs were the ones who brought the documents to 
the bank. The entire registration process took one day only. As for the learning process, it was also very quick. Some of them took only five minutes to explore and navigate the application. Notice ably, the respondents who answered these were the younger ones in the group. Others 
answered 10 minutes to an hour.   The AOs also had the opportunity to recruit agents. These members underwent a three -session 
seminar before they become official agents. These agents act like tellers in a bank where a member can withdraw from. The only difference is that the agent must have enough capital
24 
(i.e. requirement of at least PHP5,000 capital according to CARD Bank) before they can 
actually transact with the memb ers. To illustrate, should the clients decide to remit savings to 
their accounts, but find it difficult to reach the bank, what they can do is seek the assistance of 
an agent. This transaction is called agent -assisted transaction; the other one is client- assisted 
which is free of charge since clients need not rent the service of an agent. Likewise, when they need to withdraw / cash out from their accounts, they can go to an agent who has enough capital 
to provide the amount of cash they need. These agent -assisted transactions have corresponding 
fees (Table 6) . 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
22 CARD Bank organizes its members into groups called ‘centers’ . 
23 For the purposes of the discussion, the term “clients” would refer to members who are users only, i.e. they are not staff of the 
bank and/or agents.  
24 During the FGD, the agents however noted that they were not fully inf ormed that they would need a significantly large budget 
for their capital as agents.  18 
 3.3.2 . Advantages of using k2C  
 
The clients pointed out some significant advantages of using k2C. They reported that the transaction process got easier, faster, and hassle- free. They noted that the members can now 
transact at any time of the day (e.g. withdraw at night / beyond banking hours through agents) which is very important as most of them are either working or at home, doing errands (e.g. picking up their children from school).  
 There has been less cost, too. The amount of money that they pay to the agents (for agent -
assisted tra nsactions) is way lower than the cost of going to the banks themselves. Aside from 
paying high amount of fare (e.g. PHP100.00), they would no longer need to spend longer time (e.g. waiting  in line which could take the entire day) in accomplishing the neede d transactions. 
This is especially true for farmers who are distant from banks. With k2C, they only need to go to the nearest sari -sari store / agent to transact. In addition, late payment s (loan payments or 
deposits after bank operations or center meeting s) can be accommodated by agents who are 
located just within the community. Late -paying members need not go to the bank.
25 
Nonetheless, according to the officials of CARD Bank, there are members who really opt to go to the banks which are located in the cit y proper (more urbanized area) to unwind. 
 One of the center chiefs also shared her experience with the members when k2C was introduced to them. Nobody from the members wanted to register to k2C because of the perception that this entails a cumbersome proc ess. But with great persistence, she was able to convince the 
members to download at the very least the application and follow the bank’s initiative to digitalize. There came a time when the members had no choice but to transact with the agents through k2C . When they experienced the convenience brought about by the new mobile 
application, one by one, the members started buying their own android phones and use d the 
agent -assisted feature of the application. In the case of this center chief, all of the  120 members 
of the center have registered to k2C.  
3.3.3 . Bottlenecks  
 Despite these benefits, the resistance to learn and use such technology is still apparent among the members mainly due to the following factors: 1) misconception about technological upgrade; 2) presence of alternative options; 3) seemingly high overall charges; 4) absence of 
required gadget (i.e. android smartphone), and; 5) weak and/or intermittent mobile phone 
signal.  
 As mentioned earlier, some of the center chiefs reported during t he FGD that several members 
hesitated to register to k2C because of the perception that it is difficult to use such digital application. According to them, this notion particularly emanated from the elderly who have less patience to learn new technology an d thereby resort to old practice (almost 30% of the 
Bank’s clients are over 50 years old) . Such misconception about the application easily 
discourages users from migrating to digital transactions. The officers of the CARD Bank however noted that this does not pose a significant threat to the success of the application as the center chiefs tend to be creative and tactful when it comes to convincing members to adopt the new technology. Moreover, they emphasized that the current trend in banking is towards the incorporation of, if not moving towards, digital financial services.  
 
                                                           
25 According to the agents, the agent -assisted transactions occur almost every day, and these transactions are usually for late 
payments.  19 
 The second factor is the presence of other choices. For instance, in the case of one area 
(Alaminos), there are members who opted not to connect to k2C because they can give their deposits to the A O or sometimes, to the elected treasurer. Before k2C, the members were used 
to giving their deposits/regular savings to the AOs who would then deposit the money to the bank. This is free of charge. The only condition is that they give the mone y (e.g. payment) 
during the center meetings. In k2C, regardless whether it is client -based or agent -assisted, there 
is a corresponding fee per transaction. For those who give late payments, they have no choice but to transact with the agents. Hence, in the  presence of alternative option (i.e. old practice), 
some of the members would naturally be reluctant to use k2C. This practice relates to the third contributing factor.  
 The member’s decision to resort to traditional banking over using k2C is not entirely  due to the 
presence of an alternative choice, but also because of the direct charges that the members would have to pay. Some members think that it would be better if they pay at the centers  (through the 
AOs/t reasurers) with a charge amounting to PHP5.00 (previously PHP10.00) only, which they 
call “butaw”
26, rather than use k2C because of excessive charges (e.g. “growing interest”). V ia 
the k2C application, t he higher the amount of cash in/out , the higher the amount of fee charged. 
For instance, for cash -out requests ranging from PHP100 to PHP500, the total charge is 
PHP10.00, wherein PHP7.00 goes to the agent, while the remaining PHP3.00 goes to the Bank (Table 6 ). 
 
Table 6. Schedule of Fees, konek2CARD  
Cash -In Range  
(in Pesos)  Collectible  
of Agent  Total Charge  
to CARD member  
50-15,000  3.00  5.00  
     
Cash -Out Collectible  
of Agent  Total Charge  to CARD member  
Cash -Out Request  - 1.00  
100-500 7.00  10.00  
501-1,000  15.00  18.00  
1,001 -2,000  22.00  25.00  
2,001 -5,000  35.00  38.00  
5,001 -10,000  55.00  58.00  
     
Agent -Assisted 
Payment  Collectible  
of Agent  Total Charge  to CARD member  
50-500 4.00  6.00  
501-1,000  7.00  9.00  
1,001 -2,000  10.00  12.00  
2,001 -5,000  16.00  18.00  
5,001 -10,000  26.00  28.00  
10,001 -15,000  36.00  38.00  
                                                           
26 “Butaw” is a small fee (similar to the concept of membership fee) collected from each member on a regular basis. According to  
the center chiefs, the fund pool is used for special gatherings (e.g. Christmas party), buying of supplies (e.g. logbook, pens) f or 
the collector, delivering of remittance and other activities relevant to the conduct of CARD Bank transactions. The paying of  this 
fee is optional.  20 
  
Despite this perception, the  chiefs tried to explain to the members  that it would still be costlier 
for them to go to bank (e.g. including transaction costs of going to the bank and time spent for processing the loans) than simply pay to the agent the due amount. Meanwhile, one of the chiefs reiterated that the “by -transaction” charges of the k2C discourage the members from 
using the application. For instance, if there are three members in the household who needs to conduct three separate transactions, they will be charged thrice as much (e.g. PHP10.00 times 3) as compared to the fee that they will be charged when they transac t at the centers (e.g. PHP 
10.00 only for the three transactions).  
 The fourth reason is a common issue especially among low -income groups. It is the absence of 
the necessary gadget to use k2C. As of now, the app can only be accessed via smart phones, which can cater one user/member only. This is not yet available on computers which could 
allow members who do not have android phones to simply go to computer shops and rent. According to the officers of CARD Bank, they are still working on this aspect, i.e. accessibility in terms of availability in other gadgets and multi- user feature.    
 The fifth reason, which is a major problem nationwide, is the issue on telecommunication service providers. Even before the discussion on the bottlenecks during the FGD, the members were already raising their concern with regard to the connectivity. According to them, some of the members are discouraged when they see the notification, “Connection failed”. Often, the 
server is offline and the application cannot be accessed. F or those in the farms, this factor is a 
major setback when it comes to the usability of the application. Due to this obstacle, members, especially the elderly ones, easily lose their interest in exploring the application and transacting through it. Moreove r, according to the agents, there are also days when the application has 
downtime, particularly on  Saturday s and/or  Sunday s. Recognizing this serious constraint, the 
Bank is already finding ways to allow members to connect to the application even without data. This means that they would be able to transact offline. The Bank is also exploring other means to get around this major hurdle and they have been receiving suggestions from the private sector.  
 Other reasons as to the unwillingness of the members to use the app include the geographical distance of the members’ houses from the bank; if there is a nearby bank, the member is less likely to conduct transaction through k2C. Also, there is the presence of glitches in the use of the application. One of the m embers experienced a doubling of the transaction.  
 
3.3.4 . Case study insights  
 CARD Bank, as a microfinance -oriented rural bank, reaches out to the low income/poor 
households , aiming to provide them with diverse financial as well as non- financial services. 
Introducing the  K2C program reaches even more to their members as it offers convenient, time -
saving and less costly banking transactions, especially to those who live distantly from city or town centers where bank branches are located, who have w ork or have chores to take care of . 
As discussed earlier, having the mobile app has allowed the members  accessibility to their 
accounts anytime of the day, which saves on transport cost, on the time spent to travel, and on the cost of waiting in line at th e bank branch (instead of spending time at work and earning, or 
doing chores).  
 The literature on financial inclusion discuss es benefits of digital finance for  households and 
individuals  (compilation by McKinsey & Co mpany  2016 ). For one, digital finance gives 21 
 opportunity to own a financial account. In owning an account, especially by women in the 
household, there is tendency to spend more on food, education and health care, thereby increasing the welfare and productivity of the fa mily. On another note, studies have also looked 
at the impact of convenience and lower cost s associated with digital finance . A study by Acker 
et al. (2015)  in Niger, Africa, found that people  avoided  trips  to nearby towns and lining up in 
banks  when they used digital payments , and this has  saved them  an hour of travel time and 
more than 3 hours of waiting time per transaction. The amount of time and money saved has helped them improve their management of their time , e.g. spend more time at wo rk/income -
gene rating activities,  as well as their expenses.  In Malawi, a study found that farmers whose 
crops sales income are deposited into accounts were able to spend 13% more on inputs for future crops and r eached a 21% average increase from  the previous year’s harvest, compared 
to farmers who received payments in cash (Brune et al . 2015). These studies indicate that 
through digital finance, people could improve management of their income and expenses, and are able to invest (more) in their b usinesses/occupation, spend more on food, education and 
health care, and even put money aside for unanticipated economic shocks.  
 Meanwhile, f inancial inclusion also entails relevance of financial services provided to 
customers. K2C’s mobile application of fers basic banking transactions, e.g. cash -in 
(deposit/savings), cash- out (withdrawal/loans), cash payment which may be agent -assisted / 
client -assisted; balance inquiry; fund transfer (accounts within the bank); transaction history, 
and customer service, and will be offering more features in the next phase, according to the bank executives. During t he FGD, t he members mentioned of certain services that they wish 
to include in the application for future transactions. These include money transfer (from CARD Bank to other banks, and vice versa), bills payment, and remittances. They also suggested having multiple log -in feature in the application so that other members can access their 
accounts using other member’s cellphones. As for the side of the Bank, it is on its way to implement its various digitalization initiatives. The aforementioned services will be eventually integrated in the application, including electronic load. These added features, among others, will be implemented soon and by phases. Also, they are now targeting to expand their membership to all members of the household.  
 The FGD participants recognize the benefits  of k2C and are aware of members that are not too 
willing to use the app. They suggested that one of the ways through which the bank can 
encourage other members to use k2C is through house -to-house visit. According to them, this 
would greatly rely on the persistence of the elected Center Chief, Secretary, and Treasurer.  
 Issues and concerns of members as to the use of k2C are related to  access cost, connectivity 
and hesitation to use technology. As mentioned earlier, some of the members find the mobile 
access/transaction charge relatively high, especially when compared with options to transact in group through agents, or to just go direc tly to the bank particularly for those living in close 
proximity to the bank/center. Meanwhile, there is some hesitation to use the app especially by the older and the less tech savvy members. On both these cases, continuous and financial education could l essen the concerns. As for the weak and intermittent internet connectivity, it 
has been a big concern especially for businesses including individual users who have clamored for a review/reform of government regulations.  But o verall, given a choice, the cl ients unanimously think that they would prefer to use k2C 
over the ongoing traditional banking process. It is just that the members encounter difficulties in using their phones or connecting to the internet and some still prefer to the write in their own passbook, withdraw, and go to banks, that is why many are still not convinced to migrate or at 22 
 least utilize the app. It is even acceptable for them to fall in line in banks. This is especially 
true for the older members of the CARD Bank. According to the b ank, the public acceptance 
of this upgrade, just like most innovations, would definitely take time, but they are positive that eventually, members would appreciate the benefits of using the mobile application provided that the major issues are resolved.  
 
3.4. Role of the regulator    
 The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) perceives digital finance as an enabler of efficiency and scalability in the delivery of financial products and services to the people. Financial inclusion originally rested a lot on phys ical reach of the service providers ; however, with digital 
technology, providers are now able to immensely expand their reach  especially among the low -
income groups because of declining transactions costs.   To support further access and usage of digital f inancial services, the BSP Inclusive Finance 
Advocacy Office (IFAO) identified three major prerequisites that need to be achieved. The first one is the establishment of a national identification (ID) system that would facilitate the 
penetration of low -income groups in the digital economy . Currently, there is a pending bill in 
the Senate which aims to create a national ID system that is simpler and incentive -based rather 
than the previously proposed security -based system (Avendaño, 2017).  The BSP  IFAO  
emphas ized that this initiative is a pivotal step toward financial inclusion especially in the  
conduct of digital transactions. According to them , there are still banks  today  that require two 
IDs and some are  even  selective when it comes to choosing the right ID. Without the national 
ID system in place, joining the digital economy would prove to be very problematic. Fears that 
this would compromise the people’s right to privacy still remain and this has to be prope rly 
dealt with by the government and the regulator. To avoid any conflict with regard to data privacy, the BSP IFAO asserts that it would suffice to have very minimal information such as biometrics.  
 The second factor is that there is still a need for low -cost, low -key access points nationwide  
especially in unbanked and underserved local government units (LGUs). In terms of physical 
reach, current data shows that the overall access situation in terms of areas with banking 
presence remains low at 65.5% while  those with at least one access point, that can either be 
bank or other access point, is at 90.2% (Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, 2017a ). According to the 
BSP, they still aim to have at least one bank and not just an access point in every municipality.   
Even  if digital finance requires less need to build “brick and mortar ” units , people would still 
need an access point through which they can open a transaction account. Recently, the BSP has allowed banks and commercial establishments such as mini- grocery shop s (e.g., 7 Eleven ) and 
pawnshops to become access points . Through this policy, these entities  can now expand their 
services without spending as much.  
 Under Memorandum Circular  (MC) No. 987, series of 2017, the BSP has also allowed the 
creation of branch -lite units to expand the physical reach of the banks’ services and thus 
provide the people a democratized access to financial transactions regardless of their socio-economic status. To complement this, the BSP has recently implemented a  policy on “Basic 
Deposit Account” (BDA) that will encourage banks to offer micro -deposit products (i.e. zero 
minimum balance and low dormancy fee charges) and services to clients by  incentivizing these 
banks  with zero-reserve requirement. These policies will promote the expansion of coverage 
in unbanked and underserved areas.  
 23 
 The third prerequisite is the implementation of the National Retail Payment System (NRPS) 
framework which serves one of the bac kbones  of digital finance in the Philippines. This was 
adopted by the BSP in November 2017 through MC No. 980 and covers “all retail payment -
related activities, mechanisms, and users” in the Philippines . Through this collaborative  effort , 
the government ai ms to p romote cashless payment system while ensuring the safety of 
consumers and the efficiency, affordability and reliability of the retail payment systems. Right now, the percentage of digital payments to the overall retail payments is very low at about 2  
percent. By 2020, the BSP aims to increase this to 20 percent . Implementation of activities are 
now underway (e.g. creation of the “Payment Management System Body”) toward this goal.   As for consumer protection, the BSP IFAO noted  that even without financial inclusion, 
consumer protection has always been a priority in digital financial transactions. In fact, there is a separate department within BSP (i.e. Financial Consumer Protection Department) that ensures consumer protection as  stipulated under MC  No. 857, series of 2014. This foundation 
is very important  in the pursuit of financial inclusion and digital finance because the people, 
especially the unbanked and underserved, need to trust the system. One of the recent initiatives that the BSP is currently undertaking is  on disclosure and pricing (NRPS; Circular No. 980) 
which requires banks to submit their pricing scheme on fund transfers for publication on the BSP website. Also, aside from the requirements among banks  to come up wi th their own 
consumer protection policies, the BSP asks  them to include BSP standards with regard to 
transparency and fairness.   With regard to the emergence of crypto -currencies, the BSP is ensuring that banking entities 
conduct responsible innovations. The BSP implements the “test and learn” approach wherein it engages with the private sector to run pilot tests and see the projects’ risks and possible 
impacts. GCash, a micro -payment service under Globe T elecom, underwent this process. There 
are innovations / new platforms that undergo test and learn but can already be covered by the existing regulatory framework; there are others, however, that need policy adjustments or create an entirely new issuance (e.g. issuance of E -money regulation). That said, the  BSP noted 
that they do not directly regulate these emerging digital finance platforms; rather, it is the banks that they regulate. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the banks to ensure that the platforms that they are partnering with are operating in  accordance with the existing laws and regulations 
of the BSP.  Despite these efforts and upcoming initiatives, the BSP IFAO perceives some challenges that abound. First is on cybersecurity. There is a need to increase digital awareness among the providers  and end- users as safety has become a primary concern in the usage of cyberspace 
worldwide. This includes also the potential threat to anti -money laundering since the 
transferring of money abroad is becoming more seamless nowadays. Second is the lack of infrastructure (e.g. connectivity) which is of significant concern to those residing in the rural 
areas; notwithstanding the very high internet connection rates / connection fees that inhibits greater access and usage. Third is the need to promote further di gital literacy and protection 
because trust issue among the consumers is a real problem as suggested by the BSP IFAO. And fourth is the need for the BSP to maintain its regulatory tools and capabilities, while anticipating the future demands of the market (e.g. case of bitcoin) as technological evolution is becoming more fast -paced. The plans, as well as the needed regulations, have already been 
laid out. What the BSP must work on is the  adoption. They have to strongly engage with banks 
which entails stronger promotional activities.  
 24 
 In terms of connectivity, the Department of Information and Communications Technology 
(DICT)  is currently implementing the National Broadband Plan proje ct which aims to provide 
faster affordable  and secured  internet connec tion in the country especially in the rural areas  or 
those unserved / unreached by private providers . It has three broad strategies, namely: 1) 
creation  of policy and regulatory reforms; 2) investment of government  in broadband 
“infostructure ”27; and 3) support for the stimulation of broadband demand (DICT, 2017) . Some 
examples include the provision of  free Wi -Fi in public places with high foot traffic (e.g. train 
stations, waiting shed).  
 Based on the interview conducted, the DICT  iGovPh  also supports the move to have a national 
ID system that could account for everyone especially those in the rural areas. There is also a 
need to address issues on policy, regulation, security with regard to entering a digital economy. 
Introducing this tec hnology is hard due to who are reluctant to changes.  
 
In the case of the Department of Finance (DOF), its main contribution in achieving financial inclusion is the development of financial products that are specifically designed for the poor. 
These financi al products must be accessible, affordable and comprehensible by the mass. One 
of the financial products that prove to be e ssential is the microinsurance which is supervised 
by the Insurance Commission (IC) under the DOF. Microinsurance can now be transact ed 
through mobile phone, specifically through text messages for areas without internet data 
coverage. Recently, the IC hailed FINTQ’s KasamaKA  Microinsurance  program, a private 
sector initiative,  as a national digital enabler in achieving its goal of reach ing the country’s 
insurance penetration rate of 4% by 2020 (BusinessWorld, 2018) . Currently, it stands about 
1.7%  only. This crucial innovation is very helpful in informing the unbanked and uninsured 
Filipinos about the importance of financial security.  Nonetheless , the DOF mentioned of the 
difficulty that is being experienced by the Credit Information Corporation (CIC) in implementing Republic Act No. 9510 or the Credit Information System Act. To provide credit information to all lenders, the registry needs to have a unique identifier of the borrowers which could not be easily provided for one reason or another. This is another  motivation in 
establishing a national ID system.   
 
Gleaning from the results of the interviews  with the regulators, it is apparent that the 
digitalization of financial transactions greatly  helps  in the achievement of financial inclusion 
because as emphasized by Llanto (2015), digital financial innovations such as e -money and 
mobile banking can over come issues on physical barriers including poor physical infrastructure 
(e.g. roads and seaports) and high transaction costs resulting from the inaccessibility of some areas. Collaborative efforts between the BSP and the telecommunication companies, on the  
other hand, remain intact and strong –  a factor that has been deemed to be one of the success 
factors in the implementation of the  electronic money (e -money) and electronic money issuers 
(EMI)  operations  in the country (Llanto and Rosellon, 2017).  
  
4. Conclusion and policy recommendation 
 
Digital finance presents a great potential for more inclusive finance.  With appropriate and affordable technologies and applications, the financially excluded and the unserved could hope for participation in mainstrea m banking and finance that will open many opportunities for 
consumption smoothing and investment and earning possibilities.  Yet CGAP stresses that the 
                                                           
27 Refers to Philippine Integrated Infostructure  25 
 digital ecosystem will take time to develop as there are also barriers that need to be addressed 
to create access and scale.28  The global (and the Philippine) financial inclusion agenda 
underlines the importance of building consumer financial capabilities, fostering financial literacy and ensuring consumer protection especially for the less capable members o f society.
29 
 
In the Philippines, e -banking and e -money applications are offered in the market. The 
government, through BSP, issued regulations  to support the development of digital finance in 
the country  and ultimately promote  an inclusive financial system.  Digital finance in the 
Philippines has its strengths and potentials, but also has weaknesses and faces threats (Annex 
B provides a summary). As the data revealed, the number of accounts and value in e -money 
transactions is increasing, but there still appears to be low digital adoption rate , such as in 
mobile payments . The study found some issues and concerns that  would need to be addressed 
to improve provision and use of digital finance. Below are key findings.  
 
• Based on the FGD at CARD Bank , the extent of usage among registered clients varies  
from young to old  and irrespective of educational attainment. Nonetheless, seemingly 
the younger ones  tend to use the application more often since the respondents explained 
that most of the older clients let their grandchildren or  younger relatives  operate the 
mobile application. Moreover , much of the transactions are still agent -assisted .  
• Despite the early stage of e- finance services (i.e. k2C), people start to recognize its 
importance and strong potential in bringing about convenience and less cost in conducting financial transactions. The k2C mobile application has been particularly 
helpf ul to clients who have other work or errands to do.  
• Users of k2C save travel cost and time from using the service. The money and time saved can be spent on work or chores and the money saved used for other family 
expenses. This indicates that d igital fina nce could help people manage their time and 
expenses and use this to improve their productivity e.g. able to invest more and spend 
more time in business.  Moreover, digital finance allows for wider coverage and 
utilization of financial services.  Savings, loans, and other important financial services 
that can be easily tapped are great mobilizers of consumption smoothing which is 
particularly useful to poor households. Given the opportunity to access and use financial 
services, households can spend more on food, education, health care, and even put aside 
money for unexpected economic shocks , thereby improving the welfare of the family .     
• Based on World Bank’s Digital Adoption Index, the Philippines performs lower than 
its ASEAN counterparts such as Indonesia , Malaysia, Thailand and Viet Nam.  
• Users of k2C consider weak and intermittent mobile network signal as one of their 
concerns. There are spots in the Philippines that have weak mobile network signals and 
data indicate that the Philippines’ internet speed is way below the global average.  
• Misconception or lack of understanding about digital finance hinders greater coverage especially among the underserved and unbanked people in rural areas. Trust issues are also prevalent among this segment of the economy. In this light, stronger and more 
extensive financial literacy programs becomes of particular importance.  
• Based on data from the 2015 NBSFI, Filipino adults reported the following barriers to 
transacting with e -money agents include: the product/service is not  needed or does not 
suit their requirements and preference; lack of awareness of how to transact; transaction 
is not cheap; lack/absence of required documents.  
 
                                                           
28 http://www.cgap.org/topics/digital -financial -services  
29 “Financial Inclusion” http://www.cgap.org/topics/financial -inclusion  26 
 The following recommendations are presented, based on these findings:  
• Financial education/literac y should be incorporated in the implementation of digital 
finance. Our study found that there is some hesitation to use digital services by the 
older/less tech savvy segment of the population, who are considerably a sizeable section of the  population and should. Apart from education, a review of the complexity of 
digital platforms can be done. 
• Usage of e -finance depends largely on existing infrastructure. Weak infrastructure, 
notably in rural areas, highly discourages potential users to lea rn the technology. 
Reliable internet connection also contributes in building trust among users and financial service providers. Internet connectivity has been a problem in the country for many 
years. The government, together with the private sector/provide rs, should thoughtfully 
consider soon how to improve the digital infrastructure.  
• As exemplified by the CARD Bank and FINTQ, the private sector in the Philippines are very active and innovative in terms of bring about change in the financial landscape  
despi te the existing constraints (e.g. weak infrastructure) . Recognizing the size of the 
remaining underserved market and inevitable move toward digitalization, these companies should continue to find ways to extend more affordable, suitable, and 
convenient  services  to Filipinos especially those situated in hard- to-penetrate areas.   
• The BSP remains committed in its goal to achieve financial inclusion. Necessary 
regulations have been put in place and complementary programs are currently ongoing. 
Today, their thrust is more on ensuring the adoption of the regulations among banks 
and in strengthening its financial literacy efforts among all Filipinos nationwide. 
Nonetheless, there seems to be a need for greater collaborative efforts among other national gove rnment agencies in expanding the usage of digital finance in the country . 
The government, through BSP, in collaboration with the private sector should continue 
to support and test competitive business models by companies that introduce innovations in the digital financial market. Having a financial market and business environment that is dynamic will be conducive to progress in digital finance.   
• The law to implement the national ID system is currently being reviewed in the Senate. 
If successfully legislated, this  will help facilitate the inclusion of the unbanked Filipinos 
in the digital economy. Meanwhile, forward -looking, the private sector can explore 
investing in innovative methods of identification, such as biometric scans.  
• The interoperability could be a source of concern in the future since this affects the 
costs of service provision. Regulators must be wary of its potential implications especially to the consumers and in pursuing financial inclusion.  
  
  27 
 Bibliography  
 
Aker , J., R. Boumnijel, A. McClelland , and N. Tierney . 2015. Payment mechanisms and anti -
poverty programs: Evidence from a mobile money cash transfer experiment in Niger . 
CDG Working Paper N umber 268, July 2015.  
Arabehety, P. G., G. Chen , W. Cook, and C. McKay . 2016. Digital Finance Interoperability and  
Financial Inclusion: A 20- Country Scan. Washington, D.C.: Consultant Group to Assist 
the Poor. http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/interoperability.pdf . 
Avendaño, C.O. 2017. Senate to pass national ID system by 2018. Philippine Dai ly Inquirer . 
December 5. Retrieved March 1, 2018, from 
http://newsinfo.inquirer.net/949820/senate -to-pass-national -id-system -by-2018 
(accessed on March 8, 2018). 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas  (BSP) . 2017a . Financial Inclusion in the Philippines Dashboard as 
of Third Quarter of 2017. Manila : BSP. 
http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/Publications/2017/FIDashboard_3Q2017.pdf  
(accessed on March 7, 2018) . 
__________. 2017b. A Status Report of the Philippine Financial System, 1st Semester 2017. 
Manila:  Office of Supe rvisory Policy Development, BSP.  
Boston Consulting Group (B CG). 2014. Cross -border E -commerce Makes the World Flatter. 
https://www.bcg.com/perspectives/170622 (a ccessed on February 14, 2018) . 
Bourguignon, F. and M.  Klein. 2008. Foreword. In Finance for All? Policies and Pitfalls in 
Expanding Access , edited by A. Demirguc -Kunt, T. Beck and P. Honohan. A World 
Bank Policy Research Report.  Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.  
Brune, L., X. Gine, J. Goldberg, and D. Yang . 2015. Facilitating savings for agriculture: Field 
experimental evidence from Malawi . NBER  Working Paper Number 20946, February . 
Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee. 2016. Digitalisation: The -Second -Machine- Age.  New York: 
W.W. Norton and Company . 
BusinessWor ld. 2018. FINTQ to offer 1 million free microinsurance policies. BusinessWorld. 
March 4. http://www.interaksyon.com/fintq -to-offer -1-million -free-microinsurance -
policies/ (accessed on  March 8, 2018).  
Cull, R., T. Ehrbeck, and N. Holle. 2014. “Financial Inclusion and Development: Recent 
Impact Evidence” CGAP Focus Note No. 92, April . 
http://www.cgap.org/publications/financial- inclusion- and-development -recent -
impact -evidence  (accessed on February 24, 2018) . 
Department of Information and C ommunications Technology  (DICT) . 2017. National 
Broadband Plan: Building Infostructures for a Digital Nation. Quezon City: DICT.  
GSM ( Groupe Spéciale Mobile) Association  (GSMA) . 2012. Mobile Money in the Philippines 
– The Ma rket, the Models and Regulation. London: GSMA. 
https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -
content/uploads/2012/06/Philippines -Case- Study -v-X21-21.pdf  (accessed on March 8, 
2018).  
Internati onal Finance Corporation (IFC) . 2017. Digital Financial Services: Challenges and 
Opportunities for  Emerging Market Banks. Washington, D.C.: IFC.  
Kimura, F. and L. Chen. 2017. Commerce as Asia’s New Growth Engine. ERIA Policy Brief 
2017- 02, October . Jakarta: Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia.  
Lauer, K. and T. Lyman. 2015. Digital Financial Inclusion: Implications for Customers, 
Regulators, Supervisors, and Standard- Setting Bodies . Consultative Group to Assist the 
Poor (CGAP) Brief, February.  
Llanto, G.M. 2015. Households’ Access to Financial Services.  Philippine Review of 
Economics  Volume 52(2):170- 191. 28 
 _________. 2017. Philippines. Chapter 7 . In Financial Inclusion, Regulation and Education: 
Asian Perspectives , edited by N. Yoshino and P. Morgan. Tokyo: Asian Development 
Bank Institute.  
Llanto, G.M. and M.D. Rosellon. 2017. What Determines Financial Inclusion in the 
Philippines? Evidence from a National Baseline Survey. PIDS  Discussion Paper Series 
No. 2017- 38. Quezon City: Philippine Institute for Development Studies . 
Lopez, M . 2017. E -money transact ions hit all- time high in  2016. Bus iness World Online. 
May 23. 
McKinsey & Company . 2012. Online and upcoming: The Internet's impact on aspiring 
countries. January. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/high -tech/our -
insights/impact- of-the-internet -on-aspiring -countries  (accessed on March 4, 2018). 
McKinsey & Company. 2016. Digital finance for all: Powering inclusiv e growth in emerging 
economies.  September . https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Global 
Themes/Employment and Growth/How digital finance could boost growth in emerging 
economies/MGI -Digital- Finance -For-All-Executive- summary -September -2016.ashx  
(accessed on March 10, 2018). 
Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP). 2014. Building financial capabilities 
through m -banking. http://rbap.org/2014/03/building -financi al-capabilities -through- m-
banking/ . 
Saal, M., S. Starnes, and T. Rehermann. 2017. Digital Financial Services: Challenges and 
Opportuni ties for Emerging Market Banks. EM Compass Note 42, August . 
SpeedTest. 2018, February. Speed Test Global Index. http://www.speedtest.net/global -index  
(accessed on March 8, 2018).  
Think with Google. 2017. E-economy SEA, Unlocking the $200 Billion Digital Opportunity 
in Southeast Asia. http://apac.thinkwithgoogle.com/research -studies/e -conomy -
seaunlocking -200b- digital- opportunity.html  (accessed on March 10 , 2018) . 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD) . 2017. Information 
Economy Report 2017: Digitalization, Trade and Development .  Geneva: United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.  
Yoshino, N. and P.  Morgan. 2017.  Financial Inclusion, Regulation and Education: Asian 
Perspectives  Tokyo: Asian Development Bank Institute. 
     
  29 
 Annex A. Profile of FGD Respondents  
 
The focus group discussion (FGD) was conducted with the members (i.e. clients and agents) 
of the CARD Bank. All of these members are registered in the recently launched mobile application of the Bank branded as, “konek2Card” or “k2C”. T he FGD was conducted in two 
parts – the first one was with the agents, who are also users of the mobile application and the 
second one, with the users only. The main objectives of the discussions are to determine the 
members’ receptiveness in using digital financial services, usage behavior, challenges and 
issues, and the likelihood to continue using the k2C.   
 Profile of the Respondents  
The total number of FGD participants
30 is 37 who are all active members and registered to the 
k2C. Looking at their educa tional background, most are at least high school graduates, of which 
three respondents have attained post -graduate degree (Table 1). Majority are also married (92 
percent), while the remaining are either widowed or single.  
 
Table A.1  
Level of Education  
Elementary Graduate  2 
Some High School  4 
High School Graduate  9 
Vocational Graduate  2 
Some College  9 
College Graduate  8 
Post -Graduate Degree  3 
Total  37 
 
As for the job or occupation, most of the participants have their own “sari -sari” stores / 
neighborhood sundry stores (40.5 percent) while the rest are engaged in direct selling / buy and 
sell, selling of electronic mobile load and digital financial transf er services (e.g. Smart Money 
Padala). This implies that majority of the participants acquire their income from their own businesses (Table 3), while a considerable number relies on remittances from family/relatives and friends and from wages / salary from  the companies they are employed in.  
 
Table A .2  
Job / Occupation  
Sari-sari store (owner)  15 
Direct selling/Buy and Sell (e.g. 
cosmetics, chicken, vendor)  5 
E-load / Smart Money Padala  4 
Computer shop rental  3 
Family Business (i.e. small piggery, 
rental)  3 
Business woman  2 
Housekeeper / Care Taker  2 
Professional (i.e. Architect)  1 
                                                           
30 Originally, the total number of invited participants was 40. However, due to unforeseen circumstances, only 37 participants 
arrived.  30 
 Job / Occupation  
Farmer  1 
Sewist  1 
No job  3 
No response  2 
 
Table A.3 
Source of Income   
Income from own business  28 
Pension  2 
Remittance  7 
Receive wages or salary from a 
company  5 
Rental income  1 
No response  1 
 
Meanwhile, 19 out of the 37 participants (51.4 percent) have been clients of CARD Bank for 
more than 5 to 10 years and 7 have been members for more than 10 years now.  Their reasons for opening bank account are for savings (31 respondents) and loans (17 respondents) which 
will be primarily used for their businesses and tuition of their children. Notably, there were 4 participants who answered that one of their main consideration is having an insurance.  
 
Table A.4 
Years of Membership  
0 to 1   2 
Greater than 1 to 5   9 
Greater than 5 to 10   19 
Greater than 10 to 
20  6 
20 and above   1 
Total   37 
 
Table A.5 
Reason/s for Opening Bank Account  
Savings  31 
Loans (e.g. business)  17 
Insurance  4 
No response  2 
 
        31 
 Annex B. Digital Finance in the Philippines: A SWOT Analysis  
 
Strengths  Weaknesses  
Regulators:  
• Main regulator (i.e. BSP) is very supportive 
of responsible digital innovation in pursuit 
of financial inclusion –  necessary regulations 
are in place  
 Providers: 
• Strong collaboration with the government toward achieving financial inclusion (e.g. programs such as “Lendr” and “KasamaKA”)  
• Number of e -money accounts has been 
growing (i.e. from 9.4 million registered accounts in 2015 to 11.4 million in 2016)  
Clients:  
• Filipinos are generally tech -savvy and can 
easily adapt to technological change  
 Regulators:  
• Slow implementation or lack of actions in 
terms of addressing expensive and poor internet performance especially in far- flung 
municipalities  
• Lack of neces sary infrastructure to implement 
the national ID system which serves as a 
major facilitator to digital financial inclusion  
Providers: 
• Banks may need to improve their technical 
infrastructure to protect the privacy of its users – this is necessary to increase the trust 
among the unbanked clients  
 
Clients:  
• Some may not have the necessary gadget to 
conduct digital transaction  
Opportunities  Threats  
Regulators:  
• Ongoing digital financial literacy programs 
of the BSP among Filipinos  
Providers: 
• Presence of greater market opportunities 
/demand: About 35% of the municipalities 
in the Philippines remain unbanked which  
translates to more than 50% of adult 
Filipino who do not have bank account31 
 
Clients:  
• Filipinos are generally tech -savvy and can 
easily adapt to  technological change  
• Increasing use of the internet by Filipinos  
 Regulators:  
• Continued poor performance of the 
telecommunication companies  
• Continued slow implementation of relevant 
government programs such as the National 
Broadband Plan  
• Security and privacy breach of clients  
• Issue on interoperability  
• Consumer protection  
Providers: 
• Slow -to-adapt service providers –  some of the 
MBOs / rural banks who largely cater low -
income individuals may not have the 
necessary capital and technical capacity to 
invest  on digital mobile services  
• Security and data privacy breach  
• Despite growing number of registered e -
money accounts, utilization remains low.  
Clients:  
• In the case of those who rely on cash agents, 
fraud or mismanagement of money (e.g. 
deposits) can occur on  the side of the agents.  
 
                                                           
31 http://www.bsp.gov.ph/downloads/Publications/2017/FIDashboard_3Q2017.pdf   