The childr en the w orld 
chooses to forgetA Rigorous Review and Narrative SynthesisEDTECH FOR LEARNING  
 IN EMERGENCIES AND  
     DISPLACED SETTING S
Michaelle Tauson and Luke StannardAcknowledgements
The authors of this report and Save the Children UK would like to thank Mike Fisher 
and Leah Williams for their research support.
A huge thank you goes to the reviewers of the report as well: Charlotte Balfour-
Poole, Mark Chapple, Mary Cox, Marco Grazia, and Mary Greer, Arlo Kitchingman. 
Y our feedback was invaluable.  A very special thank you goes to Prisca Benelli, 
Sebastien Hine, and Josie Scott for their support. 
Published by Save the Children UK
savethechildren.org.uk 
First published 2018
© Save the Children UK 2018
This publication may be used free of charge for the purposes of
advocacy, campaigning, education and research, provided that the
source is acknowledged in full.
Cover photo:  Save the Children provided Dorothy* with books, pens and a radio to help 
her learn remotely from radio lessons while schools were closed. We also fund a team of 
community volunteers who help children with their school work, provide psychosocial support 
and refer vulnerable children to Save the Children for further referral as necessary.
*name has been changed for security reasons.
Credit: Save the Children
Typeset by: iCRE8designContents
1. Executive Summary 6
  Background and Objectives 6
  Methodology 7
  Main findings and implications 8
2. Introduction and Background 11
 2.1  Introduction 11
 2.2. Purpose of the Report  12
3. Definitions and Theories of Learning 13
 3.1  Definitions 13
 3.2  Conceptual Framework 14
   3.2.1  Theories of learning 14
   3.2.2  Zone of Proximal Development 14
   3.2.3  Scaffolding 14
   3.2.4  Types of learning  15
   3.2.5 Pillars of learning 15
   3.2.6  Barriers to T eacher Engagement 16
   3.2.7  Learning during and after crisis 17
4. Methodology 19
 4.1  Designing the Research 19
 4.2  Step by Step Process 19
 4.3   Limitations of the Study 21
5. Mapping of Research 22
 5.1   Classification of Studies 22
 5.2  Categorisation of Findings 24
 5.3 Synthesis of Current Systematic Reviews 30
6. Narrative Synthesis of Findings/Analysis of ‘What works’ 33
 6.1   The Child 33
   6.1.1  Learning outcomes are not improved simply by the provision of hardware alone.  33
   6.1.2  EdT ech must take pedagogical standard of design seriously 35
   6.1.3  EdT ech software must be tied to curriculum for optimal results 36
   6.1.4  EdT ech must be responsive to the learners’ level 37
   6.1.5  Examples must be relevant to learners’ context 39
   6.1.6  EdT ech can increase learner motivation 40
   6.1.7  EdT ech can potentially boost learner’s ‘21st Century’ learning skills.  40
   6.1.8  Learners can teach themselves how to use tech quickly 41Caption? 6. 2  The Community 42
    6.2.1   Adult/T eacher led scaffolding key to productive learner engagement with technology 42
    6.2.2   EdT ech must supplement and not supplant teaching if it is to be successful  44
    6.2.3   T eacher perceptions of technology are important 46
    6.2.4   The availability of T eacher Professional Development 47
    6.2.5   Parents perception of technology is important.  50
    6.2.6   Context of intervention is key to successful integration: History and  
       Context affects usage      50
    6.2.7  EdT ech can, but does not necessarily, represent the best value for money/sustainability 52
 6.3   The Enabling Conditions 53
    6.3.1  Infrastructure a major barrier to successful utilization of EdT ech 53
    6.3.2  EdT ech for accelerated learning: preparation to integration to formalized education 54
    6.3.3  EdT ech can blur lines between formal, informal and nonformal learning  55
    6.3.4  Gender 56
    6.3.5  Wellbeing 58
7.  What are the major gaps in research in emergency and displaced settings? 59
8.  Summary of Findings 61
9.      How do we ethically implement EdT ech in emergencies:  A Framework for Engagement  64
10.  References:  66
Appendices 71
 Appendix I:   Research Strings:  71
 Appendix 2:   Academic Databases and Journals Searched 72
 Appendix 3:   Grey Literature Search 72
 Appendix 4:   T echnology Overview 74
 ContentsCREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDRENY oung boy using VR in conjunction with a 
smart phone in Bandung, Indonesia.BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES 
Estimates suggest that children living in countries 
affected by violence and disasters are roughly 
three times more likely to be out of school than 
children living in stable, but low-income countries 
(World Bank, 2011 as cited in Dahya, 2016). With 
roughly 535 million children currently living in 
these settings (UNICEF , 2016), many children 
are at risk of missing out on education. With the 
ever-increasing incidence of emergencies and 
the ever-changing face of conflicts, tackling the 
issue is becoming increasingly challenging and 
complex.  At the same time, global funding for 
education has decreased steadily since 2009 
(from 10 per cent to less than 7 per cent in 2015) 
and households now bear a high percentage of 
education costs (UNESCO, 2017).
Due to ever increasing challenges, increased costs, 
and decreased funding, governments, international 
organisations, and civil society have begun to 
welcome, and even call for, private sector support in 
the delivery of education (Menshay and Zakharia, 
2017).  According to UNESCO’s 2017 Global 
Monitoring Report, the private sector is now a 
major key player in the delivery of education. 
Investment is increasing steadily where ‘spending on 
both private tutoring and education technology is 
expected to exceed US$200 billion in the next five 
years’ (UNESCO, 2017: 106). Educational technology 
(EdT ech), or the use of information communications 
technology (ICT) for educational purposes, had been 
a key area of engagement for the private sector. For example, according to Menashay and Zakharia 
(2017: 8), roughly 50 per cent of the engagement of 
the private sector in the Syria response has included 
the ‘development and distribution of technological 
education innovations’. 
Taking into account the above, the purpose of this 
report is to build an understanding of ‘what works’ 
in EdT ech to ensure that children can learn in crisis 
or displaced settings. The field of EdT ech is vast, 
and has influenced almost every facet of modern 
educational delivery. This report will focus on ‘child 
facing’ EdT ech, which refers to technology – both 
software and hardware – designed directly for use 
by the child or by a teacher, parent, or facilitator 
working with a child. 
Overall, this report amasses evidence to develop a 
more nuanced understanding of what is required to 
implement effective and ethical EdT ech programmes 
that lead to children learning, asking the research 
question:
 How can the utilisation of  
 EdTech (at home or at school)  
 for teaching and learning best  
 facilitate the learning process  
 of children in crisis-affected   
 settings?1. Executive Summary
USING EDTECH FOR LEARNING IN EMERGENCIES  
AND DISPLACED SETTINGS: A RIGOROUS REVIEW  
AND NARRATIVE SYNTHESIS
67
METHODOLOGY  
The purpose of this review is to build a holistic 
understanding of how EdT ech can impact learning, 
trying to ascertain what conditions lead to more 
positive outcomes, taking into account learning 
theories; impact studies; and feedback from teachers, 
parents, and students. We wanted to take a step 
back from traditional systematic reviews, which often 
focus almost exclusively on the results of randomised 
control trials and quasi experimental designs in order 
to decide ‘what works’. In this study we wanted to 
investigate ‘the what’ alongside ‘the how’ and ‘the why’ 
in order to understand how investments in EdT ech 
really matter for efficient and effective learning. 
Ultimately, if investment in EdT ech for learning has 
arrived and is here to stay, we want to be able to help 
guide investments so they are sustainable, ethical, and 
lead to efficient student learning. For this reason, this 
review has used a wide range of data sources to build up an evidence base to understand why and how 
EdT ech works.  
This review process, after establishing a clear research 
question and research strategy, included a search 
of both academic and grey literature, reviewing a 
large body of sources. Databases searched included: 
Google Scholar, Springerlink, Proquest, ERIC, Sage 
Journals, and JSTOR. Searches were also conducted 
using individual journals which included The Journal 
of refugee studies, Refugee Survey Quarterly, 
Migration Studies, International Journal of Refugee 
Law, and Information T echnologies and International 
Development. 
These searches turned up 1000s of hits, and in  
the end we collected roughly 500 documents.  
After a second and third review for relevance and 
quality, 135 documents were included in the study.  
A narrative synthesis was then conducted to 
synthesize and analyse findings.Joshua* is an Ebola survivor who was treated 
in the Kerry T own Ebola Treatment Centre. 
His father, younger brother and grandmother, 
along with 10 other members of his family 
all died from Ebola. Although he recovered 
from Ebola he suffered serious complications 
and was taken home unconscious in an 
ambulance. He also had problems with his 
sight and a wound on his foot.
As part of a consortium we provided a school 
bag, pens, books and money for lunch to help 
him return to school, and a radio he listens 
to lessons on. He is visited regularly by Save 
the Children Child Protection Office Officer 
Konday Marah who provides psychosocial 
support and helps him access other services 
like healthcare.
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN   
81. Impact evidence exists but is not utilized  
 appropriately:  Although there is an  
 overwhelming consensus of how EdT ech can  
 contribute to learning and the facilitation of the  
 learning process, many EdT ech initiatives are  
 designed without taking existing evidence into  
 consideration. 
2. The provision of hardware alone is not  
 sufficient to improve learning outcomes.  
 The mere access of ICT in schools or at home  
 does not implicate learning outcomes.  A number  
 of factors must be in place for learning outcomes  
 to improve. 
3. EdT ech is a tool that needs to be   
 constructed with the principles of pedagogy  
 in mind, such as active learning, engagement,  
 and content that hooks onto previous learning.  
 EdT ech should support cognition and not only  
 present content.
4. EdT ech must be implemented in line with  
 the local curriculum. Neglecting alignment will  
 mean that content may not be relevant for the  
 child, but may also increase the workload of the  
 teacher. 
5. EdT ech must be responsive/adapt to the  
 learners’ level. Materials should be at the   
 correct level for the child so that they are   
 challenged, but can also progress. Content should  
 allow children to learn through their mistakes.
6. Scaffolded, appropriate, and adaptive   
 software can be extremely useful in  
 classroom settings. EdT ech can indeed support  
 teachers and free them up to engage in greater  
 student-teacher interaction, which is important  
 to improving learning outcomes.
7. Examples must be relevant to the learners’  
 context. If not, children will struggle to connect  
 to the examples, and therefore will fail to learn  
 the material. Contextually appropriate material  
 means that children are more likely to engage.
8. Material that is contextually appropriate  
 can be used by families and can help   increase opportunities for social   
 engagement. This is important in emergencies  
 where family support is crucial for child wellbeing  
 and can help a child to achieve improved learning  
 outcomes. 
9. Child learners tend to be able to teach   
 themselves how to use technology fairly  
 quickly. Children, do not necessarily need  
 extensive support in learning the technical aspects  
 of simple EdT ech devices. In fact, if left to explore  
 the devices at the outset they can collectively  
 build an understanding in a child-centred manner. 
10. Adult/teacher led scaffolding is key  
 to productive learner engagement with  
 technology. The iterative, affective support that  
 adults can provide is necessary to ensure learning,  
 as in-app scaffolding cannot ‘differentiate a  
 careless error from more serious    
 misunderstanding’. 
11. EdT ech must supplement and not substitute  
 teaching if it is to be successful. Evidence  
 shows that EdT ech used to supplement in  
 classroom learning can lead to improved learning  
 outcomes. However, when teaching is substituted  
 for EdT ech, learning outcomes tend to diminish. 
12. How EdT ech is used matters more than  
 what  EdT ech is used. EdT ech can be an  
 important tool to supplement and indeed   
 potentially improve learning outcomes for those  
 who engage with it. For this to be successful it is  
 important that attention is paid to how it is used,  
 for example not simply to deliver content to  
 learners. It can, if appropriately utilized, provide  
 very valuable support that has the potential to  
 facilitate teachers in being able to provide more  
 support, and increase the chances of teacher-  
 student interaction. 
13. We cannot change the learning  
 environment just to utilise a tool. We must  
 avoid the desire to reengineer how students  
 interface with learning environments, just to suit  
 a new educational tool. We must use the evidence  
 of how this tool can improve current practice. MAIN FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS9   
14. T eachers’ opinions and perspectives matter  
 when it comes to effective EdT ech use.  
 T eachers’ opinions of EdT ech and its relevance to  
 the learner’s educational development are  
 important. T eachers’ attitudes play a more  
 important role in whether technology is effectively  
 implemented over other barriers, such as teacher  
 training or time. 
15. T eachers must be trained and engaged  
 with regularly for EdT ech to be an effective  
 tool in the classroom. EdT ech is a relatively  
 new educational tool, as with all educational tools  
 the teacher, or primary deliverer of content, needs  
 to be comfortable using it, prior to using it with  
 learners. 
16. Poor teacher training leads to poor results.  
 If resources are stretched too thin, the  
 implementation is rushed, and/or teacher training  
 is not engaged with readily, then the impact of the  
 intervention on learning outcomes is diminished.  
 Not only does the quality of this initial teacher  
 training need to be of a high standard, it needs  
 to be sustained. Continued teacher development  
 positively correlates with successful EdT ech  
 take up.
17. Parents’ perception of technology is  
 important for learning. Parents/Primary  
 Care-givers are the most important actors in  
 their children’s education and parents have to  
 be supportive of EdT ech if it is to be used and  
 used effectively. Taking an active approach to  
 parental engagement can work to alleviate  
 fears they may hold around technology, and  
 indeed promote a positive attitude to the  
 education their children are receiving at school. 
18. The history and context of the country and  
 education systems will influence the usage  
 of EdT ech for learning. Should the wider  
 cultural context of a country or community be  
 engaged with in a proactive manner then it can  
 go a long way to support the successful  
 integration of EdT ech which can lead to  
 sustainable improvements in learning outcomes. 19. EdT ech can, but does not necessarily,  
 represent the best value for money or  
 sustainability. Educational technology can be  
 expensive. In emergency situations when resources  
 are limited and the infrastructure to support the  
 technology is under strain, the sustainability and  
 feasibility of an intervention has to be established,  
 if long-term improvements in learning outcomes  
 are the aim of the intervention. T echnology  
 interventions can become a burden to the  
 communities in which EdT ech is integrated if the  
 long term considerations of software updates and  
 maintenance are not considered. The issues that  
 need to be considered regarding value for money  
 include considering the appropriateness of the  
 hardware, sustained training initiatives for  
 teachers, adaptation costs for the learning  
 environment, and capacity building, where needed,  
 to ensure that broken equipment can be   
 maintained.
20. Infrastructure is a major barrier to the  
 successful utilization of EdT ech. Infrastructure  
 will differ based on the region engaged, so too  
 will equity of access within countries. There is a  
 need to look beyond the claimed infrastructure  
 and policy framework of specific countries, and  
 build an understanding of the actual and current  
 infrastructure and what it is best suited for.  
 Otherwise, initiatives will lead to wastage and  
 opportunity costs. 
21. EdT ech can be effectively used alongside  
 accelerated learning programmes  in order  
 to help children to catch up and get back on  
 track in their appropriate learning levels, but only  
 if EdT ech programmes are aligned with the  
 curriculum and work as a supplement to  
 accelerated learning programmes. 
22. Boys and girls perform the same when  
 not facing barriers to access, but barriers  
 to access are both gendered and pervasive and  
 are buried within economic and societal contexts.  
 In an emergency, or any context, we have to build  
 our own understanding of these divides by  
 working closely with local populations before  
 engaging in programmes that may exacerbate  
 inequality in society. 10In August 2014 Magnum photographer 
Michael Christopher Brown travelled 
to Za’atari and taught a group of 
Syrian refugee teenagers how to take 
photographs using an Apple iPhone. 
These photographs were taken by 
Omar*, a 14 year old Syrian boy living 
in Za’atari refugee camp in Jordan. 
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN112.1 INTRODUCTION
Globally, according to UNESCO (2017),  
264 million children of primary and secondary 
school age are out school. UNESCO also 
estimates that worldwide roughly 100 million 
young people are fully illiterate. While data 
on attendance, enrolment, and literacy can be 
difficult to gather in fragile and conflict-affected 
settings, estimates suggest that children in these 
settings are roughly three times more likely to 
be out of school than children living in stable, but 
low-income countries (World Bank, 2011 as cited 
in Dahya, 2016). With roughly 535 million children 
currently living in countries affected by violence 
and disasters (UNICEF , 2016) many children are 
at risk of missing out on education.
In addition, the occurrence of natural disasters has 
been increasing steadily since the 1970s (Guha-
Sapir and Hoyois, 2015) and in recent years the 
incidence of violent conflict has seen an upsurge. 
Conflicts have become more severe and the number 
of displaced persons continues to rise. Conflicts have 
become more complex as they become more urban 
over time and contexts remain fragile for longer 
periods even after a conflict “ends” (IISS, 2017).  
With the ever-increasing incidence of emergencies 
and the ever-changing face of conflicts, tackling 
the issue is becoming increasingly challenging and 
complex.  At the same time, global funding for 
education has decreased steadily since 2009 (from 
10 per cent to less than 7 per cent in 2015) and 
households now bear a high percentage of education 
costs (UNESCO, 2017).
In recent decades, due to these challenges, increased 
costs, and decreased funding, governments, 
international organisations, and civil society have 
begun to welcome, and even call for, private sector 
support in the delivery of education (Menshay and 
Zakharia, 2017).  According to UNESCO’s 2017 
Global Monitoring Report, the private sector is now 
a major key player in the delivery of education. Investment is increasing steadily where ‘spending on 
both private tutoring and education technology is 
expected to exceed US$200 billion in the next five 
years’ (UNESCO, 2017: 106). Educational technology 
(EdT ech), or the use of information communications 
technology (ICT) for educational purposes, had been 
a key area of engagement for the private sector. 
For example, according to Menashay and Zakharia 
(2017: 8), roughly 50 per cent of the engagement of 
the private sector in the Syria response has included 
the ‘development and distribution of technological 
education innovations’. 
The merits and risks of private sector engagement 
in the field of education in emergencies, especially 
regarding technology, have been intensely debated. 
Proponents see technology as ubiquitous, therefore 
capable of bringing equal access to all, efficiently 
and effectively. Opponents, on the other hand, voice 
concerns over exploitation and undermining the 
role of the state as the main duty bearer to provide 
education to all children within its borders (see 
Menashay and Zakharia, 2017 for a more nuanced 
debate). Opponents also cite the fact that evidence 
in conflict, disaster, and displaced settings is so 
sparse that we lack an understanding of how to best 
use technology in these circumstances. 
The purpose of this report is not to engage in this 
debate, but start from the assumption that private 
sector engagement in education in emergencies 
has already taken hold, as evidenced in the Middle 
East. We assume that the trend of using EdT ech 
to address gaps in the provision of education is 
increasing and will continue to do so, regardless 
of the advantages and disadvantages. The purpose 
of this paper is, however, to examine the evidence 
regarding EdT ech, from a learner centric perspective 
in all settings, and to apply findings to emergency 
settings. The purpose is to build an understanding 
of ‘what works’ so that we can help guide tech 
companies, governments, international organisations, 
and civil society to work better together to ensure 
that children are learning and will not be left behind 
due to conflict and disasters.2. Introduction and BackgroundWhile taking for granted that EdT ech is “here”, 
does not mean that the arguments of opponents 
should not be considered. On the contrary, 
greater consideration must be taken to ensure 
EdT ech interventions are ethically and effectively 
implemented. Firstly, engaging with the private 
sector introduces an additional layer of complexity 
to an already over complex situation. Working to 
deliver education in emergencies already includes 
the involvement of a wide range of stakeholders 
with competing agendas, varying values and 
priorities, diverse knowledge bases and many ways 
of working.  As a result, it can become challenging 
to ensure that children’s needs are put first and the 
best innovations for the context are put forward. 
Simply, in some cases, the drive to introduce 
innovative practices can lead to the implementation 
of programmes or endeavours that may not be the 
most appropriate for children within the context.
2.2. PURPOSE OF THE REPORT
Taking into account the above, the purpose of 
this report is to build an understanding of ‘what 
works’ in EdT ech to ensure that children can learn 
in crisis or displaced settings. We have focused on 
the aspect of learning over other areas, such as 
school management, teacher training, or classroom 
management. Not discounting the importance of 
these other areas, we were keen to understand 
how technology can be used to help children whose 
learning may have been temporarily or permanently 
disrupted, taking into consideration what is best for 
the child. 
Overall, this report amasses evidence to develop a 
more nuanced understanding of what is required to 
implement effective and ethical EdT ech programmes 
that lead to children learning, asking the research 
question:
 How can the utilisation of   
 EdTech (at home or at school)  
 for teaching and learning best  
 facilitate the learning process  
 of children in crisis-affected   
 settings?T o answer this question, we reviewed the most 
recent academic, peer-reviewed literature as 
well as a small number of grey studies to build 
an understanding around the following (see 
Methodology section for more details):
In general, a comprehensive review is missing from 
the literature that clearly links the variables that 
matter for better learning to EdT ech initiatives. This 
research attempts to connect theories of learning 
with impact studies and systematic reviews in order 
to establish these links. This research also identifies 
the gaps in the research and prioritises a list of what 
we need to know to ensure the effective design of 
programmes to help children, making clear what we 
do not know. 
Finally, after analysing the evidence on learning we 
develop theory based guidance on the best actions/
interventions to address the needs of the learner 
through EdT ech. In this sense we are building a 
framework for engagement that asks, how can 
EdT ech best be used and when should we use it? 
The purpose of this tool is to help the third sector 
to engage with private and tech actors that wish 
to engage in humanitarian crises and offer support, 
allowing for a more straightforward engagement 
process.  
12   
1. What EdTech interventions or trends are  
 considered successful/lead to the most   
 effective learning for children
2. What interventions or trends are considered  
 failures 
3. Which factors are necessary for the success  
 of interventions and what factors lead to  
 failures (or no outcome)133.1 DEFINITIONS
T o ensure that readers are on the same page as 
the authors of this review, we provide working 
definitions of relevant terms. Many of these terms 
have a wide usage and encompass multiple 
meanings, however we have provided simplified 
definitions to ensure that findings are clearly 
presented. 
EdTech
The concept of EdT ech generally includes a number 
of broad definitions across disciplines; however, 
for the purposes of this research, Ed T ech will be 
seen as ‘practice’ as opposed to theory1 Simply, 
EdT ech as practice is the use of technology for 
teaching and learning. In this review EdT ech will be 
examined across the spectrum, including independent 
learning at home to face-to-face learning with 
the incorporation of technology, and all that lies 
between.  
Technology
T echnology is also a broad term, and when left open 
to ambiguity, can easily be replaced with terms 
such as innovation or advancement. However, we 
restrict the term to reflect the use of information 
and communications technology (ICT), specifically as 
a tool to facilitate education. ICT, for the purposed 
of this research, includes the use of radio to the most 
sophisticated and interactive digital teaching and 
learning tools.  
Learning and Facilitating the Learning Process
Learning can be seen as ‘the retention of 
information’ and ‘the acquisition of knowledge, 
skills, and attitudes’ or generally, ‘understanding’ 
(Januszewski and Molenda ,2013: 4-5). Due to the 
nature of the research, as this is not an evaluation 
of a particular project, measuring ‘learning’ is 
not feasible. The purpose of this research is to 
understand how technology either enhances 
learning outcomes or creates an environment 
where learning can take place. Therefore, it would 
not be practical or feasible to attempt to assign an indicator for learning and measure specific learning 
outcomes. Instead this research seeks to build an 
understanding of the learning process in relation to 
EdT ech. 
In this sense, the use of the word ‘facilitation,’ is 
synonymous with terms such as promotion or 
assistance (Robinson et al., 2013). Overall, we are 
interested in understanding if EdT ech programmes 
‘promote an environment where learning can more 
easily occur’ (Januszewski and Molenda, 2013: 4). 
We are interested in finding out if EdT ech can 
support personalised learning, for example does its 
use help children to achieve numeracy or literacy, 
improve skills, or contribute to the improvement 
of psychosocial outcomes? Also, can EdT ech help 
children to catch up so they are able to achieve 
at appropriate schooling levels? And finally, we 
are interested in understanding if EdT ech can help 
children learn to learn.
Pedagogy  
Pedagogy is a concept used extensively, but defined 
rarely. It is important to define what is meant by 
pedagogy because, as Murphy (1996: 28) states ‘in 
different cultures at different points of time in history, 
the meaning and status has shifted’. It is synonymous 
with educational research and discussions. In this 
review when pedagogy is referred to, it is in relation 
to the praxis of teaching. Praxis is used to describe 
the relationship between ‘theory and practice in 
teaching’ (Murphy, 1996: 34). It is the process by 
which a learning environment is established and 
coordinated. In short, pedagogy is the  ‘interactions 
between teachers, students and the learning environment 
and learning tasks’ (Ibid). When EdT ech is introduced 
to a learning environment it will be structured in a 
manner that influences these interactions and this is 
significant and worthy of consideration. 
Crisis-affected
Borrowing from Burde (2015) the terms ‘crisis-
affected’ as well as ‘emergency’ will be used in order 
to describe the context. Much debate surrounds 
these labels, for example, when does an emergency 
become protracted and cease to be a humanitarian 3.	Definitions	and	Theories	of	Learning
1 http://edutechwiki.unige.ch/en/Educational_technology14issue and become a concern of development 
practitioners? We will leave these debates in 
this review to establish a working definition that 
incorporates sudden onset crises, protracted 
situations, and will include post-conflict settings.
The motivation behind this inclusive definition is 
twofold. First, data and information are limited in 
sudden unset and acute crises due to a number of 
security, logistical, and ethical reasons. We therefore 
must broaden our search for evidence. Second, 
while protracted situations may fall under another 
definition, depending on the audience, the medium 
and short term consequences are clearly linked and 
findings from these settings remain relevant. 
3.2 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The field of education is awash with theories that 
explain what learning is, how best to promote it, and 
in which manner it should be measured. T o engage 
with the theoretical perspectives, and the array 
of evidence covered in this review it is necessary 
that time is taken to address what theoretical 
perspectives informed our framing of learning.
3.2.1 Theories of learning 
As Lowyck, (2014: 6) points out ‘learning theories 
do not constitute a monolithic, coherent system.’ 
Indeed, there are a number of theories of learning 
that have developed to build our understanding of 
this broad topic. The purpose of this research is to 
consider salient arguments around learning and 
apply them to how children may or may not learn 
using EdT ech. We cannot cover all of the competing 
theories; however, it is important that this report 
acknowledges this diversity.
The majority of the studies that have been analysed 
for this rigorous review took a sociocultural 
perspective to learning. This position posits that 
individuals learn through ‘an active process 
and that the context has an important role in 
learning’ (Hall, 2007: 96). These theories have been 
developed from the work of Lev Vygotsky (1978). 
From this perspective, ‘active’ learning is mediated 
through other people, and the use of tools. T ools 
are psychological, for example, language is a tool, 
and we use it to help others expand their own 
understanding of a topic or subject. When a learner 
knows how to use new language (Hall, 2007: 96) it modifies and ‘transform the learners’ thought 
processes’. From a sociocultural perspective EdT ech 
can be a means of helping with the uptake of 
language (tool); it is not a tool in itself. It is part 
of the environment the learner experiences. The 
learning that takes place via the EdT ech has to be 
accessible to the learner. 
3.2.2 Zone of Proximal Development 
When we introduce learners to new ideas, these 
ideas need to sit within the grasp of the learners’ 
current understanding. This idea was worked on 
by Vygotsky (1978) who developed the notion of 
the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD), which 
represents an important aspect of this theory 
of learning. Belland (2014: 506) states that this 
(2014: 506) involves activities a learner ‘cannot 
yet accomplish but which they can accomplish 
with assistance’. T o give an example, single-digit 
subtraction and multi-digit subtraction: 6-1 = 5 
will likely be within a particular learner’s ZPD, and 
others could be given as questions like 7-3 = 4. 
However, 19-11=8 is likely to be too difficult for that 
learner, without having the concept broken down 
into its constituent parts and explained to them. 
3.2.3 Scaffolding
The disaggregation of concepts and ideas, as 
explained above, is referred to as scaffolding. 
Scaffolding supports buildings whilst we construct 
them: it affords those constructing them the safety 
and support to move onto the next level of the 
process, or the next ‘zone’ to use the language 
of Belland. The concept of scaffolding is integral 
to educational support for children and adults. 
Belland (2014: 507) states that this structuring 
‘refers to the role of scaffolding in simplifying tasks 
while still representing the whole task’, put simply 
it is signposting where or what is next, and giving 
the student the support to make that step. It is 
not taking that step for them. This support can be 
presented by humans, peers, or an appropriate 
piece of software. T o build a robust understanding of 
effective EdT ech, this concept needs to be clear. 
Importantly for those looking at EdT ech, there are 
elements that can inhibit that step being taken, as 
Belland (2014: 507) describes ‘two contextual factors 
[that] influence students’ reception of scaffolding: 
the extent to which the cultural knowledge 
contained within scaffolding conflicts with students’ 15existing internalized cultural knowledge, and students’ 
motivation.’ Therefore, the context of the learning, 
whether it sits within their ZPD, and the example used 
to mobilize that learning are of great importance.  
3.2.4 Types of learning 
A considerable number of the studies that this review 
has assessed looked at learning outcomes as a 
measure of progress.  A learning outcome is likely to 
contain a number of forms of learning within it. T o 
define learning is not a simple task, to assist with this 
demarcation we will draw from Bloom’s (1956) work 
on a taxonomy of educational outcomes. In this work 
Bloom discussed the three domains of learning in 
humans, that are still used and discussed today in the 
learning sciences (Hirsh-Pasek, 2015, Krathwohl, 2002).
The first of these is referred to as the cognitive domain 
of learning. Bloom (1956: 7) argued that this domain 
deals with the ‘recall or recognition of knowledge and 
development of intellectual abilities and skills’. It is a 
domain of learning that Hsin et al. (2014) found to 
have garnered the most research in their review of 
EdT ech, and is the one most closely associated with 
actions produced by the learner that are assessed in 
terms of learning outcomes, for example, remembering 
and recalling facts and statistics. 
The second domain of learning is the affective domain 
of learning. The affective domain, according to Bloom 
(1956: 7) deals with ‘objectives which describe changes 
in interest, attitude, and value’. It is the social domain of 
learning, that when engaged with encourages learners 
to improve interpersonal skills, and the development 
of ideas. The affective domain is important to consider 
with regards to EdT ech, which many fear can isolate 
learners and stunt affective development. This fear 
was expressed to researchers by parents in Jordan for 
example (Qablan, 2009). 
The final domain of learning that will be referred to in 
this paper goes by an array of names, Bloom (1956) 
called it the manipulative form of learning, Dave (1967) 
and Simpson (1972) referred to it as the psychomotor 
domain, but in this review, we shall refer to it as the 
Technical domain of learning. It is concerned with 
physical hands on learning, and (Kasiligam et al, 2014: 
30) ‘on performing sequences of motor activities’ such 
as learning to use a tablet, for example. 
These domains of learning intersect and overall development in a learner is likely to include 
development from all of these domains. The manner  
in which to evoke learning is the subject of much 
debate, it is also the topic of the learning sciences, 
which have produced evidence-based theory on how 
best to stimulate learning.  
3.2.5 Pillars of learning 
Hirsh-Pasek et al.’s (2015: 7) work on what constitutes 
learning is drawn from ‘well agreed upon pillars of 
learning at the core of the learning sciences’. The 
learning sciences combine aspects of linguistics, 
neurobiology, psychology, brain imaging and other 
areas that are not concerned with (2015: 6) ‘merely 
what we should teach children – that is, what content 
– but also how children best learn’. In this regard it is a 
framework that looks at learning as a verb, an active 
and developed process of acquiring skills, knowledge 
and an ability to apply such learning. It is a child-
centric approach to learning that considers learning to 
be the action of the child, not simply the reception of 
information.
The first pillar is referred to as active ‘minds on’ 
learning. This pillar (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015: 8) draws 
the distinction between being ‘physically active and 
mentally active.’ Evidence demonstrates that (Hirsh-
Pasek et al., 2015: 9) ‘learning is not simply a passive 
registration of information nor is it simply a result 
of any type of physical activity’). Learning that is 
sustained requires active engagement on the part of 
the learner. For example, when a learner is presented 
with a new word, it is not simply typing that word into 
the software as a means of demonstrating they have 
learnt it.  All this shows is they have learnt the spelling, 
not the use. It is using the new language the learner 
has been exposed to in a sentence, which demonstrates 
an active engagement with the words connotations 
and meaning.
The second pillar is referred to as engagement with 
the learning process, which states that the ‘type of 
engagement is critical for learning’ (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 
2015: 11): In essence does the exercise keep the learner 
on task. This pillar states that distraction is a key 
problem in learning that must be avoided, that learning 
is about building resilience in the learner and (Hirsh-
Pasek et al., 2015: 13) ‘praising children for their efforts 
and hard work helps them understand that learning is 
not instantaneous’. 16The third pillar of this framework is a call for 
meaningful learning. This relates to context and 
learning that (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015: 13) ‘comes 
from experiences that connect to our existing 
knowledge’ or as Ausubel (1968) referred to it, 
learning that ‘hooks’ onto what the child already 
knows. Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015: 14) argue that this 
distinguishes ‘meaningful learning from rote learning’ 
which occurs when ‘new information does not link to 
previously learnt content’.
The fourth and final pillar of this framework 
for learning stresses the importance of social 
interaction. Sociocultural perspectives of learning 
consider learning to be an inherently social activity. 
This framework argues that (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 
2015: 18) for ‘social interaction to benefit learning 
it must be high quality’ and the benefits of social 
interactions influence on learning (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 
2015: 17) ‘have been known for decades’. This does 
not mean that all learning must happen in groups, 
but there is a strong evidence base that suggests 
sharing our new understanding with others helps 
to reinforce the learning and build connections to 
material previously covered. This factor is related to 
the learning environment, be it formal or informal, 
there are a multitude of actors in a given learning 
environment.3.2.6 Barriers to Teacher Engagement 
One of the key actors in any learning environment 
is the teacher/facilitator of the space. This review is 
interested in what promotes effective EdT ech use. 
There are a multitude of reasons why education 
professionals do not engage with the EdT ech that 
is available to them.  As a means of addressing 
the different reasons this paper will draw on the 
framework built by Ertmer (1999) in their paper 
‘addressing First- and Second-order barriers to 
change: strategies for technology integration’. In 
this Ertmer discusses what can enable and prevent 
teachers using EdT ech in classrooms. 
Ertmer (1999: 50) identified first-order barriers to 
engagement as consisting of ‘obstacles that are 
extrinsic to teachers’, examples of which include 
‘equipment, time, training support’ and general 
infrastructure to support technology use. These 
essentially include the issues that are out of the 
teaching staffs’ control. Second-order barriers to 
engagement (Ertmer, 1999: 51) are ‘typically rooted 
in teachers’ underlying beliefs about teaching and 
learning’. These are often related to teachers’ 
opinions of the value of technology integration, and 
an aversion to changes in practice, not dissimilar 
from any adult working in an environment that is 
changing. 
Y aarub and Sulafa* working hand in hand on executing his border scene during an animation workshop run by  
Save the Children in Lebanon, facilitated by photographer and filmmaker Diaa Maleab.
*names have been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN17The influence of structural barriers (first-order) to 
EdT ech engagement are important considerations 
for all those interested in education practice. These 
are coupled with perception led (second-order) 
barriers to engagement. These understandably 
overlap and reinforce one another. For example, 
if as a teacher you are working extra shifts to 
accommodate an extended student body (first-
order) then there is perhaps little time to learn 
a new piece of EdT ech software. This first-order 
barrier is likely to compound a belief (second-order) 
that it is not appropriate to use EdT ech with your 
class. What this framework gives us is a clearer 
means of demarcating the barriers to engagement. 
with the hope to employing practice that works to 
address one or both of these in difficult crisis based 
settings.
3.2.7 Learning during and after crisis
In order to build an understanding about EdT ech 
and what aspects enable children to learn in crisis 
settings, we have to first understand how a child’s 
ability to learn is affected by crisis. It is important 
to consider what obstacles children face in these 
circumstances so that we are able to develop the 
right technology interventions to help overcome 
these issues. 
If we are to speak of learning in emergencies, we 
must take into account the potential impacts of 
trauma and ongoing stress on children their ability 
to learn in these contexts.  Child and families who 
find themselves at the centre of an emergency 
are exposed to trauma on multiple levels. Many 
experience the loss of homes, livelihoods, and, in 
many cases, physical harm and/or the physical 
harm of others. Even after the initial shock of 
conflict or a disaster, individuals often continue to 
face innumerable stressors. Children and families, 
including the displaced and refugees, will often see 
a lack of access to basic needs such as housing, 
health care, education, and dignified livelihoods 
opportunities. In addition, the displaced may be 
confronted with discrimination, violence, extortion, 
and many other stress inducing situations. 
Research shows that exposure to trauma is a 
major impediment to learning in adults as trauma 
impairs both cognitive and executive functions 
(Tauson, 2017). For example, those who suffer from 
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) will often demonstrate an inability to control or regulate 
emotions, maintain attention, switch attention 
between tasks, and even have extreme behavioural 
reactions, lower IQ test scores, short term memory 
loss, paranoia, and hallucinations (Aupperle et al., 
2012; Emdad, 2005; Freeman, et al., 2013; Gracie et 
al., 2007; LaGarde, 2010; Starcke and Brand, 2012). 
Even for those who do not suffer from PTSD, there is 
evidence to suggest that poverty, stress, and trauma 
can interfere with cognitive function.  According to 
Mani et al. (2013) poverty and scarcity can lead to 
temporary or prolonged cognitive impairment and 
a reduction in cognitive functioning. These findings 
are bolstered by research done on intrusive thinking. 
Those who undergo trauma or extreme stress are 
more likely to experience intrusive thoughts, such 
as rumination about the past or worry about the 
future (Aikins et al., 2009; Bomyea and Lang, 2016; 
Michael et al., 2007; Munoz et al., 2013). These 
are particularly constraining in that individuals 
only have limited attentional resources in which 
to process concerns and think critically, therefore 
excessive rumination and worry can cause cognitive 
impairment (Munoz et al., 2013). Essentially when 
we find ourselves facing extreme levels of stress and 
trauma we will become preoccupied with thoughts 
that will impede our ability to 1) focus on whatever 
current task in which we are engaged, 2) weigh 
consequences and make the best decisions, and 3) 
achieve wellbeing (Tauson, 2017).
For children suffering with PTSD, the research 
on mental health outcomes and the impact on 
memory and learning is less abundant but seems 
to show similar findings (Beers and De Bellis, 2002; 
Samuelson et al., 2010; Yasik et al., 2007). Beers 
and De Bellis (2002) have shown that children with 
PTSD showed lower results in measures of attention 
and abstract reasoning/executive function. Studies 
by Yasik et al. (2007) and Samuelson et al. (2010), 
looking at children in the United States found that 
children with PTSD suffer from memory and learning 
deficits. Findings from these studies also showed that 
children who had experienced trauma, but did not 
suffer PTSD, did not suffer the same deficits. However, 
these Western studies may not be applicable to 
emergency and crisis settings as they do not take 
into account on-going and reoccurring exposure to 
stress, trauma, and chaos.  18Delaney-Black et al. (2002: 283) on the other hand, 
show that children regardless of PTSD, if having 
faced trauma, ‘may actually inhibit intellectual and 
academic functioning’. Findings from the study, again 
conducted in the US, showed that ‘self-reported 
violence exposure in children was negatively 
correlated with IQ scores and standardized reading 
achievement test performance’ (Delaney-Black et 
al., 2002: 283). Enlow et al. (2012) similarly find that 
children exposed to trauma in the first 5 years of 
age, even after adjusting for a number of factors – 
including gender, socioeconomic status, maternal IQ, 
and others, suffer long term consequences. Children 
demonstrated decreased cognitive scores at least 
until the age of eight, and children who experienced 
violence in the first 24 months showed even worse 
outcomes. 
Evidence of the impact of trauma and crisis on 
cognitive ability is less abundant in countries affected 
by such atrocities. However, evidence does exist 
which shows that lasting impact on mental health, 
which, as we have established above, has strong links 
to memory, clear thinking, and attention.  Attanyake 
et al. (2009) conducted a meta-analysis, examining 
evidence from 17 countries where children were 
exposed to war. Their findings showed that children 
exposed to conflict were more likely to suffer from 
depression and anxiety disorders.  A study conducted in Sri Lanka with 420 school children (Elbert et al., 
2009: 238) showed similar findings and that those 
children who had been traumatised experienced 
‘lasting interference’ in their daily lives. Children had 
lower school performance and did not perform as 
well on memory tests. 
We need to take into account how children learn, 
but at the same time we also have to consider the 
fact that those facing ongoing trauma and stressors 
may face additional impediments to learning. This 
study investigates the evidence surrounding EdT ech 
in order to show what helps children to learn 
and what helps to facilitate the learning process. 
However, we must take note that these initiatives 
may have different outcomes when implemented 
with crisis affected populations. Throughout this 
study we will call these practical and contextual 
barriers to learning and education into question and 
report our results with clear caveats. 
Further, we need to consider, especially in 
emergency settings, that learning outcomes may 
not be the most important objective. Childhood is 
a critical time for cognitive, emotional and physical 
development (Attanyake, et al., 2009). Therefore, we 
must consider the most appropriate interventions to 
long term wellbeing when we consider using EdT ech 
in emergencies.
Ali* attends a Save the Children drop in centre for child labourers where centre staff encouraged him to return to 
school. He is several grades behind, and receives support from the centre to help him keep on top of his schoolwork. Ali is 
friends with T arek who encourages him to stay in school. He is not sure if he will stay in school, but he hopes to become a 
mechanic some day. He wakes up every morning at 4am to go to work. 
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN194.1 DESIGNING THE RESEARCH
The purpose of this section is to describe and 
justify the methodology, research methods, 
and analysis used in this review. The process 
of designing the methodology for this review 
began by recognising some of the challenges 
and drawbacks of traditional systematic reviews, 
which were first to designed to be used in 
medical sciences in the 1970s with the purpose 
of identifying “what works” (Mallet et al. 2012). 
This approach is extremely useful in the field of 
medicine as studies are conducted using similar,  
if not nearly identical methods. In the end, findings 
can be easily compared across studies, building 
a clear picture of what works. However, in social 
sciences, such as international development 
and humanitarian fields, these studies can be 
extremely biased and present mixed findings.
The methodology of this study was developed 
taking into consideration many of the critiques and 
recommendations that have resulted from work done 
at the Overseas Development Institute (Mallet et al. 
2012; Hagen-Zanker and Mallet, 2013). Mallet et al. 
(2012) present several critiques and challenges of 
conducting systematic reviews in development and 
crisis settings, while Hagen-Zanker and Mallet (2013) 
provide a number of recommendations of steps to 
take in order to combat these challenges. 
Of the many considerations provided by Hagen-
Zanker and Mallet (2013: 19) to ensure reviews in 
development are flexible and fit for purpose, their 
method allows for reviewers to:
•	Only keep track of and collect information on  
 studies that are included and disregard studies  
 that are discarded 
•	Use an analysis that appropriately answers the  
 research question in a sensible and appropriate  
 way (in that a meta-analysis is not required)
•	Flexibly adapt the process if challenges are  
 encountered – although alterations must be  
 highlighted and addressed. The purpose of this review is to build a holistic 
understanding of how EdT ech can impact learning, 
trying to ascertain what conditions lead to more 
positive outcomes, taking into account learning 
theories; impact studies; and feedback from teachers, 
parents, and students. We wanted to take a step 
back from traditional systematic reviews, which 
often focus almost exclusively on the results of 
randomised control trials and quasi experimental 
designs in order to decide ‘what works’. In this study 
we wanted to investigate ‘the what’ alongside ‘the 
how’ and ‘the why’ in order to understand how 
investments in EdT ech really matter for efficient and 
effective learning. Ultimately, if investment in EdT ech 
for learning has arrived and is here to stay, we 
want to be able to help guide investments so they 
are sustainable, ethical, and lead to efficient student 
learning. For this reason, this review has used a wide 
range of data sources to build up an evidence base 
to understand why and how EdT ech works.  
4.2 STEP BY STEP PROCESS
Step 1  in this process involved the defining of the 
research question. The question of ‘what works in 
educational technology’ has broadly been asked 
many times in recent decades and investigated in 
a large number of recent systematic reviews (see 
section 5.3). However, upon an initial investigation 
into the research, we identified major gaps in this 
area, most notably in emergency settings. More 
specifically, we noticed what was missing from 
the research was an analysis which builds an 
understanding of how EdT ech can effectively lead 
to or facilitate learning in emergencies. Even more 
so, a major gap surrounds how EdT ech can be most 
effectively and ethically used, especially in crisis 
settings. 
Step 2  led us to the development of a research 
strategy, defining of research strings, setting of 
exclusion and inclusion criteria, and establishing 
a retrieval process. Research strings were initially 
established by making use of the comprehensive 
list provided by Burde et al (2015: 84). This list 
made for an extremely useful starting point as it is 
comprehensive. Some words were removed from the 4. Methodology20list and a column of terms related to EdT ech were 
added for the purpose of this study (the full list can 
be seen in  Appendix 1).  
At first, these strings were applied using complex 
Boolean searches. However, we found these searches 
were overly complex and did not result in useful 
findings. We then started the process over, using 
much more simplified searches which incorporated 
fewer terms at a time.
We chose to search both academic and grey 
literature, reviewing a large body of sources. 
Databases used included Google Scholar, 
Springerlink, Proquest, ERIC, Sage Journals, and 
JSTOR. Searches were also conducted using 
individual journals which included The Journal of 
refugee studies, Refugee Survey Quarterly, Migration 
Studies, International Journal of Refugee Law, 
and Information T echnologies and International 
Development (See Appendices 2 and 3). 
These searches turned up 1000s of hits, which were 
quickly scanned by title and abstract. When a large 
number of hits were retrieved while searching 
databases, research officers would stop reviewing 
documents when no relevant article was seen for 
2 to 3 pages, and all relevant titles and abstracts 
where exhausted. When using google scholar, the 
first 10 pages were scanned before attempting a 
different set of search terms. Those documents that 
were deemed relevant were saved in Mendeley for 
review in the next step.  In the end we collected 
roughly 500 documents. 
Step 3 included a second review of documents for 
relevance. Reviewers examined all 500 documents, 
closely reading abstracts and skimming documents 
for a basic quality and relevance assessment. 
Examples of documents that were excluded at 
this stage may have included articles that did not 
adequately address learning.  At the end of this 
process 257 documents remained.
Step 4 included the final quality assessment of 
documents. In this stage reviewers examined 
documents using two tools. Qualitative documents 
and systematic reviews were checked for quality 
using Critical Appraisal Skills Programme Checklists2  
(CASP). CASP checklists include 10 questions to 
assess rigour, credibility, and relevance to the topic. For quantitative and mixed method studies 
the Quality Assessment T ool for Quantitative 
Studies created by the Effective Public Health 
Practice Project3 was used. While many tools are 
available for quality assessment, all have strengths 
and weaknesses. These tools were chosen due to 
simplicity and straightforward guidance. 
If any disagreements in the team took place 
regarding the level of quality, we re-reviewed and 
discussed, and decided as a team if the document 
should be included. Quantitative studies were only 
included if they were deemed medium to high quality. 
The authors took care not to place too much 
emphasis on findings from research that was deemed 
medium quality.  At the end of this process 135 
documents were included in the study. 
Step 5 incorporated the classification of studies. 
Each retrieved study, which was deemed as quality 
research, was classified by the following (see 
Appendix # for classification sheet):  Author/s, 
year, methodology, type of publication, outcome 
indicator, general findings, type of technology 
studied, country category, country, education level 
addressed, and type of education. We sought to 
record if learning outcomes were captured and in 
what subjects.  Additional information such as gender 
issues, disability, marginalized groups, refugees, and 
emergency contexts was captured (see section 
5.1). This categorization allowed us to do a final 
assessment for quality and also helped to identify 
blaring gaps in research.
Our final step in the process was to conduct the 
analysis.  As stated above, as the purpose of this 
study is not only give a list of types of technology 
that work, but to understand what about tech works, 
we needed to understand what about each study 
was successful and what about the design and the 
delivery of the programme led to its success or 
failure. We not only wanted to uncover statistical 
significance, but to understand that if a study had 
positive and significant findings, what elements of 
the programme were successful and what patterns 
emerged. In order to do so we conducted a narrative 
synthesis. 
Snilstveit et al. (2012) point out a number of 
weaknesses in conducting a narrative synthesis, most 
notably the lack of transparency and clarity. This is 
2   http://www.casp-uk.net/casp-tools-checklists
3   http://www.ephpp.ca/PDF/Quality%20Assessment%20T ool_2010_2.pdf21due to the fact that methods of conducting such an 
analysis are not necessarily objective and formal 
guidance does not exist in this process. In order to 
combat these shortcomings, we have worked to 
identify and group findings by theme and present 
findings in tables (see section 5.2). While analysing 
each study, we coded findings, grouped studies by 
findings, and presented these groupings in tables as 
a sort of descriptive vote counting. The narrative 
synthesis developed around these findings in the 
following sections are then linked back to the tables. 
In this sense readers can visually identify the saliency 
of each finding. This also allow for readers to quickly 
identify gaps and where more research is needed.   
4.3 LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY
The research team encountered two major 
limitations over the course of the study. First, the 
research team was comprised of only English 
speakers, which meant that studies in other 
languages were not reviewed, resulting in a strong 
bias toward Western perceptions of progress and 
outcomes. Second, impact studies, specifically randomized 
control trials and quasi experimental studies, from 
conflict and displaced settings are generally missing 
from the literature (Carlson, 2013; Dahya, 2017). 
Therefore, to address the research question and 
overcome this clear limitation we begin by forming 
a theory of learning, taking into considerations the 
impact of stress and trauma on children’s ability to 
learn and retain information. We then investigate 
the research question by analyzing and synthesizing 
the findings from a large body of literature across 
multiple disciplines and multiple country settings 
where information is available. We break down the 
findings from studies to understand what about 
each initiative led to its success or failure, analysing 
patterns that can be applied to all settings. We 
then analyse and apply findings to emergency and 
displaced settings. Seven practitioners with extensive 
experience in these settings have reviewed the 
document in order ensure the application of findings 
was sound. 
A Save the Children T emporary Learning Center at A Primary School in a village in Sindhupalchok District, Nepal. 
The school building was badly damaged and is not usable for teaching. Save the Children has worked with the 
community to build a T emporary Learning Centre which was completed, and used to teach students, a week before 
the official Back to School Date.
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN225.1 CLASSIFICATION OF STUDIES
The purpose of this section is to visually map 
the research retrieved and used in this review. 
This section allows the reader to not only see 
the types of studies used to generate evidence, 
but where findings are concentrated in regard to 
geography, type of technology, school level, and 
gender. The biases in research are rather notable 
in most regards. 
For example, Table 5.1 demonstrates the 
methodological split and the broad backgrounds from 
which EdT ech research emanates. Different types of 
reviews make up a large share of evidence available. 
For instance, nineteen systematic reviews or rigorous 
meta- analysis have been conducted in order to 
answer questions relating to ‘what works’ in EdT ech. 
T wenty-one narrative and landscape reviews, which 
tend to include a stock taking of initiatives, have been 
conducted. Quantitative and mixed methods studies 
together provide the largest body of evidence for 
this report. The twenty-five theory based documents, 
represent a common theme in the literature, which is 
the attempt to bring a common form of analysis and 
application to the diverse market of Edtech.The categories of countries (see Table 5.2) where 
research takes place shows a definite bias towards 
OECD and OECD defined middle income countries.4 
Only 35 per cent of studies took place in mainly 
lower income countries or what might be considered 
fragile5 states. This bias is not surprising considering 
the high cost factor associated with EdT ech. What is 
perhaps interesting to note is the lack of studies from 
a middle-income background. These economies spend 
more money per head on their education systems 
than low incomes. The large group of studies from 
low-income states may indicate the diverse of non-
state actors involved in education in these countries.
The breakdown of the regional coverage of this 
review can be seen in Table 5.3.  As can be seen in 
the table, there is a high concentration of studies 
conducted in North America and Europe as well 
as Sub Saharan and North Africa. However, as 
mentioned in the methodology, the research team 
was limited by language and only studies that were 
written in or translated into English were used.5. Mapping of Research
T able 5.1: Methodology of reviewed studies
Methodology  No.
Quantitative  23
Mixed Methods  19
Qualitative  28
Systematic Reviews  19
Theoretical Framework  25
Landscape/Literature Reviews  21T able 5.2: Country category of studies
Country Category  No.
OECD  51
Mainly OECD  3
Middle Income   29
Low Middle Income   6
Low Income with OECD Examples  9
Low Income  30
Fragile/Post Conflict  5
4     http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/daclist.htm
5     Studies were catagorised as conducted in a fragile state if stated by the author of the respective reportStudy Location  No.
North America  14
Europe  10
Sub-Saharan Africa   22
North Africa  14
Latin America  8
South East Asia  5
South Asia  5
Middle East  8
Oceania  5
Multiple  44Educational Level  No.
Pre-Primary  13
Primary  61
Secondary  31
T ertiary   24
Other  7
T ype of T echnology  No.
1-to-1 Computer  43
Smartphone  7
2G Mobile  7
Tablets  20
Radio  2
Apps  16
Other/Multiple    40Subject  No.
Science  13
Math  20
Numeracy  10
Literacy  31
Reading  34T able 5.3: Regional Coverage
T able 5.4: Type of T echnology StudiedAs Table 5.4 demonstrates, this review found a 
considerable amount of literature on 1-to-1 device 
use. This is not overly surprising considering that 
tablet computers (which we examine separately) 
and smart phones are relatively new in comparison. 
When we discuss 1-to-1, we speak of other devices 
that children can use independently, i.e. computers 
and laptops. Studies which examine laptop use mostly 
come from the world’s biggest EdT ech project, the 
One Laptop Per Child Programme (OLPC). Desktop 
computer based educational programming is perhaps 
the most common form of EdT ech that is evidenced in 
this review. In reports written in five years from now, 
or perhaps less, it would be safe to expect the amount 
of studies that concentrate on tablet use would 
increase substantially. We also separate studies that 
look at particular apps or a small number of apps, 
rather than the whole device.In regard to the level of education, this review found 
primary was the predominant level of investigation, 
secondary or pre-primary.  All of the pre-primary 
studies emanated from OECD countries. It must be 
noted that tertiary studies were not sought in this 
review and many tertiary studies were discarded, due 
to relevance. Even still, 24 tertiary studies were still 
included, likely indicating that the tertiary level is the 
most investigated learning level.
Of the studies that measured learning outcomes (see 
Table 5.6), an overview of subjects shows that literacy 
and reading outcomes were readily examined more 
often than maths, numeracy, and science.
Table 5.7 shows that most studies did not focus on the 
use of EdT ech among specific groups nor generally 
mention these groups in the studies. Most studies 
looked at mainstream student outcomes and did 
not differentiate by gender, children with disabilities, 
marginalized groups, or refugees. This demonstrates a 
major gap in the literature. 
23T able 5.5: Educational Level of Intervention
T able 5.6 Educational Subjects addressed in studies245.2 CATEGORISATION OF FINDINGS
During the analysis stage findings from documents 
were coded and grouped by theme.  All 135 
documents were coded and the themes are reflected 
in Table 5.8. The table shows 20 common and 
reoccurring themes within the literature. The findings are disaggregated by 1) children, 2) community, and 
3) the enabling conditions. What can be seen from 
this visual display is that the amount of evidence 
unequally supports findings. For example, some 
findings are supported by a substantial amount of 
evidence, while others demonstrate much more 
evidence is needed. Section 6 provides a narrative Category  Focus General T otal
Gender  15 23 38
Disability  2 2 4
Marginalized Groups   9 11 20
Refugee/ Displaced Persons  9 11 20T able 5.7: Specific Groups Investigated
T able 5.8: 20 common and reoccurring themes within the literature
Section Theme/Finding Source
Ale (2017) 
Bando (2016) 
Berrera-Osorio (2009) 
Bulman and Fairle (2016)
Islam and Grönlund (2016)
Genlott and Grönlund (2016)
Mouza and Cavalier (2012) 
Passey (2016) 
Piper et al. (2015)
Power (2014)
Petko (2017)
Steffens (2014) 
Valk et al. (2010) 
Wainer (2015)
Chang and Tilanhun (2014)
Chiong and Shuler (2010)  
Flewitt (2015) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016) 
Koutromanos (2016) 
Mouza (2012) 
Neumann (2016) 
Neumann (2013) 
Northropp (2013  
Verenikin (2016) 
Wolf et al. (2014)6.1.1
6.1.2Learning outcomes are not 
improved simply by the provision 
of hardware
EdT ech must take pedagogical 
standard of design seriously25Section Theme/Finding Source
Ale et al. (2017)
Dahya (2016) 
Hubber (2016) 
Hirsk-Pasek et al. (2015)
Gomez et al. (2013) 
Genlott and Grönlund (2016) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016) 
Jabbar (2015) 
Kim et al. (2011)
Koutromanos (2016)
McManis and Gunnewig (2012) 
Northrop et al. (2013) 
Passet et al. (2016)
Piper et al. (2015) 
Valk et al. (2010)
Arguel (2016)
Cayton-Hodges (2015)
Hirsh-Paseket al. (2015) 
Genlott and Grönlund (2016) 
Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015) 
Hirsheleifer (2016) 
Hsin et al. (2014) 
Hirsheleifer (2016) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016) 
McManis (2012) 
Neumann (2013) 
Northropp et al. (2013)
Kumar (2012)
Koutromanos (2016) 
Mouza et al. (2012) 
Piper et al. (2015)
Wolf and Wolf (2010)
Zualkernan (2016)
Bulman and Fairle (2016) 
Carlson (2013) 
Dahya (2016) 
Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015) 
Higgins et al. (2012)
Hsin et al. (2014) 
Islam et al. (2016) 
Keengwee and Bhargava (2014)
Kim et al. (2008) 
Spitzer (2014) 
Sultana (2006) 
Zualkernan and Karim (2016)6.1.3
6.1.4
6.1.5EdT ech software must be tied to 
curriculum for optimal results
EdT ech must be responsive to the 
learner’s level
Examples must be relevant to 
learner’s context26Section Theme/Finding Source
Higgins (2012) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016)
Jabbar (2015) 
Jantjes (2015) 
Koutromano (2016) 
Mouza and Cavalier (2012) 
Tamim (2015) 
Zelezny-Green (2014) 
Ananiadou and Claro (2009) 
Airasian and Miranda (2002)
Carlson (2013)
Cayton-Hodges (2015)
Genlott and Grönlund (2016)
Zheng et al. (2016)
Kim (2012)
Wolf et al. (2013)
Ale et al (2007)
Cayton-Hodges et al. (2015)
Hsin et al. (2014)
Islam and Grönlund (2016) 
Lowyck (2014)
Koutromanos (2016)
Northropp et al. (2013) 
Neumann and Neumann (2013) 
Piper et al. (2015) 
Yelland and Masters (2007)
Ale et al. (2017)
Arguel et al. (2017) 
Genlott and Grönlund (2016)
Hasehmi (2011) 
Hosman (2010) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016)
Morpeth (2009) 
Restyandito (2013) 
Tamim (2011)
Zualkernan (2016)6.1.6
6.1.7
6.1.8
6.2.1
6.2.2EdT ech can potentially increase 
learner motivation (mixed 
evidence)
EdT ech may contribute to the 
acquisition of ‘21st Century’ skills 
(mixed evidence)
Learners can teach themselves 
how to use technology relatively 
quickly 
Adult/teacher led scaffolding 
is key to productive learner 
engagement with technology
EdT ech must supplement and not 
substitute teaching if it is to be 
successful27Section Theme/Finding Source
Agarkar (2016) 
Berrera-Osorio (2009)
Blackwell (2016) 
Blikstaf-Balas (2017)
Conje (2008) 
Flewitt (2015) 
Gomez et al. (2013) 
Hosman (2010) 
Hennessy (2010) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016) 
McManis (2012) 
Passey (2016)
Piper (2015) 
Qablan (2016) 
Kahn (2016) 
UNESCO (2013)
Tay (2016) 
Vadachalam (2017) 
Valiente (2010) 
Warschauer et al. (2014)
Webb et al. (2004) 
Zheng et al. (2016) 
Agarkar (2016) 
Berrera-Osorio (2009)
Blackwell (2016) 
Blikstaf-Balas (2017)
Conje (2008) 
Flewitt (2015) 
Gomez et al (2013) 
Hosman (2010) 
Hennessy (2010) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016) 
McManis (2012) 
Passey (2016)
Piper (2015) 
Qablan (2016) 
Kahn (2016) 
UNESCO (2013)
Tay (2016) 
Vadachalam (2017) 
Valiente (2010) 
Warschauer et al. (2014)
Webb et al. (2004) 
Zheng et al. (2016)6.2.3
6.2.4T eacher perceptions of 
technology are important for the 
success of programmes
The availability of T eaching 
Professional Development 
is relevant for the successful 
integration of EdT ech28Behind the Scenes of Save the Children’s 
first VR shoot in Bandung, Indonesia.
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN29Section Theme/Finding Source
Chiong and Shuler (2010)
Dahya (2016)
Hsin et al. (2014)
Passey et al. (2016)
Qablan and Abuloums (2009)
Steffens (2014)
Sultana (2006)
Agarkar (2016) 
Ames (2013) 
Chukwuere (2015)
Dahya (2016)
Forgasz (2010) 
Hubber (2016)
Hosman (2010)  
Hsin et al. (2014)
Islam and Grönlund (2016)
Kolodziejcy (2015) 
Passet et al (2016)
Qablan (2009) 
Steffens (2014)
Valiente (2010) 
Valk et al. (2010) 
Warschauer et al. (2014) 
Bando et al (2016) 
Carlson (2013) 
Dahya (2016) 
Hennessy (2010) 
Passey (2016)
Paterson (2007) 
Valk et al. (2010) 
Warschauer et al. (2010)
Bando (2016) 
Berrera-Osorio (2009)
Carlson (2016) 
Conje (2008) 
Dahya (2016)
Gulati (2008) 
Hosman (2010)
Hennessey (2010) 
Islam and Grönlund (2016)
Khan (2012) 
Paterson (2007) 
Qablan (2009) 
Steeves (2017)
Vadachalam (2017)
Warschauer et al. (2014) 
 6.2.5
6.2.6
6.2.7
6.3.1Parents Perceptions of 
technology are important if 
EdT ech is to be used at home or 
at school
Cultural dispositions towards 
technology and education must 
be considered as part of EdT ech 
interventions
 
EdT ech does not necessarily 
represent the best value for 
money/sustainability 
Infrastructure is a major barrier 
to successful utilization of EdT ech30Section Theme/Finding Source
Banerjee et al. (2007) 
Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015) 
Lewis et al. (2016) 
Linden (2008)
Mauralidharan et al. (2017) 
Mouza (2012) 
Nedungadi et al. (2014)
Neumann (2016) 
Wolf et al. (2014) 
Garcia (2015) 
Khaddage et al. (2016)
Zelezny-Green (2014)
Aesaert (2015) 
Chew et al. (2014) 
Cummings (2015)
Forgasz (2010)
Hilbert (2011) 
Kahn (2012)
Kim (2012)
Kolodziejcszy (2015)
Power (2014)
Punter (2013) 
Power (2014) 
Steeves (2017)
Yang (2012) 
Cardak (2013) 
Dunn et al. (2012)
Emert (2013)
Spitzer (2014)6.3.2
6.3.3
6.3.4
6.3.5EdT ech for accelerated learning 
can aid in the preparation 
to integration to formalized 
education
EdT ech has the potential to blur 
lines between formal, informal 
and nonformal learning 
Gender is not a factor that 
determines the success of EdT ech, 
if socio-economic barriers are 
addressed in implementation.
Wellbeing must be considered 
with regards to EdT ech use, 
however the implications for 
technology use and the wellbeing 
of children is under-researched.
5.3 SYNTHESIS OF CURRENT  
SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS 
As can be seen in Table 5.9 a large number of 
systematic reviews have been conducted in regard 
to EdT ech examining a wide variety of settings 
and types of technology. While very limited 
rigorous research is available in regard to EdT ech 
in emergency and displaced settings, during our search for literature we uncovered a large number 
of reviews which examine the impact of educational 
technology on learning. Through our quality and 
relevance review process we identified 8 reviews (see 
Table 5.9 below) that fell within our specified criteria 
(in addition to 11 others that were excluded due to 
quality, year of publication, or direct relevance). The 
wide availability of systematic reviews shows that 
evidence that links EdT ech and learning is plentiful, 31The below table presents findings from the eight 
reviews. These reviews include the combined 
evidence from several hundred  peer-reviewed 
articles, evaluations, and grey literature. Overall, 
examining multiple types of technology, across 
all regions of the world, mostly within the last 
decade, the research findings have a great many 
consistencies and none of the documents present 
greatly divergent results. Findings from these studies 
have been analysed and results are presented throughout the documents. However, the table 
below demonstrates that the research is not limited, 
and reviews are thoroughly examining a diverse 
range of EdT ech initiatives across the world.  As 
will be discussed throughout this report, EdT ech 
initiatives do not necessarily take this over-whelming 
consensus of evidence into consideration when 
designing programmes to be used in emergency and 
displaced settings.  
Reference T echnology 
investigatedCountries/
ContextYears Number  
of studies  
includedGeneral Findings
Bulman 
and Fairle 
(2016)
Carlson 
(2013)
Haßler et 
al., 2015
Higgins, 
2012ICT and CAI 
at home and 
school
Mobile phones, 
internet 
enabled 
computer labs, 
interactive 
radio 
instruction
Tablet use in 
SchoolsGlobal (No 
studies from 
Africa)
Global/Conflict 
Affected
Global
Global  
(mostly  
OECD)1999-
2014
2008-
2013
2009-
2015
2000-
201231
12 case 
studies
23
33Findings are mixed: ICT investments 
should not be expected to largely 
impact learning outcomes, including:
grades, test scores and other 
measures of academic outcomes
This review, looking solely into 
emergency settings shows evidence is 
sparse; more systematic approaches 
to gather evidence are needed. 
However, when appropriately applied 
in contextually relevant ways, EdT ech 
initiatives can enable positive learning 
experiences and improve learning 
outcomes. Findings showed that 
programmes can be cost effective 
once scaled up, if implemented 
properly
Reviews are mixed: 16 show positive 
learning outcomes, 5 no difference 
and 2 negative. The generalisability 
of evidence is limited and detailed 
explanations as to how or why
using tablets within certain activities 
can improve learning remain elusive.
Research findings from experimental 
and quasi-experimental designs 
indicate that overall technology-
based interventions tend to 
produce just slightly lower levels of 
improvement when compared with 
other researched interventions. The 
range of impact identified in these 
studies suggests that it is not whether 
technology is used (or not) which T able 5.9: Literature/Systematic Reviews regarding EdT ech and Learning32Reference T echnology 
investigatedCountries/
ContextYears Number  
of studies  
includedGeneral Findings
Hsin et al. 
(2014)
Islam and 
Grönlund 
(2016)
Power, 
2014
T amim et 
al. (2015)T echnology 
supported 
learning 
(undefined) 
children  
ages 0-8
1:1 devices in 
the classroom
Wide range 
(including radio, 
laptops, tablets 
and e-readers, 
CAL)
Tablet and 
mobilesGlobal
Middle and 
low income 
countries
Global (Mostly 
USA and East 
Asia)2003-
2013
2000-
2013
2005-
2014
2010-
201587 (peer-
reviewed)
145 
(including 
59 peer-
reviewed)
83 studies 
(45 research 
documents, 
20 literature 
reviews and 
18 grey 
literature 
reports)
68 (27 quant 
and 41 qual)makes the difference, but how well 
the technology is used to support 
teaching and learning.
As for learning results, 61 studies 
reported positive findings,  
24 reported no differences, and only  
2 reported negative outcomes.  
Fifty-one studies of the 87 reported 
that effects on learning are 
conditional on a number of factors.  
This review shows mixed results 
and that using ICT in the classroom 
can lead to improved, negative, 
and no results. They find that 
only ‘good pedagogy guarantees 
improvements.’ 
Access to ICT alone does not 
lead to positive outcomes. ICT 
interventions should: 
• be designed to enable  
 educational change, emphasizing  
 curriculum, pedagogy, teaching  
 and learning, not the technology. 
• develop systematic MEAL,  
 capturing changes in teaching   
 and learning practices and  
 learning outcomes, as well  
 as participants’ experiences and  
 perspectives. 
Findings indicate a moderate effect 
size for the impact of tablets and 
smart mobile devices on student 
learning outcomes overall. Findings 
showed a significant favouring of 
student-centred pedagogical use of 
technology.In order to understand “what works” we 
synthesized and analyzed the findings from 135 
documents relating to EdT ech. We have attempted 
to investigate any ‘truths’ or consistent findings 
that are reported to have an impact on learning 
outcomes.  
Therefore, this document unpacks these findings and 
builds an understanding of how these can be related 
to education in emergency settings. There are 20 
major themes and subsequent findings in this report. 
This is a considerable number to tackle and from 
which to build a framework of engagement. In order 
to conceptualise and make sense of the findings, we 
have grouped these themes and findings into three 
interrelated areas: The Child, The Community, and The 
Enabling Conditions. Save the Children believes in the 
rights of the child to thrive, be protected, and to learn. 
The right of a child to a quality education that enables 
them to grow and positively participate in the society 
is a fundamental value of the organization. This focus 
on the child is where our findings begin.
6.1 THE CHILD
The majority of the findings relate directly to the child 
and the immediate educational environment they 
encounter. It is important that we focus on the learner 
as we are working to ascertain what conditions lead 
to improvements in learning outcomes for those 
displaced by emergencies. What follows are 11 themes 
and subsequent findings relating directly the child 
including the pedagogical design of EdT ech, the child’s 
interaction with the EdT ech, and other supporting 
factors. 
As discussed in the conceptual framework (page 13) 
this review considers that learning: should be child 
centered, an ‘active’ process that requires children 
to manipulate stimuli in order to better understand; 
necessitates that the child be engaged and focused on 
the task in question; must be meaningful to the child’s 
context and their previous learning so that it hooks onto this knowledge; and finally, promotes social 
interaction as a means of corroborating and building 
an understanding of a topic or subject. 
6.1.1 Learning outcomes are not improved simply by the 
provision of hardware alone.
Learning outcomes are often used as an indicator to 
determine whether or not an EdT ech intervention can 
be classified as a success. When EdT ech is introduced 
to a learning environment we often imagine that it is 
the provision of hardware that improves the learning 
that takes place, thus impacting outcomes. Therefore, 
if the mere access to technology is linked to learning 
and improved learning outcomes, then we would 
assume to see a positive relationship among ICT in 
schools and ICT and learning outcomes. However, this 
link is not clear. 
Overall, the findings of studies evaluated throughout 
this narrative analysis consistently show that the 
provision of hardware alone is not enough to improve 
learning outcomes (Piper et al., 2015: Genlot and 
Grönlund, 2016; Mouza and Cavalier, 2012; Petko, 2017; 
Steffens, 2014., Berrera-Osorio et al., 2009). Bulman 
and Fairle (2016: 46) in their systematic review of 
ICTs influence in schools and at home, they concluded 
that the influence on learning outcomes of ICT use 
in schools is ‘ambiguous’. Steffens (2014: 561) goes 
further stating that ‘there is no linear relationship 
between ICT use and achievement in PISA’.
Determining a causal relationship between ICT access 
and learning outcomes can be difficult to establish. 
For example, whether at home or at school, ICT 
access is often correlated to a wide variety of factors. 
These can include variables such as wealth and 
geographic location, but can also include variables 
that are difficult to measure, such as attitudes toward 
ICT usage and the beliefs in its benefits.  At the same 
time, learning outcomes can also be linked to a large 
number of social and demographic factors. Schools 
in wealthier areas may have more access to ICT and 
less wealthy schools might be included in targeted 6. Narrative Synthesis of Findings/  
Analysis of ‘what works ’
3334programmes so that they are more likely to have 
ICT (Bulman and Fairle, 2016). However, even when 
adjusting for income and other factors, Bulman and 
Fairle (2016) present evidence that shows that this link 
may not exist. 
A study by Petko (2017) using large scale assessment 
data, provides evidence that the link between ICT 
access and test scores is indeed less straight forward 
than one might assume.  According to this study no 
correlations were found among ICT usage in schools 
and test scores. However, when linked to quality 
of technology available and attitudes associated 
with technology, outcomes may be positive. For 
example, the use of digital entertainment at home 
is negatively correlated with learning outcomes, but 
the use of other types of technology, coupled with 
positive attitudes towards technology are related 
to positive outcomes. While Petko submits that the 
results are rather limited – and no causal link has 
been established-, results might lend evidence to the 
argument that the pedagogical design of the EdT ech, 
considered application, and use are more important 
than its mere presence.  A study from Wainer (2015) looking at 5th and 9th 
grade students in Brazil, showed that computer 
ownership at home once adjusted for social and 
economic status had positive correlations with 
learning outcomes. However, when examining internet 
connectivity and test scores, Wainer finds a negative 
correlation for 5th grade students and positive for 
9th grade students, though not statistically significant. 
This poses questions regarding distraction and the 
most useful types of ICT and how they are used. More 
evidence is needed to understand this link. 
According to Steffens (2014: 554) there is a much 
more nuanced relationship between ICT use at home 
and learning outcomes, if just having access to ICT 
results in better learning, PISA scores should have 
increased incrementally alongside the increase in tech 
usage. However, no “linear relationship between ICT 
use and PISA results” exists.  According to Steffens, 
to a certain point, as ICT usage goes up so do PISA 
scores. However, beyond this set point, as ICT use 
goes up, PISA scores go down. This includes ICT use 
for both entertainment, and school related activities. 
This study provides evidence that the type, amount, 
Chandika Bhattrei* has been a teacher at a Primary School in a village in Sindhupalchok District, Nepal. She 
has taught at the school since 1998. The school was completely damaged and is not usable for teaching. Save 
the Children has worked with the community to build a T emporary Learning Centre which was completed, and 
used to teach students, ahead of the official Back to School Date.
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN35and engagement with technology matters and that 
families’ attitudes and engagement practices with ICT 
matter for learning outcomes.  
According to Islam and Grönlund‘s (2016: 208) 
systematic review of 1-to-1 computer interventions, 
the influence EdT ech has on teaching and learning 
‘critically depends on the implementation method 
which is generally sensitive to existing teaching 
methods’. This concentration on how and not what 
was reinforced by Glenlot and Gronlund (2016: 78) 
who stated that ‘only when ICT is used to support 
other pedagogic factors that have been shown to 
have positive impact more efficient and effective’ 
(Genlott and Gronlund, 2016: 78). 
From this macro level perspective, we can conclude 
that the mere access of ICT in schools or at home 
does not implicate learning outcomes on its own.  
A number of other variables will matter for the 
successful integration of EdT ech. Research seems to 
show there might be a right amount of technology 
and a right way to use technology for it to be 
beneficial for learning outcomes. This is an important 
finding for those implementing EdT ech programmes, 
especially in displaced and emergency settings where 
children encounter a number of distractions on a daily 
basis, which can impede cognitive function. Overall, we 
need to determine the right amount and right type of 
technology so that families and schools are optimizing 
the learning opportunities of children. Making the 
assumption that any technology is good technology 
could lead to negative outcomes for children who are 
already at a disadvantage. 
6.1.2 EdTech must take pedagogical standard of design 
seriously
As demonstrated in the previous section (6.1.1), the 
provision of hardware is not in and of itself enough to 
improve learning outcomes. In this sense, technology 
can be used as an educational tool, and like any tool 
it can be used in a range of ways. There is a great 
deal of literature which discusses how tools can best 
be used to assist in the learning process. These were 
alluded to in the conceptual framework (Section 
3.2), which situated learning as: 1) active learning, 
2) with content that promotes engagement and 
avoids distraction, 3) and is relevant to the learners’ 
lived context so that it ‘hooks’ onto what they have previously learnt and provides an element of social 
interaction with other learners. EdT ech is no different; 
it needs to be constructed with these principles that 
have been developed through practice and theory for 
a very long time. 
Hsin et al. (2004) in a systematic review of literature 
relating to young children’s use of technology, claim 
that the teaching and learning approaches applied to 
the design of the EdT ech do indeed matter. Children 
learn better when we design programmes that utilize 
evidence from the learning sciences and apply these 
findings to practice (Kempler and Keakick, 2006; 
Passey et al., 2016; Sonder, 2006 cited in Mouza and 
Cavalier, 2012: 155). Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015: 7) state 
that the ‘pedagogical structure of the environment 
determines what kind of learning’ occurs.  As such, 
focus needs to be on what form of activity is being 
promoted within the EdT ech in question, and not just 
the technology itself. 
These principles are not always readily engaged with 
by commercial providers of Edtech. Work by Lunch 
and Redpath (2014 cited in Flewitt et al., 2014: 297), 
argued that ‘whilst commercially produced apps 
may use state-of-the-art imagery, they are mostly 
based on outmoded behaviourist and/or transmission 
theories of learning’. This issue was reinforced by 
Wolf et al. (2014: 14) where they argued ‘the need for 
far more, theoretically grounded apps’ was evident. 
Verenikina et al. (2016: 389) maintain that when it 
comes to early years apps, they are designed by 
adults ‘using pre-determined and predictable coding 
scripts, within content areas that they anticipate the 
children will be interested in.’ There is, it appears, a 
dearth of engagement with the evidence of how we 
learn utilized in the development of EdT ech. That said 
there are examples that have been developed with 
this evidence in mind, such as the UK based NGO: 
OneBillion
The focus must, according to Passey et al. (2016: 123), 
be around ‘support for cognition’ rather than on 
‘presentation of content’. The presentation of content 
is indicative of rote learning, which does not require 
active engagement and manipulation on the part of 
the student.  Cognition implies active manipulation of 
the learning object by the learner. For example, take 
the building of a Lego house, rote learning approaches 
would show the learner the house, give them the 36instructions, then ask them to write down how to 
build the house.  Active child centered learning would 
involve giving the child the bricks, and asking them, 
with a model or a guide (scaffolding), to build the 
house. They would therefore be actively constructing 
the model as they learnt.
Chi (2009) provided a clear taxonomy of learning that 
drew from findings in the learning sciences, in which 
they argued learning must be active, constructive, and 
interactive. These more collaborative approaches to 
childrens’ interaction with EdT ech were referred to 
by Flewitt et al. (2014: 15) in a qualitative study that 
addressed early literacy interventions with iPads, as 
‘‘open content’ apps, where users could personalize 
activities, engaged children more deeply and creatively 
in learning tasks’ and they report that children 
developed a more rounded learning experience than 
the ‘closed’ more behaviourist apps. 
Mouza and Cavaliar (2012: 146) conducted a 
longitudinal study looking at one-to-one computing 
in the education of high-risk students in the USA. The 
authors state that there are few ‘studies that have 
looked at changes in the learning environment or 
identified instructional practices’ that make the most 
of EdT ech, or in this case laptop computers.  This is not 
to say that teaching approaches must replicate the 
exact processes enacted with previous educational 
tools, but that the form of learning encouraged via 
EdT ech interventions is significant.  As stated by Islam 
and Grönlund (2016: 206), in their systematic review 
of international literature associated with one-to-one 
laptop initiatives ‘only good pedagogy guarantees 
improvements’ in learning.
What the findings from a number of these studies 
show is that it is not simply the EdT ech itself, but 
the wider educational activities that promote 
collaboration between learner and learners, as well as 
learners and teachers, that promote better learning 
outcomes. More consideration needs to be given to 
those engaging in the provision of EdT ech to look at 
what makes successful learning activities if EdT ech is 
to be utilized to its full potential.
The implications of these findings for education in 
emergency settings are clear. If improving learning 
outcomes is the goal of an intervention, there must 
be an active attempt to produce software that encourages active, engaged learning, which connects 
to the child’s previous learning and promotes social 
interaction with the subject at hand. Fortunately, there 
are positive examples of this to work from, and it does 
not have to restrict commercial providers of Edtech. 
Indeed, it can free developers to be creative within a 
framework that has been proven to work, and can 
assist teachers with the integration of the Edtech into 
the teaching of the curriculum. 
6.1.3 EdTech software must be tied to curriculum for 
optimal results
Curricula are in a fundamental sense, an attempt 
to coordinate and develop a child’s exploration of a 
particular subject in a logical and progressive manner, 
which builds on their previous learning and progresses 
towards more complex material that follows. 
EdT ech software has the potential to assist with this 
progression. In emergency settings this progression 
is almost always disrupted, and, as such, our goal 
should be to get children back on track to attain the 
educational goals.  
McManis and Gunnewig (2012: 22) in their framework 
for early years teachers’ engagement with Edtech 
argue that there ‘is growing recognition of the 
importance of incorporating technology in meaningful 
and authentic ways to the curriculum’.  A key and 
consistent finding during this review is that for 
the greatest influence on learning outcomes to 
occur, EdT ech must be integrated within a model of 
curriculum (Hirsk-Pasek et al., 2015; Passey et al., 2016; 
Islam and Grönlund. 2016; Valk et al., 2010; Genlott 
and Grönlund, 2016; Northopp et al., 2013; Gomez et 
al., 2013; Piper et al., 2015; Dahya, 2016; Jabbar, 2015; 
McManis, 2012). The need for education projects to 
engage with curricula to build sustainable change, 
according to Dahya, (2016: 30) ‘is no different when 
working with ICT’. 
A study conducted by Piper et al., (2015: 12) 
compared three separate EdT ech interventions in 
the Kenyan education system. The authors found 
all three to promote positive learning outcomes in 
English and Kiswahili when compared to the control 
(which received the same intervention but without 
any use of technology). The study did not find a 
statistically significant difference between the tablet 
use among teachers, instructional supervisors, and 37an e-reading initiative. What was consistent amongst 
the interventions was that these were aligned to the 
national curriculum. It did conclude that, as well as 
the need for teacher training to optimize integration 
of EdT ech, the government must ‘address ICT as an 
instrument of teaching’.
Ale et al. (2017) conducted a longitudinal, quasi-
experimental study that assessed the impact of in-
depth contextualization prior to the implementation 
of One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) projects in nine 
rural Indian primary schools. This study focused on 
changing the manner in which the OLPC programme 
contextualized its intervention and included a 
‘specific OLPC-subject syllabus [that] was created 
collaboratively with teachers to integrate with the 
pre-existing curriculum’ (Ale et al., 2017: 779).  In this 
study they worked with the teachers already in place 
to ‘provide structure and guidance’ on how to use the 
OLPC programmes with their classes. In addition to 
this, device maintenance was provided, this contributed 
to a positive influence on learning outcomes, over 
the control group. The results (Ale et al., 2017: 784) 
‘demonstrated the role of contextualized technology 
in rural Indian classrooms’ as being beneficial to 
learning outcomes. Without this support teachers 
were less likely to feel comfortable delivering the 
curriculum via the EdT ech device, this support was 
relevant to the context and the need of the  
teaching staff.
Neglecting alignment with the curriculum can also 
increase pressure for teachers. Kim et al.’s 2011 
mixed methods study based in two Mexican primary 
schools near the USA border, addressed differences 
in technology engagement between a rural and an 
urban group of students. The authors (Kim et al., 
2011: 477) reported that teachers expressed that ‘the 
learning contents of the mobile devices did not align 
with the curriculum and lesson they were teaching’. 
The study demonstrates a secondary issue associated 
with a lack of integration of EdT ech into the 
curriculum, when an intervention is not well aligned 
to curriculum, teachers must work to incorporate 
such an intervention into the learning of the students. 
This could exacerbate the second-order barriers 
associated with teachers’ attitude to EdT ech (see 
section 3.2.6 for more information on second-order 
barriers).  These findings demonstrate that EdT ech needs to 
be incorporated into a plan for learning. Ideally this 
will align with a national curriculum that the child 
can track in the years ahead and will pull from the 
skills and knowledge that the child has previously 
attained. While in an emergency or crisis setting this 
can be particularly challenging, it is an important 
consideration. If implemented properly, EdT ech 
programmes can help to fill-in the gaps during 
disruption and increase the speed with which learners 
can return to full time education. This will require 
working with ministries, civil society, and teachers 
to understand the missing elements. T o enable a 
transition through education it is important that the 
EdT ech software is responsive to the learners’ level 
and needs as they progress through the curriculum. 
Overall, we cannot just decide what a child should 
know, but should build on their pre-existing skills and 
experience. 
6.1.4 EdTech must be responsive to the learners’ level
Making mistakes is a critical part of learning. When a 
child encounters a task that is too difficult for them, 
a positive response is for them to seek assistance. 
This is often referred to as ‘help seeking behaviour’; 
if the learner receives the right support they can 
renegotiate their previous attempt and move onto the 
next issue. If the tasks that follow continue to be too 
difficult, the learner’s motivation to continue is likely 
to reduce. The work needs to be suitable for their 
developmental level and adaptive to their mistakes 
for engaged practice on the part of the learner to 
continue. 
The literature reviewed for this report has consistently 
shown that for EdT ech to result in positive learning 
outcomes, it must adapt to the level of the learner 
(Zualkernan, 2016; Cayton-Hodges, 2013; Arguel, 
2016; Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015; Neumann, 2013; Hsin et 
al., 2014; Hirsheleifer, 2016; Mouza et al., 2012; Islam 
and Grönlund, 2016; Piper et al., 2015; and Glenlott 
and Grönlund, 2016; Valk et al., 2010). This is often 
referred to as personalized learning which Wolf and 
Wolf (2010: 15) refer to as a ‘student-driven learning 
path’. The authors claim that ‘each student’s path may 
vary not only in terms of when and where learning 
takes place, but also in terms of the modalities and 
instructional strategies used’.38Northropp et al. (2013: 523) also maintain that the 
content ‘needs to be accessible to the student and 
matched to his or her appropriate developmental 
learning level’ for it to be effective.  This extends 
beyond the realm of learning alone and moves into 
motivational issues.  As Hirsh Pasek et al. (2015: 
12) argue, if the ‘content is too easy or too familiar, 
children may stop’ and as highlighted by Lewis (2016: 
12) ‘learners need content that meets their academic, 
linguistic, and skill needs’. 
EdT ech software can, if appropriately designed, offer a 
range of hints, tutorials and guidance in the software.  
As Cayton-Hodges et al. (2015: 16) stress software 
can ‘guide the user along the path through challenges,’ 
and Genlot and Grönlund, (2016) found this formative 
assistance to be beneficial to learning outcomes in 
literacy. Cayton-Hodges et al., (2015: 16), in their 
survey of maths apps available on the Apple App Store 
identify that it is important to reward ‘help-seeking 
behaviors’. They allow teachers to assess what the 
learner understands, and are a sign that the child is 
comfortable in the situation and seeks help to improve 
their own understanding. 
Hirshleifer (2016: 6) argues that appropriate software‘allows students to learn from mistakes as they 
complete the exercise’ which in a busy classroom is 
a tool of real value, to the learner and the teacher. In 
an emergency or crisis situation, where class sizes are 
often bigger and capacity is stretched (Burde, 2015) 
EdT ech software with the ability to provide scaffolding 
support for a teacher/facilitator could be a real asset. 
It could (Cayton-Hodges et al., 2015: 16) ‘keep the 
user engaged, on task, and moving forward which is 
positive to the learning experience’. This is particularly 
important in non-formal education settings where 
there are learners across a range of age ranges 
working in the same class. EdT ech that responds to 
the learners input can provide the teacher/facilitator 
with more time to go between learners, and not 
constantly have to field questions from students 
at different stages in their understanding. Findings 
by Islam and Grönlund (2016: 205) comprehensive 
systematic review indicate that if EdT ech is adaptive to 
the learners level, this increased ‘focus on the learning 
tools may help reduce students’ behaviour problems’ 
and subsequently allow teachers to spend more time 
teaching, as opposed to dealing with behavioural 
issues that arise through a lack of understanding or 
completion of a task. 
Nour*, 14, lives with her grandmother siblings and extended family. She has returned and dropped out of school several 
times and says that classes are rushed and hard to keep up with and that teachers are impatient with students. She 
struggles to see the value in education as she does not believe she will do well at school in its current format. 
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN39Though there are clear benefits to adaptive and 
personalized learning there are still areas for 
improvement (Cayton-Hodges et al., 2005). Cayton-
Hodges et al. (2005) state that there are three main 
forms of feedback provided by educational apps 
found on tablets; these were: status feedback, corrective 
feedback, and conceptual feedback.  They found that 
‘conceptual feedback is less common’ than other 
forms of feedback and it is this form of feedback that 
engages higher order thinking, such as evaluation 
(Cayton-Hodges et al., 2005: 8). This raises questions 
about what form of learning is being encouraged and 
the depth and quality of the feedback that is currently 
being most readily provided by EdT ech software. 
EdT ech that provides conceptual feedback could 
be even more important for those in displaced or 
emergency settings, where teachers are not as likely 
to be formally trained (Burde, 2015). 
These findings indicate that if the EdT ech is adaptive 
to the learner’s developmental level, is linguistically 
appropriate, and scaffolds learning for students, then 
it can help to foster a more proactive educational 
environment that has the potential to make school 
more attractive for those in emergency settings. 
Other considerations include using EdT ech that is 
age appropriate and not just appropriate to the 
learning level, particularly in education in emergencies 
or situations of displacement. Due to the fact 
that children are likely to have had their learning 
disrupted, children fall behind in school. If EdT ech is 
designed exclusively for these earlier grades and does 
not adjust for the older learner, it can lead to the 
demotivation of the learner. 
Indeed, if these aims are achieved then EdT ech can be 
used to promote sustained engagement by the student 
and will promote ‘minds on’ active engagement. 
This is an extremely important consideration in 
emergency settings where children are often pushed 
out of education and pulled in to more harmful coping 
strategies, such as child labour and early marriage. 
Children and families in these situations need to feel 
that a child’s time at school is time well spent. 
6.1.5 Examples must be relevant to learners’ context 
As we have seen it is possible for EdT ech if it is 
responsive to the learner’s developmental level 
and tied to the appropriate curriculum, can be an 
educational tool of real value. Part of reason that EdT ech, or learning in general, must be tied to the 
curricula in order to lead to positive learning outcome 
is due to context. Curricula generally reflect the 
context in which they are devised, and it is important 
that the examples used are compatible with the 
learners understanding of the world. The literature 
reviewed shows a clear need for learners’ context to 
be considered (Hirsh-Pasek et al., 2015; Keengwee and 
Bhargava, 2014; Kim et al., 2008; Dahya, 2016; Carlson, 
2013; Sultana, 2006; Islam and Grönlund, 2016; Hsin et 
al., 2014).  All new learning needs to (Ausubel, 1968) 
hook onto the old learning the child has done before if 
it is to be sustained.
Keengwee and Bhargava (2014: 745) in their study 
built out of three case studies in mobile learning 
recognize the need for technology to be implemented 
and designed in a manner that is ‘relevant to the 
social and cultural context of learning’. Hsin et al. 
(2014: 93) in their systematic review argue that the 
‘content of the technologies also plays a role in the 
children’s development’. If for example, visual tools, 
avatars, or examples are appropriate to the child’s 
culture then they are more likely to engage with the 
software readily. This extends beyond interactions in a 
formal classroom set up.  As Hirsh-Pasek et al. (2015: 
93) argue when content is contextually appropriate, 
the chances for ‘interpersonal meaning as a shared 
parent-child experience, potentially connected to 
previous and subsequent family activities’ are greater. 
EdT ech has the potential to increase the opportunities 
for social interaction in family settings, which we know 
to be essential to learning.  
Dahya’s landscape review of education in emergencies 
(2016: 19) argues that the projects that produce the 
best learning outcomes in emergency settings take 
a ‘learner and community-centered approach to 
ICT for education [that] is culturally relevant’. This 
finding was echoed by Burde’s review of EIE (2016) 
and reinforced by Sultana (2006) in a study based in 
Hebron, in the West Bank, Palestine, during the Israeli 
military’s second Intifada  in 2001. The conclusions 
of this qualitative study found that community 
engagement and contextual understanding led to 
better designed learning interventions.  This was not 
simply down to contextualized examples, there was 
a hugely committed educational community and 
strong parental engagement, but the learning was 
relevant. Indeed Sultana (2006: 75) stressed that many 40distance-learning initiatives struggle because they ‘fail 
to connect to the realities of the context in which they 
are applied’. In a war zone, post-conflict setting, or 
crisis there are ample incentives to keep children at 
home. If the learning does not speak to the context of 
the child, or indeed the parent, then it has less of  
a draw.   
These studies show the need for EdT ech to be 
accessible to the lived experience of the child using 
the software. Most importantly, designers of EdT ech 
need to ensure that the learning is relevant to the 
child’s cultural context, and in emergencies with 
diverse populations working with potentially limited 
resources, this poses a real but achievable challenge 
for those engaged in education in emergency settings. 
EdT ech providers need to take this challenge seriously 
if learning engagement is to be sustainable and at an 
optimal level.
6.1.6 EdTech can potentially increase learner motivation 
The use of EdT ech is often cited as a contributing 
factor in increasing students’ motivation (Mouza and 
Cavalier, 2012; Islam and Grönlund, 2016; Jabbar, 2015; 
Koutromano, 2016; Zelezny-Green 2014; Higgins, 2012; 
Tamim, 2015; Jantjes, 2015). This is an important, but 
perhaps unsurprising finding. It shows that EdT ech has 
an allure that is worth considering for those working 
in education in emergency settings where education is 
but one option for many children in displaced settings. 
Islam and Grönlund (2016: 200) in their systematic 
review of one-to-one computing initiatives stated 
that increased engagement and motivation are one 
of ‘three most frequently cited findings on positive 
impacts’ of EdT ech. Mouza and Cavalier (2012: 149) in 
their review of One-T o-One computing in education 
for at risk high school students in the USA stated that 
the use of laptops can increase ‘student motivation 
and persistence in doing school work’. This noted 
increase in persistence is positive, as EdT ech can 
increase children’s self-efficacy in tasks, which is known 
to be an important aspect of learning. 
However, some studies have found that motivation 
may wane over time (Tamim et al., 2015) and that 
students who are accustomed to using technology 
may be less motivated than those who are 
unfamiliar (Gulati, 2008). Therefore, we must build an understanding around what it is about EdT ech that 
has the potential to motivate students rather than 
acting on the assumption that tech motivates learners 
in and of itself. It is important that any motivation that 
comes with EdT ech is maintained through engaging 
with students and considered software that promotes 
learning in a sustainable fashion.  At the same time, we 
have to weigh the costs and benefits of using EdT ech 
in order to increase motivation. In other words, given 
the overall shortfall in education in emergencies 
funding, should we implement EdT ech only as means to 
increase motivation and attendance, when lower cost 
interventions are readily available?
6.1.7 EdTech can potentially boost learner’s ‘21st Century’ 
learning skills 
The question of how to obtain the skills necessary 
to thrive in the 21st Century is the subject of much 
debate in education circles. These skills are often 
associated with EdT ech, and they include skills such 
as: problem solving, collaboration, analysis, evaluation, 
and synthesis.  According to Genlott and Grönlund 
(2016: 68) in the near future learners will be expected 
to ‘find, select, interpret, analyze, and produce 
information that is relevant to them’. 21st Century 
skills are widely considered to be ‘higher order skills’ 
and are more difficult to engender in a learner than 
mere comprehension (Airasian and Miranda, 2002: 
249). These skills require the learner to not only 
understand what has been covered, but to be able to 
engage with who has written it, and potentially why 
they have done so.
Why these skills are so important is complex. One 
argument is related to the changing demands of 
industry in modern economies.  Ananiadou and Claro 
(2009: 6) in a paper on the subject for the OECD 
stated that ‘the current century will demand a very 
different set of skills and competencies from people 
in order for them to function effectively’. The forms 
of work will likely render the current definitions of 
literacy insufficient.  Another argument relates to the 
need for learners in conflict settings to interrogate 
the validity of information they encounter, especially 
considering the politics at the time of writing. 
A systematic review of one-to-one laptop 
environments by Zheng et al. (2016: 1074) concludes 
that there was ‘a wide consensus in the studies we 41reviewed that the use of laptops promotes 21st-
century learning skills’.  At the same time, Zheng adds 
that ‘studies rarely attempted to operationalize and 
systematically measure the growth of 21st-century 
skills’. Therefore, what these skills are and if they are 
adequately achieved is still up for debate. 
This finding is corroborated by Islam and Grönlund 
(2016: 214). Islam and Grönlund (2016: 214) go further 
to state that these skills ‘must be developed not in 
competition with, but alongside and integrated with 
‘traditional’ skills’. This leads back to the previous 
finding (section 6.1.2) that ‘EdT ech must take 
pedagogical standard of design seriously’. If EdT ech 
software is designed in a manner that promotes 
collaboration, critical thinking and active problem 
solving there is no reason why such skills cannot be 
developed through EdT ech use.
What we do know is that these 21st Century skills 
are important in emergency settings and in post-
conflict and peace building scenarios. The ability for 
young people to not only read, but analyze multiple 
sources of information, and have the skills and self-
efficacy to critique their origin or intention is vital 
for young people who might find themselves living in 
a hostile environment. Not only this, but for learners 
who have had their education disrupted it is important 
that they are equipped with skills that are relevant to 
their potential work places in the future. T o do so they 
must be furnished with strong foundations in which 
to build these 21st Century skills. The foundation is of 
fundamental importance. 
6.1.8 Learners can often teach themselves how to use 
technology quickly
It is often stated that young people pick up technology 
very quickly, that they can teach themselves how 
to use phones, or how to use tablets at a rate that 
often astonishes their parents and teachers. There 
are implications for the programming of EdT ech 
interventions, such as whether time should be spent 
teaching children how to use technology, or if more 
time should be dedicated to explaining and engaging 
with the content of the curriculum. 
Kim (2012) conducted a comparative analysis of a 
game-based learning model in low socioeconomic 
communities in rural India. The study drew from 
six marginalized communities from across India, working with 210 children aged 6-14 years old. 
Students were given EdT ech hardware that they had 
never encountered before, and very quickly taught 
themselves how to use it. In the study, Kim (2012: 
7) reported that all the children ‘could adopt and 
teach themselves new technology without specific 
interventions by adults’. The author further proposed 
that learners transitioned through four stages when 
learning how to use the device, which they labeled 
‘Exploration, Recognition, Interaction, and Iteration’. 
They worked in groups to affectively support and 
teach one another how to use the devices. 
Work by Wolf et al. (2013: 12), with children in two 
villages in rural Ethiopia also supports this finding. 
The study showed that children are able to teach 
themselves the technical, or practical aspects of 
EdT ech hardware, in this case with Android tablets. In 
this study tablets were given to a group of children 
in a rural community that had no recognized school 
or literacy amongst its adults or children. By the 
end of the study ‘all the children [were] completely 
“computer-literate” with the tablets’. These two 
studies represent a level of self-efficacy in children that 
is positive for those wishing to engage with EdT ech to 
reach socially excluded learners. 
This finding has implications for EdT ech use in general 
and for emergency settings. Children, at least in these 
cohorts, did not need extensive support in learning 
the technical aspects of simple EdT ech devices. In 
fact, if left to explore the devices at the outset they 
can collectively build an understanding in a child-
centered manner. However, a word of caution. 
T echnical competence is one aspect of learning. It 
does not mean that they could teach themselves the 
curriculum devised and delivered through the apps or 
the hardware. Indeed Wolf (2013: 13) stated that no 
‘child in either village was able to decode the words 
in the decoding task’. This is unsurprising, learning the 
connotations associated with a language for example 
are not a simple task. It appears that to get to the 
more productive, or higher levels of learning requires 
adult intervention. What this finding can mean for 
those engaging in EdT ech is that the evidence shows 
that providing ‘technical training’ for young people 
may not be the most productive use of resources, and 
that a focus should be on supporting cognitive and 
affective learning. 426.2 THE COMMUNITY  
When we refer to ‘the community’ in this review we 
refer to all actors that are directly and indirectly 
engaged with a child’s education. This can include: 
teachers, school officials, parents, community 
organisers, local NGOs, policy makers, religious 
leaders, education department officials, and 
governments. The research demonstrates that a large 
range of actors need considering, if the intention 
is to promote sustained improvements in learning 
outcomes for those affected by emergencies or 
disasters. 
6.2.1 Adult/Teacher led scaffolding key to productive learner 
engagement with technology
As we have seen in the analysis so far, there is 
great potential for EdT ech to provide personalized, 
contextualized, and engaging activities to support 
learners in their education. These represent three of 
the four pillars of learning identified in the conceptual 
framework (page 12). The final pillar of learning is the 
need for social interaction to reinforce the positive 
learning experience. The literature has shown that 
adult or teacher led support is an important means 
for this social interaction. 
As children encounter new theories, ideas and 
examples, they look for support. The literature 
demonstrates that children benefit from having their 
engagement with EdT ech mediated by an adult or 
teacher (Islam and Grönlund, 2016; Piper et al., 2015; 
Koutromanao, 2016; Northop et al., 2013; Neumann 
and Neumann, 2013). These studies reinforce that 
when looking to engage children in high quality, 
sustainable learning, the examples, and iterative 
affective support that adults can provide is valuable to 
ensuring such engagement is productive. This is not to 
say that EdT ech software does not attempt to scaffold 
information for users, however Cayton-Hodges et 
al (2015: 15) highlight that in-app scaffolding cannot 
‘differentiate a careless error from more serious 
misunderstanding’.  At present, only an adult can 
provide this comprehension for learners. 
In the review conducted by Hsin et al., (2014: 92) 
which investigated young children’s use of technology 
and its influence on their learning reported that 
adults make up a ‘critical component in the typology 
for conceptualizing the interplay between children’s learning and their technology’.  EdT ech is a means of 
engaging in learning in a new and exciting manner, 
therefore it follows that children will need support 
engaging appropriately with this learning tool so as to 
keep the focus on learning. 
This engagement, whether in formal or informal 
settings, is referred to as scaffolding (Vygotsky, 
1978). This temporary staggering of learning tasks 
enables the child to interpret new learning in a logical 
and progressive manner. There are three forms of 
scaffolding relevant to our understanding of EdT ech 
use.  Yelland and Masters (2007) draw attention to 
cognitive scaffolding  which takes the form of teacher/
adult questioning of an activity to further engage the 
child in the learning process, for example “If this the 
right shape, what do we need to do next to make 
it fit this position?”. The second form is referred to 
as affective scaffolding,  which is best understood as 
‘the emotional dimension of human behaviour’ and 
learning (Lowyck, 2014: 59). This form often entails 
positive or negative reinforcement of behaviour 
related to a learning topic. Finally, there is technical 
scaffolding , which relates to the child’s interaction with 
the hardware itself, for example “Can you show me 
how to play that video again?”.
Northropp et al. (2013: 536) in their evidence informed 
framework for using iPads to build early literacy skills 
recommend that ‘use of technology be coupled with 
effective instruction’ to promote learning and that 
adults ‘explicitly teach the content before introducing 
the app’. This call for cognitive scaffolding  helps to 
avoid misconceptions by the child and reinforces that 
(Northropp et al. 2013: 535) ‘guidance and feedback 
provided by the teacher are crucial’ to positive 
engagement. This cognitive scaffolding  situates the 
activity as learning, and not just play, reinforcing that 
the engagement with technology is purposeful and not 
an end in itself. 
The need for technical scaffolding , which involves 
providing support on how to use a device, was 
reflected in work by Ale et al. (2007: 784) and states 
‘the active participation of teachers in guiding, 
assisting and monitoring laptop use was crucial in 
direction how children learnt’. This reinforces the 
need for adults/facilitators/ teachers to be present 
to assist children through their work. What is 
particularly pertinent about this work is that it is not 43The formal education system in Greece is 
not prepared yet to provide introductory 
courses for children between 15-18 years 
old so they can gradually integrate into 
the Greek schools. We provided refugee and 
migrant children with 45 hours of classes to 
prepare them for the European Computer 
Driving Licence (ECDL).
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN44simply teachers who influence and shape children’s 
interaction with technology, but a wider group of 
actors in children’s lives.  A study by Neumann and 
Neumann (2013: 235) that looked at tablets as a tool 
for stimulating emergent literacy in young children 
argued that technical scaffolding  is often carried out 
‘through parent-child interactions children learn how 
to use the tablet’.
The review by Hsin et al. (2014: 92) goes further 
by drawing focus to the fact that to optimize 
engagement ‘adults provided them with a safe climate, 
encouraged them to participate in conversation, 
involved them in establishing the goals of the activity’ 
which demonstrates that for effective learning the tool 
and the pedagogy are crucial, but so too is the wider 
wellbeing of the child. This has important implications 
for education in emergency settings. 
Neumann and Neumann (2013) found that all three 
areas of scaffolding are important for children’s 
engagement with tablets, as a means of reinforcing 
positive behaviour, developing learning, and promoting 
technical competence.  According to Neumann and 
Neumann (2013: 235) ‘scaffolding can also help 
children master tablet operation skills’ and indeed 
stimulate child-parent interaction. This represents an 
area of EdT ech in need of greater investigation.  
What these studies go some way to demonstrate is 
that effective support and adult-led scaffolding are 
of real benefit to the students’ engagement with 
their studies. Children need guidance and indeed 
seek reassurance from adults just as they do in other 
learning environments, formal or informal. If this 
support, that spans a range of areas of learning is 
not provided, then it will affect the learning outcomes 
of the children using the technology, and even risk 
the development of poor habits and potentially lead 
to frustration and disengagement on the part of the 
learner. 
Further, these interactions can help to foster stronger 
emotional bonds and engage parents in children’s 
learning.  Although aspects of cognitive and technical 
scaffolding can be provided by EdT ech software, 
EdT ech is not yet in a position to actively comprehend 
what exactly a learner misunderstands when an error 
occurs.  What the implications are for education in 
emergency settings are clear. We need to ensure that 
all adults in the children’s immediate environment, and their teachers, are comfortable and have the 
necessary literacy levels to use the technology 
themselves. If they are not, then they will struggle 
to scaffold and help the child learn. However, if they 
are, then they are much more likely to engage and 
promote learning on the part of the children which 
ultimately is to the benefit of children’s learning 
outcomes. The next finding of this review reinforces 
this need for EdT ech to play a supporting role in 
learning, not a primary role. 
6.2.2 EdTech must supplement and not supplant teaching if 
it is to be successful
 ICT can replace teachers and   
 organized  learning only in rare instances;  
 but it can provide effective  support to  
 education, especially when supplemented  
 with teacher training (Lewis et al. 2016: iv).
As previous findings have demonstrated, EdT ech 
can play an important supporting role in enabling 
learners to engage with their education. It is a useful 
teaching tool. T ools are best used for the task they 
are appropriate for and should not be expected to 
perform all of the complex tasks in a classroom. The 
literature covered, consistently demonstrates that 
for optimal results EdT ech should support teachers 
in the classroom and not attempt to substitute them 
(Tamim, 2011; Islam and Grönlund 2016, Hosman; 
2010; Morpeth 2009; Restyandito, 2013; Hashemi 2011; 
Genlott and Grönlund, 2016). 
A comprehensive meta-analysis by Tamim et al. (2011: 
16) concluded that technology use in the classroom 
had ‘significant positive, small to moderate effect sizes’ 
favouring its utilization in the classroom. Crucially this 
work demonstrated that interventions which support 
instruction ‘compared to technology applications that 
provide direct instruction’ had a ‘significantly higher 
average effect sizes’.  The difference between these 
in real world terms could be a piece of software 
that students use to guide their whole path through 
an algebra module, and a piece of software used 
in conjunction with the teacher to, for example, 
demonstrate the practical application of Pythagoras’ 
theory.  
Islam and Grönlund (2016: 204) in their detailed 
systematic review of 1-to-1 computing in schools 
found that EdT ech could, if appropriately used 45increase the opportunity for ‘teacher-student 
communication and student-student communication’. 
These interactions are fundamental to building 
‘improved relationships that in turn help learning 
productivity’.  If for example, a class is being led by a 
computer-generated avatar, then all the learners will 
likely have headphones on, and therefore the chance 
for interaction is diminished. If the EdT ech is used to 
supplement the teacher’s actions in the classroom, it 
provides them time to engage on a one-to-one level, 
more often. Islam and Grönlund (2016: 212) also 
reported evidence in the literature of a reduction in 
‘disciplinary problems’ in classes the integrated laptop 
use. With the extra time teachers have to interact 
with learners, it is not difficult to see how overall 
student behaviour could improve. 
The work of Ale et al. (2017: 784), which focused on 
the contextualization of One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) 
projects in rural India ‘supported claims on the 
centrality of teachers in educational contexts’ where 
EdT ech was integrated. This does not have to imply 
that teachers lead every activity but that they are key 
to influencing ‘the development of efficacious beliefs 
and successful action’ (Sivandani et al., 2014 cited in Ale et al., 2017: 284). T eacher’s ability to encourage 
self-efficacy in students is key to understanding the 
importance of EdT ech supplementing teacher’s actions 
and not replacing them. Self-efficacy is defined by the 
psychologist Bandura (1994: 2) as ‘people’s beliefs 
about their capabilities to produce designated levels 
of performance’. This belief is reinforced, or indeed 
improved, through teacher’s affective scaffolding  of tasks, 
and promoting a sense in students that perseverance 
will bring rewards. Izmesti (2012 cited in Zualkernan 
2016: 244) states that ‘ICT can help in personalization 
by presenting content in an engaging and attractive 
form, helping teachers record, and constantly monitor 
the progress of each student’. Students need to be 
supported in their affective learning, as much as other 
areas of learning. Zualkernan (2016) in a review 
of personalized learning for developing countries 
stresses that it is still beyond the reach of most 
EdT ech programmes to engage with a learner on 
this affective, or emotional level. This was supported 
by Arguel et al.’s (2017) study that assessed EdT ech 
software’s ability to recognize student confusion levels. 
If the software supports the teacher, then they can 
provide this engagement more readily. 
Children participate in an Arabic language class in one of the 10 temporary learning spaces managed by 
Save the Children in Jed’ah IDP camp.
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN46Hosman (2010: 60) assessed a case study of St Julie 
Model Primary School in rural Buseesa, Uganda. The 
in-depth analysis of the integration of ICT into this 
school is used to build a model of best practice, one 
aspect of which ‘is an understanding of technology 
as an enabling tool and a compliment to existing 
teaching and infrastructure’. What all of these 
examples show is that it is imperative that we work 
with the resources that are currently in place. EdT ech 
can indeed support teachers and free them up to 
engage in greater student-teacher interaction, which 
is important to improving learning outcomes. We must, 
as the literature shows, avoid the desire to reengineer 
how students interface with learning environments, 
just to suit a new educational tool. We must use 
the evidence of how this tool can improve current 
practice.
Morpeth et al.’s, 2009 review of open and distance 
learning opportunities for UNICEF in South Asia, 
highlighted some of the uses of EdT ech in reaching 
and enabling learning in emergency situations. In 
this study it is argued that ‘ready-made educational 
resources can be deployed in emergency areas or to 
untrained or under-trained teachers/mentors/carers 
working in severely under-resourced circumstances’ 
they can provide crucial support for those engaged 
in educating children who perhaps do not have the 
requisite training (Morpeth et al., 2009: 28). What all 
of these resources do, is support instruction and not 
replace the instructor. It is clear that the teacher/
tutor/carer needs to be present, in whatever manner, 
to support, encourage and guide children through 
their learning. 
Analysis from this review provides evidence that 
Edtech is an important tool to supplement and 
indeed potentially improve learning outcomes for 
those who engage with it. For this to be successful 
it is important attention is paid to how it is used, for 
example not simply to deliver content to learners. It 
can, if appropriately utilized, especially in emergency 
situations where class sizes are often increased, 
provide valuable support that has the potential to 
facilitate teachers in being able to provide more 
support, and increase the chances of teacher-
student interaction. T o do this those who provide, 
or implement Edtech projects must focus on how 
it can help, and not replace the need for teaching 
staff. T eachers are fundamental to positive learning environments, they also hold opinions and beliefs that 
can positively influence and negatively influence the 
integration of Edtech into the classroom. 
6.2.3 Teacher perceptions of technology are important
T eachers’ opinions of EdT ech and its relevance to 
the learner’s educational development is important. 
The influence these attitudes play was discussed in 
the conceptual framework (See section 3.2.5) and 
reflected in a number of studies (Blikstaf-Balas, 2017; 
Piper et al., 2015; Valiente, 2010; Zheng et al., 2016; 
Berrera-Osorio, 2009; Gomez et al., 2013; Blackwell, 
2016; Henessy, 2010;  Webb et al., 2004; Flewitt, 2015; 
Warschauer et al., 2014). 
Value judgments about technology are a second-
order barrier to their use.  According to a study 
completed by Blackwell et al. (2016: 311) in which 
they surveyed 1329 early-years educators across the 
United States, value judgments ‘play a more important 
role in changing whether and how much teachers 
integrate technology’ in the classroom than the first-
order barriers, such as teacher training, or time. This 
finding was reinforced by Vadachalam and Chumbo’s 
(2017) study looking at maths teaching in tertiary 
education in South Africa. These findings imply that 
those engaging in EdT ech delivery need to consider 
the opinions of teachers seriously. 
Blackwell et al. (2016: 317) also found that ‘teacher’s 
highest educational attainment [level] was also 
predictive of access’ to technology.  Access is 
important because it builds familiarity, and leads to 
the development of positive perceptions of EdT ech. This 
was reinforced by findings by Flewitt et al. (2014) and 
is relevant to the application of EdT ech in emergency 
situations, where the teaching stock may not be stable 
and qualification levels lower (Burde, 2016), resulting 
in decreased access and negative attitudes toward 
EdT ech. The implications of this for emergencies are 
considerable, with large class numbers and often-poor 
physical resources teachers are likely to encounter 
both first-order barriers such as lack of internet, and 
second-order barriers to engagement. 
Findings presented Valiente’s (2010: 11) review of 
1-to-1 initiatives in education affirms the importance 
of attitudes and beliefs of teachers and added that 
‘when teachers do not perceive that expected uses of 
technology closely aligned with the curriculum’ they 47are less likely to use it. This reinforces previous findings 
(section 6.22) related to the importance of EdT ech 
designers integrating EdT ech nto the curriculum they 
plan on engaging with. 
Valiente’s (2010) review goes on to state that there 
is evidence of an ‘adaptation’ stage with regards to 
EdT ech and teaching practice (Valiente, 2010: 11). 
This phase of adaptation is substantiated by findings 
of Passey et al. (2016: 125) and states that the ‘initial 
implementation of ICT into teaching practice leads 
to a downturn in performance’. Overall, teachers 
need time to adjust, and this period of adjustment 
can then affect learning outcomes of children. This 
is an important finding for education in conflict and 
displaced settings; having to change your teaching 
practice whilst dealing with the stresses of working in 
an emergency situation are not conducive to positive 
engagement, especially if this leads to a perceived 
drop in overall performance. In addition to this staff 
turnover of teachers in emergency or displaced 
settings can be high, leading to additional issues 
related to integration of EdT ech. This leads on to the 
next finding in this narrative review. This relates to the 
importance of training for teachers, to the successful 
integration of EdT ech in an educational space.
What these studies identify are a number of the 
reasons why teachers may have negative opinions of 
EdT ech. What has to be considered is that first-order 
issues such as a lack of time, or poor infrastructure, 
are likely to compound second-order issues that are 
related to perception.  A means of negotiating this 
is to involve teachers more readily in the change 
process that the introduction of EdT ech represents. We 
know from the literature that teachers in emergency 
settings are likely to be subject to a number of first-
order barriers and we have seen how these interact 
with second-order barriers. What these findings show 
is the need for teachers and key stakeholders to be 
active agents in processes of EdT ech introduction, if 
our aim is to have a positive influence on learning 
outcomes. 
6.2.4 The availability of Teacher Professional Development
T eachers are key stakeholders when it comes to 
the successful integration of EdT ech into a learning 
environment. The introduction of EdT ech results in a 
material change for many teachers’ practice, indeed it is learning a new skill. This change needs to be 
introduced in a manner that is sensitive to the scale of 
this change in practice. The material covered provides 
insights into some of the positive actions that can be 
taken to promote successful integration of EdT ech into 
a new learning environment. 
The literature covered for the review consistently 
reiterated that teacher training is an essential aspect 
of successful EdT ech integration (Piper et al., 2015; 
Valiente, 2010; Zheng et al., 2016; Berrer-Osorio, 2009; 
Blikstaf-Balas, 2017; Gomez et al., 2013; Blackwell, 
2016; Hennessy, 2010; Webb et al., 2004; Flewitt et al., 
2015; McManis, 2012; Warschauer et al., 2014; Passey 
et al., 2016; Kahn, 2016; Agarkar, 2016; Hosman, 2010; 
Qablan, 2016; Islam and Grönlund, 2016). EdT ech is 
a new educational tool, as with all educational tools 
the teacher, or primary deliverer of content, needs to 
be comfortable using it, prior to using it with learners. 
Learning, we have seen needs to be supported, 
collaborative, and linked to previous practice for 
it to be successful, there is no reason why the 
implementation of EdT ech should be any different.
Warshchauer et al. (2014: 57), in their assessment of 
OPLC implementation in three different schools in the 
USA found that the level of the training and support 
provided was related to the quality of the EdT ech’s 
utilization in the classroom. In the poorer area of 
Birmingham, Alabama, for example, ‘little time was 
provided for training in XO-supported instruction’.   
As a result, the effects on learning outcomes were less 
when compared to schools in Littleton and Saugus 
where (2014: 58) ‘teachers participated in extensive 
collaboration within and between schools’ This 
study concludes that (Warshchauer et al. 2014: 59) 
‘teacher support was often tied to the ways in which 
laptops were used in the classroom’ (2014: 59). This is 
a significant issue to draw attention to. If the quality 
of training is better and sustained, then teachers are 
furnished with more options of how to adapt their 
practice with the EdT ech.  As previous findings suggest, 
it is not so much the provision of hardware that 
influences learning outcomes, it is how the teachers 
use that hardware that impacts on the learners. 
Indeed, Piper et al. (2015: 11) found that the Kenyan 
government following a review of their EdT ech 
initiatives, ‘is now focusing on improving teacher skills 
and pedagogy as the key to effectively’ utilizing new 48Behind the Scenes of Save the 
Children’s first VR shoot in 
Bandung, Indonesia.
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN49EdT ech interventions.  As Piper et al. (2015: 12) state, 
the training provided to teachers needs to be of 
‘high-quality’. In relation to emergency settings, there 
is important learning in this finding. If resources are 
stretched too thin, or the implementation is rushed, 
and teacher training is not engaged with readily, then 
the impact of the intervention on learning outcomes is 
diminished. 
What high-quality training looks like depends on 
the cohort of teachers. For training to be successful, 
according to Forgasz et al.’s (2009) systematic review 
of technology in maths teaching, found that teachers’ 
qualification levels are correlated with the likelihood 
that they will successfully utilize EdT ech opportunities. 
This is significant because, if you wish to engage 
teachers with training that reflects their skill level then 
their current level must be known. In an emergency 
situation, where it is potentially more difficult to get 
reliable data on the teaching cohort’s qualification 
levels, then the training provided needs to be adaptive 
to their level. It cannot be a one size fits all approach. 
Further, active engagement on the part of those 
teaching, must be encouraged for successful 
programmes, and teachers cannot be bystanders 
to the process. Northropp et al. (2013:  532) for 
example, argue ‘teachers need to consider whether 
the technology is providing instruction at a student’s 
appropriate level’. This not only requires a specific 
skill set on the side of the teacher, but also requires 
dialogue between the institution and the EdT ech 
provider, or in an emergency setting between an NGO 
and the teaching staff. In emergency situations where 
teachers’ time is a precious resource, learning can 
be taken from Mouza and Cavaliar (2012: 156) who 
stated that ‘identifying digital resources closely aligned 
with their curricular and their students’ needs’ was 
better received than generic instruction on how to 
use EdT ech. It needs to be relevant to the teachers’/
instructors’ situation.
Not only does the quality of this initial teacher 
training need to be of a high standard, it needs to be 
sustained. Continued teacher development positively 
correlates with successful EdT ech take up (Blackwell, 
2016; Warschauer et al., 2014; Piper et al, 2015). 
Dahya (2016: 22) stressed that ‘teacher training and 
ongoing program support is invaluable to the long-
term effectiveness of mobile initiatives’. This was corroborated by findings by Islam and Grönlund 
(2016: 210) which stated that ‘a sustained commitment 
from the supply side’ is required for EdT ech to have 
the biggest influence of students learning outcomes.  
This does not come without a cost implication for the 
provider of the EdT ech.  As was the case with Piper 
et al. 2015 in Kenya, if the training is not engaged 
with appropriately at the start, then the EdT ech will 
not likely be used appropriately. In line with the INEE 
guidelines for EIE interventions to ‘Do No Harm’, it 
would be inappropriate to provide hardware that the 
recipients then have to retrospectively provide training 
for, at their own cost, so as to allow for its successful 
utilization.  
Caution must be taken when addressing training and 
EdT ech, as it is not a silver bullet. There is evidence 
from a robust six yearlong study in Maharashtra, 
India, that even with continued support and the 
continued provision of new teaching material that 
usage of EdT ech is not guaranteed (Agarkar, 2016).  
What this study argues is that changes in practice 
(Agarkar, 2016: 421) ‘depends on the teacher’s 
awareness of new developments in school education’ 
and if time is not available for this engagement it 
is unrealistic to expect such change.  The previous 
pedagogical structure of a particular culture and 
space is important when it comes to changing 
practice. These findings were corroborated by 
Berrer-Osorio and Linden (2009: 25) in their work 
for the World Bank assessing the evidence from an 
RCT looking at the effects of ICT integration into a 
language arts programme which concluded that ‘mere 
training and equipment does not seem to be sufficient’ 
at improving learning outcomes’. 
The introduction of EdT ech represents a change in 
teacher’s working habits, training; active teacher 
development can go some way to improve the 
perceptions of teachers towards EdT ech. What the 
studies covered demonstrate is that teacher training 
is a key facet of successful EdT ech uptake in a learning 
environment. The form that this training takes is 
significant – it must be relevant to the teacher’s 
context, and promote integration of EdT ech with the 
curriculum. In emergency situations where teachers 
are less likely to be formally qualified, training 
represents an essential capacity building opportunity. 
If the EdT ech interventions aim is to foster long-50term improvements in children’s learning outcomes 
then the evidence shows the training needs to be 
sustainably funded and part of a pallet of adopted 
measures. This need to work with actors beyond the 
children themselves is shared by the next finding. 
EdT ech interventions offer the opportunity to build a 
cooperative attitude between teachers, parents and 
the learners themselves.
6.2.5 Parents perception of technology is important.
Parents/Primary Care-givers are the most important 
actors in their children’s education (Clarke-Stewart, 
1983; Caddell et al., 2000; Vincent, 1996).  The 
introduction of EdT ech offers opportunities to increase 
education related conversations in a household, and 
promote intergenerational learning. These are just a 
sample of the reasons why taking an active approach 
to parental engagement can work to alleviate 
fears they may hold around technology, and indeed 
promote a positive attitude to the education their 
children are receiving at school. 
Parents/Primary Care-givers are key stakeholders 
in their children’s education.  As work by Sultana 
(2006: 77) in the West Bank states ‘genuine parental 
involvement can have a most positive impact on the 
levels of learning achievement of young children’.  
Their understanding and attitudes towards technology 
influence their children’s uptake of EdT ech and use of 
technology (Qablan, 2009, Hsin et al., 2014; Passey et 
al., 2016; Steffens, 2014; Dahya, 2016). Hsin et al. (2014: 
93) stated in their systematic review that ‘adults’ 
perceptions of children’s technology use influence 
how they support or do not support their children’s 
learning through technology’. 
Qablan and Abuloum’s (2009) qualitative study that 
addressed barriers to integration of EdT ech in Science 
classes in a girl’s school in Jordan, found that parents 
worry that technology is too much of a distraction 
for learners.  As one of the interviewees in the study 
stated, (2009: 297) “When my parents see me using 
the computer at home, they think I am playing not 
studying”.  At this stage, EdT ech was not likely part 
of many adults’ educational experience. In this study 
a parent raised fears for their child’s safety with 
regards to Internet use, which is important to consider 
when developing EdT ech interventions for difficult to 
reach, or socially excluded learners in an emergency 
situation. If parents do not welcome technology into their home or allow usage, then it is a wasted 
investment in the humanitarian response. 
Passey et al. (2016: 15) in their conceptual paper that 
drew evidence from developing countries engagement 
in EdT ech, stated that parents ‘values and concerns 
need to be known if change is to be managed 
successfully’. This points to the need to be proactive 
and seek out and engage with the key stakeholders 
in a target population, prior to intervention. This 
finding was reiterated by Dahya (2016: 6), in her 
landscape review of EdT ech in education in emergency 
settings, and asserts the importance of working  ‘with 
community members to determine appropriate ICT 
application whenever possible’. What these findings 
show is that not only are parents perceptions 
important to uptake of EdT ech, or technology use 
in general, but that also this can be an avenue 
to broaden community engagement and project 
development in general, which should be to the benefit 
of the children involved. 
As these studies demonstrate parents/primary care-
givers attitudes to technology are 
important. This finding if engaged with, offer 
opportunities to build a stronger network of 
actors around the learner. In an emergency or crisis 
situation this capacity building can 
prove an asset. This process can assist with the 
development of EdT ech that is contextually
and culturally appropriate to the learner and their 
learning environment.
6.2.6 Context of intervention is key to successful integration: 
History and Context affects usage
Education systems in every country are unique and 
often cater to the social, political, and economic 
needs of a country. Everything from policies, school 
management, teacher training, and curriculum 
development will vary by country. Many of these 
factors, and decisions around these factors, are deeply 
rooted in the wider culture and history of the country.  
These factors have to be taken into consideration in 
the development of EdT ech. The notion that the culture 
of a country is important to the interaction with 
EdT ech within it was reflected upon by a number of 
studies (Kolodziejcy, 2015; Keengwee and Bharagava, 
2014; Hubber et al., 2016; Valiente, 2010; Valk et al., 
2010; Ames, 2013; Forgasz et al., 2010; Warschauer 
et al., 2014; Agarker, 2016; Hosman, 2010; Islam 51and Grönlund, 2016; Qablan, 2009). For example, 
Chukwuere et al. (2016: 264) conclude, following 
an evaluation of technology use in a South African 
tertiary education programme, ‘culture impacts on 
how people use and value communication media’. 
Hubber at al. (2016: 3) in their assessment of the 
suitability of tablet use in Malawi, argue crucial factors 
affecting implementation include ‘attitudes towards 
tablet technology and the embedding of tablet 
technology within a country’s education system’. 
If time is taken to consider the attitudes towards 
new technology, then it ‘enables generic features of 
implementation to be differentiated from country-
specific factors’. The authors’ argue that this will 
increase the likelihood of successful programming, 
improving uptake, and increasing learning outcomes, 
the benchmark of the majority of education 
interventions this rigorous review has addressed. 
Keengwee and Bharagava (2014: 740) in their case 
study driven theoretical framework for mobile 
learning integration argue that ‘the context in different 
countries can be different and so understanding the 
cultural backgrounds is important when designing 
the technology’. The paper offers the MILLEE project, 
a mobile-based English language learning course 
taken by 800 children in 40 villages in Andhra Pradesh, 
India as an example of best practice. This initiative 
worked with local stakeholders prior to deploying 
mobile-based technology so as to better understand 
the context and used a multidisciplinary approach. 
The study recommends that time is spent with key 
actors in the communities prior to implementation to 
build a greater understanding of the culture around 
technology, so as to maximize the opportunity for it 
to improve learning outcomes, when implemented. The 
study states that this understanding played (Keengwee 
and Bharagava, 2014: 743). ‘a big role in making 
projects like MILLEE successful and feasible’ 
The need to evaluate cultural dispositions is not 
limited to the country, or culture in which an Edtech 
programme is being implemented. It extends to the 
culture of the country in which this programme 
has originated. This is an aspect of the findings of 
Ames and Rosner’s (2014) investigation into an 
OLPC project, which provided a case study in Easy 
Bay Fixit Clinic in the USA, identifying some of the 
issues that can arise if this scrutiny is not applied. The authors (2014: 362) submit that the OLPC project 
had a ‘specific conception of ‘childhood’ which was 
largely built around the foundations of a ‘Western, 
individualist, middle-class and often male’ culture. The 
attributes of this programme were not a good fit for 
the diverse population of the study. The implications 
for education in emergencies are considerable, actors 
must consider the assumptions they bring to a project 
surrounding what constitutes ‘good education’ and 
learning in general. These factors must be considered 
prior to the implementation of an often high-cost 
EdT ech intervention that may well be incompatible 
with cultural expectations of a target population. 
Another consideration when looking at the overall 
education system, is that of timing. Qablan (2009) 
found that teachers working with students in their 
final year, in Jordanian schools, were less likely to 
use EdT ech available to them, due to the demands of 
summative assessment.  This builds a broader point 
about which years of education are best served by 
new interventions relating to Edtech. The final year 
of education in the UK for example is heavily focused 
towards summative assessments, and therefore the 
likelihood of teachers changing their practice with 
these year groups is reduced due to these pressures. 
What is evident is that there is a real need to 
consider the wider culture and education systems 
of a country, or community, before implementing 
EdT ech interventions. There is a wealth of development 
literature that can be drawn upon to inform 
programming of these interventions. Should the 
wider cultural context of a country or community 
be engaged with in a proactive manner then it 
can go a long way to supporting the successful 
integration of EdT ech which can lead to sustainable 
improvements in learning outcomes. The implications 
for emergencies are considerable. Emergencies are 
often situations were a population has been displaced 
into a different cultural setting, which is likely to 
have its own distinct approaches to education. This 
preliminary work to open discussions with a target 
population, regarding attitudes to technology can 
provide a useful opportunity for dialogue surrounding 
wider issues of integration. Education is a universal 
discourse that offers the chance for greater interparty 
communication. EdT ech is an exciting educational tool, 
and can be a catalyst for wider discussions related to 
community integration. 526.2.7 EdTech can, but does not necessarily, represent the 
best value for money/sustainability 
Educational technology can be expensive. In 
emergency situations when resources are limited 
and the infrastructure to support the technology 
is under strain, the sustainability and feasibility of 
an intervention has to be established, if long-term 
improvements in learning outcomes are the aim of the 
intervention. 
EdT ech or ICT does not always represent the best 
value for money in terms of learning outcomes, 
according to a number of studies covered by the 
rigorous review (Bando, 2016; Hennessey et al., 
2010; Dahya, 2016; Carlson, 2013; Passey et al., 2016; 
Warschauer et al., 2010). There are a number of issues 
that contribute to this. Work by Hosman (2010: 61) 
that investigated several Edtech interventions in rural 
Uganda, argued that ‘project sustainability is of great 
consequence’ when considering the long-term effect 
of introducing Edtech into an education system. For 
example, in a large scale randomized control trial 
across 271 schools in Honduras, Bando et al. (2016: 
19) ‘found textbook replacement with laptops did not 
affect student learning after one year’. This important finding leads to questions about implementation time 
frames and sustainability of investment. 
Paterson (2007: 98) made the case that across 
Botswana, Namibia and the Seychelles, despite having 
different issues related to implementation, ‘financial 
allocations to ICT must properly take into account 
the full costs of sustainable ICT systems’. Otherwise 
technology can quickly become a burden on the 
communities in which it is integrated. T o provide a 
sense of perspective, Passey et al. (2016) make the 
case that the integration of EdT ech takes roughly 
ten years, and countries such as the UK, USA, and 
Australia have been integrating EdT ech into their 
curriculums for nearly two and a half decades.  
Another issue related to sustainable EdT ech 
engagement relates to teacher training (as discussed 
in section 6.2.4). Evidence shows that training needs 
to extend beyond an initial introductory session 
for teachers to utilize EdT ech effectively. In fact, 
the integration of EdT ech programmes offers an 
opportunity to develop a collaborative community 
of practice amongst teaching staff, should the 
infrastructure and the funding be sustained. 
Shadi * is 16 years old and lives in an area for people displaced by the conflict in Syria. He lives in a temporary 
shelter in an area where many families are living in makeshift tents made of plastic sheets, with only the most basis 
items available to them, like mattresses and blankets. He has been living in the camp for a year and a half, together 
with his mother and father and his younger brother and married sister.
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN53A major concern is that of sustainability and long-
term funding once a pilot has run its course.  As 
Hennessey et al. (2010: 95) warn ‘sustainability of 
schemes and potential for further rollout are also 
highly uncertain once funding runs out and deserves 
more attention’. The implications for education 
in emergencies are considerable, questions must 
be asked about the long-term suitability of the 
hardware that is being provided: Will it be compatible 
with software in two or three years’ time? Work 
by Warschauer et al. (2014: 57) state that in the 
case studies and the literature they assessed, 
‘laptops tended to go unrepaired’. Work by Ames 
and Warschauer (2010: 41) went on to claim that 
‘27.4 percent of machines were out of commission’ 
in Uruguay within two years of the scheme’s 
introduction. In an emergency of crisis setting, where 
resources are limited and supporting infrastructure is 
under strain, we have to consider, for example, how 
broken equipment can be repaired. These are just 
two simple examples that are intended to provide a 
window into the considerations required, relating to 
sustainable EdT ech engagement for those working in 
education in emergencies. 
What the evidence covered in this study shows is that 
there are a number of factors that must be considered 
when addressing the sustainability of EdT ech 
programmes. The issues that need to be considered 
regarding value for money include consideration 
of the appropriateness of the hardware, sustained 
training initiatives for teachers, adaptation costs 
for the learning environment, and capacity building, 
where needed, to ensure that broken equipment can 
be maintained.  As such, funding needs to be sustained 
to allow for the change in practice to take hold and 
for positive learning outcomes to take place. This is an 
important consideration in education in emergencies 
where the crisis that precipitated the intervention may 
have damaged the infrastructure crucial to EdT ech 
utilization. 
6.3 THE ENABLING CONDITIONS
The evidence covered by this review so far has related 
to actors, namely the child directly engaging with 
the EdT ech and the actors that surround the child’s 
engagement. The following findings relate more 
directly to those engaged in the implementation of 
EdT ech initiatives and the most likely audience for this 
piece of research. 6.3.1 Infrastructure is a major barrier to successful 
utilization of EdTech
A common theme across the literature has been 
the barrier of existing infrastructure in preventing 
the successful integration of EdT ech (Bando, 2016; 
Gulati, 2008; Paterson, 2007; Hennessey et al., 2010; 
Vadachalam, 2017; Zualkernen and Conje, 2008; 
Dahya, 2016 Carlson, 2016; Qablan, 2009; Warschauer 
et al., 2014; Hennessey et al., 2010; Hosman, 2010; 
Islam and Grönlund, 2016; Berrera-Osorio, 2009). 
When we discuss infrastructure, we mean resources 
as basic as electricity and school buildings to more 
advanced resources, such as internet and data 
availablity.
In reference to the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) 
programme Warschauer et al. (2014) found that the 
countries that had the relevant infrastructure prior 
to the programme’s introduction saw this biggest 
increase in learning outcomes.  A study in Uganda 
by Hosman (2010: 60) found that the best way to 
frame EdT ech integration was to view ‘technology 
as an enabling tool and a compliment to existing 
teaching and infrastructure, not as a silver bullet or 
end in itself’. The study (Hosman, 2010: 60) argues 
there must be a ‘realistic assessment of the existing 
situation. If there are insufficient schools, classrooms, 
and teachers, the provision of these must precede 
technology initiatives’. This reiterates the need for 
greater assessment of infrastructure on the part of 
the providers of the hardware. 
Infrastructure differs based on the region engaged, 
so too does equity of access within countries, which 
was discussed by a number of studies (UNESCO, 2013; 
Qablan, 2009; Gulati, 2008). Gulati (2008: 12) in their 
review of technology-enhanced learning in developing 
countries, conclude that although equitable provision 
was a key driver in the implementation of open 
and distance learning, ‘the lack of educational and 
technology infrastructures’ stood in the way of these 
intended goals. Indeed, the study went further to claim 
(2008: 12) than when equity of access was considered, 
for the poorest in society, ‘traditional technologies 
such as printed material, radio, and television 
remain more effective and accessible for rural and 
disadvantaged groups’ claiming that in the developing 
countries addressed in the review, the improvements 
to infrastructure disproportionately benefited the 
urban dwelling rich and wealthy.  54A report by UNESCO (2013) that assessed the 
E-readiness in five Arab states found that there is a 
need to look beyond the claimed infrastructure and 
policy framework of specific countries, and analyse 
what the current infrastructure is best suited for.  
Ascertaining what form of EdT ech would work best 
with the infrastructure available is an attainable 
goal and one education in emergency professionals 
should work towards. This was corroborated by 
Carlson’s (2013) final report on a USAID project 
in South Sudan, which utilized interactive radio. The 
infrastructure for radio was, for the most part, already 
in place.  As Burde (2016) draws attention to, the crisis 
that precipitate the intervention are likely to have 
affected the relevant infrastructure. This issue cannot 
be overlooked when considering the applicability of 
EdT ech options available in emergency settings. 
As these studies have shown, there is a need when 
faced with a poor standard of infrastructure, to think 
honestly and creatively about what technology is 
best suited for the region. What may be deemed ‘old’ 
technology from the position of technology providers 
in OECD countries, may well, as the case in Sudan 
demonstrates, be the ideal avenue for engagement. 
If long-term impacts on learning outcomes and 
child wellbeing are the aim of the intervention, then 
a proactive engagement with the infrastructure 
available is an essential component of building 
successful EdT ech interventions. Simply stated, we 
have to consider what is necessary for children to 
learn, and we must prioritise safe space, teachers, and 
appropriate learning materials before we consider the 
integration of technology. 
6.3.2 EdTech for accelerated learning: preparation to 
integration to formalized education
In emergency and displaced settings children often 
fall behind in learning. Even when children are 
able to resume education relatively quickly, they 
often find themselves in different settings where 
language, curriculum, and/or teaching styles may 
vary dramatically. However, evidence supports that 
EdT ech can be used alongside accelerated learning 
programmes, providing opportunities for children 
to catch up and get back in to public schools, or 
for out of school overage children to complete a 
primary education in half the time (Banerjee et 
al., 2007; Linden, 2008; Muralidharan et al., 2017; Nedungadi et al., 2014). Some evidence suggests 
that poorly performing children can benefit more 
from EdT ech than their high achieving counterparts 
(Linden, 2008; Muralidharan et al. 2017). Of course, 
effective programmes seem to have all of the same 
characteristics as discussed in early sections such as 
teacher’s engagement and training, a supplement to 
regular learning as opposed to a substitute, and are 
closely tied to the curriculum.
Nedungadi et al. (2014) implemented a small study 
in Kerala, India with 38 students from marginalized 
groups, in order to assess the effectiveness of using 
low cost tablets to improve learning outcomes in 
maths, reading (both the local language and English), 
and writing. Findings were qualitative, so the effect 
is not measured precisely, however, findings seemed 
to indicate that children learned faster, specifically in 
reading. The apps on the tablets used pedagogy that 
was integrated with the curriculum, used songs and 
stories from the area, and used the local language. 
T eachers were trained and felt comfortable utilizing 
the technology, and integrated the technology into 
their daily teaching. Children worked in groups and 
were able to play lessons over and over until they 
felt they understood. T eachers and students reported 
increased motivation, engagement, and accelerated 
learning. In emergency settings these types of activities 
can bring the learner closer to their appropriate 
learning level, if implemented correctly. 
Muralidharan et al. (2017) evaluated a technology 
aided learning after school programme in urban 
India. Children who were the furthest behind saw the 
greatest improvement. In this randomized control trial, 
those who took part, relative to the control group, 
‘experienced twice the test score value-added in math 
and 2.5 times that in Hindi’ (Muralidharan et al. 2017: 
2). The authors identified that the most useful aspect 
of the programme was that the software used in this 
study was adaptive to the learner’s level, rather than 
the grade level, in which the child is enrolled.
A 2007 study conducted by Banerjee et al. evaluate 
two remedial programmes in India. In the first 
programme children were provided a tutor. The tutor 
in the study was a woman from the local community 
who received two weeks of training. Students who 
worked with the tutor for two hours a day during 
the school day for an entire school year saw gains 55in numeracy and literacy. The second programme 
was a computer aided learning (CAL) programme 
where students were provided ‘two hours of shared 
computer time per week (two children shared one 
computer) – one hour during class time and one hour 
either immediately before or after school’ (Banjeree 
et al., 2007: 1241). Facilitators (who had received 5 
hours of training total) were present to help children, 
explaining games and helping children when they 
were stuck. ‘The instructors encouraged each child 
to play games that challenged the student’s level of 
comprehension, and, when necessary, they helped 
individual children understand the tasks required of 
them by the game’ (Banjeree et al., 2007: 1241). Both 
programmes were extremely effective, with the CAL 
programming producing slightly larger effect sizes. 
The CAL programme was even more effective in the 
second year as opposed to the first. In the first-year, 
standard software was used, and in the second year 
the programme teamed up with a local developer 
to develop games that were more in line with the 
curriculum.
Linden (2008) evaluates a CAI programme used 
by two groups of children, using the programme 
both in school (as a substitute) and out of school 
(as a supplement). The programme was designed 
to ‘reinforce students understanding of material 
presented in class ‘(Linden, 2008: 1). This study is 
important because Linden is examining the results 
of the same programme on two different groups 
of students, shedding light on the importance of 
regular school instruction. The material is designed 
to complement the school curriculum by presenting 
the same information they have received during 
the day in a different way. When used in this way 
learning outcomes increased. However, when used 
as a substitute, learning outcomes decreased. Poorly 
performing and over aged students tended to 
experience the most significant gains, showing that 
CAL, as a supplement to instruction time can be used 
as a way to bring children up to an age appropriate 
learning level. This study shows that EdT ech by itself is 
not effective in bringing the learner’s outcomes up to 
the appropriate level. 
Accelerated learning programmes are often an 
important facet of education in emergencies 
programming. These studies show that, when 
implemented properly, EdT ech programmes can help children to catch up. However, we must reinforce 
the notion that EdT ech must be supplement learning 
programmes and not attempt to substitute them.  
6.3.3 EdTech has the potential to blur lines between formal, 
informal and nonformal learning  
There has been much enthusiasm and speculation 
surrounding EdT ech and its ability to make education 
accessible for those who are currently denied regular 
access 7. In emergency settings education is often 
interrupted, both as a direct result of violence and 
disasters, and as an indirect result children may be 
forced to engage in labour inside and outside the 
household. While many programmes have been 
piloted, limited evidence is available demonstrating 
the best ways in which to ensure that mobile learning 
can reinforce or strengthen appropriate learning 
outcomes which are linked with the formal curriculum. 
According to Khaddage et al. (2016: 16) the ‘potential 
of mobile technologies for learning lies in the ability 
to provide timely access to learning in authentic 
working contexts’. However, as noted throughout 
this document, access to ICT and EdT ech software 
is not enough to ensure learning takes place. What 
is necessary is to ensure that technology links the 
informal learning process to the formal (or non-
formal) so that ‘seamless learning can occur anytime’ 
(Khaddage et al. 2016: 16).
Garcia (2015) through social network analysis, 
investigates how secondary school children, in a 
creative arts college in the UK use social network and 
social media technology to build networks outside 
of the classroom and how they may use these types 
of technology to encourage informal learning. The 
study was unable to determine if established networks 
led to informal learning. However, the author of the 
study noticed that students who were active users of 
Facebook and were central to their networks were 
more likely to stay on the course and attend regularly. 
The study did not establish causation, but may shed 
light on how outside of classroom uses of social media 
can encourage participation. More research is needed 
to explore how learning can be maximized through 
the use of social media. 
Zelezny-Green (2014) presents another example 
of how technology use outside of school can help 
to support formal learning. The study conducted 
in Kenya, showed that secondary school age girls 
7 See Dayha, 2016 for a comprehensive review of projects and programmes56mediate intermittent access to education through 
the use of mobile phones. The study showed that girls 
regularly used their mobile phones to call classmates 
to see what was missed, to make plans to revise, 
and to use Google to help find information about 
what was missed. While the access of Google does 
not equate learning as defined by our framework, 
Zelezny-Green (2014) does submit that the mobile 
phone is a natural tool to supplement learning in 
Kenya, especially for secondary school aged girls. 
6.3.4 Gender
An ongoing debate has been in existence regarding 
gender and technology use, as women and girls 
are, in many cases, less likely to use technology for 
learning and other purposes (Aesaert and van Braak, 
2015; Cummings and O’Neil, 2015; Forgasz, 2009; 
Hilbert, 2011; Kolodziejcszy, 2015; Punter et al., 2016; 
Steeves and Kwami, 2017; Yang, et al., 2012;). The 
understanding around diminished usage is limited. 
Questions surround whether or not causes are merely 
cultural and structural, or if men and boys are more 
likely to benefit from using technology for educational 
and other purposes, thus resulting in a lack of 
enthusiasm or technophobia amongst women (Hilbert, 
2011). It is well cited that cultural and structural 
inequalities can exacerbate this digital divide, including 
both social and material barriers (Cumming and 
O’Neil, 2015; Hilbert, 2011; Kahn et al., 2012; Steeves 
and Kwami, 2017). However, some have posited a 
simple explanation: that boys are more predisposed 
to use technology, due to access issues, and therefore 
will benefit more (as cited in Hilbert, 2011; Forgasz, 
2009). However, others suggest that the learning styles 
of boys may make learning through technology more 
amenable, leaving girls behind (as cited in Forgasz, 
2009; Kim et al, 2012). Developing an understanding 
about barriers, usage, and benefits is extremely 
important in the context of emergencies and displaced 
settings as gender disparities are easily intensified, and 
we must ensure that we mitigate these factors and 
not exacerbate them. 
Considering Access
Kolodziejczyk’s 2015, study in Papua New Guinea, that 
addressed attitudes to ICT use in Higher Education 
Institutions showed that the debate is actually more 
nuanced and less straight forward than presented 
above. Through a mixed methods study, findings from this study showed that male and female university 
students were just as likely to access computers 
and use them for the same amount of time during 
the day. For those who had internet access, time 
spent on the internet was the same across genders. 
However, a qualitative follow up to the study showed 
women perceived having less internet access than 
men. Men, according to the study, had first access 
to computers and women felt they had to wait to 
access them after men were finished. Some women 
also cited lack of security as a reason they had less 
access, due to security issues women were restricted 
at night, whereas men were able to use the computers 
on campus. Women also suggested that due to 
responsibilities at home, they had less time to use the 
computers and internet and therefore only used them 
for work related purposes and not for entertainment 
or leisure. 
A UNESCO study (West and Chew, 2014) that 
conducted surveys on mobile phone usage for reading 
showed that men ‘vastly outnumber female mobile 
readers in the countries studied8. On average, there 
were approximately three male mobile readers to 
every one female’ (West and Chew, 2014: 26) At 
the same time, however, women hold more positive 
attitudes toward reading and reading on their mobile 
phones, showing that the issue is more one of access 
than will. 
Researchers (Steeves and Kwami, 2017) in Ghana 
completed a qualitative study which included multiple 
interviews with 80 participants with head teachers, 
staff from the MOE, staff from the Millennium 
Development Project, and children in the study over 
the course of roughly four years of the project.  
Amongst a barrage of implementation issues, the 
study showed that the program ‘failed to consider 
the gendered nature of human interactions with ICTs 
in the design and implementation of the program’ 
(Steeves and Kwami 2017: 184).  As a result, girls were 
excluded from usage due to their lack of leisure time, 
whereas boys had much more time and freedom of 
mobility to use their devices and access internet cafes, 
allowing boys to practice skills on computers. Due to 
this, girls had a lack of understanding of technology 
usage as compared to boys.  A small survey, also 
conducted in Ghana, (Kwapong 2009) showed similar 
findings. The study showed that women encounter a 
number of barriers to access, which include language 
8 Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Kenya, Nigeria, Pakistan and Zimbabwe57and geographical location – limiting them from 
content and connectivity. Kahn et al. (2012) also 
discuss the issues of implementation in Bangladesh 
and cite gender as a major issue as women are 
‘deprived’ access to ICT as opposed to men. 
Do boys do better than girls?
While it is clear that girls can face more barriers than 
boys, it still leaves the question of boys’ predisposition 
to technology usage due to learning styles and 
personal preference. In order to investigate this 
question, Kim et al. (2012) performed a comparative 
analysis of a game based learning programme in 
India. Children aged 6 to 14 played maths games on 
mobile technology to ascertain if children were able 
to teach themselves how to use technology and what 
factors mattered in children’s ability to learn to use 
technology. Researchers found that when dividing 
participants into three groups (boys only, girls only, 
and mixed gender) boys-only groups solved more 
problems than girls-only and mixed groups were 
able to solve more problems than both (although the 
latter finding was not statistically significant). The 
authors were not able to justify or make sense of 
this finding, but pointed to research on how children 
perform in gendered groups, rather than ways of using 
technology, as a likely factor.
In a very different study Aesaert and van Braak (2014), 
after testing 378 year six students in Belgium on 
their ICT competencies, showed that girls had better 
technical ICT skills and higher-order ICT competences 
than boys. In addition, an analysis of data from 
the 2013 International Computer and Information 
Literacy Study, which examines ICT literacy of 14 
year olds in 9 European countries showed similar 
findings (Punter et al., 2013). Girls outperformed 
boys especially in areas of ‘evaluating and reflecting 
on information’ and ‘sharing and communicating 
information.’ There was no significant difference 
between boys and girls’ on ‘applying technical 
functionality’ (Punter et al., 2013:16).
Yang et al. (2013) tested something similar, asking if 
boys and girls can equally gain from computer-based 
education in primary schools in China. Researchers 
conducted randomized studies in three types of 
schools: migrant community schools (maths), rural 
public schools (maths), and Qinghai minority rural 
schools (Chinese Language). They found there was no difference in learning outcomes for boys and girls and 
found positive outcomes for all those attending CAL 
schools.  Similarly, findings from a study conducted in 
India (Muralidharan, et al., 2016, see section 6.2) show 
comparable conclusions. The supplementary maths 
and language tests benefited both boys and girls 
equally, bringing up students who were furthest behind, 
regardless of gender.
Overall, findings suggest that girls and boys can 
both benefit from EdT ech when barriers are not in 
place.  According to Hilbert’s (2010) study which 
analysed data sets from 12 Latin American and 13 
African countries from 2005-08, gendered access to 
technology is embedded in a large number of societal 
factors.  At the same time, findings showed that lack 
of interest was not one of these barriers. Hilbert’s 
findings suggest that internet and technology use may 
be gendered because, as women encounter socio-
economic obstacles to access, it ultimately translates 
into perceptions that women are ‘technophobic’ or 
lack interest, which is not the case.
Forgasz (2010) also demonstrates the importance of 
context, not only in access but in learning outcomes 
as well. Forgasz finds that results are mixed and 
highly dependent on the culture. Forgasz cites a 
study In Australia (Forster 2002), for example, where 
the introduction of technology seemed to widen the 
gender gap. The optional use of EdT ech introduced 
in a math class meant children who felt comfortable 
with tech, mainly boys, opted to use the tech and 
performed better.  Alternatively, a study in Mexico 
(Ramirez Mercado, 2006) demonstrated the opposite. 
In this study teachers observed that when a new 
EdT ech initiative was introduced, girls were more 
willing to ask questions than boys, as boys rarely 
ask for help, according to the study, because they do 
not want to be seen as unknowledgeable. Therefore, 
girls adapted more quickly and gained more from the 
introduction of tech due to their willingness to seek 
clarity and understanding.
In an emergency or displaced context these findings 
are extremely important. Boys and girls perform the 
same when not facing barriers to access, but barriers 
to access are both gendered and pervasive and are 
buried with economic and societal contexts.  As 
evidenced from the above, this has implications for 
both boys and girls. In an emergency, or any context, 58we have to make these barriers known by working 
closely with local populations before engaging in 
programmes that may exacerbate inequality in 
society. 
6.3.5 Wellbeing
Very little research has been conducted on the impact 
of technology use and the wellbeing of children in 
emergencies. This area is a particularly important 
concern in emergency and displaced settings, where 
child wellbeing is already at risk. Questions such as: is 
too much screen time detrimental to a child’s social 
development, if so, at what point? And, can engaging 
in too much screen time have negative impacts on 
a child’s physical and mental health, if so, at what 
point? Having an understanding of these concerns is 
important in emergency settings.  As children already 
face a large number of barriers to access quality 
educational institutions, if we try to substitute EdT ech 
at home for traditional education, what risks to 
wellbeing are children and families facing?
Spitzer (2014) highlights issues related to EdT ech and 
wellbeing, citing distraction and tech addiction as 
major concerns. Cardak (2013) similarly highlights 
the dangers of technology addiction, finding that 
university aged students who were identified as 
addicted to the internet had significantly lower levels 
of psychological wellbeing. However, causation is not 
established as the authors have not identified whether 
or not internet use causes lower levels of wellbeing or if internet use is a coping mechanism in itself. Either 
way, over consumption of the internet does not seem 
to have a positive impact on wellbeing. 
At the same time, tech initiatives can also be used 
to improve wellbeing amongst refugees. Dunn et al. 
(2012) have demonstrated that combining drama and 
technology can enhance both learning and wellbeing 
of refugee students who were resettled in Australia. 
Drama (as cited in Dunn et al. 2012) has been proven 
to help language students learn faster and combined 
with technology may help students to build resilience. 
Emert (2013) also showed through his study the use 
of drama and technology to enhance wellbeing. In 
this study 70 recently resettled refugee boys were 
engaged in a programme to use digital storytelling 
to develop literacy and language skills. Findings from 
this study showed that first, the programme built 
academic resilience, in that students were invested in 
the outcome and worked through frustrations. Second, 
the programme empowered the boys to share their 
experiences, as they found a medium they enjoyed. 
This opened doors to communication about culture 
and problems that they felt were previously closed. 
While these EdT ech endeavors provided a useful 
platform, they are again a tool in a larger picture, 
where facilitators and teachers were invested in 
outcomes of the students. More research is needed 
in both understanding how technology negatively 
impacts children’s wellbeing as well as how it can be 
Whisnu* would like to work on computers when his is older.    Whisnu, 12, can’t walk and has been a wheelchair-user 
since 2013. With Save the Children’s help, Whisnu goes to school where he has many friends and enjoys learning 
science. When he grows up, he’d like to be a computer expert, but he’s worried he won’t be able to.
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN591. The most obvious and glaring gap in research  
 is the lack of evaluations and impact studies  
 in emergency settings. Granted, RCTs and  
 quasi-experimental designs are extremely difficult  
 to implement in emergency settings, however, the  
 challenges of doing so are not insurmountable.  
 For example, many smart phone and tablet  
 applications can collect data remotely and this  
 can be used to inform EdT ech design. However,  
 much of the data currently collected is used to  
 monitor usage and does not seem to provide  
 evidence of learning outcomes. T ech providers  
 need to work more closely with practitioners to  
 ensure that key indicators are identified and  
 collected.
2. Although it is clear that the mere access to ICT  
 in schools or at home does not implicate learning  
 outcomes, more research is needed to understand  
 how and which technology is the most useful when  
 it comes to facilitating the learning process. 
3. There is limited research in emergency settings,  
 however this does not mean that we cannot  
 learn from research in other contexts (as we have  
 attempted to do in this review). It appears  
 that there is not a lack of evidence, but a lack of  
 application of the available evidence. While not all  
 of the research is applicable, much can at  
 least provide the foundations for planning  
 and implementation. Simply, if we take the time to  
 understand how children learn and take into  
 account what works in EdT ech generally, before  
 designing interventions, we are more likely to be  
 successful in emergency situations.
4. There are many assumptions about self-directed  
 learning when formal or non-formal learning  
 institutions are not available. Some tech companies  
 assume that children and families can direct  
 themselves through an online or virtual curriculum.  
 However, no evidence exists to show that this  
 type of learning has positive outcomes for children  
 or families. No evidence exists as to how such a  
 curriculum might be feasible and what skills (such  
 as time management and dedication) are needed  
 and/or how they might be obtained.  5. In this review of literature we uncovered very  
 limited research that engages with the views,  
 wants, and needs of children and families in  
 emergency settings. What this review has found  
 is that these actors’ opinions, attitudes towards  
 technology, and digital literacy levels are all  
 important to successful EdT ech usage. Building this  
 understanding should be the first step in  
 developing a clearer understanding of what  
 EdT ech is suitable in a given emergency. 
6. Findings from this study show that simply having  
 access to technology does not lead to improved  
 learning outcomes, research is needed to address  
 what types of technology are useful, how much  
 time should be spent on them, and what skills the  
 use of technology can generally provide.  
 Having this understanding can help practitioners  
 to incorporate guidance for families in these  
 settings on how to use tech to optimise children’s  
 learning, and not the opposite.
7. Scaffolding within EdT ech is possible. However, at  
 the moment the form of feedback, or support  
 does not readily promote higher-order thinking  
 (such as reflection, conceptual evaluation) in  
 learners. More evidence is needed as to how, in  
 emergency situations that are increasingly  
 protracted, EdT ech can be used to promote such  
 learning, which is crucial to developing skills  
 necessary to negotiate the ever-changing labour  
 markets young people find themselves entering.
8. Evidence is limited regarding the use of EdT ech  
 to increase learner’s motivation.  As is seen in  
 section 6.1.5 evidence does suggest that the use of  
 EdT ech can engage students. However, some  
 studies do show that this engagement may  
 diminish over time or may have less of an impact  
 for those students who have had more exposure  
 to EdT ech. This means we do not understand  
 how tech and engagement are connected,  
 therefore we cannot be certain about how  
 to maximise engagement with EdT ech. This is an  
 important question in emergency settings where  
 children face many distractions from learning such  
 as early marriage, increased household  
 responsibility, and engagement in the labour force.7. What are the major gaps in research  
in emergency and displaced settings?609. Regarding 21st century skills, a major gap in  
 knowledge concerns how to measure and  
 understand the acquisition of these skills, first.  
 Second, limited research has been conducted as to  
 how EdT ech can be used to acquire these skills.  
 Third, limited evidence shows how the acquisition  
 of 21st Century skills can help children to obtain  
 or enhance traditional skills and knowledge.  
 Caution should be exercised when claims are  
 made about the acquisition of 21st Century skills;  
 the ability to use laptops and tablets does not  
 equate to the development of such skills. More  
 research needs to be conducted to develop an  
 understanding around this concept. 
10.  More evidence is needed on the best ways in  
 which to blend formal, non-formal and informal  
 learning. In emergency settings this is an  
 important factor as regular school attendance  
 is often interrupted, but that does not mean that  
 learning stops. Research needs to consider the  
 best ways to use technology to ensure that   
 informal learning can be maximised and support  
 formal and non-formal education structures. This  
 is particularly important in emergency settings  
 where children and young adults in emergency  
 situations, who have yet to finish their education,  
 are often required to work in the informal sector  
 to assist their families. EdT ech could potentially  
 offer the chance to change the manner in which  
 these young adults interface with education yet,  
 there has been little research that addresses this. 11. The impacts of EdT ech on the wellbeing of  
 children needs to be further investigated. Sufficient  
 evidence is lacking to determine the risks of  
 EdT ech to children’s overall wellbeing and how  
 it can be used to encourage positive wellbeing  
 outcomes. In emergency settings, where wellbeing  
 is difficult to attain, this is of particular importance.
12. The most glaring gap in the literature includes  
 the disregard of the use of EdT ech by children with  
 disabilities. The literature fails to address a number  
 of aspects. First, the potential implications of the  
 use of EdT ech designed for the mainstream on  
 children with disabilities is ignored. EdT ech has  
 the potential to leave children with disabilities  
 further behind if done improperly. Second, impact  
 from particular programmes, geared towards  
 children with different abilities, were not discussed. 
13. Whilst active learning should absolutely the  
 standard, in many countries rote learning is still  
 standard practice. However, there is no evidence to  
 show how EdT ech works in these contexts where  
 rote learning. For example, can active learning  
 through EdT ech work when students and teachers  
 only know rote learning practices? And is there  
 a benefit to rote learning through EdT ech in these  
 contexts given the potentially low capacity of  
 teachers in some chronic settings? 
14. Research and evidence on costing are generally  
 missing from the literature. In addition,  
 any systematic cost benefit analysis of EdT ech  
 programming does not exist. 
Sali*, 14 years old, lives with her family of three brothers, one sister, her mother and unemployed father in a one room 
house in Dar Saad district in Aden. Sali has had many difficult experiences throughout the 20 months of war in Yemen.
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN611.  Research gaps/utilization of research: 
Although there is an overwhelming consensus of how 
EdT ech can contribute to learning and the facilitation 
of the learning process, many EdT ech initiatives do not 
take the evidence into consideration when designing 
programmes to be used in emergency and displaced 
settings.
2.  The provision of hardware alone is not 
sufficient to improve learning outcomes.  The 
mere access of ICT in schools or at home does not 
implicate learning outcomes.  A number of factors 
must be in place for learning outcomes to improve. 
3.  EdT ech is a tool that needs to be constructed 
with the principles of pedagogy in mind, such as 
active learning, engagement, and content that hooks. 
EdT ech should support cognition and not only present 
content.
4. EdT ech must be implemented in line with 
the local curriculum.  Neglecting alignment will 
mean that content may not be relevant for the child, 
but may also increase the workload for the teacher. 
EdT ech needs to be incorporated into a plan for 
learning that the child can track and will pull from 
skills and knowledge the child has previously attained. 
This is extremely important in an emergency setting, 
where learning is often disrupted, and children often 
have to step out of the school system and step back in 
at another time. 
5. EdT ech must be responsive/adapt to the 
learners’ level. Materials should be at the correct 
level for the child so that they are challenged, but can 
also progress. Content should allow children to learn 
through their mistakes.
6. Scaffolded, appropriate, and adaptive 
software can be extremely useful in classroom 
settings. It allows the teacher more time to focus 
on individuals who struggle. This is especially helpful 
in emergency settings where schools tend to be over 
crowded and where children may have fallen behind. 
EdT ech can indeed support teachers and free them 
up to engage in greater student-teacher interaction, 
which is important to improving learning outcomes.7. Examples must be relevant to the learners’ 
context.  If not, children will struggle to connect 
to the examples, and therefore will fail to learn the 
material. Contextually appropriate material means 
that children are more likely to engage.
8. Material that is contextually appropriate 
can be used by families and can help increase 
opportunities for social engagement. This is 
important in emergencies where family support is 
crucial for child wellbeing and can help a child to 
achieve improved learning outcomes. 
9. Child learners tend to be able to teach 
themselves how to use technology fairly 
quickly. Children, do not necessarily need extensive 
support in learning the technical aspects of simple 
EdT ech devices. In fact, if left to explore the devices at 
the outset they can collectively build an understanding 
in a child-centered manner.  Although, it does not 
mean that children could teach themselves the 
curriculum devised and delivered through the apps or 
the hardware. 
10.  Adult/teacher led scaffolding key to 
productive learner engagement with 
technology.  Adults/facilitators/teachers must be 
present to assist children through their work. The 
iterative, affective support that adults can provide 
is necessary to ensure as in-app scaffolding cannot 
‘differentiate a careless error from more serious 
misunderstanding’. Children need guidance, and 
indeed seek reassurance from adults just as they do 
in other learning environments, formal or informal. If 
this support, that spans a range of areas of learning is 
not provided, then it will affect the learning outcomes 
of the children using the technology, and even risk 
the development of poor habits and potentially lead 
to frustration and disengagement on the part of the 
learner. 
11. EdT ech must supplement and not substitute 
teaching if it is to be successful. The literature 
covered consistently demonstrates that for optimal 
results EdT ech should support teachers in the 
classroom and not attempt to substitute them. EdT ech 
could, if appropriately used, increase the opportunity 8. Summary of Findings62for ‘teacher-student communication and student-
student communication’. These interactions are 
fundamental to building ‘improved relationships that in 
turn help learning productivity.
12. How EdT ech is used matters more than 
what EdT ech is used.  Analysis from this review 
provides evidence that Edtech is an important tool to 
supplement and indeed potentially improve learning 
outcomes for those who engage with it. For this to 
be successful it is important attention is paid to how 
it is used, for example not simply to deliver content 
to learners. It can, if appropriately utilized, especially 
in emergency situations where class sizes are often 
increased, provide very valuable support that has 
the potential to facilitate teachers in being able to 
provide more support, and increase the chances of 
teacher-student interaction. T o do this, those who 
provide, or implement Edtech projects must focus on 
how it can help, and not replace the need for teaching 
staff. T eachers are fundamental to positive learning 
environments, they also hold opinions and beliefs that 
can positively influence and negatively influence the 
integration of Edtech into the classroom. 
13. We cannot change the learning 
environment just to utilise a tool. We must avoid 
the desire to reengineer how students interface with 
learning environments, just to suit a new educational 
tool. We must use the evidence of how this tool can 
improve current practice. This recommendation has 
learning for those in education in emergency context.  
14. T eachers’ opinions and perspectives matter 
when it comes to effective EdT ech. T eachers’ 
opinions of EdT ech and its relevance to the learner’s 
educational development is important. T eachers’ 
attitudes play a more important role in whether 
technology is effectively implemented over other 
barriers, such as teacher training or time. 
15. T eachers must be trained and engaged 
with regularly for EdT ech to be an effective 
tool in the classroom. EdT ech is a relatively new 
educational tool, as with all educational tools the 
teacher, or primary deliverer of content, needs to be 
comfortable using it, prior to using it with learners. 
If the quality of training is better and sustained, 
then teachers have more options of how to adapt 
their practice with EdT ech.  Again, it is not so much 
the provision of hardware that influences learning 
outcomes, it is how the teachers use that hardware  
that impacts on the learners. 16. Poor teacher training leads to poor 
results. If resources are stretched too thin, or the 
implementation is rushed, and teacher training is 
not engaged with readily, then the impact of the 
intervention on learning outcomes is diminished. Not 
only does the quality of this initial teacher training 
need to be of a high standard, it needs to be sustained. 
Continued teacher development positively correlates 
with successful EdT ech take up.
17. Parents’ perception of technology is 
important for learning. Parents/Primary Care-
givers are the most important actors in their children’s 
education and parents have to be supportive of 
EdT ech if it is to be used and used effectively. Taking an 
active approach to parental engagement can work to 
alleviate fears they may hold around technology, and 
indeed promote a positive attitude to the education 
their children are receiving at school. In addition, the 
introduction of EdT ech offers opportunities to increase 
education related conversations in a household, and 
promote intergenerational learning.
18. The history and context of the country and 
education systems will influence the usage 
of EdT ech for learning. What is evident is that 
there is a real need to consider the wider culture 
and education systems of a country, or community, 
before implementing EdT ech interventions. Should the 
wider cultural context of a country or community be 
engaged with in a proactive manner then it can go a 
long way to supporting the successful integration of 
EdT ech which can lead to sustainable improvements in 
learning outcomes. 
19. EdT ech can, but does not necessarily, 
represent the best value for money or 
sustainability. Educational technology can be 
expensive. In emergency situations when resources 
are limited and the infrastructure to support the 
technology is under strain, the sustainability and 
feasibility of an intervention has to be established, if 
long-term improvements in learning outcomes are 
the aim of the intervention. T echnology interventions 
can become a burden to the communities in which 
EdT ech is integrated if the long term considerations 
of software updates and maintenance are not 
considered. The issues that need to be considered 
regarding value for money include considering the 
appropriateness of the hardware, sustained training 
initiatives for teachers, adaptation costs for the 
learning environment, and capacity building, where 63needed, to ensure that broken equipment can be 
maintained.
20. Infrastructure is a major barrier to the 
successful utilization of EdT ech.  A common 
theme across the literature was the barrier of existing 
infrastructure in preventing the successful integration 
of EdT ech. Infrastructure will differ based on the 
region engaged, so too will equity of access within 
countries, There is a need to look beyond the claimed 
infrastructure, and policy framework of specific 
countries, and analyse for what the actual and current 
infrastructure is best suited. Otherwise, initiatives will 
lead to wastage and an opportunity cost. 21. EdT ech can be effectively used alongside 
accelerated learning programmes in order to 
help children to catch up and get back on track in 
their appropriate learning levels, but only if EdT ech 
programmes are aligned with the curriculum and 
work as a supplement to accelerated learning 
programmes. 
22. Boys and girls perform the same when 
not facing barriers to access, but barriers to 
access are both gendered and pervasive and are 
buried within economic and societal contexts. In an 
emergency, or any context, we have to build our own 
understanding of these divides by working closely with 
local populations before engaging in programmes that 
may exacerbate inequality in society. 
Samuel*, 15, at his school in Freetown, Sierra Leone. .At the peak of the Ebola epidemic, the health system collapsed and 
Samuel was unable to get the treatment he needed for an injury to his leg. During this period his condition worsened with 
infection and became life threatening. Meanwhile his mother and grandmother became infected by the Ebola virus and 
passed away. Save the Children referred Samuel to an emergency hospital where they were able to amputate his leg and 
save his life. 
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN64This rigorous review has synthesized and 
analysed the findings from 135 quality documents. 
These findings have allowed us to form a holistic 
picture regarding ‘what’ and ‘how’ EdT ech works 
best in both emergency and non-emergency 
situations. What is clear from our findings and 
analysis is that EdT ech is not a silver bullet, and, 
in and of itself, cannot solve the global education 
crisis. We know that children still need assistance 
and guidance from facilitators, teachers, and 
parents, and that technology is, in its current 
state, not sufficiently advanced to bypass this 
support. We also know that children want and 
need to learn from one another and can learn 
more in groups than in 1:1 device settings.  
We have seen that the best and most useful EdT ech 
programmes are well thought out and carefully 
planned and integrated. For example, effective 
programmes are well aligned with the curricula, 
have teacher and parent buy-in, are adaptive to the 
learner’s level, and are contextually appropriate. We 
have also compiled evidence that clearly shows that 
EdT ech, unless implemented with much forethought 
and planning, can often be costly and wasteful. 
This evidence therefore leads to many more questions, 
but provides us some guidance in which to think 
ethically about how and what EdT ech can be used to 
help children learn. The evidence has shown that we 
have to prioritise children and families’ needs first. We 
must ensure that children have opportunities to learn, 
and only then, ask how EdT ech can fit into this picture. 
Findings from this report show that it should never 
be the other way around; the needs of the child must 
always drive the use of EdT ech. 
T o ensure this is the case we need to truly understand 
an emergency setting and the context. We have to ask 
some very basic questions to start:Needs and values of the families
In each emergency setting we need to assess and 
understand what families and children want and need. 
We have to understand the families’ expectations of 
learning and how families see and are willing to use 
technology in the home. For example:
1. Do families have devices at home?
2. Would families see the value in devices for at  
 home learning (or if they are given devices, would  
 they be inclined to sell them to meet basic needs?)
3. Do families prefer their children go to school and  
 how do they see technology as part of that  
 process?
Emergency setting
We need to understand the type of emergency 
before us, this will help to determine if, how and what 
technology might be the most useful. For example, 
short-term disruptions may only require that children 
keep up with skills and knowledge so they do not fall 
behind. 
1. Is the disruption short term?
 a. What skills do children need to reinforce to  
  ensure they are not left behind?
2. Is disruption long-term?
 a. Do children have access to formal or non- 
  formal education?
  i.  If so, how can EdT ech help children be get  
   caught up and learn more efficiently at  
   school and at home. 
  ii. If not, why. 
1. Does the government restrict access for the  
 displaced and is it possible to use the integration  
 of technology in schools as a way to leverage  
 access?
2. If it is unsafe to travel to school, what can children  
 use at home to facilitate learning until a longer  
 term solution is found?9. How can we ethically implement  
EdTech in emergencies?: Some  
Guiding Questions65Learning needs of the child
Clearly we have to understand what the child has 
been through, where in their learning journey were 
they disrupted, for how long has their learning been 
disrupted and what do they need to learn to stay the 
path?
1. What is the age of the child? What curricula were  
 they learning from and how can they move  
 forward in their current situation?
2. What is contextually appropriate for the child,  
 depending on their age and background?
3. How can families be engaged?
Infrastructure
The type of infrastructure that is available will matter. 
We have to ask ourselves:
1. Is there constant electricity? 
 a. Do devices need to be charged and is charging  
  available?
2. Are there classrooms and safe spaces?
3. Are teachers available to help scaffold? If not, can  
 facilitators be trained?
4. Is there internet or data? Does the EdT ech depend  
 on this?
5. What is practically available?
Equity of Access
We also have to ask ourselves about accessibility and 
equality: 
1. Will the integration of EdT ech leave some children  
 behind, such as girls and children with disabilities?
2. What are the barriers that are in place that  
 may affect some children’s access to EdT ech –  
 exacerbating pre-existing divides? And how do we  
 circumnavigate, or even dismantle, these barriers?Cost and Feasibility
Once we are able assess this information, we can ask 
if technology can enhance the learning environment, 
and if so, what type of technology would be useful, 
when is the appropriate time to integrate it, and is it 
worth the cost? 
1. Is the infrastructure in place to support the  
 technology, and are the time, money, and skills  
 available to ensure the sustainability and cost  
 effectiveness of the programme?
2. Is time allocated to training teachers and families  
 and is there on-going support?
3. What is the cost, and are there more cost effective  
 alternatives out there that will support education  
 in the same manner?
4. What are the pros and cons of each device? (See  
 Appendix 4 for an overview)
Overall, the above list of questions is not exhaustive, 
but can help us to understand what factors are 
important if and when EdT ech is implemented in an 
emergency setting. Findings from this report show that 
implementing EdT ech efficiently and effectively requires 
sufficient time and consideration and should not be 
seen as a simple solution to an extremely complex 
problem.  
Alister*, reviews the sms message on his mobile phone 
confirming a cash transfer has been made to his family’s 
account in the Binga district of Zimbabwe.
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDREN66Abdul Jabbar, A. I., & Felicia, P . (2015). Gameplay Engagement 
and Learning in Game-Based Learning: A Systematic Review. 
Review of Educational Research, 85(4), 740–779. 
Aderinoye, R. (2008). Literacy and communication 
technologies: Distance education strategies for literacy 
delivery. International Review of Education, 54(5–6), 605–626. 
Aesaert, K., & van Braak, J. (2015). Gender and 
socioeconomic related differences in performance based 
ICT competences. Computers & Education, 84(C), 8–25. 
Agarkar, S. (2016). Role of Open Educational Resources to 
Support School Science Education in India. In M.-H. Chiu 
(Ed.), Science Education Research and Practice in Asia  (pp. 
409–441). Springer. 
Ale, K., Loh, Y.  A. C., & Chib, A. (2017). Contextualized-
OLPC education project in rural India: measuring learning 
impact and mediation of computer self-efficacy. Educational 
Technology Research and Development, 65(3), 1–26.
Ames, M. G., & Rosner, D. K. (2014). From drills to laptops : 
designing modern childhood imaginaries. I nformation, 
Communication & Society, 17(3), 357–370. 
Ananiadou, K. & Claro, M. (2009). 21st Century Skills and 
Competencies For New Millenium Learners in OECD 
Countries, OECD, Education Working Paper no.41. OECD.
Arguel, A., Lockyer, L., Lipp, O. V., Lodge, J. M., & Kennedy, 
G. (2017). Inside Out: Detecting Learners Confusion to 
Improve Interactive Digital Learning Environments. Journal 
of Educational Computing Research,  55(4), 526–551.
Arndt, P .  A. (2016). Computer usage for learning how to 
read and write in primary school. Trends in Neuroscience and 
Education, 5(3), 90–98.
Ausubel, D. P . (1968) Educational psychology, A cognitive 
view. New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. 
Bando, R., Gallego, F ., Gertler, P ., & Romero, D. (2016). Books 
or Laptops? The Cost-Effectiveness of Shifting from Printed to 
Digital Delivery of Educational Content. Working Paper
Bandura, A. (1994). Self-efficacy. In V. S. Ramachaudran (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of human behavior New Y ork: Academic Press.
(Reprinted in H. Friedman [Ed.], Encyclopedia of mental 
health. San Diego: Academic Press. Vol. 4, 71-81.
Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duflo, E., & Linden, L. (2007). 
Remedying Education: Evidence from T wo Randomized 
Experiments in India. Quarterly Journal of Economics,  
(August), 1235–1264. 
Barrera-Osorio, F ., & Linden, L. L. (2009). The Use and Misuse 
of Computers in Education: Evidence from a Randomized 
Controlled Trial of a Language Arts Program. Policy Research 
Working Paper Series – The World Bank, (March).
Beers, S. R., & De Bellis, M. D. (2002). Neuropsychological 
function in children with maltreatment-related 
posttraumatic stress disorder. The American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 159(3), 483–486. Belland, B., (2014) Scaffolding: Definition, Current Debates, 
and Future Directions.  In: Spector, J, M. Merill, M, D., Elen, 
J., Bishop, M., (eds) Handbook of Research on Educational 
Communications and Technology (4th edition), New Y ork, 
Springer.
Blackwell, C. K., Lauricella, A. R., Wartella, E., Robb, M., & 
Schomburg, R. (2013).  Adoption and use of technology 
in early education. The interplay of extrinsic barriers and 
teacher attitudes. Computer and Education, 69, 310-319. 
Blikstad-balas, M., & Davies, C. (2017). Oxford Review of 
Education Assessing the educational value of one-to-one 
devices : have we been asking the right questions? Oxford 
Review of Education, 4985(May), 1–21. 
Bloom, B., Englehart, M. Furst, E. Hill, W., Krathwohl, D. (1956) 
Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classification of 
educational goals. Handbook 1: Cognitive Domain. New 
Y ork, T oronto: Longmans, Green. 
Buckner, E., & Kim, P . (2012). Mobile innovations, executive 
functions, and educational developments in conflict zones: a 
case study from Palestine. Educational T echnology Research 
and Development, 60(1), 175–192. 
Çardak, M. (2013). Psychological well-being and Internet 
addiction among university students. TOJET: The Turkish Online 
Journal of Educational Technology, 12(3), 134–141. 
Carlson, S., (2013). Using technology to deliver educational 
services to children and youth in environments affected by 
crisis and/or conflict. USAID
Cayton-Hodges, G.  A., Feng, G., & Pan, X. (2015). Tablet-
Based Math Assessment:  What Can We Learn from Math 
Apps?  International Forum of Educational Technology Journal of 
Educational Technology & Society, 18(2), 3–20. 
Chang, A., Tilahun, L., & Breazeal, C. (2014). Visualisations 
of Data from the Literacy Tablet Reading Project in Rural 
Ethiopia. Proceedings of the EVA London 2014 on Electronic 
Visualisation and the Arts, 142–149. 
Chiong, C., & Shuler, C. (2010). Learning: Is there an app for 
that? Investigations of young children’s usage and learning 
with mobile devices and apps. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center 
at Sesame Workshop.  
Chukwuere E. Joshua, Mavetera Nehemiah, and M. E. 
(2015).  A Conceptual Culture-Oriented e-Learning System 
Development Framework (e-LSDF): A Case of Higher 
Education Institutions in South Africa. International Journal of 
Trade, Economics and Finance, 6(5). 
Crea, T. M. (2016). Refugee higher education: Contextual 
challenges and implications for program design, delivery, 
and accompaniment. International Journal of Educational 
Development, 46, 12–22.
Cristia, J., Ibarrarán, P ., Santiago, C., Santiago, A., & Severin, E. 
(2012). T echnology and Child Development : Evidence from 
the One Laptop per Child Program. IZA Discussion Paper No. 
6401. References67Cronje, J. (2008). Lessons from Africa. In H. H.  Adelsberger, 
Kinshuk, J. M. Pawlowski, & D. G. Sampson (Eds.), Handbook 
on Information Technologies for Education and Training, Berlin 
Heidelberg, Berlin pp. 423–438. 
Cummings, C., & O’Neil, T. (2015) Do digital information 
and communications technologies increase the voice and 
influence of women and girls? A Rapid Review of the evidence  
Overseas Development Institute.
Dave, R. (1967). Psychomotor domain. Berlin: International 
Conference of Educational T esting.
Dahya, N. (2016). Education in Conflict and Crisis : How 
Can T echnology Make a Difference? A Landscape Review. 
INEE.
De Melo, G., Machado, A., & Miranda, A. (2014). The Impact 
of a One Laptop per Child Program on Learning: Evidence 
from Uruguay, IZA Discussion Papers. 
Dunn, J., Bundy, P ., & Woodrow, N. (2012). Combining 
drama pedagogy with digital technologies to support the 
language learning needs of newly arrived refugee children: 
a classroom case study. Research in Drama Education: The 
Journal of Applied Theatre and Performance, 17 (4), 477–499. 
Elbert, T., Schauer, M., Schauer, E., Huschka, B., Hirth, M., & 
Neuner, F . (2009). Trauma-related impairment in children-A 
survey in Sri Lankan provinces affected by armed conflict. 
Child Abuse and Neglect, 33 (4), 238–246. 
Fisher, K. E., Bishop, A. P ., Magassa, L., & Fawcett, P . (2014).  
Action!: Codesigning Interactive T echnology with Immigrant 
T eens. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Interaction 
Design and Children  pp. 345–348.
Fisher, K. E., Yefimova, K., & Bishop, A. P . (2016).  Adapting 
Design Thinking and Cultural Probes to the Experiences 
of Immigrant Y outh: Uncovering the Roles of Visual Media 
and Music in ICT Wayfaring. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems  pp. 859–871.
Flewitt, R., Messer, D., & Kucirkova, N. (2015). New directions 
for early literacy in a digital age : The iPad. Journal of Early 
Childhood Literacy, 15(3), 289–310. 
Forgasz, H. J., Vale, C., & Ursini, S. (2010). T echnology for 
Mathematics Education: Equity, Access and Agency. In C. Hoyles 
& J.-B. Lagrange (Eds.), Mathematics Education and Technology-
Rethinking the Terrain: The 17th ICMI Study  (pp. 385–403). 
Boston, MA: Springer US. 
Garcia, E., Elbeltagi, I. M., Dungay, K., & Hardaker, G. (2015). 
Student use of Facebook for informal learning and peer 
support. The International Journal of Information and Learning 
Technology, 32 (5), 286–299.
Genlott, A.  A., & Grönlund, Å. (2016). Closing the gaps 
– Improving literacy and mathematics by ict-enhanced 
collaboration. Computers and Education, 99, 68–80. 
Gómez, F ., Nussbaum, M., Weitz, J. F ., Lopez, X., Mena, J., & 
T orres, A. (2013). Co-located single display collaborative 
learning for early childhood education. International Journal 
of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 8 (2), 225–244. Gulati, S. (2008). T echnology-enhanced learning in 
developing nations: A review. International Review of Research 
in Open and Distance Learning, 9 (1), 1–16. 
Hall, R. (2007) Vygotsky Goes Online: Learning Design from 
a Socio-cultural Perspective, Learning and Socio-cultural theory: 
Exploring Modern Vygotskian Perspectives International Workshop, 
1 (1), p.94-107.
Hamm, S. Drysdale, J. Moore, D. (2013). Towards a Mobile 
Learning Pedagogy.  In Hamm, S. T owards a Mobile Learning 
Pedagogy and Perspectives on T eaching and Learning, IGI 
Global, 1-19.
Hashemi, M., Azizinezhad, M., Najafi, V., & Nesari, A. J. (2011). 
What is mobile learning? Challenges and capabilities. In 
Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 30, pp. 2477–
2481.
Haßler, B., Major, L., & Hennessy, S. (2016). Tablet use in 
schools: A critical review of the evidence for learning 
outcomes. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 32 (2), 
139–156. 
Hennessy, S., Onguko, B., Harrison, D., Kiforo, E., Namalefe, 
S., & Naseem, A. (2010). Developing the Use of Information 
and Communication T echnology to Enhance T eaching and 
Learning in East African Schools: Review of the Literature.  
Africa, 2 (May), 121. 
Higgins, S., Xiao, Z., & Katsipataki, M. (2012). The Impact 
of Digital T echnology on Learning : A Summary for the 
Education Endowment Foundation Full Report. Education 
Endowment Foundation.
Hilbert, M. (2011). Digital gender divide or technologically 
empowered women in developing countries? A typical 
case of lies, damned lies, and statistics. Women’s Studies 
International Forum, 34 (6), 479–489. 
Hirsh-Pasek, K., Zosh, J. M., Golinkoff, R. M., Gray, J. H., Robb, 
M. B., & Kaufman, J. (2015). Putting Education in “Educational” 
Apps. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, Vol. 16 (1).  
3 – 34.
Hirshleifer, S. R. (2016). Incentives for Effort or Outputs ?  
A Field Experiment to Improve Student Performance What 
incentive contracts are most effective at motivating effort in 
order to improve outcomes ? 1-45.
Hosman, L. (2010). Policies, Partnerships, and Pragmatism: 
Lessons from an ICT -in-Education Project in Rural Uganda. 
Information Technologies & International Development, 6 (1), 
48–64.
Hsin, C. T., Li, M. C., & Tsai, C. C. (2014). The Influence of 
Y oung Children’s Use of T echnology on Their Learning:  A 
Review. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 17 (4), 
85–99. 
Hubber, P . J., Outhwaite, L.  A., Chigeda, A., McGrath, S., 
Hodgen, J., & Pitchford, N. J. (2016). Should touch screen 
tablets be used to improve educational outcomes in 
primary school children in developing countries? Frontiers in 
Psychology, 7 (JUN), 1–4. 
Islam, M. S., & Grönlund. (2016).  An international literature 
review of 1:1 computing in schools. Journal of Educational 
Change, 17 (2), 191–222.68Jalbout, M. (2015). Opportunities for Accelerating Progress 
on Education for Syrian Children and Y outh in Jordan.  
Their world. 
Jantjies, M., & Joy, M. (2015). Mobile Enhanced Learning 
in a South African Context. Source: Journal of Educational 
Technology & Society Educational Technology & Society, 18 (181), 
308–320. 
Keengwe, J., & Bhargava, M. (2013). Mobile learning and 
integration of mobile technologies in education. Education 
and Information Technologies, 19 (4), 737–746. 
Khaddage, F ., Müller, W., & Flintoff, K. (2016).  Advancing 
Mobile Learning in Formal And Informal Settings via 
Mobile App T echnology:  Where to From Here, and How? 
Educational Technology & Society, 19 (3), 16–26. 
Kim, P . H. (2009).  Action research approach on mobile 
learning design for the underserved. Educational Technology 
Research and Development, 57 (3), 415–435.
Kim, P ., Buckner, E., Kim, H., Makany, T., Taleja, N., & Parikh, 
V. (2012).  A comparative analysis of a game-based mobile 
learning model in low-socioeconomic communities of 
India. International Journal of Educational Development, 32 (2), 
329–340. 
Kim, P ., Hagashi, T., Carillo, L., Gonzales, I., Makany, T., Lee, B., 
& Grate, A. (2011). Socioeconomic strata, mobile technology, 
and education:  A comparative analysis. Educational 
T echnology Research and Development, 59(4), 465–486. 
Kim, P ., Miranda, T., & Olaciregui, C. (2008). Pocket School: 
Exploring mobile technology as a sustainable literacy 
education option for underserved indigenous children in 
Latin America. International Journal of Educational Development, 
28(4), 435–445. 
Kleine, D., Hollow, D., & Poveda, S. (2013). Children, ICT and 
Development Capturing the potential, meeting the challenges.
Kolodziejczyk, I. (2015). Mixed methods for study of gender 
issues in access, application, and attitudes toward ICT in 
higher education institutions in Papua New Guinea. SAGE 
Open, 5 (2), 1–15. 
Koops, M. C., Verheul, I., Tiesma, R., de Boer, C.-W., & 
Koeweiden, R. T. (2016). Learning Differences Between 3D 
vs. 2D Entertainment and Educational Games. Simulation & 
Gaming, 47 (2), 159–178. 
Koutromanos, G., Sofos, A., & Avraamidou, L. (2015). The use 
of augmented reality games in education: a review of the 
literature. Educational Media International, 52 (4), 253–271. 
Kumar, A., Reddy, P ., T ewari, A., Agrawal, R., & Kam, M. 
(2012). Improving literacy in developing countries using 
speech recognition-supported games on mobile devices. 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Annual Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems – CHI ’12, (April), 1149 – 1158
Kwapong, O.  A. T. F . (2009).  A comparison of ICT knowledge 
and usage among female distance learners in endowed and 
deprived communities of a developing country. E-Learning, 
6(2), 164–174.
Lewis, K., & Thacker, S. (2016). ICT and the Education of 
Refugees: A Stocktaking of Innovative Approaches in the 
MENA Region: Lessons of Experience and Guiding Principles.  World Bank Education T echnology & Innovation: SABER-ICT 
Technical Paper Series; No. 17 World Bank, Washington, DC.
Linden, L. L. (2008). Complement or Substitute ? The Effect 
of T echnology on Student Achievement in India. JPAL Working 
Paper, Columbia University , June 3, 2008.
McManis, L., & Gunnewig, S. (2012). Finding the education 
in educational technology with early learners. YC Young 
Children, 67 (3), 14–24. 
Melo, G. De, Machado, A., & Miranda, A. (2014). Working 
Papers The Impact of a One Laptop per Child Program 
on Learning : Evidence from Uruguay October 2014 The 
Impact of a One Lap to per Child Program on Learning : 
Evidence from Uruguay, Germany Discussion Paper No. 
8489. 
Menashy, F ., & Zakharia, Z. (2017). Investing in the Crisis: Private 
participation in the education of Syrian refugees. Education 
International. 
Morpeth, R., Creed, C., Cullen, J., Page, E., Raynor, J., Jabeen, 
N., Crofts, K. (2009). Open and Distance Learning for Basic 
Education in South Asia: Its potential for hard-to-reach children 
and children in conflict and disaster areas.  
UNICEF , Paris
Mouza, C., & Cavalier, A. (2013). Emerging T echnologies for 
the Classroom, The Role of One-to-One Computing in the 
Education of at-Risk High-School Students p.145-159.
Muralidharan, K., Singh, A., Ganimian, A. J., Banerjee, A., 
Bergman, P ., Bharadwaj, P ., Walters, C. (2017). Nber Working 
Paper Series Distributing Education? Experimental Evidence 
on T echnology-Aided Instruction in India. Experimental 
Evidence on T echnology-Aided Instruction in India.  
Working Paper. 
Murphy, P . (1996) Defining Pedagogy, in: Murphy, P . F ., 
& Gipps, C.V., Inequity in the Classroom: Towards Effective 
Pedagogy for Girls and Boys, UNESCO.
Nedungadi, P ., Jayakumar, A., & Raman, R. (2014). Low cost 
tablet enhanced pedagogy for early grade reading: Indian 
context. Proceedings of the IEEE Region 10 Humanitarian 
Technology Conference 2014, R10 HTC 2014, 2015–Janua, 
35–39.
Neumann, M. M. (2016). Y oung children’s use of touch screen 
tablets for writing and reading at home: Relationships with 
emergent literacy. Computers and Education, 97 , 61–68. 
Neumann, M. M., & Neumann, D. L. (2013). T ouch Screen 
Tablets and Emergent Literacy. Early Childhood Education 
Journal, 42 (4), 231–239.
Northropp, L., & Killeen, E. (2013).  A Framework for Using 
Ipads to Build Early Literacy Skills, Source: The Reading 
Teacher, 66 (7), 531–537. 
Passey, D., Laferrière, T., Ahmad, Y.-A., Bhowmik, M., Gross, D., 
Price, J., Shonfeld, M. (2016). Educational Digital T echnologies 
in Developing Countries Challenge Third Party Providers, 
19(3), 121–133. 
Paterson, A. (2007). Costs of information and 
communication technology in developing country school 
systems: The experience of Botswana, Namibia and 
Seychelles. International Journal of Education and Development 69Using Information and Communication Technology, 3 (4), 89–101.
Perry, K. H., & Moses, A. M. (2011). T elevision, language, and 
literacy practices in Sudanese refugee families: “I learned 
how to spell English on Channel 18.” Research in the Teaching 
of English, 45 (3), 278–307.
Petko, D., Cantieni, A., & Prasse, D. (2017). Perceived Quality 
of Educational T echnology Matters. Journal of Educational 
Computing Research, 54 (8), 1070–1091. 
Piper, B., Jepkemei, E., Kwayumba, D., & Kibukho, K. (2015). 
Kenya’s ICT Policy in Practice : The Effectiveness of Tablets 
and E-readers in Improving Student Outcomes. Forum for 
International Research in Education, 2 (1), 3–18.
Power, T; Mathew, R and Siddique, A (2015). Changes in 
teaching and learning: what counts, who to, and how is 
it counted? In: UKFIET 2015 Conference Papers, 13th 
International Conference on Education & Development. 
UKFIET: The Education & Development Forum. 
Pruet, P ., Ang, C. S., & Farzin, D. (2015). Understanding 
tablet computer usage among primary school students in 
underdeveloped areas: Students’ technology experience, 
learning styles and attitudes. Computers in Human Behavior, 
pp. 1131–1144. 
Punter, R.  A., Meelissen, M. R., & Glas, C.  A. (2016). 
Gender differences in computer and information literacy: 
An exploration of the performances of girls and boys 
in ICILS 2013. European Educational Research Journal, 1, 
147490411667246. 
Qablan, A. M., Abuloum, A., & Al-Ruz, J.  A. (2009). Effective 
Integration of ICT in Jordanian Schools: An Analysis of 
Pedagogical and Contextual Impediments in the Science 
Classroom.  Journal of Science Education and Technology, 18 (3), 
291–300.
Raji, M., & Zualkernan, I. (2016).  A Decision T ool for 
Selecting a Sustainable Learning T echnology Intervention. 
Journal of Educational Technology & Society Educational 
Technology & Society, 19 (193), 306–320. 
Restyandito, Chan, A. H. S., & Lestariningsih, F . E. (2013).  A 
Review on the Use of T echnology to Develop Literacy. 
International Journal of Information and Education Technology, 
3(6), 611–614. 
Sam, S. (2015). Exploring mobile internet use among 
marginalized young people in post-conflict Sierra Leone. 
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries. 
1-20.
Samuelson, K. W., Krueger, C. E., Burnett, C., & Wilson, C. K. 
(2010). Neuropsychological Functioning in Children with 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Child Neuropsychology, 16 (2), 
119–133. 
Shahadat, M., Khan, H., Hasan, M., Kum, C., & Prof, C. 
(2012). Barriers to the introduction of ICT into Education 
in Developing Countries: The Example of Bangladesh. 
International Journal of Instruction, 5 (2), 1694-609. 
Simpson, E. J. (1972). The Classification of Educational 
Objective in the Psychomotor Domain. Washington, DC: 
Gryphon House.Spitzer, M. (2014). Information technology in education: Risks 
and side effects. Trends in Neuroscience and Education, 3 (3–4), 
81–85. 
Steffens, K. (2014). ICT use and achievement in three 
European Countries: What does PISA tell us? European 
Educational Research Journal, 13 (5), 553–562. 
Sultana, R. (2006). Education in Conflict Situations: 
Palestinian Chidlren and Distance Education in Hebron. 
Mediterranean Journal of Educational …, 11 (1), 49–81. 
Tamim, R. M., Bernard, R. M., Borokhovski, E., Abrami, P . C., 
& Schmid, R. F . (2011). What Forty Years of Research Says 
About the Impact of T echnology on Learning: A Second-
Order Meta-Analysis and Validation Study. Review of 
Educational Research, 81 (1), 4–28. 
Tamim, R. M., Borokhovski, E., Pickup, D., Bernard, R. M., & El 
Saadi, L. (2015). Tablets for Teaching and Learning: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analysis. 
Tauson, M. (2016). Seeking Asylum in Bangkok, Thailand: 
Surviving, Coping, and the Wellbeing Strategies of Palestinian-
Syrian Refugees. University of Sussex, Brighton.
Tay, L. Y., Lim, C. P ., & Lim, S. K. (2015). Differences in ICT 
Usage Across Subject Areas. Journal of Educational  
Computing Research, 53 (1), 75–94. 
UNESCO and UNESCO Institute of for Statistics and group 
Talal Abu-Ghazaleh. (2013). ICT in education in five Arab 
countries Comparative analysis of the integration of ICT and 
e-Readiness in Schools in Egypt, Jordan, Oman, Palestine, Qatar. 
UNESCO (2017) UNESCO Global Education Monitoring 
Report.  Accountability in Education: Meeting our Commitments. 
UNESCO Publishing.
USAID, Dubad, H. I., Somali, T., Radio, I., Program, I., & 
Development, I. (2012). Somali Interactive Radio Instruction 
Program. USAID.
Vadachalam, N., & Chimbo, B. (2017). Using Information 
and Communication T echnologies to teach and learn 
mathematics in South African schools:  A snapshot view of 
its impact.  Africa Education Review, 6627 (June), 1–23. 
Valiente, O. (2010). “1-1 in Education: Current Practice, 
International Comparative Research Evidence and Policy 
Implications”, OECD Education Working Papers,  No.44,  
OECD Publishing. 
Valk, J.-H., Rashid, A. T., & Elder, L. (2010). Using mobile 
phones to improve educational outcomes: An analysis of 
evidence from Asia. The International Review of Research in 
Open and Distributed Learning, 11 (1), 117–140. 
Vassilopoulou, A., & Mavrikaki, E. (2016). Can ICT in biology 
courses improve AD/HD students’ achievement? Improving 
Schools, 19 (3), 246–257. 
Verenikina, I., Kervin, L., Rivera, M. C., & Lidbetter, A. (2016). 
Digital play: Exploring young children’s perspectives on 
applications designed for preschoolers. Global Studies of 
Childhood, 6 (4), 388–399.70Vygotsky, L. (1978) Interaction between learning and 
development. In Gauvain & Coles (Eds.) Reading on the 
Development of Children. New Y ork: Scientific American 
Books. Pp.34-40. 
Wagner, D. (2014). Mobiles for Reading: A Landscape 
Research Review. USAID.
Wagner, D.  A., Castillo, N. M., Murphy, K. M., Crofton, M., 
& Zahra, F . T. (2014). Mobiles for literacy in developing 
countries: An effectiveness framework. Prospects, 44(1), 
119–132. 
Warschauer, M., & Ames, M. (2010). Can One Laptop Per 
Child Save the World’s Poor? Journal of International Affairs, 
64(1), 33–51. 
Warschauer, M., Zheng, B., Niiya, M., Cotten, S., & Farkas, 
G. (2014). Balancing the One-T o-One Equation: Equity 
and Access in Three Laptop Programs. Equity & Excellence in 
Education, 47 (1), 46–62. 
Washington, K., & Rowell, J. (2013). Syrian Refugees 
in Urban Jordan, Baseline Assessment of Community-
identified Vulnerabilities among Syrian refugees living in 
Irbid, Madaba, Mufraq, and Zarqa. Rapid Participatory 
Community Assessment, Care Jordan. 
Webb, M., & Cox, M. (2004).  A review of pedagogy related 
to information and communications technology. Technology, 
Pedagogy and Education, 13 (3), 235–286. 
West, M., & Chew, H. E. (2014). in the Mobile Era. United 
Nations Educational. 
West, M. (2010) Innovate to Educate: System [Re]Design 
for Personalized learning – A Report from the 2010 
Symposium, In collaboration with ASCD and the Council of 
Chief State Schools, Officers, Washington, DC. 
Wolf, M., Gottwald, S., Breazeal, C., Galyean, T., & Morris, R. 
(2016). “I Hold Y our Foot:” Lessons from the Reading Brain 
for Addressing the Challenge of Global Literacy Maryanne. 
In Children and Sustainable Development  (pp. 225–238). 
Wolf, Maryanne; Gottwald, Stephanie; Galyean, Tinsley; 
Morris, R. (2014). Global Literacy and Socially Excluded 
Peoples. In Proceedings of the Pontifical Academy of Social 
Sciences, Meeting on the Socially Excluded Peoples  (pp. 1–19). 
Vatican.
Xu, Y., Maitland, C., & T omaszewski, B. (2015). Promoting 
participatory community building in refugee camps with 
mapping technology. Proceedings of the Seventh International 
Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and 
Development – ICTD ’15, 1–4. 
Yang, Y., Zhang, L., Zeng, J., Pang, X., Lai, F ., & Rozelle, S. 
(2013). Computers and the academic performance of 
elementary school-aged girls in China’s poor communities. 
Computers and Education, 60 (1), 335–346. 
Yasik, A. E., Saigh, P .  A., Oberfield, R.  A., & Halamandaris, 
P . V. (2007). Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Memory and 
Learning Performance in Children and Adolescents. 
Biological Psychiatry, 61 (3), 382–388. Zelezny-Green, R. (2014). She called, she Googled, she knew: 
girls’ secondary education, interrupted school attendance, 
and educational use of mobile phones in Nairobi. Gender & 
Development, 22 (1), 63–74. 
Zheng, B., Warschauer, M., Lin, C.-H., & Chang, C. (2016). 
Learning in One-to-One Laptop Environments: A Meta-
Analysis and Research Synthesis. Review of Educational 
Research, 86 (4), 1052–1084. 
Zualkernan, I.  A. (2016). Personalized Learning for the 
Developing World. In B. Gros, Kinshuk, & M. Maina (Eds.), 
The Future of Ubiquitous Learning: Learning Designs for 
Emerging Pedagogies (pp. 241–258). Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 71Appendices 
APPENDIX 1: RESEARCH STRINGS:
EMERGENCIES AND CRISIS EDUCATION ICT
radio
television
laptop
tablet
device
Mobile phone
cellular phone
software
hardware
technology
EdT ech
EdT ech
MOOCS
Online
internet
digital
Social media
ICT
Gaming
EReader
elearning
connectivity
Smart phone
SMS
Multi-media
Applications
Apps
Virtual learning environments
Mobile learning
Digital technology
Virtual realityconflict 
war 
natural disaster 
violence 
post conflict 
post-conflict 
emergency
humanitarian 
disaster 
refugee 
internally displaced 
violence
fragility 
conflict affected 
conflict-affected 
terrorism 
attacks 
armed conflict 
Flood(ing)
crisis
asylum
displaced
relief
Earthquake
hurricane
drought
tsunami
cyclone
famine
landslide
pandemic
outbreak
gangseducation
school 
nonformal education
learning centre (center)
vocational 
training 
early childhood 
skills
Curriculum
classroom 
teacher 
youth 
adolescent 
primary education 
secondary education 
teenager
child friendly space 
child-friendly space 
safe space
Informal education
learning
psycho-social
psycho social
Emotional learning
socioemotional
social-emotional
socio-emotional
reading
teaching
wellbeing72APPENDIX 2:  ACADEMIC DATABASES AND JOURNALS SEARCHED:
APPENDIX 3: GREY LITERATURE SEARCH:Database SearchedDatabase Searched
Springerlink
ProQuest
ERIC
Sage Journals
JSTOR
Google ScholarSelected Journals
Journal of Refugee Studies 
Refugee Survey Quarterly 
Migration Studies
Journal of Refugee Law
Information T echnology and International Development
Title Website/Database Search words
(advanced search) ICT and  
Education
ICT, Education
Conflict, Education, T echnology
Education, ICT, Conflict
War, T echnology, Education
EDtech, youth
ICT, EducationChildren, ICT and development : 
capturing the potential, meeting 
the challenges
Low-cost devices in educational 
systems: The use of the “XO-
Laptop” in the Ethiopian 
Educational System 
Education in Conflict and 
Crisis:  How Can T echnology 
Make a Difference? 
Country ICT Survey for  
Sri Lanka
Education in Situations  
of Emergency and Crisis: 
Challenges for the New 
Century 
Do digital information and 
communications technologies 
increase the voice and influence 
of women and girls? 
ICT and the Education of 
Refugees: 
A Stocktaking of Innovative 
Approaches in the MENA 
Region BLDS
GIZ
ELDIS
World BankTitle Website/Database Search words
ICT, Education, War
Refugee, Education, Y outh,  
T echnology
Learning, IDPs, T echnology
Learning, IDPs, T echnology
School, youth, radio
Conflict, school
Education, ICT, Y outh
ICT refugee
“ICT” and “refugee” and  
“education”
“ICT” and “refugee” and  
“education”
“ICT” and “refugee” and  
 “education”
Evaluation, refugee, ict,  
educationExpanding Access to Early 
Childhood Development 
The Jordan Education Initiative 
A Multi-Stakeholder Partnership 
Model to Support Education 
Reform 
Lessons Learned from World 
Bank Education Management 
Information System Operations 
T echnologies in education 
across the Americas: 
 The promise and the peril –  
 and some potential ways   
 forward 
Information and 
Communication T echnology 
(Ict) In Education iIn Five Arab 
States 
 
Guidebook for planning 
education in emergencies and 
reconstruction 
T echnologies for Education
‘Delivering Quality Basic 
Education in Challenging 
Circumstances’ 
ICT4refugee
Learning for a future: refugee 
education in developing 
countries
UNESCO technology and 
education presenation
Policy Report on UNHCR’s 
Community T echnology Access 
Program: Best Practices and 
Lessons Learned UNESCO
Global Partnership for  
Education
Google
73T ype of T echnology Positives associated with tech Issues to consider
There is a risk of theft; issues 
surrounding the sustainability 
of the hardware in difficult 
environments; only as good as 
the software provided; charge 
and battery life diminishes 
throughout life of product. 
Expensive; sustainability 
issues surrounding hardware 
maintenance; only as good as 
the software provided; charge 
and battery life diminishes 
throughout the life the product; 
high risk of theft or potential 
for exclusion/jealousy. 
Risk of theft; issues with 
sustainability of the hardware; 
limited by the size and 
resolution of the screen; 
data packages in developing 
countries a considerable cost 
for families and downloads cost 
data; battery life diminishes 
throughout life of product. 
Limited functionality; lack of 
opportunity to personalise 
learning; limited by screen size 
and resolution; limited language 
settings; 
Limited language settings; lack 
of personalised learning; no 
scaffolding; limited by screen 
size and resolutions.
One way medium; lack of 
personalisation; limited by 
electricity infrastructure (no 
offline use).Work can be personalised to the 
learners level; Increase learner 
motivation; can promote self-
efficacy can work on a broad 
range of educational skills. 
Personalised learning capability; 
can develop self-efficacy can work 
on a broad range of educational 
skills; potential for instantaneous 
feedback; strong assessment 
potential 
Work can be personalised to the 
learners level; software can be 
aligned with a curriculum; increase 
learner motivation; can promote 
self-efficacy can work on a broad 
range of educational skills; allows 
access to out of school children. 
Relatively cheap to buy; Simple to 
use; battery life is long; widespread 
availability of spare parts; cost-
effective delivery of content; can 
be remotely topped up; can help 
promote literacy
Great capacity to hold large 
amounts of information; literacy 
focus; cost-effective delivery 
of content; support teacher 
instruction. 
Infrastructure often established 
in country; multigenerational 
medium; multiuser medium; 
inclusionary e.g. deaf students can 
use; useful for authentic language 
acquisition; relatively cheap; wide 
range of applicable subjects1 to 1 Computers/Laptops
T ablets
Smart Phones (3g)
Mobile Phones (2g)
e-readers
T elevisionAPPENDIX 4: TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW
This table provides a snapshot of the positives and issues associated with the main genres of EdT ech engaged 
with throughout this rigorous review and narrative synthesis
74T ype of T echnology Positives associated with tech Issues to consider
One way medium; lack of 
personalisation; no scaffolding 
provided by, or enabled 
through the device itself; can be 
easily coopted for propaganda 
purposes. Infrastructure well established 
across world; multigenerational 
medium; multiuser medium; 
electricity not a pre-requisite 
as wind up radios available; 
relatively cheap; wide range 
of applicable subjects; medium 
lends itself to traditional 
mediums of communication 
(storytelling). Interactive Radio 
75Ali* attends a Save the Children drop in centre for child labourers where centre staff encouraged him to return to 
school. He is several grades behind, and receives support from the centre to help him keep on top of his schoolwork. 
Ali is friends with T arek who encourages him to stay in school. He is not sure if he will stay in school, but he hopes to 
become a mechanic some day. He wakes up every morning at 4am to go to work. 
*name has been changed for security reasons
CREDIT: SAVE THE CHILDRENsavethechildren.netEDTECH FOR LEARNING  
 IN EMERGENCIES AND  
     DISPLACED SETTING S