 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL INCLUSION IN THE MALDIVES  
FINDEX  2018 SURVEY   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized 
Financial  Inclusion  in the Maldives1 
 
 
INTRO:  In this note we explore  the many  ways  that adults  in the Maldives  are using  digital  
payment  services  through  mobile  phones,  the internet,  and bank  accounts.  We also explore  savings  
habits  and outline  opportunities  to use digital  technology  to bring  financial  services  to adults  who 
still have  no accounts.  
The Findex  Note s series  summarizes  data compiled  by the Global  Findex  from  nationally  
representative  surveys  of more  than 150,000  adults  in over 140 economies  in 2017,  including  more  
than 1,000 adults  in the Maldives . The Global  Findex  is the world's  most  comprehensive  data set 
on how adults  save,  borrow,  make  payments,  and manage  risk. The full dataset  and methodology  
are available  at https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/ . 
Research is showing that when  people embrace digital financial services , a range of development 
benefits follow. When women in India received personal accounts linked to a jobs guarantee 
program, they increased their labor force participation and earnings compared to women who 
received such payments into a join account controlled by their husbands. The improvements in 
employment and earnings improvements disproportionately benefitted women with previously 
low labor force participation and those whose husban ds were most opposed to their getting a job.i 
Women -headed households in Nepal spent 15 percent more on nutritious foods (meat and fish) 
and 20 percent more on education after receiving free savings accounts.ii Another  study found that 
the adoption of mobil e money accounts in Kenya helped lift 194,000 people out of poverty, and 
that the accounts  proved especially beneficial for women.iii Mobile money has also been cited as 
a fast and efficient method of sending and receiving  funds from a network of acquaintanc es during 
an emergency, potentially reducing the likelihood that those impacted by a financial  crisis will 
descend into poverty. The benefits  of digital financial services  extend to governments as well. In 
 
1 This paper was authored by Leora Klapper, Saniya Ansar, Jake Hess and Dorothe Singer (Development Research 
Group, World Bank ), under the supervision of Anoma Kulathunga (Finance, Competitiveness & Innovation Global 
Practice, World Bank)  as one of the outpu ts on FIRST Initiative Funded  Enabling a Non -Bank Mobile Money 
Solution  Technical Assistan ce Project  (P15569 3) to Maldives  on September 22, 2019 . Any follow -up to this note 
may be referred to Anoma Kulathunga, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, South Asi a Finance Competitiveness and 
Innovation Global Practice (Team Leader) or Amila Indeewari Dahanayake, Economist, South Asia Finance 
Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice (co -TTL).   
 India, leakage dropped by 47 percent when pension payments were made via biometric smart cards 
instead of being handed out in cash.iv 
 
Account ownership is high  
In the Maldives 80 percent of adults have an account, the highest number of any South Asian 
economy other than India (Figure I). Regionall y and globally, most adults who have an account 
do their banking at a formal financial institution, such as a bank, credit union, or microfinance 
institution. Some people —particularly in Sub -Saharan Africa —use mobile money accounts which 
are offered by tel ecommunications companies and operated on simple mobile phones. The 
Maldives is one of the rare economies outside of Sub -Saharan Africa with high mobile money 
penetration.  In the Maldives, 23 percent of adults have a mobile money account.  No other South 
Asian economy has mobile money penetration above 10 percent, except for  Bangladesh, where the 
number is 21 percent.    
 
 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure I: 8 in 10 adults in the Maldives have an account
Adults with an account (%), 2017Women and the poor lag behind  
Account ownership inequalities persist even though the Maldives has relatively high financial 
inclusion. While 85 percent of men have an account, only 74 percent of women do, leaving an 
income gap of 11 percentage points  (Figure II). Regionally, the Maldives' gender gap falls in the 
middle. Significantly larger gender gaps exist in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, and Pakistan and 
smaller ones are found in Sri Lanka and India.  
 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 
Adults in the richest 60 percent of households in the Maldives are 15 percentage points more likely 
to have an account than those in the poorest 40 percent. That income gap is fairly typical in South 
Asia outside of India and Sri Lanka, where income  differences are only a third of what they are in 
the Maldives  (Figure III). Afghanistan's low -income gap likely refle cts low overall account 
ownership in that country.  0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure II: Women lag men on account ownership
Adults with an account (%), 2017
Men Women 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 
Barriers  to financial inclusion  
About 1 in 5 adults in the Maldives still have no account at a financial institution and are therefore 
unbanked. To reveal barriers to financial inclusion, the Global Findex survey asked these people 
why they have no accounts at financial institutions. Around half of the unbanked said they do not 
need an account. Yet only 5 percent cited this as their sole reason, which might suggest that 
unbanked adults would be open to using financial services if they were affordable and relevant to 
their needs. The next most commonly cited reason for being unbanked was that a family member 
already has an account, which is cited by slightly l ess than half of respondents, followed by 
insufficient funds, which is mentioned by nearly 40 percent.  Only  6 percent of respondents pointed 
to religious concerns, and 1 percent cited this as the sole reason for being unbanked. By contrast, 
15 percent of r espondents mentioned insufficient funds as their sole barrier  (Figure IV) . 0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure III: Account ownership is higher among wealthier adults 
Adults with an account (%), 2017
Adults in the richest 60% of households Adults in the poorest 40% of householdsSource: Global Findex database.  
 
High mobile phone ownership  
Goods and services —including financial services —are increasingly provided through mobile 
phones.  Research suggests that digital transactions are often safer, quicker, and cheaper than cash . 
Mobile phones can be especially helpful for people who live in ru ral areas that are overlooked by 
traditional banks. More than 90 percent of adults in the Maldi ves have a mobile phone, which is 
the largest share in South Asia, and close to the average found in high income economies (Figure 
V).  As the next sections of t his note show, high mobile phone ownership is reflected in widespread 
use of digital transactions in the Maldives.  0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%Religious reasonsFamily member already has an accountLack of trustLack of necessary documentationFinancial institutions too far awayAccounts too expensiveDo not need an accountNot enough moneyFigure IV: Unbanked adults in the Maldives face a range of barriers to getting 
an account -Adults without a financial institution account reporting barrier as 
a reason for not having one (%), 2017
Cited with other barriers Cited as sole barrier 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 
People use their accounts  
Accounts only matter if people use them to improve their financial wellbeing . The goal of financial 
inclusion is to  help people manage their money,  so they can escape poverty, invest in the future, 
and insure against economic emergencies.  
Globally, most people actively use their accounts, whether for saving, making payments, or some 
other purpose. South Asia, and especially India, are notable for having a lot of unused accounts. 
In India, for example, nearly half of accounts are dormant —unused for any sort of deposit or 
withdrawal in the past year. Behind India's high dormancy rate is a  recent  government policy that 
gave free accounts to  more than 1 billion previously unbanked adults.  Many of these new account 
owners have yet to start transa cting.  
Dormancy is relatively low in the Maldives, where more than 90 percent of account owners report 
using their accounts for at least one deposit or withdrawal in the past year  (Figure VI). These 
numbers reflect widespread usage of accounts for digital payments, as the next section s explore in 
detail.  0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure V: Mobile phone ownership is nearly universal in the Maldives
Adults with a mobile phone (%), 2017 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 
Widespread use of digital payments  
Overall in the Maldives, 68 percent of adults report making or receiving digital payments —by far 
the largest share in South Asia (Figure VII). These payments can include but are not limited to 
retail transactions made through mobile phones and the internet, receipt of wages, government 
payments, or agricultural payments into an account, collec ting domestic remittances into an 
account, and payments through a debit card or credit card.   0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure VI: Most account owners in Maldives actively use their accounts
Adults with an account (%), 2017
Active account Inactive accountSource: Global Findex database.  
 
Digital  wage payments  
The Maldives leads South Asia both in the overall share of adults using domestic remittances and 
the percentage who rely on digital channels to do so. Nearly half of adults  in the Maldives  report 
sending money to  or receiv ing money from friends or relatives living in other parts of the country. 
Among  domestic remittances users , about two -thirds  report using a financial institution to do so. 
Overall a fifth of adults in the Maldives and Bangladesh report using a mobile phone fo r domestic 
remittances . This last number likely reflects the rise of mobile money accounts, which are widely 
seen as a cheap and efficient way to move money.  
Digital wage payments are also common in the Maldives. Overall, about 4 in 10 adults report 
recei ving wage payments in the past year. Among wage recipients, 82 percent receive their 
earnings directly into a financial institution account. When it comes to use of digital payroll, the 0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure VII: In the Maldives, widespread use of digital payments
Adults with an account (%), 2017
Made or received digital payments in the past year Accountpublic sector is ahead of the private sector. While 93 percent of publ ic sector wage earners are paid 
digitally, the same is true of only 73 percent of private sector wage earners.   
Digital financial products are only helpful if people know how to use them.  One rough indicator 
of financial capability is the use of mobile pho nes or the internet to check account balances. In the 
Maldives, around half of account owners do so, which is relatively high compared with the rest of 
South Asia (Figure VIII).  
 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 
Domestic remittances  
Online shopping is more advanced in the Maldives than the rest of the region. About 1 in 3 adults 
in the Maldives report using the internet to buy something online in the past year. The share is in 
the low single digits in all other low  and middle -income economie s in South Asia for which data 
is available.  Purchasing something on the internet does not necessarily mean paying for it on the 
internet; some people prefer to pay in cash when the order is delivered. In the Maldives, online 0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure VIII: 1 in 2 account owners access their account through a mobile 
phone or the internet -Adults with an account (%), 2017
Used a mobile phone or the internet to access an account (% age 15+) Accountshoppers prefer to pay digital ly. Among the adults who reported making on online purchase, nearly 
two-thirds said they paid for it online, and a third said they paid in cash upon delivery.   
Domestic remittances —money sent to friends or relatives living in other parts of the country —
play an important role in development and financial inclusion. For example, r esearch shows that 
people who have access to domestic remittances through mobile money are better able to manage 
unexpected expenses and therefore less likely to fall into poverty. In the Maldives, 47 percent of  
adults report sending or receiving domestic remittances in the past year. That number is far beyond 
the average in South Asia or de veloping economies generally. People can use domestic remittances 
in different ways. Some use accounts, while others use an over -the-counter service such as Western 
Union, or simply send cash. In the Maldives, accounts are by far the most popular option (F igure 
IX). 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 
Savings in formal financial institutions  
People save for future expenses —a large purchase, investments in education or a business, 
retirement, or possible emergencies. There are various methods of saving. Some people keep their 0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%45%50%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure IX: In the Maldives, most domestic remittances are sent through 
accounts -Adults sending or receiving domestic remittances in the past year 
(%), 2017
Using an account Using an OTC service In cash only Using other methodmoney in a bank account. In developing economies, many people use semi-formal rotating savings 
groups, which usually operate by collecting weekly deposits from members and disbursing the 
entire amount to a new member each week.  Some savers prefer to use "other" methods, such as 
stuffing cash under a mattress, or holding se llable assets like gold or livestock. In the Maldives  we 
find a strong use of formal savings:  4 in 10 adults report saving money, and the overwhelming 
majority of savers use a formal financial institution to do so. This is in contrast to economies such 
as Nepal and Pakistan, where semi -formal savings are popular, as well as Afghanistan and 
Bangladesh, where "other" methods are common  (Figure X) . 
 
Source: Global Findex database.  
 
Expanding account ownership by digitizing domestic remittances  
Although account ownership is high in the Maldives, there are still chances to bring unbanked 
adults into the formal financial system by moving routine cash payments into accounts. Overall 85 
percent of unbanked adults in the country have a mobile phone, potentially putting digital financial 
services in reach. Roughly 1 in 6 unbanked adults in the Maldives report sending or receiving 0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35%40%45%50%
Afghanistan Bangladesh India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri LankaFigure X: Most savers in the Maldives use a formal financial institution
Adults saving any money in the past year (%), 2017
Saved formally Saved semi-formally Saved using other methods onlydomestic remittances exclusively in cash or through an over -the-counter (OTC) service. People 
who use OTC domestic remittance services might be relatively easy to sign up for accounts. They 
are already familiar with digital payments and  might be comfortable making transactions through 
an account. The challenge for t he private sector is to offer people affordable options for moving 
money. One reason for the popularity of OTC services is that they tend to be less expensive than 
accounts.  
Digitizing utility payments could increase account usage  
There are also opportunities to increase usage of digital payments in  the Maldives. Two-thirds of 
adults  in the country  pay utility bills, yet 69 percent of these payers use cash only to do so. Among 
adults with an account, nearly half still pay utility bills in cash. Allowing utilities users to pay for 
services such as water, electricity, and trash collection digitally can have big benefits. For 
providers, digital payments lower the costs of collecting fares. A recent review of utilities in Africa, 
Asia, and Latin Ameri ca found that digital payments lowered trash collection costs by between 57 
percent and 95 percent and increased revenue from between 15 percent and 37 percent. For 
customers, digital channels save time by removing the need to travel to government offices.  Yet it 
is critical that utilities providers ensure that digital products are clear and easy to use. Digital utility 
payments have suffered low adoption in some countries due to poor product design.v    
 
Conclusion  
 
The Maldives has some of South Asia's strongest financial inclusion numbers. Account ownership 
is high, digital payments are widespread, and people are using mobile phones for a range of 
transactions. These achievements notwithstanding, the Global Findex s hows that governments and 
businesses could boost ownership and use of formal financial services by transitioning routine cash 
payments into  digital channels2. 
 
 
i Field, Erica, Charity Troyer Moore, Rohini Pande, Natalia Rigol, and Simone Schaner. Ongoing. “Strengthening 
Women’s Financial Control Through Personal Bank Accounts.” IPA  research overview, available online at 
www.poverty -action.org  
 
2 This analysis does not include the Findex additional questions on mobile usage.    
ii Prina, S. 2015. "Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a field experiment." Journal of 
Development Economics 115(C), 16 -31. 
iii Suri, Tavneet, and William Jack. 2016. "  “The long -run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money.” Science 
354 (6317): 1288 -1292.  
iv Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2016. “Building State Capacity: Evidence from 
Biometric Smartcards in India.” American Economic Review 106 (10): 2895 -2929.  
v Waldron, Daniel, C aroline  Frank, A kanksha  Sharma, and A lexander  Sotiriou. 2019. "Testing the Waters: Digital 
Payments for Water and Sanitation." Working Paper, March 2019, CGAP/GSMA.  