Media, Culture & Society
 1 –17
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:  
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0163443714523877
mcs.sagepub.com
Four challenges in the field of 
alternative, radical and citizens’ 
media research
Clemencia Rodríguez
University of Oklahoma, USA
Benjamin Ferron
Sciences Po Rennes, France
Kristin Shamas
Oklahoma City University, USA
Abstract
In January 1994 the Zapatista movement in southern Mexico inaugurated a new 
era of media use for dissent. Since that time, an array of dissenting collectives and 
individuals have appropriated media technologies in order to make their voices heard 
or to articulate alternative identities. From Zapatista media to the Arab Spring, social 
movements throughout the world are taking over, hybridizing, recycling, and adapting 
media technologies. This new era poses a new set of challenges for academics and 
researchers in the field of Communication for Social Change (CfSC). Based on examples 
from Mexico, Lebanon, and Colombia, this article highlights and discusses four such 
research challenges: accounting for historical context; acknowledging the complexity 
of communication processes; anchoring analysis in a political economy of information 
and communication technologies; and positioning new research in relation to existing 
knowledge and literature within the field of communication and social change.
Keywords
alternative media, Colombia, community media, Egypt, Israel-Palestine, Lebanon, 
Mexico, social media, social movements, social networks
Corresponding author:
Clemencia Rodríguez, Department of Communication, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019-0390, 
USA. 
Email: clemencia@ou.edu523877 MCS 0010.1177/0163443714523877 Media, Culture & Society Rodríguez et al.
research-article 2014
Article2 Media, Culture & Society 
Not too long ago mainstream media and social movements’ media occupied different 
spheres, and rarely crossed paths. Corporate broadcasting and print existed in a universe 
of advertisers, target audiences, and a continuous commodification of leisure and infor -
mation. In a separate sphere, social movements and media activists appropriated media 
technologies, divorced them from their corporate originators, and re-invented technolo -
gy’s uses in ways not intended by the designers. In the early 20th century, for example, 
print technologies were appropriated by anarchist movements in the United States, and 
by revolutionary groups in Mexico and Russia. By 1920 Bolivian tin miners were using 
radio technologies to mobilize their unions in their struggle for social justice against 
corporate and state oppressive forces (Downing, 2010). Similarly, during the 1968 
revolts, workers and students’ movements benefited from technological progress and 
lower prices in the systems of reprography to publish their own newspapers, as shown 
with the ‘ prensa marginal ’ in Mexico (Trejo, 1980), the ‘parallel press’ in France 
(Chadaigne, 2002), or the underground press in the United States (Lewes, 2000). Social 
movements and media activists learned to use media technologies to mobilize, express 
dissent, empower marginalized voices, or propose economic, political, and cultural 
alternatives.
Assuming that militant and alternative uses of media technologies are at least as 
important as mainstream media, communication scholars began documenting and 
theorizing instances in which marginal communities, social movements, or grassroots 
collectives use media technologies on their own terms (Kidd and Rodríguez, 2009). 
As early as the 1980s, communication scholars studied pirate radio in Europe 
(Drijvers, 1992; Hagerstrand, 1986; Jankowski et al., 1992; Lewis, 1984); ‘ medios 
populares ’ in Latin America (Fox and Schmucler, 1982; Huesca, 1996; Reyes Matta, 
1983; Roncagliolo, 1991; Simpson Grinberg, 1981); guerrilla video and television in 
the United States and Canada (Boddy, 1990; Boyle, 1997; Downing, 1991; Thede and 
Ambrosi, 1991); traditional forms of communication for dissent and alternative media 
in Africa (Chipembere Lwanda, 2011; Nyamnjoh, 2006; Oduro-Frimpong, 2011; 
Spitulnik, 2003; Ugboajah, 2006); and indigenous media (Michaels, 1994; Roth and 
Valaskakis, 1989). Many different terms are used to label media technologies appro -
priated and used by social movements, citizens’ groups and grassroots collectives, 
including: alternative media, social movements media, participatory media, commu -
nity media, radical media, grassroots media, autonomous media, the French term 
‘médias libres ’, the Spanish term ‘ medios populares ’, and citizens’ media (Rodríguez, 
2001).1 Each term emphasizes different elements of autonomous media use and con -
nects with specific theoretical frameworks, thus revealing the complex nature of media 
appropriation processes. While some researchers continued to produce isolated local 
or national monographs, others have progressively integrated this area of research into 
an international field that was first labeled Communication and Development (or 
Development Communication), better known today as Communication for Social 
Change (CfSC). Development Communication was originally founded on moderni -
zation theory and the use of media in Third World development. During the 1970s, a 
critical stand against modernization galvanized a conscious rupture with 
Development Communication, and the emerging critical approaches are loosely 
unified as CfSC. Community/alternative/citizens’ media uses for mobilization and Rodríguez et al.  3
empowerment constitutes one of these critical approaches (Rodríguez and Murphy, 
1997; Waisbord, 2001).
With the recent emergence of so-called ‘new information and communication tech -
nologies’ and online platforms, alternative uses of media technologies are not clearly 
divorced from their corporate originators. Today, social justice and social movements’ 
uses of platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube remain within the corporate 
frameworks that underpin these platforms, a shift that helps explain why these uses of 
technology for social change have become such a magnet for mainstream media atten -
tion. This newly found excitement around social movements’ uses of information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) has spilled over into academic research, creating a 
massive wave of studies on social media and social unrest, dissent, immigration, and 
human rights (Ali, 2011; Bennett and Segerberg, 2011; Christensen, 2011; Cottle and 
Lester, 2011; Harlow, 2012; Juris, 2012). For those of us doing research in the field of 
CfSC, this trendy new line of research presents opportunities and challenges. On the one 
hand, the appropriation of media technologies by communities has rarely occupied such 
a central place in academia. On the other hand, this centrality brings its own risks. This 
article examines how the new era of Web 2.0 technologies used by activists and social 
movements presents a series of research challenges in the area of CfSC. Questioning the 
excitement around the availability and effectiveness of Web 2.0 platforms, we under -
score the risks of neglecting historical context; we urge researchers to take into account 
the political economy frameworks of ICTs; we stress the need to overcome narrow defi -
nitions of communication; and, finally, we emphasize the urgency of grounding research 
on social movements and ICTs in the field of CfSC in order to avoid ‘re-inventing the 
wheel’.
Risk one: neglecting historical context
Recent corporate journalism and media in general are full of stories about communities 
using ICTs for dissent and social change. Popular sound bites such as ‘the cell phone 
revolution’ or ‘the Twitter revolution’ proliferate, even in the most traditional media 
sources. For example, in an often-cited op-ed article, Roger Cohen (2011) goes so far as 
to say that the 2011 Tunisian uprising was ‘perhaps the world’s first revolution without a 
leader. Or rather, its leader was far away: Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of Facebook’. 
After the 2009 Iranian student demonstrations became known as ‘the Twitter revolution,’ 
Mark Pfeifle (2009), a former national security adviser, called for Twitter to be nomi -
nated for the Nobel Peace Prize. This excitement around Web 2.0 platforms spills over 
into academic research. Whereas it was previously obscure and marginal, research on 
social movement media now comprises a bloated bibliography of trendy research topics 
such as ICTs and the Arab Spring, Occupy, or ‘ Indignados ’. For instance, regarding the 
Arab Spring alone, a spate of articles across a variety of disciplines has sought to address 
the role of ‘new media’ (Axford, 2011; Gladwell, 2010; Howard and Hussain, 2011; 
Khondker, 2011; Zhuo et al., 2011).
Many of these studies, with their focus on the ‘newness’ of ICTs, reduce the richly 
contextual human relations that surround media use into a flat and unrevealing techno -
logical determinism. Semantically powerful soundbites such as ‘the cell phone 4 Media, Culture & Society 
revolution’ or ‘the Twitter revolution’ actually erase historical contexts and the passion(s) 
of politics, as technology becomes equated with political action. Subsequently, human 
agency is rendered invisible. The speed and efficiency of new technologies overshadows 
more complex issues, politics, and dynamics.
In order to avoid reductionist studies that erase these multifaceted processes, we need 
theoretical frameworks that reposition as central political action and human agency, as 
stated by Colombian cultural studies scholar Jesús Martin Barbero in his call for a move 
from ‘the media’ to ‘the mediations’. According to Martin Barbero:
now more than ever, we need to maintain the epistemological and politically strategic 
tensions that exist between the historical mediations that establish the scope of influence 
and meaning that media have on our societies, and the role that the media play today as 
actual mediators. Without this minimum distance – or negative thinking, as the Frankfurt 
School would say – critical thought is just impossible. (2006: 280)
Martin Barbero unpacks this notion of mediations, explaining that ‘politics are a sort 
of social fabric where social actors negotiate their identities through interaction’ (2006: 
284) – a statement that repositions communication as central.
When Martin Barbero first called for a move from the media to mediations in the early 
1980s, he was clearly picking a fight with media effects research, which at that time 
threatened to take over Latin American communication schools. And yet we can find 
clear parallels in today’s research on ICTs and social change. At the time, Martin Barbero 
questioned the legitimacy of studies that fragment social reality, that disconnect com -
munication and media as if they can be understood in isolation, studies that focused 
exclusively on the operationalization of information and communication variables. As a 
response to Martin Barbero’s call, scholars in the field of CfSC embraced more complex 
research approaches that examined media use as traversed by and interlocked with social, 
economic, and cultural conditions (Rodríguez and Murphy, 1997; Murphy and Rodríguez, 
2006). Again, the pronounced visibility of today’s ICTs risks leading us into studies that 
isolate communication and media technologies from history, culture, and politics.
Additionally, we need to add a new threat to these potentially fragmenting approaches, 
rare at the time Martin Barbero was writing: the availability and easy access to data. It takes 
a researcher less than 45 minutes to find data demonstrating how the KONY 2012 video 
went ‘viral’ immediately after Oprah Winfrey ‘tweeted’ about it (Rainie et al., 2012). 
Today’s social movements and their uses of ICTs have become a gold mine for researchers 
looking for big data. A study conducted by the University of Zaragoza’s Institute for 
Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems (BIFI) between 25 and 26 April 2011 
monitored 70 Twitter hashtags related to the M15 movement in Spain. The study docu -
ments the patterns, hubs, and connections of 581,749 Twitter messages and 87,569 users, 
in an attempt to understand the formation of complex networks (Tarrancón et al., 2011).2
As researchers in the area of CfSC, we need to recognize that this type of data is 
insufficient for answering complex research questions about the cultural negotiations, 
hegemonic forces, anti-hegemonic resistances, and political economy frameworks that 
traverse uses of media technologies. We need research that takes seriously the idea that 
ICTs are used within historical conditions. We need to explore how media technologies 
are bent in specific ways according to local power dynamics, levels of expertise, Rodríguez et al.  5
cultural negotiations, and social interactions. In the following pages, we highlight a 
few studies that assume the challenge of situating ICTs within complex historical 
contexts.
Merlyna Lim’s research about the uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt reveals the com -
plexities of today’s social movements and their use of ICTs. Lim’s research on the 
Egyptian uprising – an event frequently described as a fine example of the so-called 
‘Revolution 2.0’ – finds that what happened in Tahrir Square in 2011 had been in the 
making for years. If the uprising in Egypt only ‘suddenly’ made it onto our research 
radars, it was not because the uprising ‘spontaneously’ emerged from Facebook and 
Twitter, but because many of us were not paying attention to the 2003 Tahrir 12 Hours of 
Protest, the Kefaya movement between 2004 and 2007, or the student protests for judi -
cial independence in 2006, all political actions of dissent spiraling into the 2011 Tahrir 
Square demonstrations (Lim, 2012: 232–6). Similarly, the failure of international main -
stream media to cover collective expressions of dissent in the Middle East contributed to 
the Arab Spring’s broader image as a collection of spontaneous, sudden revolutions 
(Cottle, 2011).
Lim also demonstrates how social movements of dissent cross-pollinate, learn from 
each other, and inspire each other in their uses of ICTs. In Egypt, Lim identifies how the 
Tahrir uprising adopted the use of Twitter from the April 6th Youth Movement, despite 
the latter’s failure to generate mass protests (Lim, 2012: 239–41). More broadly, many of 
the representational tactics employed during the start of the Arab Spring can be traced to 
a postcolonial aesthetics of resistance that circulated within the eastern Mediterranean 
and North Africa for decades by way of Arabic cinema, journalism, and literature. This 
example is far from being exceptional. The Indymedia network, often presented as a 
spontaneous initiative of Global Justice Movement activists during the anti-WTO con -
ference in Seattle in 1999, was actually the product of years of maturation within trans -
national networks of activists, especially in the aftermath of the Zapatista rebellion in 
Chiapas, Mexico, in 1994 (Ferron, 2012a: 402–36; Wolfson, 2012). In other words, 
research in the field of CfSC needs to keep track of and monitor how alternative, com -
munity, radical, and citizens’ media activists and practitioners share know-how, redefine 
technologies’ potential, and articulate their own goals for media technologies. Lim’s 
research on Egypt emphasizes the complexity of communication processes in situations 
of dissent and social mobilization. Communication is required for social movements to 
gain momentum and galvanize collective political action, but this generally implies a 
multiplicity of forms of communication, from the performative communication of bodies 
in the street to the disembodied informational act of texting a meeting time and place; 
according to Tufekci and Wilson (2012: 370), 48.4% of participants first heard about the 
Tahrir Square demonstrations through face-to-face communication, 28.3% through 
Facebook, and 13.1% via telephone. In Egypt, Lim identifies taxi drivers and food ven -
dors as key communicators, and coffee shops, mosques, and soccer fields as crucial 
spaces for information dissemination (Lim, 2012: 242–3). Similarly, Gerbaudo (2012: 
143) identifies how anti-globalization activists played key roles during the Indignados 
movement in Spain; so did anarchists during the Occupy movement in the United States 
(143). Based on ethnographic data from various case studies, Gerbaudo (2012) insists on 
the need to understand how media practices happen in interaction with specific localities; 6 Media, Culture & Society 
his study centers on how interactions between movements and media choreograph spe -
cific forms of mobilization.
Finally, Lim’s research shatters the flattening effect of Facebook and Twitter, where 
every communicator becomes a data point. In the Tahrir demonstrations many different 
social movements joined forces, playing key but differentiated roles; the Muslim 
Brotherhood knew how to handle the logistics of feeding so many people and Cairo’s 
soccer fans employed their street-battle know-how (Lim, 2012: 243).
Research on social movements and media use that takes historical context seriously 
demonstrates that media repertoires do not happen in a social vacuum. A recent study 
that compares the media repertoires of the Zapatista movement with those of the Anti-
Occupation Movement in Israel/Palestine (Ferron, 2012a) shows that social movements’ 
uses of media technologies are mediated by a complex mesh of factors that include the 
internationalization of the political capital of activist networks, interaction between alter -
native and mainstream media, as well as specific individual and organizational trajecto -
ries of the so-called ‘mediactivists’. In 1994 Subcomandante Marcos, the iconic leader 
of the Zapatista movement, didn’t even have access to a computer; the houses where 
Marcos wrote his famous communiqués didn’t have access to electricity, let alone the 
internet (Ferron, 2012a: 403). Based on fieldwork in Chiapas and Mexico City, methodi -
cal historical research, and hundreds of hours of interviews, Benjamin Ferron’s study 
reveals how many different individuals and collectives, with their own biographies, 
know-how, and political passions, shaped the movement’s media use. For example, 
Elliot Young, a graduate student doing fieldwork in Mexico for his dissertation in history, 
became key in translating and posting information about the Zapatistas. At the time, 
Young used precarious e-bulletin boards to transmit text and sold VHS tapes for less than 
a dollar to distribute video material (Ferron, 2012a: 407–16). Young’s access to a com -
puter and a video camera, and his knowledge of media were crucial to that specific 
moment. Still, the role played by activists is not enough to explain the remarkable case 
of Zapatista media use.
Another key factor was the interaction between the mainstream media and the 
Zapatista leadership. According to Ferron’s comparison, while the Anti-Occupation 
movement in Palestine benefited from the variable but constant attention of the main -
stream media to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Zapatistas were dropped from 
national and international media soon after the first wave of drama around Marcos from 
1994 to 2001. As a result, the Anti-Occupation movement is generally trying to ‘correct’ 
the mainstream media, while Marcos and the Zapatistas almost gave up on the main -
stream media and decided to develop their own alternative media system when the news -
worthiness of the Chiapas conflict declined. In these two cases, looking at how social 
movements, mainstream media, and dissent media interact is key to understanding the 
differentiated paths of Zapatista media and Anti-Occupation media.
Moreover, Ferron shows that the catch-all expression ‘alternative media’ actually 
refers to many different concrete social spaces of cooperation/rivalry relationships. 
Indeed, the production and reproduction of these media generally depend on weak eco -
nomic and organizational resources. This situation generates constant tension within and 
between the network of media activists. The study of the rupture between the ‘Free 
Radio’ and the ‘Community Radio’ network that emerged in Mexico City after the huge Rodríguez et al.  7
student strike of the National Autonomous University in 1999–2000 clearly illustrates 
the structuring dimension of these internal divisions between a radical and a citizens’ 
pole, particularly when relationships between ‘alternative media’ and the state and the 
market are at stake (Ferron, 2012b).
Kristin Shamas’s (2011) research on ICT use in Lebanon highlights the importance 
of historical context in studies on social movement media. Using a multi-pronged meth -
odological approach, Shamas explores how media shape and are shaped by subjectivi -
ties, and how this interaction is in itself determined by complex historical contexts. 
During the 2006 war between Israel and Hizbollah, a contingent of Lebanese-descended 
bloggers emerged as a powerful form of citizens’ media that sought to counter the prop -
agandistic, dispassionate, and misinforming coverage provided by national and interna -
tional mainstream media. Shamas’s study takes seriously the idea that media use 
happens in specific and multifaceted historical conditions that sometimes require longi -
tudinal studies. Working to understand the historical conditions that gave rise to the 
prolific outpouring by Lebanese bloggers in 2006, the study finds key answers in 
Lebanese literature produced during and after the 1974–90 Lebanese Civil War. A 
detailed analysis of how these literary texts discuss communication technologies reveals 
ways in which local and global media were inadequate to meet the information and 
communication needs of the Lebanese people during decades of armed conflict. 
Lebanese literature articulates how national media were unable to go beyond partisan 
frameworks that incited more violence; how local and international news stories de-
humanized ‘the other’; how the lived experience of war was flattened by ‘objective’ 
practices within global journalism. For example, in the autobiographical Beirut 
Fragments: A War Memoir , the narrator compares the lived experience of violence with 
past accounts of war:
On the way out I pick up a piece of shrapnel from the rubble. Shrapnel. So this is shrapnel, I 
think. I never took it seriously before. Somehow when I had heard someone had died of 
shrapnel wounds, it hadn’t sounded quite as serious as dying from a bullet or in a fire. But this 
jagged, heavy, twisted, hot piece of iron – this is shrapnel. Shrapnel is serious. (in Shamas, 
2011: 145)
In Jad El-Hage’s The Myrtle Tree , the narrator critiques how local media has covered the 
war:
People took their radios with them everywhere. Each had his favourite station. Radio V olcano, 
for instance, promised nothing less than the end of the world. Its airwaves were served by 
speakers straight out of Armageddon. They vowed to kill everyone including babies and the 
unborn. […] But the weirdest of all was Radio Anarchy. This one transmitted a freakish mish-
mash of sound effects: children crying, explosions, ambulance sirens, parodies of songs, 
recording from live battles, street commotion, soundtracks from hospital operating theatres. (in 
Shamas, 2011: 155)
Lebanese literature, particularly the civil war novel, became a cultural space used 
by the Lebanese to articulate alternative visions of media and communication (Shamas, 
2011). For example: Samuel Hazo’s novel Stills  depicts a war photographer trying to 8 Media, Culture & Society 
capture the complexities of the lived experience of war (Shamas, 2011: 161). The 
Lebanese civil war novel also highlights the value of local, informal, sometimes hid -
den information and communication networks. In The School of War , men gather at the 
barbershop every morning to piece together fragments of information (Shamas, 
2011:163). In De Niro’ s Game  ‘the women from the building met every morning over 
coffee to exchange news about the prices and availability of food and any other infor -
mation they had’ (Shamas, 2011: 163–4). The novels highlight people’s agency as they 
develop their own information and communication systems and networks, countering 
their frustration with mainstream media. Years before the emergence of the Lebanese 
blogosphere, these novels signaled the failure of single-voice media narratives for cap -
turing the experience of war, and repositioned as central lived experience – as opposed 
to detached ‘objective journalistic coverage’ – both key characteristics of Lebanese 
blogging during the 2006 war. Literature was the site of an intense and polyvocal pub -
lic conversation about, first, the inability of current media structures to meet the infor -
mation and communication needs of the Lebanese people and, second, the need to 
‘design alternative media systems to overcome the “betrayal” of traditional news 
media’ (Shamas, 2011). This research demonstrates how, in Lebanon, the social condi -
tions that triggered the 2006 generation of bloggers were in the making for decades. In 
a similar vein, Sreberny and Khiaban suggest that Iran’s enormous blogosphere can 
only be explained by looking at complex historical conditions, including ‘the legacy of 
a revolutionary political culture, the perception and experience of repression by citi -
zens, culturally preferred modes of expressivity as well as the meaning and experience 
of the Iranian diaspora’ (2011: xi).
The type of research undertaken by Lim, Ferron, and Shamas addresses Martin 
Barbero’s call to apply ‘our continuous effort to disentangle the increasingly complex 
fabric of mediations that articulates the relations between communication, culture and 
politics’ (2006: 281). By taking historical context seriously, these research studies over -
come several challenges: first, assuming that communication phenomena are tightly 
woven with other historical processes, dynamics, and conditions, they avoid the de-
territorialization of communication research; second, they maintain the epistemological 
tension between the media and mediations; and, third, they break away from disciplinary 
isolation and explore other fields, such as literary studies, social movements studies, and 
the sociology of journalism to find answers about media use.
Risk two: separating media and ICTs from their political 
economy frameworks
In Colombia, the term ‘minute’ has become a common trope in social life. Walking down 
the street, the word ‘minutes’ appears on all types of signs, from the hand-written card -
board signs of street vendors to sophisticated, professionally printed banners. In 
Colombia, cellular telephony regulation mandates that the caller, rather than the receiver 
of the call, pays for the call. People use cell phones only to receive calls, thus everyone 
is always buying cell phone minutes to make calls. In the digital divide, who are these 
call-receiving Colombians? Are they cell phone haves? Or have-nots? This is a key Rodríguez et al.  9
question if we are to understand how Colombians are using cell phones – the political 
economy of cellular telephony in Colombia.
Jack Qiu (2009) reminds us that ICTs do not happen in a contextual vacuum. They 
have a material positionality in the political economy of information and communica -
tion. Qiu’s superb analysis of the information ‘have-less’ in urban China questions the 
use of short-cut terms such as ‘the digital divide’ (Qiu, 2009). Qiu reveals how the idea 
of the ‘digital divide’ creates blinders that obscure complexities in how ICTs are used in 
specific contexts, as their use is mediated by class, mobility, age, and closeness or dis -
tance from the production of ICTs. Qiu takes on the challenge of investigating what 
exactly is happening in working-class communities in urban China and how they use 
ICTs, like internet cafés and wireless phones, including how specific groups such as 
migrants or senior citizens use these technologies to meet their information and com -
munication needs.
We need to always remember that all uses of media are framed by the political 
economies of ICTs. While we can applaud their potential for social change, we can 
never forget how ICTs are shaped and molded by regulatory regimes, international 
trade, corporate greed, and intrusive surveillance practices on the parts of both finan -
cial and political powers. As Sasha Costanza-Chock says, ‘in business-speak, “User 
Generated Content” means free cultural product for monetization and cross-licensing, 
“participation” means free user data to mine and sell to advertisers, and all user activity 
is subject to surveillance and censorship’ (2008: 857). Or, in harsher terms, Web 2.0 
can be seen as ‘a venture capitalist paradise where investors pocket the value produced 
by unpaid users, ride on the technical innovations of the free software movement, and 
kill off the decentralizing potential of peer-to-peer production’ (cited by Costanza-
Chock, 2008: 857). If Web 2.0 has become a corporate paradise for free technical 
innovation and user-generated content, the next generation of social media platforms 
– known as Web 3.0 – privileges technologies that connect vast networks of users and 
organize data, maximizing consumers’ profiles, matching profiles with corporate 
advertising, and refining surveillance of online identities (Barassi and Treré, 2012). As 
Barassi and Treré assert, ‘these applications propose to manage, organize and create 
meaning from user-generated data in such a way that it maximizes the tracing of digital 
identities (Harris, 2008; Watson, 2009) and behavioural advertising (Tasner, 2010)’ 
(Barassi and Treré, 2012).
Contagious waves of enthusiasm over Web 2.0 and 3.0 spill over from corporate 
spheres into social movements and academic circles. ‘Old’ media technologies such as 
radio and print media begin to sound ‘primitive’. And yet, when examined in their degree 
of ‘separability’ and autonomy from their corporate originators, old technologies fare 
better. When used by social movements or grassroots organizations, audio cassettes, 
faxes, or murals can be entirely separated from corporate interests, adapted and re-
invented to meet local information and communication needs (Downing, 2010; Sreberny-
Mohammadi and Mohammadi, 1994). Even a radio station powered by solar energy or 
batteries allows for more autonomy from corporate interests and state surveillance than 
Facebook, YouTube, or Twitter. Still, the dazzling speed and immediacy of social media 
platforms tend to overshadow academic interest in ‘old’ ICTs.10 Media, Culture & Society 
Risk three: using simplistic definitions of communication
In contexts of social dissent and social change, collective uses of media technologies 
include a complex mesh of different modes of communication. Wanting to explore how 
people living in regions of armed conflict use media technologies, Clemencia Rodríguez 
developed a research study on citizens’ media among unarmed communities living in 
war regions in Colombia (Rodríguez, 2011). Originally, the idea was to focus on how 
media technologies are used for purposes of mobilization against war or for alternative 
coverage of war. However, during fieldwork, these notions of communication under -
stood as simply ‘information’ or ‘reporting’ became too narrow and myopic and gave 
way to a much more complex understanding of communication.
The recent excitement around Facebook and Twitter emphasizes the use of ICTs for 
dissemination of information among networks of individuals. In contrast, Colombian 
community communicators use media technologies to ‘trigger’ different types of com -
munication processes – they intervene to repopulate the public sphere, to activate inter -
action between local government officials and their constituencies, or to trigger 
performative communication happenings.
Local public spheres are among the first casualties when unarmed communities are 
caught in the fighting of warring groups. People witness their streets and plazas being 
invaded by heavily armed groups. Sandbag barricades are erected to protect local police 
stations or government buildings. In this kind of war, local geographies become sites of 
surveillance, sometimes through informants recruited by armed groups from the local 
population. When public places are permeated by suspicion, people desert them and 
retreat to their private spaces, and the social fabric starts to erode. To counter this impact 
of war on the everyday life of its community, Radio Andaquí, a community radio station 
in southern Colombia, designed a Christmas decorating contest. To purposely encourage 
neighbors to interact and repopulate their streets, Radio Andaquí defined contestants as 
blocks, not individual households. As a result, people on the same block began interact -
ing, fetching tools, painting and decorating together. The station then used its radiocycle, 
a mobile unit mounted on a tandem bicycle, to transmit from a different block every 
night. Little by little, neighbors began coming and going from one block to another, 
comparing decorating strategies. Radio Andaquí knows that each of those conversations 
is a thread in the social fabric that sustains the community and keeps the terror of war at 
bay. In this case, the community medium designed a communication intervention 
intended to repopulate a deserted public sphere. Even the prize, a block party, is designed 
to trigger and cultivate communication and interaction, not between the medium and its 
audience, but community members (Rodríguez, 2011).
In this case, the community communicators behind the medium carefully designed 
ways to use media technologies to ‘trigger’ specific dynamics among the community. 
The talent for designing these communication happenings was developed through 
years of experimenting with technology, sharing know-how with other community 
communicators, and applying immense doses of creativity. These Colombian com -
munity communicators have a profound understanding of the communication and 
information needs of their community in times of war. Information and communica -
tion needs are not defined solely in terms of information dissemination or news. Rodríguez et al.  11
Instead, these communicators have learned to see the social fabric of a community as 
a mesh of communication dynamics that shape people’s sense of identity, their sense 
of belonging and agency, and togetherness – all necessary ingredients for collective 
action (Rodríguez, 2011).
Colombian community communicators operate as relentless ethnographers, continu -
ously exploring every nook and cranny in their community to detect communication and 
information needs and to figure out ways to use media technologies to meet those needs. 
They know how changing historical conditions impact on communication and informa -
tion processes; they detect the opening of new communication spaces even while others 
may be closing; they understand how social, political, and economic dynamics impact on 
communication processes in the community.
Rodríguez’s research documents numerous other instances in which community 
communicators, like Radio Andaquí and their Christmas decorating contest, designed 
community communication interventions – similar to media happenings – tailored to 
meet local communication needs. In Colombian regions of armed conflict, community 
media are used to move already existing communication processes from isolated mar -
gins to central positions. For example, sometimes in moments of collective terror, when 
a community is under siege or attack by armed groups, subtle, frail moments of resist -
ance emerge in unexpected places. Detecting these emerging dynamics, these commu -
nicators design spontaneous media uses that strengthen precarious expressions of 
collective agency. Media are used to help move the community from being mere victims 
of armed groups, paralyzed and silenced, toward a collective of active agents with a 
voice (Rodríguez, 2011).
In other cases, media are used to open communication spaces in which men, women, 
and children find ways to articulate the lived experiences of human rights violations and 
other modes of victimization at the hands of armed groups in the form of camouflaged 
messages that won’t alert armed groups (Nordstrom, 2004; Ramírez, 2001). Frequently, 
community media carefully and safely move these messages from private to public 
spheres, allowing feelings of shared experience to grow.
Similarly, community communicators use media to improve governance, monitor 
local governments to increase transparency, monitor local elections, de-escalate potential 
violent conflicts within the community, strengthen peace-building community initia -
tives, re-build trust in post-conflict situations, counter the disintegration of life-worlds 
caused by war, re-signify social and cultural spaces hijacked by armed groups, strengthen 
dimensions of life not permeated by war, reconnect families and communities separated 
by war, negotiate and mediate with armed groups, assist refugee families, and coordinate 
food distribution and other logistics (Rodríguez, 2011). As they design media uses to 
trigger or cultivate specific processes, community communicators understand that they 
need to use the full battery of forms of communication: persuasive communication along 
with diffusion of information, participatory communication, communication that empow -
ers, communication that mobilizes, and citizens’ journalism.
Most interesting, however, is their understanding of the performative potential of 
communication. Colombian community communicators have learned that media tech -
nologies can be used ‘to make things happen’ within a community. Media are used not 
just to inform, transmit messages, or empower. They literally make things happen, 12 Media, Culture & Society 
moving into the realm of performative communication. For example, instead of sending 
messages describing non-violence or trying to persuade people to live non-violently in a 
war-torn community, a radio station triggers a process of non-violent conflict resolution 
in the community. The medium allows people to experience non-violent ways to manage 
conflict; the medium subjects  people to what non-violent conflict resolution feels like 
(Rodríguez, 2011).
But for community communicators to activate performative media, the technologies 
need to be malleable and flexible. As with Radio Andaquí’s radiocycle, community com -
municators need to be able to re-invent, bend, hybridize media technologies. But what 
about the plasticity of social media platforms? Is it more or less difficult to bend these 
technologies? Clearly, grassroots organizations and leaders are learning how to bend social 
media platforms. Progressive software designers are developing applications specifically 
designed to meet the communication needs and demands of social movements; to facilitate 
digital story-telling among communities with limited access to technology, a university-
based team working with a group of low-wage immigrant workers co-designed an applica -
tion that allows Latina/o immigrants to upload photos and interviews using basic cellular 
phones (The V ozMob Project, 2011). Recently YouTube released a new tool that allows 
users to blur the faces of demonstrators in YouTube videos in order to protect anonymity 
and to bypass state or police surveillance (Gregory, 2012). These new technologies, how -
ever, are not easily cut off from the for-profit intentions of their originators, again empha -
sizing the importance of political economy discussed in the previous section.
Fourth risk: losing track of the field and re-inventing the 
wheel
As scholars in the area of CfSC, we need to maintain historical, longitudinal perspectives 
on how social movements have used and are using ICTs; we need theoretical and meth -
odological approaches that recognize the complex mesh of factors that shape the poten -
tial of media technologies in contexts of dissent and/or social change. Among these 
factors, speed, immediacy, and the potential to reach massive audiences are important, 
but so are issues of autonomy from corporate and political powers, surveillance and ano -
nymity, cultural malleability, and technological plasticity. New studies on ICTs and 
social movements need to be strongly grounded in this field of research that has flour -
ished since the 1960s. Otherwise, we run the risk of fragmenting findings and simply 
re-inventing the wheel if we lose track of the field of research in the area of CfSC.
In an article in the Journal of Women’ s Health , Carolyn Wang (1999), a public health 
scholar working with women’s health issues in rural China, analyzes an allegedly new 
participatory communication strategy called ‘Photovoice’, which entails women using 
photo cameras to document their lives and health (1999). Wang explains:
People merely creating images is not the key to Photovoice, however. The process also requires 
that people define those images. Photovoice entails people discussing images that they have 
produced, and by doing so, they give meaning to, or interpret, their images. By women telling 
their and their communities’ stories, we might better understand the context that women confer 
their lives and health conditions. (1999: 186)Rodríguez et al.  13
Apart from a single nod to Paulo Freire, the author makes no reference to nor builds upon 
any of the numerous discussions about media making and empowerment that pepper the 
field of participatory video. Not one single reference to the late 1960s Fogo Process 
(Quarry, 1994; Waugh et al., 2010), or Pilar Riaño’s (1994) well-known book on women 
and grassroots communication, or Maria Protz’s (1994) work with video and women in 
India, or Rosa Maria Alfaro’s work with video and women in inner city Lima, Peru, or 
Pat Aufderheide’s (1995) work with the ‘Video in the Villages’ project in Brazil, just to 
name a few.
This type of scenario, in which an anthropologist or public health researcher stumbles 
upon community media and ‘discovers’ it as a ‘new’ area of research is not exceptional. 
We are seeing an increasing number of submissions to communication journals in which 
authors investigate community, participatory media, or radical, militant, social move -
ments’ media as if they were the first ones to write about the subject. Authors cite anthro -
pological or public health sources but do not link to the field of social movement media, 
participatory media, or community/alternative/citizens’ media. While not very old, this 
area of research has accumulated a significant body of knowledge since the 1980s. As a 
field of study, research on social movement media, participatory media, community/
alternative/citizens’ media has clear boundaries, a canon, a set of classics, several gen -
erations of experts, ongoing debates, major theoretical and methodological contributions 
(especially in areas such as agency and voice, interconnections between communication 
and power, communication and culture as political actions), and key historical moments 
(the Iranian revolution, the Nicaraguan revolution, Zapatista uses of media technologies, 
Indymedia, to name just a few of the most salient examples). Within the discipline of 
communication, community/alternative/citizens’ media is arguably the most internation -
alized area of research. Losing track of the richness of the field, and conducting research 
on media, social movements, and social change as if the field of CfSC did not exist, puts 
at risk significant opportunities to build upon already existing knowledge gleaned from 
a multitude of locations, contexts, and conversations.
Conclusion
During the 1980s and 1990s, community/alternative/citizens’ media research had an 
extremely low population density; at the time, researching alternative media was first, 
obscure, and, second, looked down upon as completely useless and anachronistic – after 
all, the Berlin Wall had fallen down, and academic conference halls brimmed with enthu -
siasm for free markets and mainstream media. Today we experience a very different type 
of scenario, where discussions around social movements and alternative uses of ICTs 
have become so trendy that we see them everywhere, including among mainstream 
media and corporate voices boasting about their role in revolutionary contexts. To ade -
quately understand the rich historical contexts, political economy frameworks, and com -
plex modes of communication involved in these media happenings will require a 
commitment to engaging existing research and pushing it in new directions.
It has been a long journey from the time of tin miners’ radio stations in Bolivia and 
uses of video for empowerment on Fogo Island; and yet here we are today, after having 
witnessed and studied the Iranian revolution, the Zapatistas, Indymedia, the World Social 14 Media, Culture & Society 
Forums, the Arab Spring, the ‘ Indignados ’ movement, and the Occupy movement. As 
researchers in the field of community/alternative/citizens’ media, our challenge is to help 
facilitate an organized interchange of research, methodologies, and ideas. We must con -
tinue positioning the field, with its rich history, previous and new debates, and major 
contributions to the discipline. Initiatives such as John Downing’s Encyclopedia of 
Social Movement Media  (2010), or Alfonso Gumucio-Dagron’s and Thomas Tufte’s 
Communication for Social Change Anthology  (2006) have made key contributions to 
positioning the field. We all need to continue this trend.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or 
not-for-profit sectors.
Notes
1. Benjamin Ferron (2012a) compiled numerous terms, including: alternative, radical, citizens’, 
marginal, participatory, counter-information, parallel, community, underground, popular, 
libres , dissident, resistance, pirate, clandestine, independent, new, young, micro – showing 
that the struggles for the definition of these media are inseparably struggles for legitimizing 
or delegitimizing them.
2. See: www.youtube.com/watch?v=H5w4amBIHj4&feature=youtu.be
References
Ali AH (2011) The power of social media in developing nations: new tools for closing the global 
digital divide and beyond. Harvard Human Rights Journal  24: 185–219.
Aufderheide P with Carelli V (1995) The ‘Video in the Villages’ project: videomaking with and 
by Brazilian Indians. Visual Anthropology Review  11(2): 83–93.
Axford B (2011) Talk about a revolution: social media and the MENA uprisings. Globalizations  
8(5): 681–686.
Barassi V and Treré E (2012) Does Web 3.0 come after Web 2.0? Deconstructing theoretical 
assumptions through practice. New Media & Society , published online 14 June.
Bennett WL and Segerberg A (2011) Digital media and the personalization of collective action. 
Information, Communication & Society  14(6): 770–799.
Boddy W (1990) Alternative television in the United States. Screen  31(1): 91–101.
Boyle D (1997) Subject to Change: Guerrilla Television Revisited . New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Chadaigne PJ (2002) La Communication alternative: la presse parallèle en France des années 60 
à la fin des années 90 . Unpublished doctoral thesis, Université Paris II.
Chipembere LJ (2011) Music and social protest (Malawi). In: Downing JDH (ed.) Encyclopedia of 
Social Movement Media . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 347–351.
Christensen C (2011) Twitter revolutions? Addressing social media and dissent. Communication 
Review  14(3): 155–157.
Cohen R (2011) Facebook and Arab dignity. The New York Times , 24 January. Available at: www.
nytimes.com/2011/01/25/opinion/25iht-edcohen25.html (accessed 8 December 2013).
Costanza-Chock S (2008) The immigrant rights movement on the net: between ‘Web 2.0’ and 
Comunicación Popular. American Quarterly  60(3): 851–864.
Cottle S (2011) Media and the Arab uprisings of 2011: research notes. Journalism  12: 647–659.Rodríguez et al.  15
Cottle S and Lester L (2011) Transnational Protests and the Media . New York: Peter Lang.
Drijvers J (1992) Community broadcasting: a manifesto for the media policy of small European 
countries. Media, Culture & Society  14(2): 193–201.
Downing JDH (1991) Community access television: past, present and future. Community 
Television Review  14(3): 6–8.
Downing JDH (2010) Encyclopedia of Social Movement Media . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ferron B (2012a) Les Répertoires médiatiques des mobilisations altermondialistes. Contribution 
à une analyse de la société transnationale . Unpublished doctoral thesis, Université de 
Rennes, France. Available at: http://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/73/18/09/PDF/THESE_
BENJAMIN_FERRON.pdf (accessed January 2014).
Ferron B (2012b) Giving voice to the voiceless or giving peace to the establishment? The ambiv -
alent institutionalization of alternative minority media in Mexico and Israel. In: Rigoni I 
and Saïtta E (eds) Minority Media in a Globalized Public Space . New York: Palgrave, pp. 
135–152.
Fox E and Schmucler H (1982) Comunicación y Democracia en América Latina . Lima, Peru: 
DESCO.
Gerbaudo P (2012) Tweets and the Streets: Social Media and Contemporary Activism . London: 
Pluto Press.
Gladwell M (2010) Small change: why the revolution will not be tweeted. The New Yorker . 
Available at: www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/10/04/101004fa_fact_gladwell (accessed 
8 December 2013).
Gregory S (2012) Visual anonymity and YouTube’s new burring tool. Blog. Available at: http://
blog.witness.org/2012/07/visual-anonymity-and-youtubes-new-blurring-tool/ (accessed 8 
December 2013).
Gumucio-Dagron A and Tufte T (eds) (2006) Communication for Social Change Anthology: 
Historical and Contemporary Texts . New York: Communication for Social Change 
Consortium.
Hagerstrand T (1986) Decentralization and radio broadcasting: on the ‘possibility space’ of a com -
munication technology. European Journal of Communication  1(1): 7–26.
Harlow S (2012) Social media and social movements: Facebook and an online Guatemalan justice 
movement that moved offline. New Media & Society  14(2): 225–243.
Howard PN and Hussain M (2011) The role of digital media. Journal of Democracy  22(3): 35–48.
Huesca R (1996) Participation for development in radio: an ethnography of the Reporteros 
Populares of Bolivia. Gazette  57(1): 29–52.
Jankowski N, Prehn O and Stappers J (eds) (1992) The People’s Voice: Local Radio and Television 
in Europe . London: John Libbey.
Juris JS (2012) Reflections on Occupy Everywhere: social media, public space, and emerging log -
ics of aggregation. American Ethnologist  39(2): 259–279.
Lewes J (2000) The underground press in America (1964–1968): outlining an alternative, the envi -
sioning of an underground. Journal of Communication Inquiry  24(4): 379–400.
Lewis PM (ed.) (1984) Media for People in Cities: A Study of Community Media in the Urban 
Context . Paris: UNESCO.
Lim M (2012) Clicks cabs, coffee houses: social media and the oppositional movements in Egypt 
(2004–2011). Journal of Communication  62: 231–248.
Kidd D and Rodríguez C (2009) Introduction. In: Rodríguez C, Kidd D and Stein L (eds) Making 
Our Media: Global Initiatives Toward a Democratic Public Sphere . Cresskill, NJ: Hampton 
Press, pp. 1 – 22.
Khondker HH (2011) Role of the new media in the Arab Spring. Globalizations  8(5): 675–679.16 Media, Culture & Society 
Martin Barbero J (2006) A Latin American perspective on communication/cultural mediation. 
Global Media and Communication  2(3): 279–297.
Michaels E (1994) Bad Aboriginal Art: Tradition, Media, and Technological Horizons . 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Murphy PD and Rodríguez C (2006) Introduction: between Macondo and McWorld: communica -
tion and culture studies in Latin America. Global Media and Communication  2(3): 267–277.
Nordstrom C (2004) Shadows of War: Violence, Power, and International Profiteering in the 
Twenty-first Century . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Nyamnjoh FB (2006) Communication research and sustainable development in Africa: the need 
for a domesticated perspective. In: Gumucio-Dagron A and Tufte T (eds) Communication for 
Social Change Anthology: Historical and Contemporary Texts . New York: Communication 
For Social Change Consortium, pp. 597–609.
Oduro-Frimpong J (2011) Music and dissent (Ghana and Nigeria). In: Downing JHD (ed.) 
Encyclopedia of Social Movement Media . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 346–347.
Pfeifle M (2009) A Nobel Peace prize for Twitter? Christian Science Monitor , 6 July. Available 
at: www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2009/0706/p09s02-coop.html (accessed 8 
December 2013).
Protz M (1994) Understanding women’s grassroots experiences in producing and manipulating 
media. In: Riaño-Alcalea P (ed.) Women in Grassroots Communication: Furthering Social 
Change . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 102–120.
Qiu JL (2009) Working-class Network Society: Communication Technology and the Information 
Have-less in Urban China . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quarry W (1994) The Fogo Process: An Experiment in Participatory Communication . Unpublished 
thesis, University of Guelph.
Rainie L, Hitlin P, Jurkowitz M, Dimoch M and Neidorf S (2012) The viral KONY 2012 video. 
Pew Internet. Available at: www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Kony-2012-Video.aspx 
(accessed 11 August 2013).
Ramírez MC (2001) Entre el Estado y la Guerrilla: Identidad y Ciudadanía en el Movimiento de 
los Campesinos Cocaleros del Putumayo . Bogotá: ICAHN.
Reyes Matta F (1983) Comunicación Alternativa y Búsquedas Democráticas . México: Fundación 
Friedrich Ebert and ILET (Instituto Latinoamericano de Estudios Transnacionales).
Riaño Alcalá P (ed.) (1994) Women in Grassroots Communication: Furthering Social Change . 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rodríguez C (2011) Citizens’ Media Against Armed Conflict: Disrupting Violence in Colombia . 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Rodríguez C (2001) Fissures in the Mediascape: An International Study of Citizens’ Media . 
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Rodríguez C and Murphy P (1997) The study of communication and culture in Latin America: 
from laggards and the oppressed to resistance and hybrid cultures. Journal of International 
Communication  4(2): 24–45.
Roncagliolo R (1991) The growth of the audio-visual imagescape in Latin America. In: Thede N 
and Ambrosi A (eds) Video the Changing World . Montreal: Black Rose Books, pp. 22–30.
Roth L and Guthrie Valaskakis G (1989) Aboriginal broadcasting in Canada: a case study in democ -
ratization. In: Raboy M and Bruck P (eds) Communicating For and Against Democracy . 
Montreal: Black Rose Books, pp. 221–234.
Shamas K (2011) Lebanese Subjectivities and Media Use: Post/Global Contexts . Unpublished 
doctoral thesis, University of Oklahoma.
Simpson Grinberg M (ed.) (1981) Comunicación Alternativa y Cambio Social: América Latina . 
Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.Rodríguez et al.  17
Spitulnik D (2003) Alternative small media and communicative spaces. In: Hyden G, Leslie M 
and Ogundimu FF (eds) Media and Democracy in Africa . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction 
Publishers, pp. 177–205.
Sreberny A and Khiaban K (2011) Blogistan: The Internet and Politics in Iran . New York: I.B. 
Tauris.
Sreberny-Mohammadi A and Mohammadi A (1994) Small Media, Big Revolution: Communication, 
Culture, and the Iranian Revolution . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Tarrancón A, Borge-Holthoefer J and Moreno Y (2011) Estudio Sobre el 15M en las Redes Sociales . 
University of Zaragoza, Institute for Biocomputation and Physics of Complex Systems (BIFI) 
and CIERZO Development. Available at: 15m.bifi.es/index.php (accessed 11 August 2013).
The VozMob Project (2011) Mobile voices: projecting the voices of immigrant workers by 
appropriating mobile phones for popular education. In: Napoli P and Aslama M (eds) 
Communication Research in Action: Scholar–Activist Collaborations Toward a Democratic 
Public Sphere . Bronx, NY: Fordham University Press pp. 177–196.
Thede N and Ambrosi A (1991) Video the Changing World . Montréal: Black Rose Books.
Trejo R (1980) La Prensa Marginal . México, DF: Ediciones El Caballito.
Tufekci Z and Wilson C (2012) Social media and the decision to participate in political protest: 
observations from Tahrir Square. Journal of Communication  62: 363–379.
Ugboajah FO (2006) Oramedia in Africa. In: Gumucio-Dagron A and Tufte T (eds) Communication 
for Social Change Anthology: Historical and Contemporary Texts . New York: Communication 
for Social Change Consortium, pp. 293–301.
Waisbord S (2001) Family tree of theories, methodologies and strategies in development com -
munication: convergences and differences. Paper prepared for the Communication for Social 
Change Consortium.
Wang CC (1999) Photovoice: a participatory action research strategy applied to women’s health. 
Journal of Women’s Health  8(2):185–192.
Waugh T, Brendan Baker M and Winton E (eds) (2010) Challenge for Change: Activist 
Documentary at the National Film Board of Canada . Montreal-Kingston: McGill-Queens 
University Press.
Wolfson T (2012) From the Zapatistas to Indymedia. dialectics and orthodoxy in contemporary 
social movements. Communication, Culture and Critique  5: 149–170.
Zhuo X, Wellman B and Yu J (2011) Egypt: the first internet revolt? Peace Magazine  27(3): 6.