CGD Policy Paper 149 
July 2019Fuel Subsidy Reform and Green 
Taxes: Can Digital Technologies 
Improve State Capacity and 
Effectiveness?
Reforming inefficient and inequitable energy subsidies continues to be an important priority 
for policymakers as does instituting “green taxes” to reduce carbon emissions. Simply 
increasing energy prices will have adverse impact on poorer consumers, who may spend 
substantial budget shares on energy and energy-intensive products even though the rich 
typically appropriate more of  the price subsidy. Equitable pricing reforms therefore need 
to be accompanied by programs to transfer compensation: depending on the situation, 
this can be targeted or universal. Successful reforms require measures to raise awareness-
of  the subsidies and the problems they cause, effective dissemination of  the reform to the 
population, and rapid feedback loops to facilitate mid-course corrections. Digital technology, 
including for unique identification and payments, as well as general communications, can 
help build government capacity to undertake such reforms and respond to changes in fuel 
markets. The paper outlines the use of  digital technology, drawing on four country cases. 
The technology is only a mechanism; it does not, in itself, create the political drive and 
constituency to push reform forward. However, it can be employed in a number of  ways to 
increase the prospects for successful and sustainable reform.
www.cgdev.org
Center for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Fifth Floor
Washington DC  20036
202-416-4000 
www.cgdev.org
This work is made available under 
the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial  4.0 
license.Abstract
Alan Gelb and Anit MukherjeeCenter for Global Development
2055 L Street NW
Washington, DC  20036
202.416.4000
(f) 202.416.4050
www.cgdev.orgThe Center for Global Development works to reduce global poverty 
and improve lives through innovative economic research that drives 
better policy and practice by the world’s top decision makers. Use and 
dissemination of  this Policy Paper is encouraged; however, reproduced 
copies may not be used for commercial purposes. Further usage is 
permitted under the terms of  the Creative Commons License.
The views expressed in CGD Policy Papers are those of  the authors and 
should not be attributed to the board of  directors, funders of  the Center 
for Global Development, or the authors’ respective organizations.Fuel Subsidy Reform and Green Taxes:  
Can Digital Technologies Improve State Capacity and Effectiveness?
Alan Gelb
Center for Global Development
Anit Mukherjee
Center for Global Development
We are grateful to reviewers of  country studies and to Shanta Devarajan 
and Sanjeev Gupta for very helpful comments on the paper
The Center for Global Development is grateful for contributions from the 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation in support of  this work. 
Alan Gelb and Anit Mukherjee, 2019. “Fuel Subsidy Reform and Green Taxes: Can 
Digital Technologies Improve State Capacity and Effectiveness?” CGD Policy Paper 149. 
Washington, DC: Center for Global Development. https://www.cgdev.org/publication/
fuel-subsidy-reform-and-green-taxes-can-digital-technologies-improve-state-capacityContents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 1 
2. Why subsidies —and sometimes reforms?  ................................ ................................ ...............  4 
2.1 Why subsidies?  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  4 
2.2 Why reforms?  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  5 
2.3 Subsidy reform in the context of climate change: towards a global consensus  
for carbon pricing and ‘green taxes’  ................................ ................................ .........................  7 
3. Components of reform  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  9 
4. Country cases: Contribution of digital technology in fuel subsidy reform  .......................  12 
4.1 Bolivia: capability without reform  ................................ ................................ ....................  12 
4.2 Nigeria: reform effort without capability?  ................................ ................................ ....... 16 
4.3 Iran: building on capacity to reform  ................................ ................................ ................  19 
4.4 India: the reform of the LPG system  ................................ ................................ ...............  23 
5. Conclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 29 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 32 
 
 
 1 1. Introduction  
Reforming inefficient and inequitable energy subsidies continues to be an important priority 
for policymakers as does instituting “green taxes” to reduce carbon emissions. In 2015, fossil 
fuel subsidies, defined as fuel consumption times the gap between existing and efficient 
prices (including environmental costs), touched $4.7 trillion, nearly 6.3 pe rcent of global 
GDP (Coady et.al. 2019). Underpricing of local air pollution constitutes half of this amount, 
and accounting for global warming contributes another quarter of the total subsidy. IMF also 
estimates that efficient fossil fuel pricing in 2015 through the introduction of “green taxes”, 
for example, would have lowered global carbon emissions by 28 percent while increasing 
government revenues by 3.8 percent at the same time.  
These aggregate numbers point to the scale of the challenge faced by gove rnments as they 
embark on a process of rationalization, reallocation and redistribution of energy subsidies, including to encourage clean, renewable energy.  But a single number for energy subsidies, 
significant as it might be, does not fully reflect the c omplexity of the politics, policies and 
programs that determine the allocation and distribution of energy subsidies for individual countries, as well as the global aggregates. Global priorities and realities within countries 
often diverge making it difficult to forge a consensus on a set of policy measures that would 
guide the process of reforms.   
At the country level, energy subsidy reform is complex, not least because of the 
distributional implications. These are recognized in Target 12c of the Sustainab le 
Development Goals:  
Rationalize inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption by 
removing market distortions, in accordance with national circumstances, including by 
restructuring taxation and phasing out those harmful subsidies, where they exist, to reflect 
their environmental impacts, taking fully into account the specific needs and conditions of 
developing countries and minimizing the possible adverse impacts on their development in a 
manner that protects the poor and the affect ed communities.  
Designing, communicating, coordinating and implementing a reform agenda that enables 
governments to move towards efficient pricing1 with equity requires political will, 
administrative acumen and technical capacity, including th e feedback mechanisms to enable 
the calibration of measures through unexpected shocks. What may be politically feasible may 
not be possible to administer effectively.  Conversely, reforms that are both desirable and 
within the capacity of the state to impl ement often need to deal with both political and 
popular opposition.  Policymakers need to strike a delicate balance between competing 
priorities and mitigating actions that will enable them to move to a solution that is both 
more efficient and more equita ble.  
                                                      
1 The term “efficient prices” is used to indicate prices that take into account the externalities generated by 
consumption of a com modity.  Efficient prices will tend to exceed market prices for commodities with negative 
externalities and to fall below them when externalities are positive.   2 There is already a large literature on the need to reform energy subsidies and the design and 
implementation of programs to address them, including many country -level cases.2 This 
paper therefore has no need to overview the entire area.  Our objecti ve is more focused: to 
consider how countries can incorporate digital technology, notably the combination of digital ID and payments, 
including through mobile technology, to help reform their energy subsidies . In particular, we focus on the 
role of digita lization in the design of mechanisms to improve both the efficiency and equity 
of budgetary or economic subsidies, and how it can help to mitigate some of the more difficult problems associated with moving to market pricing for fuels, especially petroleum 
and natural gas.
3 We build on recent experience to address the roles that new digital 
platforms can play in improving state capacity to design policies, implement programs and 
mitigate the impact of the reforms, especially on the poor.  These considerations apply 
similarly to carbon pricing reforms that give rise to the need to impose “green fuel taxes”, 
which will be more or less quantitatively significant depending on the leve l of carbon taxes.   
Digital technologies, broadly defined, have become ubiquitous across the world and almost 
all governments are adopting them at a rapid pace. Digital transformation can help countries 
to consider a wider array of policies than would ha ve been possible to implement otherwise. 
In the case of fuel subsidies, digitalization of public expenditure management, including 
payments, can improve budget reporting and forecasts and increase transparency on the use 
of public resources (Cangiano, Gelb and Godwin -Gruen 2017).  Digital communication tools 
can help governments to raise awareness of subsidies, to explain the need for reform, to build coalitions of support, to nudge consumer behavior and to monitor implementation. 
On the policy side, there can be huge gains from individualizing subsidies —shifting from 
distorting and inequitable price subsidies to direct transfers to individual beneficiaries —
including by leveraging digital and mobile financial services that are growing at a rapid pace 
around the world.  This approach is central to reforms that aim to conform to the aspiration 
of SDG Target 12c.  
The transformation, from “traditional” to “digital” governance, can be conceptualized as an 
expansion of the “policy -possibility frontier (PPF2)” , a frontier setting out the best feasible 
set of trade -offs between the three broad objectives of efficiency, equity, and sustainability. 
The analogy is with the production- possibility frontier (PPF) is widely used in supply -side 
economic analysis to deli neate the tradeoffs, at the margin, between providing various goods.  
Along the lines of the PPF, we can think of innovation as both shifting the best- practice 
PPF2 frontier outwards and enabling a government to move to an efficiency -equity -
sustainability combination that is closer to the frontier.   
Digitalization can help to expand the PPF2 frontier in several ways. For example, inefficient subsidies can be rationalized across different types of fuel with the use of a common digital 
                                                      
2 See for example, Clements, Coady, Fabrizio, Gupta and Alleyne (2013), Vagliasindi (2013), Inchauste and Victor 
(2017),  Flochel and Goptu (2017) and Rentschler (2018)  
3 The term “economic subsidies” is used to describe subsidies generated by holding down prices to less than 
market levels that do not necessarily flow through the budget.  These ar e common, particularly in fuel producing 
countries which mandate the domestic sale of fuels at less than border prices.  3 ID system —as in Ind ia, where the use of Aadhaar enables kerosene subsidies to be phased 
out for households receiving an LPG subsidy.  Reforms can seek to increase the 
developmental impact of individualizing fuel subsidies by targeting them to women and 
using payments to driv e financial inclusion, as one step on the long road towards economic 
parity with men.  Of course, there is no guarantee that the possibility  of more effective 
programs will actually  result in improvements; there are many cases where the introduction 
of new  technology with the potential to improve public administration has led to waste and 
inefficiency rather than progress (Dener, Watkins and Dorotinsky 2011, Gelb and Diofasi 
2018).   
Figure 1: Digitalization and expansion of policy options  
 
More generally, even if they expand the “policy possibility frontier” for governments, new 
technologies might do little to induce reforms.  As depicted in Figure 1, there may be little 
overlap between the set of policies made newly pos sible by technology and the set of policies 
supported by political and social priorities.  Bolivia, the first country in the spectrum 
considered here, appears to have ample capacity to shift from price subsidies towards more 
equitable and efficient individ ualized direct transfers or dividend payments, but currently 
lacks the political and social drive to do so.  Nigeria has a long record of attempting to 
reform fuel price subsides but (among other limitations) has lacked the capacity to offer 
credible compe nsation. We argue that its recent “price modulation” reforms, undertaken in 
response to extreme fiscal pressure caused by low fuel export prices, are not likely to be sustainable if, and when, world energy prices recover.  Iran, the third country in the 
spectrum, leveraged a strong civil registration and identification system as well as capacity in 
its banking system to implement a major reform.  It did not necessarily use the latest in digital 
technology but did employ digital communications in a number o f ways.  India’s continuing 
reform of its household LPG subsidies demonstrates a multifaceted use of digital systems to 
move towards market pricing of cooking fuel through a voucher -type direct cash transfer 
mechanism, in a process that could be of interes t to many other countries.   
4 Moving towards digital programs raises a number of potential hurdles for governments.  One 
is to ensure that the digital applications are inclusive.  Even though the coverage of digital ID 
and financial systems is expanding ra pidly, in many countries they still fall short of reaching 
the poorest.  In some countries, many poor people will need to acquire more capacity to 
work effectively with such systems (Microsave 2017).  Another challenge is to protect 
personal data and priva cy with the transition towards digital societies and economies. The 
number of developing countries with data protection laws has been increasing, so that some 
120 countries had such a framework in place by 2017, but many developing countries do not 
have data privacy laws and some others with laws lack the capacity to enforce them 
(Greenleaf 2017).  This paper will not go further into such cautions, but it is important to flag 
them at the outset.   
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the different motivations 
for countries to provide fuel subsidies and the rationale for reforms. Section 3 sets out a 
conceptual framework for the analysis and stages of a typical reform.  Using these stages, 
Section 4 explores the potential or actual contribution of new digital platforms in the four 
countries.  Section 5 concludes with a summary of lessons learnt and provides 
recommendations for effectively using digital systems for energy subsidy reforms going forward.   
2. Why subsidies —and sometimes reforms?  
2.1 Why subsidies?  
Part of the complexity in the design of reforms reflects the multiple reasons that lead countries to subsidize energy. They may be offered to sustain producing sectors with political clout or to  favor consumers more, or less, selectively.  One interesting analysis of 
such factors at work is by Wheeler (2008), who investigates the forces influencing US congressional voting on proposed legislation to curb carbon emissions.  At state level, he 
finds  that both high dependence on the fossil fuel industry and low income are significant 
determinants of opposition to carbon taxes or quotas.  Wheler notes that carbon taxes are 
seen, by those opposing them, as elite efforts to impose a regressive tax on poorer members 
of society as well as detrimental to producing industries. The same rejection of carbon taxes 
as “elitist” policies of the rich inflicted on the struggling poorer classes has characterized the 
violent “Yellow Vest” protests that paralyzed Paris  in late 2018.
4 
                                                      
4 As reported by the Associated Press : Macron, like French presidents before him, made environmental and energy decisions 
without expla ining to the public how important they are and how their lives will change. He’s also seen as the “president of the rich” 
— his first fiscal decision as president was scrapping a wealth tax. So hiking taxes on gasoline and diesel was seen as especia lly 
unfair to the working classes in the provinces who need cars to get to work and whose incomes have stagnated for years . December 6, 
2018.  https://www.apnews.com/8b9d12d3605b4f6fa989c5377393d547  5 Figure 2: Gilet Jaune (Yellow Vest) protest in France, December 20185 
 
Source: Wikimedia Commons (CC BY 4.0)  
Price subsidies may be provided to advance certain socio -economic and environmental 
priorities  when no better alternatives exist. For example, India subsidizes cooking gas to 
improve women’s health and reduce reliance on firewood; other countries support on-  or 
off-grid electricity for poor rural households, including to improve lighting to help children 
complete homework assignments.  In these cases, when the particular energy source is seen 
as a “merit good”, it is not sufficient to simply replace a price subsidy with a general income 
transfer; some form of consumption incentive must be offered, perhaps through vouchers 
for lifeline consumption, up to a specified level. The size and distribution of the subsidy can 
then be controlled in a similar way as for a general cash transfer compensation.   
2.2 Why reforms?  
Given that fuel subsidies distort market prices, are often inequitable and impose a significant 
burden on government budgets, the literature on energy subsidies highlights several factors that can motivate reforms.  
First, to reduce allocative efficiency losses . As is well documented, fue l price subsidies 
create distortions that lead to over -use, with accompanying adverse economic and 
environmental externalities.  While demand elasticities may be low in the short run, they 
increase substantially over time, as older plant and vehicles can b e replaced with more fuel -
                                                      
5 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yellow_vests_movement#/media/File:2018 -12-01_14- 37-38_manif -GJ-
Belfort.jpg  
6 efficient investments and as higher prices induce technology advances (see for example, 
Hossinger et al 2017).  
Second, to improve equity . Price subsidies are typically mostly appropriated by richer 
groups who have higher levels of direct and indirect energy consumption.  They are therefore 
regressive, supporting inequitable distribution of benefits across the population.  At the same 
time, the direct and indirect dependence on fuels can be high in relative terms for the poorer 
segments of society.  They may not own automobiles but may be dependent on diesel -fueled 
transport; they are also likely to use kerosene and other oil derivatives for cooking.  As shown 
by the Bolivia case (below), even if the rich use far more energy per he ad, the weight of 
energy -intensive sectors in total consumption can be higher for the poor than for the rich.  
As noted by Inchauste and Lustig (2017), increasing consumption taxes will lower disposable 
income for the poor without a guarantee that they wi ll benefit from any public services that 
might be funded.  Especially in poor countries, there are few alternatives to the use of direct 
transfers to compensate for the reduction of subsidies or for higher indirect taxes.   
Third, to reduce leakages and in crease transparency . Subsidy systems are often opaque 
and complex, partly because opacity is in the interest of those benefiting from them.  
Complex subsidy systems give rise to a substantial bureaucracy with a powerful vested 
interest in maintaining the status quo . The implementation of Nigeria’s fuel subsidies, for 
example, has itself resulted in massive losses due to diversion and corruption.  Not all of the 
cost of the subsidies corresponds to gains by energy consumers.  Reducing opacity requires 
that any alternative compensation mechanism be simpler and more transparent, with little 
bureaucratic discretion to allocate the subsidy to special interest groups (Atansah et.al., 
2017).   
Fourth, for strategic reasons.  The threat of looming resource scarci ty could provide a 
motive to reform, but in practice the prospect of reserve depletion has not usually been major reform driver.  However, reforms to decrease the fuel -intensity of the economy 
sometimes been encouraged for strategic reasons —to reduce de pendence on imports and 
improve self -sufficiency.  Thus, the US Congress first established fuel economy standards 
(CAFE) in 1975, in response to the 1973 Arab oil embargo which threatened supplies. Faced 
with international sanctions, Iran’s recent subsidy reforms were largely motivated by the 
need to improve energy efficiency.   
Fifth, in response to macroeconomic and fiscal pressure to reduce fuel subsidies.  A 
multi country review carried out by the IMF found that out of 21 country experiences of energy subsidy reform, 11 had an ongoing IMF -supported program during the reform 
episode and that in 10 of these countries this included conditionality on energy subsidy reforms.  (Clements et.al.,2013).
6 Reforms are not always, or only, driven by macroeconomic 
pressures but they are frequently a major factor in pushing countries to reduce or eliminate subsidies.  The stronger are such pressures, the higher will be the priority on eliminating 
                                                      
6 Conditionality on subsidy reform is fairly common in IMF programs.  A survey of 212 programs in 106 
countries by Gupta, Schena, and  Yousefi (2018) finds such conditionality in 40 cases.   7 diversion and leakage.  At the same time, there will be less fiscal spa ce to offer compensatory 
measures to cushion the effect of higher prices on the population at large, increasing the 
premium on effective targeting.   
Fiscal pressures evolve over the resource cycle depending on whether countries are energy 
importers or e xporters. For energy importing countries, the rationale for raising domestic 
prices is stronger when international energy prices are high or rising in order to keep 
budgetary subsidies at an acceptable level. For energy exporters, the pressure to raise 
domestic prices can be higher when world prices are low or falling, due to budgetary 
pressure on the revenue side because of lower energy taxes. Policymakers in both sets of countries therefore face the difficult task of mitigating energy price shocks in the face of 
fiscal constraints with a limited set of instruments at their disposal and make reforms durable.  
2.3 Subsidy reform in the context of climate change: towards a 
global consensus for carbon pricing and ‘green taxes’
 
Reducing fossil fuel consumptio n is at the heart of the solution to combat greenhouse gas 
emissions that causes global warming. As well as moving away from budgetary or (as in the 
case of energy exporters) economic price subsidies, fossil fuel pricing reforms can include 
the implementation of ‘green taxes’ in order to reduce carbon emissions and encourage a 
shift towards clean and renewable sources of energy.  As noted in the 2016 Carbon Pricing 
Watch Report, there is as yet no uniform carbon pricing policy across countries, but a large 
number do price carbon emissions. As of May 1, 2016, 162 intended contributions to 
reducing emissions, representing 190 parties, had been submitted to the UNFCCC.  Of these, 
more than 90 included proposals for emission trading systems, carbon taxes, and ot her 
carbon pricing initiatives.   
The Report documents a wide range of CO2 tax rates, with a few being very high and most 
at modest levels.  Seventy -five percent of the covered emissions were at prices under $10 per 
ton but quite a number exceeded this lev el by a substantial margin.  At the same time, the 
UN Global Compact called for a minimum rate of $100 per ton by 2020 to be on track for a 
temperature pathway of not more than 1.5 –2.0 degrees of warming.  Studies have suggested a 
wide range of tax rat es and tax trajectories, with initial taxes increasing from around $10 per 
ton to as much as $100 per ton in the case of the modeling of the Carbon Tax Center.7 In 
considering the distributional impact of green taxes and how to compensate for them, it is  
therefore reasonable to think about a potential carbon tax range of $10 -  $100 per ton with a 
base scenario of around $20. 8  
                                                      
7 https://www.carbontax.org/blog/2008/10/18/a -question -of-balance -finding -the-optimal -carbon -tax-rate/  
8 The impact also depends, of course, on the share of emissions covered by a carbon tax regime.  This can vary 
considerably; for the example of Canada, following the implementation of the carbon tax federal backstop on 
April 1, 2019, coverage in the province s will range from a low of 47 per cent in Prince Edward Island to a high of 
90 per cent in New Brunswick (Dobson, Winter and Boyd 2019).  8 Resources for the Future estimates that a tax of $20 per ton adds about $0.20 per gallon to 
gasoline prices (somewhat less than 1 0% of recent US retail prices) and $1.00 per 1000 cubic 
feet for natural gas9. These increases are modest relative to the observed differences in fuel 
prices across countries and variations over time.  A carbon tax at the upper end of the range 
would invo lve a tax of $1.00 per gallon but even this falls well within the range of historically 
observed price variation. Prices for West Texas Crude, for example, peaked at $122 per 
barrel in 1980, crashed as low as $18 per barrel in 1998 then skyrocketed as high  as $160 per 
barrel in mid -2008, just before the global financial crisis.  Across countries, on September 17, 
2018, petrol prices ranged from a low of $0.01 per liter in Venezuela to a high of $2.17 in 
Hong Kong, with Norway and Iceland only a little lower . Natural gas prices vary a great deal 
too, being far lower in North America, which currently has a surplus of gas, than in Asia 
which has a deficit. The percentage increase in fuel prices resulting from any given level of 
green taxes will therefore vary a great deal across countries and over time, depending on the 
prevailing price of fuels.   
Proposals to compensate consumers for higher fuel prices have outlined a number of possibilities.  For the US, for example, Metcalfe (2007) and other studies have ad vocated 
using carbon tax revenues to reduce payroll taxes.  A tax of $17 per ton for the US is 
estimated to provide enough resources to eliminate the payroll tax on the first $3,660 earned 
by each worker and would enable an average 11% reduction in payroll  taxes, with greater 
percentage reductions for the lowest -paid workers.  Such an approach could be considered 
for higher -income countries, but in low income countries payroll taxes are only levied on 
employees in formal sector occupations (and in some case s, only on public employees); these 
tend not to be among the poorer cohorts of society.  As noted previously, uncompensated 
carbon taxes would involve a further levy on the monetary earnings of lower -income groups, 
even if most of the cost would be borne by higher -income deciles who spend more on fuels 
and fuel -intensive services.  Direct financial transfers offer the only feasible way to insulate 
poor consumers from the impact of green taxes.  
How large might such transfers be, and how do they compare with the “oil to cash” 
payments that have been advocated for fuel exporting countries?  We can take the example of 
Bolivia which provides substantial fiscal and economic fuel subsidies to its citizens.  Laserna 
(2018) estimates that domestic oil and gas price s are set at around 50% of border price levels 
and that the average implied subsidy per Bolivian household from this difference would be around $300.
10 Adding a “green tax” of $20 per ton of CO2 to the world price to get an 
“efficient” reference price woul d increase the necessary compensation by around $17 per 
head, to around $360 for an average household.  For an energy exporter like Bolivia, the 
effect of a green tax at this level would therefore not be too large relative to the average 
energy subsidy alr eady received by the population.   
                                                      
9 http://www.rff.org/blo g/2017/calculating -various -fuel-prices -under -carbon -tax 
 
10 This makes the simplifying assumption that the subsidy is divided among households, with none allocated to 
help firms adjust to the new price levels.  9 To offer other (rough) estimates, fossil fuels represent around 40% of total energy 
consumption for lower -income Sub -Saharan Africa.  This is equivalent to around 70 gallons 
per head per year; green taxes of 20 cents per gallon would then amount to a uniform cost increase of $14 per person per year, somewhat less than for Bolivia.  Applying this cost 
increase to Tanzania, it would come to around $70 per year for an average family.  This is 
about the same as the level of co mpensation provided by the basic unconditional tranche of 
the TASAF PSSN program, although total transfers under this program can be considerably 
higher.  A similar calculation for India suggests an average green tax cost increase of $12.50 
per head.
 11 This level of compensation would be modest relative to central budgetary 
spending on India’s large and complex system of social benefits and subsidies, which 
amounts to around $60 per person.   
The level of compensation required to return the proceeds of gr een taxes to people 
uniformly across all income groups is therefore not negligible. However, unless the carbon tax is raised to very high levels, is well within the range of social transfers already seen in 
many lower and middle -income countries.  For mode st carbon tax rates, the levels of 
compensation may not be sufficient to warrant introducing a separate compensation scheme, so that it might be more feasible to graft additional financing onto existing programs.  For 
high carbon taxes and “oil to cash” re forms in producing countries that maintain deep price 
subsidies, the situation is different.  The implied levels of uniform compensation are large 
enough to warrant a distinct “dividend” program, especially if the intention is to aim for 
uniform compensati on than to build on existing targeted programs (Moss, Lambert and 
Majerowicz 2015).  
3. Components of r eform  
Consistent with SDG12, the general pattern of reform will seek to shift from price subsidies towards individualized compensation, with degree o f targeting depending on country 
conditions. While some studies introduce a complex representation of reform (Rentschler 
2017), we break down the process into four components as represented in Figure 1.  They are 
not strictly sequential since the reform pr ocess will involve some focus on all elements at any 
time and a constantly shifting emphasis between them.   
                                                      
11 Based on typical energy consumption levels:  see https://www.enerdata.net/publications/executive-
briefing/world -energy -expenditures.html   10 Figure 3: Conceptual Framework for fuel subsidy reform  
 
Raising awareness and building a consensus on subsidies and the need to reform 
them.  At the initial stage, the formulation of a reform agenda is usually a technocratic process 
where experts are convened to recommend policies to address identified problems.  Since 
subsidies are not always transparent, this early stage requires building an evidence base on their 
level, their allocation, the direct and indirect cost to the exchequer, and their impact, including 
on the distribution of public expenditure.  Expert recommendations then need to be marketed 
to create buy -in from the political establishment and to be communic ated effectively to the 
people —often difficult steps in the reform process.  
Effective communication on the need for reform and its prospective impact can help mitigate both the political risk and the popular opposition that are common to almost all fuel  
subsidy reform initiatives.  This is a key lesson emerging from the meta -analysis of country 
case studies (Clements et.al., 2013). Informational reforms —interventions intended to 
improve the state of information about subsidies designed with the popular  perception in 
mind —can expand the political operating space and improve the probability of a successful 
reform agenda (Inchauste and Victor, 2017). Publicly available information can be used to compare domestic policies in a global context, thereby rais ing awareness of the magnitude of 
subsidies (or ‘subsidy salience’) and the consequences of inaction. Increased transparency of 
the magnitude of the subsidies and their socio -economic and environmental consequences 
(fuel shortages, inflationary pressures, pollution etc.) is necessary to build consensus and secure buy in from key stakeholders in the reform process, and to neutralize, or preferably 
win over, the beneficiaries of the current system.  
Designing components, including the envisaged compensation m echanism as an 
integral part of the reform process . This includes details of the scope of the reform, its 
management and accountability mechanisms, its speed and sequencing, and keeping in mind 
the capacity required to implement it at scale.  These plans w ill often confront the weight of 
previously failed reform efforts; in many countries, there will be public memory of previous 
episodes of subsidy reform and their social and economic impact. Past experiences of •Extent of subsidy
•Need for reform
•Political and popular 
buy-in 
Awareness 
and 
consensus 
building•Compensation 
mechanism 
•Implementation 
capacityDetailed 
design •Managing 
compensation
•Improving 
targeting
Implementation•Performance 
evaluation
•Feedback on design 
and impactMonitoring 
and Feedback11 administrative mismanagement and personal har dship shape peoples’ perception of the 
government’s capacity to fulfill current promises. This places a premium on simplicity, even 
though it may be necessary to fine -tune the model over time.   
The need for simplicity and credibility bears on the question of whether compensation 
should be through individual or socialized benefits.  Political decisionmakers often justify 
subsidy reforms as necessary to improve fiscal management and promise improvements in 
infrastructure and social services, such as roads, p ublic transport, education and health.  But 
especially if capacity and governance is weak, such promises may not have much credibility 
in the eyes of the population.  In contrast, a reform program based on individualizing the 
subsidy regime by instituting private payments directly to beneficiaries can be more transparent and inclusive by design and can also facilitate a clear accountability structure because transfers to well -identified beneficiaries are relatively easy to track. To the extent to 
which the transfer mechanisms also help progress towards other, easily -monitorable, goals —
such as financial inclusion or more equitable compensation—they can help build the 
credibility of the reform.   
Targeting compensation and managing the distribution of bene fits. In the real world, 
this extends beyond households to encompass energy -intensive sectors and enterprises that 
will need assistance to restructure in response to higher energy costs, or else to cushion 
closure.  Around one third of the fiscal resource s released by Iran’s energy price reforms was 
dedicated to this purpose.  On the household side, countries that are able to leverage broad, 
well-functioning, social protection systems benefit from having an essential building block in 
place, as do countrie s where there is already a high level of financial inclusion or the capacity 
to leverage payments to further roll out financial infrastructure. Countries have adopted different approaches towards targeting, with some, including both Iran and India, as 
discussed below, initially imposing weak, if any, restrictions on accessing compensation but 
later shifting towards tighter targeting.  Targeting involves tradeoffs, between cost (including 
that of the targeting mechanism itself) and broad acceptability, and a lso transparency, unless 
the criteria for beneficiary selection are easily evident.   
Monitoring and tracking the program and its impact  to ensure that problems in 
implementation are identified early. Centralizing information in a “war room” can help 
polic ymakers to undertake mid -course correction if needed, through tweaking or even 
redesigning the program in response to unexpected outcomes or shocks.  Tracking 
implementation is a capacity intensive process, especially if the performance metrics involve 
collection and analysis of extensive datasets both at the administrative and individual levels. 
Moreover, demonstrating impact requires tracking process and outcome indicators, as well 
as budgetary savings and beneficiary perception of the reforms. Given inc reased popular 
awareness and scrutiny, the onus will be on the government to use data more effectively to maintain and increase support for the reform.   
Ensuring sustainability of the reforms. The success of any reform agenda relies on its 
sustainability.  Reforms are often sequential rather than a one -off process; governments need 
to be flexible in terms of the transfer as well as its targeting mechanisms. This is particularly 
true for fuel, where volatile international markets make it difficult to manage subsidies within 12 a predictable fiscal envelope. Moving from generalized price subsidies towards individualized 
compensation and the use of digital systems offers governments more degrees of freedom to 
manage the distribution of any subsidy or compensation.  Moreover, effective use of digital 
technology and communications provides an opportunity to implement “soft targeting” 
through moral suasion (or “nudges”), encouraging recipients to self -select out of the subsidy 
and increasing the probability that the re form process would be sustainable in the medium 
and long run.  
4. Country cases: Contribution of digital technology in fuel 
subsidy reform  
Can digital technology contribute towards government’s capacity to implement reforms and 
so expand the Policy -Possibi lity Frontier? Will this be reflected in better policies? We 
consider these questions in the context of a spectrum of four countries, Bolivia, Nigeria, Iran and India.  This spectrum of countries shows that having digital ID and payments is neither 
necessa ry nor sufficient for reform, but that they can be useful when other conditions are in 
place. We consider each of the cases in detail below.  
4.1 Bolivia: c apability without reform
12 
4.1.1 Country and reform context  
Bolivia, a landlocked South American country of 11 million people, has considerable oil reserves and very large natural gas reserves; it was an exporter of natural gas as early as the 
1970s.  As in many other energy producers, domestic fuel consumption is heavily subsidized. 
Prices are determine d by political decisions guided by a nationalistic ethos that natural 
resources are collectively owned, and that the dividends from their extraction are the birthright of its citizens.  Historically, this goal has been achieved by setting domestic prices 
at around half the level of FOB international prices; the fuel subsidies arise as a consequence 
of this price differential.   
Over the last two decades, with rising fuel consumption Bolivia has become a net importer 
of gasoline, so that volatile world price s cause subsidies to pose a challenge for prudent fiscal 
management.  Due to low domestic natural gas prices, demand has increased there too, from 
direct household use as well as from sectors, such as power, that use natural gas as an input.  
Bolivia has f oregone potential export earnings and fiscal revenues, distributing the dividend 
from natural gas to its citizens through a universal and untargeted price subsidy.  This, added 
to revenue foregone from the sale of domestic oil at border prices plus the bu dgetary 
subsidies on imported oil, constitutes a formidable energy subsidy.  It was estimated at almost 
$2.9 billion in 2013, very large for an economy of only $31 billion.  Another consequence has 
been the neglect of other, sustainable, sources of electri city, in particular hydro -power.  
                                                      
12 This section relies heavily on Laserna (2018).  13 Figure 4: Protests against natural gas exports in Bolivia, 2003   
 
Bolivia has made efforts to rein in the subsidies.  Following the global crisis and collapse of 
world energy prices, t he government attempted to increase the price of gasoline by 73 
percent  in December 2010.  The objective was to limit subsidies that had reached 10.5 
percent of GDP in 2008. 13 Protests erupted across the country, forcing the government to 
quickly back dow n and restore the status quo. There has not been a reform episode since 
then, and the issue is no longer on the political agenda.   
Bolivia does have experience of using fuel taxes to fund direct transfers.  Taxes levied on the 
consumption of fuel support social safety net programs such as Renta Dignidad, an old age 
pension scheme, whose origins dates back to the 1997 Bonosol program. In 2016, $422 
million was distributed to 1.3 million beneficiaries through this program, which now covers 
all citizens older  than 60 years of age. The scope of social transfers has been further 
expanded through new programs for pregnant mothers and school children, and these 
programs are also funded through fuel taxes. Recent evidence suggests that this aspect of 
Bolivia’s redistributive policy has been pro- poor, resulting in a reduction of both poverty and 
inequality over the last decade and a half (Vargas and Garriga, 2015).  
To implement these programs, Bolivia has been able to build on good capacity to identify its 
people, on widespread access to digital communications, and on a moderate level of financial 
inclusion. Biometric identification was introduced in a successful drive to register voters for 
the 2009 elections; this saw a major expansion in the rolls, with 5.2 millio n people enrolling 
to form the basis for a population register, including many in isolated communities.  The 
coverage of the biometric national ID system is now almost universal for those above 18 
years, the legal voting age in the country, and this is use d to identify those receiving transfers.   
Per the World Bank’s FINDEX 2017 report, 54 percent of Bolivia’s population age 15 and 
above have a financial account.  This is about average for South American countries, where 
                                                      
13 Presid ent Evo Morales described them as “bleeding subsidies”   
14 financial inclusion is relatively low compared to other regions at the similar levels of per 
capita GDP, but Bolivia is one of the stronger performers as it is among the poorer 
countries in the region.   
Mobile coverage is extensive —over 90 percent of households have mobile phones, and 
mobile payment points are used to distribute Renta Dignidad transfers.  In exceptional 
situations, custom disbursement arrangements prevail such as disbursement operated by the 
military in some very remote areas. This identification and payments architecture could 
readily be used to help to further reform fuel subsidies, but such initiatives have not been 
forthcoming since 2010. We can consider the potential for using Bolivia’s ID, 
communications and payments capacity to further individualize and reform su bsidies.   
4.1.2 Awareness and consensus building  
Bolivia’s case shows that while digital identification and payment systems can be used as a tool to reform fuel subsidies, they are not necessarily the binding constraint. As in many 
other countries, the pr imary constraint is political.  If fuel subsidies are equally divided among 
households, each is estimated to receive $300 annually
14. Based on consumption patterns, 
the distribution of the subsidy is highly unequal— families in the poorest decile received  $189 
while those in the highest decile get nearly five times as much ($971). Since most of the 
subsidy is not reflected in the budget, there is little public recognition of its magnitude and 
distribution, or of the potential value of reform to improve both efficiency and equity. As for other fuel exporters, high global energy prices reduce the pressure on government to 
undertake unpopular reforms.  However, the long run consequences of Bolivia’s subsidy due 
to demand growth, the regressive nature of its di stribution, and the volatility of international 
energy prices, suggests that reform needs to be high on the policy agenda.  
A first step could therefore be to increase awareness of subsidies, or subsidy salience, among 
Bolivians.  Prices posted for energy  and for energy -intensive services such as transport —
which factors large in Bolivia’s sparser regions —could be complemented with information 
on their subsidy component.  India has done this, for example, in the marketing of subsidized 
fertilizers to ra ise awareness among farmers —the first stage in promoting a dialog on the 
over-use of fertilizers (Giri et al 2017) and for consumers purchasing LPG (below).  Digital 
communications, including social media, could also be used to disseminate information an d 
generate consensus in favor of the reforms.   
4.1.3 Reform design and compensatory transfer  
Bolivia’s populist philosophy, that everyone should share in the benefit of its natural 
resources, has been reflected in a policy of socialization —the oil and gas sectors were 
nationalized in 2006 -- but without much detailed consideration of the distribution of 
benefits, which are at  present provided largely through the subsidies.  A prospective reform 
design therefore needs to address the issue of equity, especially if macroeconomic pressures 
                                                      
14 These estimate abstracts from the share of fuel subsidies that accrue to producers and that are not passed on, 
in some form, to domestic consumers.  For more details, see Laserna 2018.   15 to reduce subsidies were to result in across -the-board increases in the administered price s of 
fuels. Implementing a credible compensatory mechanism should be relatively 
straightforward, drawing on Bolivia’s largely successful system of social transfers. Per 
estimates quoted above, each family receives $300 on average annually in fuel subsidies . If 
this amount were transferred uniformly, the poorest four deciles would receive more than the amount needed to cover the higher cost of energy.  
Digitalization opens up further possibilities to calibrate the level of transfers and improve 
the efficiency  of the targeting mechanism.  Equity could be enhanced by assigning, say, half 
of the average subsidy as a universal transfer, while the remaining share is distributed to those below the poverty line (40 percent of the population in 2016).
15 Another approac h 
could be to encourage higher -income groups to self -select out of the subsidy.  As shown by 
the examples of Iran and India (below), this could be encouraged by effective communications and outreach initiative using both traditional and digital channels.   
4.1.4 Implementation  
As already noted, Bolivia already operates large scale social transfer systems that pay directly to beneficiaries —the elderly, expectant mothers and school children.  In 2016, over 11 
million transactions were performed to deliver Renta Dignidad alone.  Beneficiaries were 
given the option of receiving it monthly, quarterly or annually, in electronic form that can be 
cashed -out at banks or at agents of mobile money providers. While data on the efficiency of 
the transfer mechanism or the ease of withdrawal is not readily available, Bolivia’s delivery 
systems are of particular interest because of the challenge of its geography, with many 
remote communities.   
4.1.5 Monitoring and feedback  
One of the most important contributions of digital technologies to fuel subsidy reforms is its role in monitoring implementation and providing feedback to policymakers in almost real - 
time. With careful design of the transfer mechanism, it is possible to track uptake of subsidy 
at the individual level, including through leveraging existing delivery channels such as 
topping up payments for Renta Dignidad.  Delivery data can be monitored against census 
and satellite -based population data to help identify difficult -to-reach populations and target 
services t o them, ensuring access and increasing the reach of the subsidy transfer program as 
a whole.  Another key factor is the continuous feedback made possible by digital systems, to 
help make mid -course corrections. This would be important in case Bolivia decid es to 
individualize energy subsidies because of the need to be able to adjust to macroeconomic 
factors and world energy markets.  
                                                      
15 https://d ata.worldbank.org/country/bolivia  16 4.2 Nigeria: r eform effort without capability?16 
4.2.1 Country and reform context  
Nigeria, the most populous country in Afric a with a population of nearly 200 million, is a 
member of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Although Nigeria 
contains 28.5 percent of Africa’s crude oil reserves and produces 26 percent of the 
continent’s oil, investments in domestic re fining have lagged so that over 80 percent of 
gasoline had to be imported in 2011. In recent years Nigeria has come under severe fiscal 
stress as a result of declining global crude oil prices and political instability in the Niger delta, 
the main oil -produ cing area of the country. Volatile global prices, for both fuel exports and 
imports, create significant macroeconomic instability, including in the management of fuel 
subsidies, and present an ongoing challenge for a government with limited revenue -raising  
capacity.  
Nigeria’s fuel subsidy system is unusual for an energy exporter since it relies on fiscal 
revenues from exported crude oil to subsidize imports of refined products.  The budgetary 
burden of the fuel subsidy regime reflects the government’s pric ing formula for gasoline, as 
mandated by the Nigerian Petroleum Products Pricing Regulatory Agency (PPPRA). The federal government sets a fixed pump price for gasoline and then pays the difference 
between this and PPPRA’s open market price, which depends o n the prices of global crude 
and refined petroleum imports. This price gap is the mechanism through which subsidies are 
provided.  Corruption and malfeasance in the non -transparent administration of the subsidy 
program have often resulted in additional fi scal costs.   
The fuel subsidy amounted to a record 4.1 percent of GDP in December 2011 and has generally remained above 3.5 percent of GDP until its recent decline.  Its distribution has 
been inequitable, with the richest 20 percent of households receivin g double the benefit of 
the bottom 20 percent (Soile and Mu, 2015). The problems are compounded by deadweight 
losses to the economy, including the smuggling of fuel out of the country, the undermining 
of the domestic refining industry, and opportunities for corruption in oil import contracts.  
Reform efforts have been sporadic and mostly ineffective, largely focused on changing the 
gasoline pricing formula without any effort to undertake structural reforms. In January 2012 
the government announced the compl ete removal of subsidies in order to address the 
precarious state of public finances and the ballooning subsidy bill.  Overnight, the price of 
gasoline more than doubled from $0.46 to $0.87 per liter, catching most Nigerians by surprise. This move was foll owed by two weeks of often violent protests, forcing the 
government to reinstate the subsidies though at a lower level.   
To boost the popularity of the reforms, the government instituted the Subsidy Reinvestment 
and Empowerment Program (SURE -P) to increas e budget allocations to social sectors, 
including through programs for maternal and child health, public works, vocational training 
and other initiatives.  However, SURE -P did not offer transparent monetary compensation 
                                                      
16 This section is largely based on Onyekwena (2019)  17 for higher fuel charges.  It suffere d from a lack of credibility, and perceptions of corruption 
and mismanagement similar to those that reflected the problems with the fuel subsidy 
regime and with public spending in general. It was discontinued by the Buhari government 
as soon as it took off ice in May 2015, on a strong program of anti -corruption.  
With the fall in global oil prices and under extreme fiscal pressure, in January 2016 the government shifted from price subsidies to ‘price modulation.’  This aims to eliminate price 
subsidies throu gh periodic adjustment of domestic prices to reflect the cost of imported 
gasoline.  Although not fully a market pricing mechanism, the program has had some initial 
support and success, helped by low global energy prices that both reduce the need for 
subsi dies and constrain the ability for government to fund them.  However, its long -term 
sustainability and effectiveness in reducing subsidies is yet to be seen.
17  
The state of Nigeria’s digital infrastructure reflects its lack of effective governance in other  
spheres.  The country has struggled to roll out a national ID system under the auspices of the 
National Identity Management Commission (NIMC) set up by an Act of Parliament in 2007.  
Coverage is only about 10 percent, a problem compounded by the fact tha t it is one of over 
a dozen un -connected ID credentials used to access public and private services.18 While 
mobile phone penetration has improved significantly and now stands at 83 percent, only 40 
percent of Nigerians have access to an account in any finan cial institution.  The lack of 
robust identification and payments capacity limits the scope for designing a credible direct 
transfer mechanism, especially in the context of weak governance systems and widespread 
popular perception of corruption and ineffic iency.   
4.2.2 Awareness and consensus building  
Nigeria’s fuel subsidies have been the subject of intense political and popular debate for several decades. What sets the 2012 reform effort apart was the suddenness with which the price decontrol policy was implemented and the ‘searing anger’ that led to popular protests 
fueled by the spread of digital communications, especially mobile phones.
19 The “Occupy 
Nigeria” protests following the removal of fuel subsidy were largely organized by text messages and social media posts, eventually leading to a rollback of the reforms (Chiluwa 
2015).  
Prominent public figures played an important role building consensus against the  reforms 
through social media posts, especially Facebook and Twitter accounts followed by millions 
of Nigerians. YouTube videos spread virally through the internet making ‘OccupyNigeria’ a 
global movement.
20 As depicted in Figure 5, digital media also provided channels for venting 
frustration against the general dysfunction and corruption of the government, its inability to 
                                                      
17 There are already signs of a reversal in the 2019 budget  
https://www.sunnewsonline.com/2019 -budget -shocker -nigerians -query -fg-over-n305bn -fuel-subsidy -provision/  
18 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/156111493234231522/pdf/114628- WP-68p-
TheStateofIdentificationSystemsinAfricaASynthesisofIDDAssessments -PUBLIC.pdf  
19 https://www.cnn.com/2012/01/03/world/africa/nigeria -fuel-protest /index.html  
20 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bqbdc0xJXTk  18 provide basic necessities such as roads, electricity, healthcare and education, with strong calls 
for mass protest movement against the reforms  (Egbunike, 2015). Indeed, if the effect of 
higher fuel prices is simply to channel resources to a government that lacks spending accountability, it is not clear that reform is in the best interests of the population.   
Figure 5: Keyword analysis of Occupy Nigeria protests in social media and 
newspapers  
 
Source: Egbunike, 2015  
The power of digital and social media was taken seriously by the Buhari government as it 
moved towards the policy of price modulation whe n it assumed charge in mid -2015, in the 
face of severe fiscal stress due to lower oil revenues. Opposition to the removal of fuel subsidy was muted, in part due to greater awareness and information on the extent of the 
fiscal crisis. The government used so cial and digital media to communicate the need to raise 
prices to check corruption in public expenditure on subsidies, something that was accepted 
as credible by the general population. This helped build a broad -based coalition that 
supported the reform —at least for a period —and mitigated the likelihood of a political and 
popular backlash against it (Atansah et.al., 2017).  
4.2.3 Reform design and compensatory transfer  
Reforms focusing on eliminating price subsidies without a credible compensation mechanism to mitigate the impact are less likely to achieve their objectives.  Nigeria’s case 
illustrates the problems with the socialization of benefits of fuel subsidies - linking collective 
goods such as roads, health and education to a subsidy reform agenda —when there is low 
credibility in the capacity of state to deliver on its promises.  
The Subsidy Reinvestment and Empowerment Program (SURE -P) was intended to 
reallocate part of the savings from ending the subsidy to improve maternal and child health 
19 services, urban mass transit, vocational training, and public works for unemployed youth and 
women. Around $1.2 billion was allocated to SURE -P annually between 2012 to 2014, most 
of it coming from fiscal savings generated by the price increase of fuel (At ansah et.al. 2017). 
However, the program suffered from a perception of widespread corruption and inefficiency 
with no tangible improvement in social services as promised by the government. For this 
reason, there were no significant protests when the new government of President Buhari terminated SURE -P after taking office in May 2015, focusing instead on the need to address 
corruption and inefficiency in the allocation and distribution of subsidies. However, given 
Nigeria’s fragmented ID system, low financia l inclusion and penetration of mobile money 
services, it is unlikely that any system of compensatory direct benefit transfer can be corruption- free and effective. Developing such capacity should be a policy goal; it can be 
done if there is strong political  will and vision, as the examples of Iran and India show.  
Nigeria’s experience of distributing digital fertilizer vouchers through mobile phones offers a 
possible precedent.   
4.2.4 Implementation  
In contrast to the widespread protests that accompanied the January 2012 reforms, it is 
noteworthy that the policy of price modulation did not generate much political and popular 
opposition. As noted, the government put significant effort into implementation and 
communication; in addition, there was more transpar ency on fiscal costs and a fragmented 
opposition.  The fact that falling international prices enabled the initial price adjustment to be 
downwards may have changed peoples’ perception of the reforms, providing the government with greater political space to  maneuver.  
Judging from past experience, however, there is little reason to believe that the price modulation policy will be sustained if world prices rise again and so relax the fiscal constraint.  Nigeria has not yet evolved an effective compensation mechanism, and by late 
2018 there were signs that increasing world energy prices could signal a return of the subsidies.  There is an urgent need to lock in the gains from the reform and move towards a 
credible compensation mechan ism that would make the sharing of dividends from Nigeria’s 
energy resources more efficient, effective and equitable.
21 22 
4.3 Iran: b uilding on c apacity to r eform  
4.3.1 Country and reform context  
Iran, the largest country in the Middle East with a popul ation of 80 million, is an important 
exporter of energy and a member of OPEC.  With one -eighth of the world’s proven reserves, 
                                                      
21 https://www.cgdev.org/blog/nigeria -lifts-fuel-subsidies- misses -chance -follow -india -future  
22 Nigeria has experimented with the replacement of price subsidies with direct transfers in more limited 
programs, including for fertilizers.  This program was implemented through agricultural associations, with e-
vouchers sent to farmers through mobile phones which also served to identify the farmers.  The vouchers could 
be redeemed by the fertilizer distribu tors to cover the difference between procurement and sale price.  Research is 
on-going on the effectiveness of this initiative (CSEA forthcoming).   20 it accounted for over 11 percent of OPEC’s total production and 4.7 percent of the global 
supply of crude oil. Iran’s large oil industry and its dependence on exports as the primary 
source of government’s revenue poses a significant challenge for fiscal management, 
particularly in the context of sanctions as have been imposed by the United States and the 
EU.  
Fuel subsidies have bee n in place for nearly four decades and have proved politically difficult 
to remove. By the late 2000s, Iran had the highest rates of energy subsidy in the world; they  
were both inefficient and iniquitous. Domestic prices were 10 percent of the global mark et 
price, leading to large -scale smuggling across international borders and to high levels of 
vehicular emissions, making cities like Teheran one of the most polluted urban centers in the 
world. The top income quintile captured nearly 65 percent of the total benefits compared to only 8 percent accruing to those at the bottom, a level of inequality higher than for fuel 
subsidies in most other countries.  At the same time, the basis for the government’s support 
was largely drawn from the poorer and more conse rvative parts of the population, with less 
coming from the richer, urbanized, elite.  A more equitable distribution of energy rents was 
therefore an attractive way to motivate the reform.  
The dysfunction of the fuel subsidy regime, fiscal strain from inte rnational sanctions and the 
collapse of energy prices in the aftermath of the global financial crisis of 2008 eventually 
forced the government to undertake reforms in 2010, although related data analysis had been 
ongoing for several years before.  Iran was  the first country to institute a system of ‘Oil -to-
Cash’ transfers at a national scale, moving to individualize the subsidy into households’ bank accounts. In the process, the government was able to leverage Iran’s strong civil registration 
system to iden tify beneficiaries and capacity in the banking system to expand financial access 
to make the transition to the new system relatively smooth and effective.  
Digitization played an important role in the implementation of the reforms, especially in the banking  sector. Banks upgraded their payments infrastructure and collectively opened 16 
million new accounts to enable all eligible households to access their transfers. While the use of the mobile network for payments was not as significant, banks expanded their  ATM 
network to include many rural regions which did not previously have access to convenient 
cash out points. As the reforms progressed, the government used digital and social media to encourage richer people to give up their subsidy, thereby improving ta rgeting and equity. It 
also undertook mid -course corrections following timely feedback received in the early stages 
of implementation. Iran’s reform experience, therefore, points to the importance of 
leveraging existing strengths (civil registration, for e xample) in the design of reforms and 
upgrading the capacity of the government, including through digitization.   
4.3.2 Awareness and consensus building  
Iran’s advantage as a crude oil exporter has been undermined by geo -political factors over 
the past decades. Political mobilization has played a key role in increasing the population’s 
awareness of the difficulties faced by the country due to an adverse international environment. Even so, opposition to fuel subsidy reforms could have been substantial.  The 
government took on board lessons from the Green Movement protests in 2009 that had 21 been fueled by digital media platforms such as YouTube and Facebook, with the objective of 
better managing public opinion on the reform agenda.23  
The “oil -to-cash” reform s of 2010 were an attempt to radically overhaul the subsidy 
mechanism, lessen the burgeoning import bill and improve energy efficiency at the same 
time. To create the policy space for such a wide -ranging reform, the  government paid great 
attention to commu nication.  It initiated  a broad public relations campaign promoting the 
reform program using both traditional and digital channels -  newspapers, radio and 
television as well as websites and social media. Special public seminars and meetings by the 
presiden t and senior government officials  were also disseminated extensively. Political 
awareness, mass communication and targeted messaging —including on the need for greater 
equity —were effective to build a consensus on the reform agenda, with significantly less 
opposition compared to earlier efforts at reforming fuel subsidies in the country.  
4.3.3 Reform design and compensatory transfers  
The 2010 reforms marked a significant change from the business -as-usual approach to fuel 
subsidies. However, the groundwo rk was laid in 2007 when Iran put in place a gasoline 
rationing plan to reduce the country’s dependence on refined petroleum imports. Each private vehicle was allocated 100 liters of petrol per month at the subsidized price (10 cents 
per liter), while any consumption over and above that was at the market rate which was four 
times as much. The quota was administered through electronic “smart cards” that were distributed to each beneficiary. While the system suffered from some administrative 
problems such as the slow distribution of the smartcards, the government achieved its 
objective of reducing gasoline consumption by nearly 16 million liters per day, saving around 
$4 billion in import revenue in two years until the new system was put in place.
24 It also 
demonstrated the capacity of the state to use digital technology in reform design and to 
monitor compliance at an individual level, lessons that were put to good use in 2010.  
The digital framework had to be expanded significantly for the “oil -to-cash” reforms  to be 
successful. The core of the reform was the compensation mechanism where every family was provided with a fixed monthly transfer to cover the cost of the increase in gasoline 
prices. For this to happen, beneficiaries had to be registered into the new  system, their 
identity verified, regular payments made to their bank accounts and steps taken to make it 
convenient for people to withdraw the subsidy. To ensure credibility of the reform process, 
the challenge Iran faced was two -fold: systems for onboard ing beneficiaries had to be 
inclusive by design, and the transfer of payments had to be made regularly with the option of cashing out the subsidy on demand.  
Assessments of the reforms suggest that the government was successful on both counts, 
thereby sust aining political and popular support for the program. Delinking the transfer 
from consumption allowed an easier process than one requiring the subsidy to be linked to 
use—a single bank transfer from the exchequer to the beneficiary without needing 
                                                      
23 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqHhLy6KOMo  
24 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2007_Gasoline_Rationing_Plan_in_Iran  22 infor mation on how much fuel had been consumed. The massive scale of the transfer 
program provided an incentive for the banking sector to upgrade its physical and digital 
infrastructure, a development that could potentially generate further economy -wide benefit s 
in the long run.  
Although the intention had always been to target compensation towards the poorer 
segments of society, at the start of the reform, Iran lacked the capacity to do so and the 
compensation program was therefore universal.  Over time, howeve r, targeting mechanisms 
were progressively brought in.  Initially this was through self -targeting on a voluntary basis, 
with richer households encouraged to forego their subsidy,and then through more top- down 
targeting. This use of an initially voluntary mechanism was not unlike the process outlined 
for India, below.   
4.3.4 Implementation  
Even with the best design and compensation mechanisms in place, the success of any reform program depends crucially on its implementation.  Leveraging a strong civil reg istration 
system with nearly universal birth and death registration, the onboarding process could be 
based on self -enrolment with entries checked for duplicates using unique identification 
numbers.  The government did not institute late penalties for regis tration, so reducing the 
chances of exclusion. Despite the fact that less than 10 percent of households had internet 
access in 2010, the option of on -line registration was provided, alongside more traditional 
methods.  
The government also initiated a media  campaign to explain the registration process and 
encourage people to apply (Atashbar 2012). On the compensation side, instead of using 
regional and local governmental networks, the decision to use bank accounts to disburse the 
cash transfers increased eff iciency, eliminating time lags and possibilities of corruption in the 
funds transfer process. It also increased competition in the banking system and incentivized 
banks to upgrade to handle the cash transfers and recruit customers to receive transfers.  An 
expansion of ATMs in the rural areas allowed rural residents easier access to cash -out the 
transfers as needed, bringing modern services to previously neglected regions.   
To further boost the credibility of the reform, the government distributed tran sfers well in 
advance of actual price increases; people could see them in their account balances but not 
access them until prices were raised. Given the magnitude of the price shock (approximately 
10 times the prevailing price), this was an important eleme nt in heading off mass protests.  
4.3.5 Monitoring and feedback  
Rapid feedback loops are increasingly feasible with digital technology, and Iran’s reforms 
included a strong monitoring and feedback mechanism.  The reform legislation authorized 
the govern ment to establish a new Subsidy Targeting Organization (STO) to ensure efficient 
and centralized management of the implementation and to provide periodic reports to the 
parliament. Transparent reporting on the progress of implementation of the reform and the 
use of fiscal savings increased public confidence in the outcome of the reform and helped 
maintain the government’s credibility at the same time.  23 Feedback from beneficiaries is critical to the success of any subsidy reform agenda, especially 
when it in volves necessities such as gasoline. In the early phase of reform, the government 
engaged a feedback loop to hear citizens’ problems and to undertake mid -course correction.  
It maintained a website25 to enable households to verify whether they had received their 
transfers, thereby using digital means to help monitor this critical element of the reform. It also set up telephone hotlines for questions about the program, providing a human option 
for those who might have difficulty negotiating the digital system  (Guillaume and et al. 
2011).  
Iran’s fuel subsidy reforms therefore combined administrative monitoring with beneficiary 
feedback and a grievance redressal mechanism that provided choice to the beneficiary to use 
digital or human modes of communication.  It offers important lessons for other countries.   
4.4 India: the reform of the LPG system
 
4.4.1 Country and reform context  
India, the second most populous country in the world, is heavily reliant on imports to meet 
the energy needs of its 1.25 billion inhabitants. With over 80 percent of domestic 
hydrocarbon demand met by imports, volatile international energy prices pose significant 
challenges for policymak ers caught between the need to limit macroeconomic imbalances 
and at the same time to shield consumers from the impact of external price shocks. Reflecting the movement in global prices, India’s estimated fuel subsidy bill increased from 
0.6 percent of GDP  in 2004 to nearly 2 percent when international oil prices hit their peak in 
2008.  
Management of fuel subsidies in India has been problematic for many years. Government-
owned companies have a near -monopoly on the importation and refining of crude oil and 
the marketing of petroleum products, including motor spirits, kerosene and LPG cooking 
gas. This gives it unfettered powers to allocate subsidies in ways that that often create 
inefficiency in the system. Moreover, political and bureaucratic discretion res ults in 
deadweight losses and creates opportunities for corruption, especially when there is an 
excess demand for fuels, which —given marketing arrangements —has often been the case.  
In June 2010, after decades of administered pricing, the government an nounced full 
decontrol of petrol prices, giving the (public) oil marketing companies the task of setting 
pump prices of petrol aligned to the global price of crude oil. It also announced a phased decontrol of diesel prices but initially kept kerosene and L PG cooking gas out of the ambit. 
From 2013 onwards, major reforms have been carried out in the way LPG gas is subsidized. Instead of a price subsidy on each cylinder of cooking gas for household use, an amount 
equivalent to the subsidy is transferred direc tly to the consumer’s bank account, up to a 
ceiling of 12 cylinders per beneficiary household per year. Unlike Iran, the transfer is 
contingent on consumption, effectively making it a voucher system administered through a 
                                                      
25 www.refahi.ir  24 direct benefit transfer mechanism.  The reason for the difference is that LPG is seen as a 
merit good in India, providing a clean cooking fuel that reduces the health burden of women 
who otherwise would need to use the far dirtier alternatives of kerosene or biomass.  To the 
extent that ac cess to subsidized LPG reduces deforestation and the time demands of 
gathering fuel (also largely a cost born by women), its merit good status is further reinforced.  
India’s experience confirms that subsidy reform is not always a smooth, linear, process.  The 
direct benefit transfer (DBT) of LPG faced uncertainty regarding its design and  
implementation and was suspended in January 2014, just before the national elections. The 
new government that took power in May 2014 revived, changed, and significantly e xpanded 
the program. The re -designed DBT program, known as PaHaL, was launched nationwide in 
January 2015. It is now the world’s largest cash transfer program covering over 226 million beneficiary households.  An ancillary program, known as Ujjwala, has si gnificantly expanded 
access to clean cooking gas for rural households, issuing over 56 million new LPG 
connections in two years starting in May 2015. The fiscal savings generated by PaHaL helped 
to subsidize the Ujjwala beneficiaries, who were mostly poor rural women most in need of 
the support.   
The LPG reforms have leveraged digital technology in several ways, using India’s digital 
governance infrastructure underpinned by the ‘JAM trinity” —(i) the Jan Dhan program, the 
government’s financial inclusio n mission to increase access to bank accounts; (ii) the 
biometric ID Aadhaar; and (iii) mobile phones.  JAM has been rolled out rapidly across India.  
From mid -2015 onwards, the Jan Dhan program has opened nearly 311 million bank 
accounts, helping India a chieve 80 percent coverage of those older than 15 years by 2017 
compared to only 53 percent in 2014. Following a nationwide rollout in 2011, the Aadhaar program has registered 1.2 billion individuals on its biometric database, achieving almost 
universal co verage in just over five years. Finally, mobile phone (SIM) subscriptions 
increased from 17 per 100 inhabitants in 2007 to 85 in 2016, achieving almost universal access within a decade. The falling cost of data -enabled value -added services is providing an 
opportunity to integrate mobile services into the overall digital governance framework, 
especially for government -to-people (G2P) payments and subsidies.  All these digital 
elements have been critical for the LPG subsidy reform process, as explained below.  
4.4.2 Awareness and consensus building  
Fuel prices and subsidies have always been high on the political agenda in India and a subject 
of intense debate, both in the parliament and outside. Before the decontrol of petrol prices 
in 2010, successive governme nts were faced with the challenge of raising awareness and 
building consensus on the need to raise energy prices in response to global price movements.  
As in many other countries, household fuel subsidies have been perceived by people as an entitlement ev en though the macroeconomic consequences were detrimental in the long run. 
At the same time, the inconvenience created by the subsidy system for consumers was also 
evident, especially for LPG cooking gas. The gap between the subsidized price for 
household consumption and the market rate for commercial use gave rise to a thriving black 
market in diverted cylinders.  With few dealer incentives to service them, households could 25 be left waiting for refills for extended periods.  Shortages in LPG supply increase d demand 
for subsidized kerosene supplied exclusively by the government through the public 
distribution system (PDS) shops. As with LPG, kerosene distribution was inefficient and 
inequitable, with a significant proportion of the supply diverted to the blac k market as well.  
While there was general awareness that LPG was subsidized, beneficiaries were not fully aware of the extent of subsidies that they were receiving. The government thought that, once 
the amount of subsidy was known, people would prefer to receive a transfer in cash through 
a credible compensation mechanism and pay the market price for LPG if the other 
deadweight losses to the system (corruption, cylinder shortages, black marketing) could be 
addressed. Such a reform would shift the LPG subsi dies to an individualized benefit.  The 
government would also have greater capacity to calibrate the transfer based on international 
energy prices and its fiscal capacity to carry the burden of subsidy, without jeopardizing 
macroeconomic stability.   
The i nitial phase of the reform, starting in January 2013, suffered from a lack of clarity in 
terms of its objectives, design and implementation. In contrast, the redesigned program, 
PaHaL, was preceded by an extensive communications campaign extolling the bene fits of 
the direct transfer.
26 The campaign made use of all forms of digital channels —government 
websites, mobile text messages and most importantly, social media such as Facebook and Twitter. This dissemination strategy reached a significant proportion of beneficiaries at 
relatively low cost given that LPG was –at the start —used primarily by urban households 
who are more digitally connected than poor rural ones.  
Building on the individualization of compensation, PaHaL developed an innovative 
sequence o f steps to target the subsidy to poorer households. The first phase involved self -
targeting  via the “GiveItUp” initiative. Appealing to the more affluent section of the 
population, the government launched a campaign, including through text messages and 
social media, urging them to voluntarily give up their subsidy in the national interest. In 
return, their names would be included on a ‘Scroll of Honor’ on the PaHaL website, 
providing public recognition and linking them with the name of a poor rural family whose participation in Ujjwala had been funded by their sacrifice.  The program was deemed a 
success, with over 10.6 million beneficiaries renouncing their subsidy and contributing significantly to the overall savings from PaHaL.  
                                                      
26 The rough translation is: “Get your money and save public money”  26 Figure 6: Digital ‘nudge’  for GiveItUp campaign, India  
 
The second stage was to eliminate the subsidy for all households who had declared sufficient 
income to submit a tax return.  Some of these had already given up their subsidy; the others 
were terminated from the benefit rolls on the grounds that “your neighbors have given up 
the subsidy voluntarily so how can you defend keeping it?”.  This proceeded smoothly, 
without opposition.  The third phase of targeting has required all households benef iting from 
the scheme to sign a legally binding affidavit declaring that the combined income of the 
household falls below the income threshold for the program.  As subsidies are extended to 
poorer consumers, the steady winnowing -out of the better -off conti nues.  
The LPG reform thus demonstrates how digital technology and communications can be 
used strategically, to target different audiences and to “nudge” beneficiaries towards 
decisions in ways that would not have been possible without individualizing the subsidy.   
4.4.3 Reform design and compensatory transfer  
The LPG reform involved a two- pronged approach.  First, it was necessary to clean up the 
existing list of household LPG customers through the removal of duplicate connections and non-existent benefi ciaries.  Though not a complete solution, this would help to reduce the 
diversion of subsidized LPG cylinders from domestic to commercial use.  Second, the reform 
eliminated the dual pricing mechanism by setting a market price for all LPG consumers. Households pay the same price as commercial establishments but receive the subsidy directly 
to their bank accounts upon delivery of the cylinder. The number of subsidized cylinders is 
capped at 12 per connection per year with households paying the market price f or additional 
use.  
Use of digital technology has been integral to both these processes. The existing consumer 
databases held by the three public sector oil marketing companies had to be moved into one 
common platform, with each verified consumer issued a unique LPG ID. While the initial 
design mandated the submission of Aadhaar to obtain the LPG ID number, not all 
consumers had the Aadhaar initially, so that the program was made more flexible, giving 
27 them multiple options to verify their identity and proof  of address. As the coverage of 
biometric ID increased, beneficiaries were encouraged to link their LPG ID with their 
Aadhaar numbers remotely through a web portal or through the network of LPG 
distributors, whichever was more convenient. This made the onboarding and linking process 
more inclusive, taking into account the relatively low levels of digital literacy especially 
among women (Mittal, Gelb and Mukherjee, 2017).  
As in the case of Iran, the credibility of the compensation mechanism is an important 
determinant for success in moving from universal to individual subsidy transfer system. The 
compensation mechanism also should be designed to make the transition smooth, without 
any income shock to the beneficiaries. Linking the LPG ID to the beneficiary bank account 
is an important part of the process. Expansion of electronic banking facilities, the opening of new accounts through the financial inclusion (Jan Dhan) campaign and linking bank 
accounts with Aadhaar significantly enhanced the capacity of the g overnment to design an 
efficient compensation mechanism for PaHaL.  
PaHaL has also been one of the early adopters of the Aadhaar Payment Bridge (APB) and 
the Aadhaar -enabled Payment System (AePS), the digital payment mechanisms created to 
transfer benefits  to beneficiaries who have linked their LPG ID and bank accounts with 
Aadhaar. As the linkage of Aadhaars with LPG ID’s and bank accounts increased, new beneficiaries could be added to the program through APB and AePS with low transactions 
cost to the syst em. This further encouraged the government to expand the scope of PaHaL 
and to launch the ambitious Ujjwala program distributing LPG connections to poor rural women from mid -2016.  A survey of 600 households in Rajasthan confirms that the rollout 
of DBT me chanisms has been central in increasing financial inclusion, especially for women 
(Gelb, Mukherjee and Navis 2018). All beneficiaries had at least one bank account and most were transacting on it themselves (though sometimes accompanied by men).  Prior to the 
rollout of the program, two thirds had not owned a financial account.   
4.4.4 Implementation  
Another lesson from PaHal is to deploy appropriate technology depending on the problem 
that needs to be addressed.  Since Aadhaar coverage was not initially hi gh, the initial cleaning 
of beneficiary lists was undertaken on the basis of an algorithmic matching of names and 
addresses. While less precise than unique biometric ID, biographical matching can be quite 
effective and is used by many applications, both wi th and without a biometric component.27 
The genuine beneficiaries were issued a unique LPG ID number, for which Aadhaar was not mandatory. Over time, however, Aadhaar numbers were collected for a majority of 
beneficiaries and linked to their LPG ID as note d above. This allowed Aadhaar to be used to 
authenticate new beneficiaries as the government started to expand access to clean cooking fuel for the hitherto underserved rural areas of the country.  
                                                      
27 For example the ELISE algorithms of WCC which are used in many applications including for border control  
file:///C:/Users/agelb/Downloads/WP_WCC_MCNM03_Multi -Cultural -Name -Matching -03.pdf  
 28 With digital technology, beneficiaries could order refills  remotely and check the status of 
delivery using their LPG ID number on mobiles, through a dedicated web portal. This was 
made possible due to the digitization of the entire LPG supply chain, a reform that was 
implemented at the same time as DBT was introd uced in early 2013. Digitization improved 
coordination of the demand and supply sides, resulting in greater efficiency of the entire system.  Beneficiary surveys show overwhelming support for the new system, with the 
advantages of reduced diversion and pro mpt cylinder delivery far outweighing any potential 
inconvenience of receiving the subsidy in a bank account (Gelb, Mukherjee and Navis 2018). 
28 
Digitization also played an important role in establishing the credibility of the compensation 
mechanism. Mobil e phones served as a channel to inform beneficiaries, especially to confirm 
that benefits had been transferred to their bank accounts. Although mobile financial services 
are not as prevalent in India as in other countries such as Kenya and Bangladesh, the 
provision of such information strengthened trust in the government’s ability to deliver as 
promised. As mobile transactions become more prevalent, including through the UPI, the 
digital architecture is expected to provide beneficiaries with greater choices  vis-à-vis their use 
of the transfer beyond cashing it out.   
Finally, as the use of Aadhaar as an identifier has been extended across all benefit programs, as authorized by the Supreme Court ruling of late 2018, it has become easier to further 
rationalize  energy subsidies by linking different beneficiary databases.  This has enabled the 
government to remove the allocation of subsidized kerosene from those receiving the 
PaHaL subsidy, further reducing diversion and leakage and generating fiscal savings in the 
process. PaHaL’s implementation therefore demonstrates the possibility of better targeting through a comprehensive digital framework and improving both equity and efficiency of 
public subsidies in the long run.  
4.4.5 Monitoring and feedback  
PaHaL’s success can be attributed in large part on its use of digital technology in monitoring the implementation of the program. It uses almost real -time data to track performance and 
fix targets, building on a rapid feedback loop addressing challenges and resolving problems 
earlier rather than later. A common “data view” dashboard has been developed on an 
integrated web portal so that the same information can be disseminated throughout the 
chain of command, increasing transparency and accountability for performance. The 
availability of full daily data through the MIS has made it possible to monitor trends and set 
appropriate targets, giving program managers essential tools needed to achieve the goals of the reform.  
The integrated MIS portal allows different views and reports for different officers depending upon their function in the scheme. It can generate reports for various managerial purposes 
                                                      
28 These results, for Rajasthan, mirror the results of surveys commis sioned by the Ministry of Petroleum (Mittal 
et al 2017).  Especially for poorer beneficiaries, however, the Rajasthan survey finds that the need to pay upfront 
for part of the connection charge and the initial cylinder is a concern.  29 and respond to program management needs. All India’s 640 districts  and the district level 
departments receive daily progress on enrolment, cash transfer rates, and error rates.  These 
reports highlighted progress made and the shortfall with respect to targ ets; they help to 
identify hotspots, discuss solutions, and improve performance.  Customers can change 
dealers; they can also rate their performance, helping to bring more competition into 
cylinder distribution.   
For a reform program of this magnitude, i t is not possible to anticipate all possible 
challenges, especially in a country as diverse as India. Design and implementation mechanisms must provide flexibility for midcourse corrections from the feedback received. 
Digitization played a key role in this  process, significantly reducing the lag in the 
dissemination of information of the targets achieved and the public response to the 
program. For example, while initially only those consumers who had an Aadhaar number 
were allowed to enroll in the program, the design was quickly modified to allow enrolment 
even without it on the basis of feedback received from the ground. Similarly, consumers were given the option of being “cash transfer compliant” both with and without Aadhaar, 
providing them flexibility an d reducing the risk of exclusion.  To do that, however, the digital 
architecture underpinning the program had to be responsive to changes in the design and implementation, without disruption and inconvenience to the beneficiaries.   
A further benefit of P aHaL is the increased flexibility it offers help manage subsidy outlays 
when world LPG prices change. The effect of price increases can be offset by reducing the subsidy cap from its current level of 12 towards the national average consumption of 6.8 
cylinders per year (poor consumers generally use only 3 -4 cylinders per year) or by further 
tightening targeting to focus on the poor, as well as by passing on the price increase to all 
consumers. Looking forward, as the list of beneficiaries gets progressively  linked to their 
Aadhaar numbers and these are linked to bank accounts and to other benefit rolls, this will 
generate large volumes of transactions data that can be used for better targeting and 
enforcement. The digital reforms and PaHaL does not solve the  political problem of 
reducing subsidies if needed but it offers a wider array of options to approach the problem 
in ways that differentiate the impact across groups of consumers.   
The key lesson from PaHaL is that changing from a universal price subsidy  to an 
individualized direct benefit transfer is a complex matter, but that it can be managed 
effectively by leveraging digital technology in a way that is appropriate, adequate and 
adaptable. Digitization expands the possibilities for governments to under take innovative 
policy actions to address the challenges of fuel subsidies, strengthening credibility in its 
ability to deliver on its promises.   
5. Conclusion  
Digital ID and payments systems have been used in many other countries and contexts to 
deliver  social transfers and other G2P payments.  This paper has focused on the case of 
reforming fuel subsidies and energy pricing to increase efficiency, equity and the sustainability of development.  It therefore addresses Target 12c of the SDGs —reforming 30 energy subsidies —but this can be seen as encompassing quite a wide agenda of development 
objectives, especially with the inclusion of “green taxes” as a particular case.  
ID and payments systems are mechanisms rather than objectives, and digitization only  serves 
to make them more effective and inclusive.  Such tools do not necessarily drive policy even if 
they expand the Policy -Possibility Frontier. They are also not a substitute for government 
commitment to reform; but rather a way of supplementing and le veraging capacity to 
improve policy outcomes.  From experience in many areas, there is ample evidence that 
technology is not, in itself, the answer to deep- seated policy or governance challenges.  
However, with these caveats, the spectrum of countries in t his study suggests how much 
more difficult reforms are when government lacks certain basic capabilities —to raise 
awareness and communicate the need for reform; to individualize and pay subsidies through 
a credible and transparent transfer mechanism rathe r than providing them indiscriminately 
through controlled prices; as well as to gather and analyze data on the progress of reform, 
facilitating mid -course adjustments and corrections.  Shifting from price subsidies to 
individualized compensation also incr eases the range of flexibility to deal with unanticipated 
shocks, such as the fiscal consequences of an increase in world fuel prices.   
The four countries covered in this paper illustrate many of these conclusions.  Bolivia offers 
an example of a country that both maintains large fuel price subsidies and has the capacity to 
implement reforms to shift towards less distorting and more equitable direct transfers.  
However, at a political level and across society, the awareness and motivation to implement such reforms is lacking, even though the principle of “energy dividends to Bolivians” is 
highly compatible with the political and social philosophy of the government.  Nigeria has a 
long record of attempting to reform fuel price subsidies, most clearly when impelled by 
severe fiscal and macroeconomic constraints.  However, it has lacked the capacity to offer 
credible mechanisms to cushion the impact of higher prices, particularly on the poor.  Its 
recent achievement in shifting from subsidies to “price moderati on” under intense fiscal 
pressure is therefore not likely to be sustainable if oil prices increase.  Iran implemented a 
major change in its fuel subsidy mechanism, shifting from heavy price subsidies towards 
direct transfers.  It was able to draw on a str ong civil registration and identification system to 
help identify beneficiaries, as well as on capacity in its banking system to deliver 
compensation, showing that it is not always essential rely on the latest in digital technologies, 
but the program did u se digital communications in important ways.  India’s continuing 
reform of its household LPG subsidy system demonstrates a multifaceted use of digital 
systems —to communicate the program, to reform the subsidy mechanism towards 
individualized voucher -type payments subject to a cap on cylinders, and also to induce self -
targeting of beneficiaries —in ways that could be of interest to many other countries.  Under 
the new approach, India also has more degrees of freedom to respond to an increase in 
world LP G prices.  
Our review points to three key areas where policymakers can use digital technologies to 
successfully implement complex fuel subsidy reforms.  First, governments need to control 
the narrative, raise awareness, proactively engage with citizens and  build coalitions of 
support, including through digital media to mitigate the political risk of the reforms. Digital 
and social media can, of course, also help to mobilize citizens against reforms but they 31 should ideally be an integral part of communications strategy, highlighting the need for 
action, and laying out goals and targets, and contributing to accountability.   
Second, spread of digital technologies have made it possible to transition from general price subsidies to more efficient and equitable direct transfers or vouchers.  While relatively few 
countries have implemented this at scale, many have G2P payments, such as social pensions, maternal and child benefits, student bursaries etc. that are transferred through digital means. 
These can serve a s a backbone for direct payments of fuel subsidies to individuals. 
Beneficiary lists based on unique digital IDs can eliminate duplicate and false entries, help to 
target the poor and the economically vulnerable sections of the population, and generate 
fiscal savings for the government in the process. Moving to individualized transfers also 
offers more options to deal with fiscal stresses associated with subsidies or compensation 
programs.   
Third, digital mechanisms produce large volume of high -frequency d ata that can be used to 
monitor the implementation of the reform program. This can be supplemented by 
beneficiary feedback that would enable governments to identify bottlenecks, re -design 
policies and address grievances in almost real time. A digitally ena bled, well -functioning 
feedback and grievance redressal system improves credibility and trust in the government, 
which in turn reduces the political risk of popular backlash against the reform.  
Country experience also indicates areas of complementarity bet ween the objectives of fuel 
subsidy reform (greater efficiency and equity, reduced carbon emissions) and other possible 
goals of development policy, such as encouraging financial inclusion and improving the 
health status of women.  These are enhanced by le veraging the overall digital governance 
framework. Subsidies can be rationalized across different fuels and programs by using a 
common identifier for beneficiaries; technology can also help to empower beneficiaries 
(public feedback on dealers) and “nudge” consumers to forego subsidies in ways that help to 
diffuse potentially violent responses to targeting.  These experiences provide useful inputs for 
other countries as they seek approaches towards reforming price subsidy systems in ways compatible with SDG target 12c.  
  32 References  
Atansah, P., Khandan, M., Moss, T., Mukherjee, A. and Richmond, J. (2017). When Do 
Subsidy Reforms Stick? Lessons from Iran, Nigeria and India. CGD Policy Paper 111. 
Washington D.C: Center for Global Development 
(https://www.cgdev.org/publication/when -do-subsidy -reforms -stick-lessons- iran-
nigeria -and-india) 
Chiluwa, I. (2015). ‘Occupy Nigeria 2012’: A Critical Analysis of Facebook Posts in the Fuel 
Subsidy Removal Protests. CLINA Volume 1 (1), pages 47 -67 
(http://epr ints.covenantuniversity.edu.ng/7181/1/Chiluwa_2015_occupy%20Nigeria_2
012.pdf )  
Coady, D., Parry, I., Le, N. and Shang, B (2019). Global Fossil Fuel Subsidies Remain Large: 
An Update Based on Country -Level Estimates. IMF Working Paper 19/89. Washington, 
D.C. 
Clements, B., Coady, D., Fabrizio, S., Gupta, S. and Alleyne, T. (2013).  Energy Subsidy 
Reform: Lessons and Implications.  International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.   
Dener, C., Watkins, J. and Dorotinsky, W. (2011). Financial Management Information 
Systems: 25 Years of World Bank Experience on What Works and What Doesn’t. World 
Bank, Washington, DC.  
Dobson, S., Winter, J. and Boyd, B. (2019) “The Greenhouse Gas Emissions Coverage of 
Carbon Pricing for Canadian Provinces”  SRP Research Paper 12:6, Scho ol of Public 
Policy, University of Alberta.   
Egbunike, N. (2015). Framing the Occupy Nigeria Protests in Newspapers and Social Media. 
Open Access Library Journal 
(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276422841_Framing_the_Occupy_Nigeria_
Protests_in_Newspapers_and_Social_Media ) 
Flochel, T. and Gooptu, S. (2017).  The Energy Subsidy Reform Assessment Framework: 
Guidance for  Comprehensive Energy Subsidy Reforms. World Bank, Washington, DC.  
Gelb, A., Mukherjee, A. and Navis, K. (2018). Digital Governance in Developing Countries: 
Beneficiary Experience and Perceptions of System Reform in Rajasthan, India. Working 
Paper 489. Cen ter for Global Development, Washington D.C.  
Greenleaf, G. (2017). Global Data Privacy Laws 2017: 120 National Data Privacy Laws, 
Including Indonesia and Turkey.  UNSW Law Research Paper No. 17 -45. University of 
New South Wales, Australia   
Gupta, S., Schen a, M., and Yousefi, S. (2018) “Expenditure Conditionality in IMF -Supported 
Programs”  Working Paper WP/18/255, International Monetary Fund.  
Hössinger, R., Link, C., Sonntag, A. and Stark, J. (2017). Estimating the price elasticity of 
fuel demand with stat ed preferences derived from a situational approach. Transportation 
Research Part A: Policy and Practice.  Volume 103, Pages 154 -171 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S096585641630636X ) 
Inchauste, G. and Lustig, N. (2017). The Distributional Impact of Taxes and Transfers: 
Evidence from Eight Developing Countries. Directions in Development – Poverty. 
World Bank, Washington, DC.  
Inchauste, G. and Victor, D. ( 2017). The Political Economy of Energy Subsidy Reform. 
Directions in Development - Public Sector Governance. World Bank, Washington, DC.  33 Laserna, R. (2018). Energy Dividends in Bolivia: Are There Any Alternatives to Price 
Subsidies? CGD Policy Paper No.130 . Center for Global Development, Washington, 
DC 
Metcalfe, G. (2009). Designing a Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. Volume 3(1), Pages 63 -83. 
(https://ideas.repec.org/a/oup/renvpo/v3y2009i1p63 -83.html ) 
MicroSave (2017). Assessment of AeFDS (Aadhaar enabled Fertilizer Distribution System) 
Pilot. New Delhi, India. 
(http://www.microsave.net/files/pdf/Assessment_of_AeFDS_Aadhaar_enabled_Fertil
izer_Distribution_System_Pilot.pdf)  
MicroSave (2017). Digital Wallet Adoption for the Oral Segment in India. 
(https://www.microsave.net/wp -
content/uploads/2018/10/DWA_Research_Concept_Development_for_MoWO.pdf )  
Mittal, N., Gelb, A. and Mukherjee, A. ( 2017). Fuel Subsidy Reform in Developing 
Countries: Direct Benefit Transfer of LPG Cooking Gas Subsidy in India. Policy Paper 
114. Center for Global Development, Washington D.C.  
Moss, T., Lambert, C. and Majerowicz, S. (2015). Oil to Cash: Fighting the Res ource Curse 
through Cash Transfers.  Center for Global Development, Washington D.C.   
Onyekwena, C., Adedeji, A., Akanonu, P. and Momoh, A. (forthcoming). Energy Subsidies 
in Nigeria: Opportunities and Challenges. Center for Global Development, Washington 
D.C. 
Rentschler, T. (2018). Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reforms: A Guide to Economic and Political 
Complexity. New York: Routledge   
Soile, I. and Mu, X. (2015). Who Benefit Most from Fuel Subsidies? Evidence from Nigeria. 
Energy Policy, Volume 87, pages 314 -324 ( https://ssrn.com/abstract=2671338 ) 
Vagliasindi, M. (2013).  Implementing Energy Subsidy Reforms: Evidence from Developing 
Countries.  Directions in development -  Energy and Mining.  World Bank, Washington, 
DC. 
Vargas, J. and Garriga, S. (2015). Explaining Inequality and Poverty Reduction in Bolivia. 
IMF Working Paper No. 15/265. International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C.  
Wheeler, D. (2008).  “Why Warner -Lieberman Failed and How to Get America’s Work ing 
Families behind the next Cap and Trade Bill.”  Working Paper 149, Center for Global 
Development, Washington DC, USA.  
 