CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020  203 
 HOW IS ICT SHAPING THE REFUGEE GOVERNANCE 
LANDSCAPE IN TRANSITIONAL BANGLADESH? 
 
A. N. M. Zakir Hossain1 
 
DOI: 10.24989/ocg.338.16 
 
Abstract 
The information communication technology (ICT) has a great impact in shaping life and responses. 
The current century is running with the rampage of cutting edge technologies that compose our 
everyday life while the expansion of ICT allows us to  make our life meaningful. The most significant 
challenges in transition are to coping with the changes that even happen all of a sudden i.e., about 
one million refugee influx in Bangladesh in 2018. Nowadays people recognized ICT as a decisive and 
inseparable part of them that constructs a new fashion of modern democratic governance. Though 
ICT is crucial in representative governance but now it inflates both the magnitude and persuade. The 
study tries to treat them embedded in the governance  nexus and connected to each other. The present 
study focuses on the nexus between ICT and re fugee management which shaped the refugee 
governance landscape in transitional Bangladesh. Th e endeavor of the study is to answer the 
questions on how ICT and administration act and reac t with each other on the refugee governance 
issues and how it indicates the future role of adm inistration in refugee management and resettlement. 
The study followed the content analysis method and primarily based on secondary sources of data to reach the inferences. The results found ICT as a comprehensive platform that includes the different 
stakeholders and emphasized the trade-off between them which in our case Rohingya refugees 
governance. It provides geo-localized support for them and specific aid during the adverse situation. It is also found that it helps the administration to identify the synchronized ideas of people that 
coordinate their actions to produce services for th e people. The study concludes by arguing for the 
management and wrapping of multidimensional data through the observatory mechanism that could likely develop their life and incentives required fo r the administration to act in support of the 
governance and resettlement of refugees in the future.
  
 
1. Introduction 
 
“In the world , we live in today, internet connectiv ity and smartphones can become a lifeline for 
refugees. - Filippo Grandi ” 
 The refugee explosion all over the world has be come a tough challenge for the world community. 
The number of refugees has amplified significantl y because of armed conflicts in several parts of the 
world. The recent refugee phenomenon has become a global problem, and the resettlement of these 
refugees has become a central topic among world leaders. According to the current report of the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugee (U NHCR), the amount of forcibly displaced persons 
is 70.8 million, where 25.9 million refugees, 41.3 inte rnally displaced people, 3.5 asylum seekers as 
a result of persecution, con ﬂict, violence, or human rights violations at end -2018. Among them, only 
                                                 
1 A N M Zakir Hossain, Ph.D. Research Fellow, Doctoral Sch ool of Public Administration Sciences, National University 
of Public Service, 1083 Budapest, Hungary and Faculty of Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh-2202, 
Bangladesh. Email: anmzakirhossain@bau.edu.bd  
ceeegov2020.pdf   203 23.06.2020   09:30:15204  CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020 
 20.4 million refugees under UNHCR’s mandate ( UNHCR, 2019). As in 2018, more than two-thirds 
of the world’s refugees are from just five countries : Syria, Afghanistan, South Sudan, Myanmar, and 
Somalia. According to the UNHCR (2018), Turkey hosts the largest number of refugees 3.7 million, Pakistan 1.4 million, 1.2 Uganda, Germany 1.06 milli on while the fourth-largest number of refugees 
by country of origin persisted steadily at 1.1 mi llion from Myanmar and Bangladesh continued to 
host a large population of 906,600 refugees at the end of 2018, almost entirely from Myanmar.   It is pertinent that they are protected and treated humanely, where they take refuge. The refugee issue 
has been a sensitive subject for states because states that cause refugee problems perceived as those 
that are intolerant of racial, religious, or linguistic  minorities. Rohingya refugees faced an uncertain 
future with a lot of violations and vulnerabilities that ultimately made them stateless and fallen them in an identity crisis. Refugees who are in camps , not allowed for “legal protections enshrined in 
international, regional, and domestic laws” (Holzer, 2013) as they are waiting for relocating.  
 International and local (recognized) humanitarian o rganizations and NGOs are intervening ICT based 
services in the refugee camps all over the wo rld (Mason and Buchmann, 2016). The present study 
focuses on the nexus between ICT and refugee management, which shaped the refugee settlement landscape in Bangladesh. The study tries to tr eat them embedded in the governance nexus and 
connected to each other, especially the refugee tragedy. There’s a widespread consensus that there is 
a lack of policy in the countries that make up the resettlement of Rohingya refugees. The endeavor of the study is to answer the questions on how ICT a nd refugees are responding with each other in 
this crisis and create an impact in this context.  In our present study, we tried to figure out how 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is complementing the refugees in their distressing trip to safety from their homeland to the host country, the transitory settlement at the 
camps, and post-inclusion at the host country.  
 
2. ICT, Refugee Status, and Livelihoods 
 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is one of the major driving forces of the current 
world economy, polity, and governance. This is fact ual for human mobility; services, identification, 
and status are given for rights and opportunities al l over the world. The present world has witnessed 
an ocean of displaced people after World War II. Refugees are more and mo re connected, accessible 
to people from outside, and more and more IT serv ices by the agencies. ICT is helping several ways 
in refugee management all over the world. The form al human mobility depends on their nationality 
and status, which comprise their economic viabilit y and choices and the acceptability of the host 
country. But it does not even work for the people w ho are forced to flee from the place of origin 
where they born, grown, and lived. These people ar e going to lose the formal identity that helped 
them to prove their national identity to move a formal and legal way.   Refugee status is not a simple one and not given to  a person without any formal procedures. Once a 
person would like to get the status, it requires a formal appeal or application, then the host authority 
investigates that issue and the contemporary situations for providing him/her the refugee status. In 
this process, the host country or authorized body can use the ICT from investigation to the decision 
level to make a formal decision about the refugee status.   ICT enabled biometric helps the procedure to define  a status about a person as he/she requires and 
demands. When any person has given the refugee statu s or not given before/after the process, a simple 
biometric registration helps the hosting authority to secure and smoothen the procedures. Through 
this biometric registration, it is easy to use and manage the data of a respective person for further 
ceeegov2020.pdf   204 23.06.2020   09:30:21CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020  205 
 utilization. The process of biometric registration is  a simple way to collect the necessary information 
of a person through a computer and biometric mac hine and easy to provide him a service-based 
registration number, based on these data, and gettin g the benefits for them. Most of the cases the 
service is food, basic medical se rvice, and some house-holds products that are daily needed for their 
livelihoods at the camps. The refu gee data are fragmented, and there are two different ways that 
information is flowing and being captured; i. refuge es themselves create data sets and ii. sack the 
data. Refugees themselves create a database by us ing different social media, i.e., Facebook, whatsapp, 
twitter, phone call, Instagram, snap chat, etc. They  create their media data. Now the question is why 
we all do need this because of a beautiful marriage between control and it.   These people have given a mobile phone and SIM (subs criber identification module) card that grants 
access to the internet for available information that re quired for their livelihoods in the camp also for 
health service through SMS or phone call. Also, potentially some control over the connectivity, 
people who are connected, funding cards, etc. In J ordan for refugees, they initiated eye scanning 
instead of the card, which made it  easy to manage them in every sphere of the movements of the 
refugees, including service providing. World Food Program (WFP) and Jordan shared this biometric data to the World Health Organization (WHO) benefits. These data also help to improve the 
accountability of the organizations that are deploy ed in refugee camps for programs. The digital 
refugee is jointly constructed pe rsona, each refugee has their own story that they are putting into 
cyberspace, not all, but many and control the narratives  of this part of the story, not always, not largely 
order their control. But the implication and threat to  the security of the data and refugees are how are 
you going to manage the data, where the data is going, what has the rights of the cloud, who takes 
ownership of that data, refugee policies significantly vary from country to country.        
3. Rohingya: When and How Come  into Bangladesh as Refugee 
 
The refugees have become helpless victims, not of th eir own making. It is pertinent that they are 
protected and treated humanely in countries where they take refuge. As armed conflict caused a 
massive flow of refugees, the issue of refugees, in  turn, may lead to tensions and conflicts between 
states. The issue of the refugee has been a sensitive subject for states because states that cause refugee 
problems perceived as those that are intolerant of racial, religious, or linguistic minorities. For 
instance, Bangladesh intakes a large number of Rohi ngya Muslim refugees during the crisis periods, 
but when the ethnic cleansing started at Rakhine last year, the figure amounted to total of 918,936. In 
recent times, one can hardly find a government that has been so dreadful, so brutal, and so barbarous in its refutation of fundamental human rights to a pe ople that trace their origin to the land for nearly 
a millennium.  
 
The Rohingya Muslims are the victims, living in  the Arakan (now Rakhine) state, and become the 
forgotten people of our time (Siddiqui, 2018, Ah san Ullah, 2016, Leider, 2018). About 40 percent 
of the Rakhine population is Muslims who fled to Bangladesh from Myanmar when the ethnic 
cleansing started decades ago. That considered as “a semi-organized social movement with clear 
political goals ” (Klinken & Aun g, 2017). However Rohingya people were in a realm of statelessness 
for over six generations (Milton and Rahman, et al., 2017).  
 The political landscape in Myanmar was founded through the British colonial period; (Kipgen, 2016). It is necessary to know why the alienation of Rohingya started (Knuters, 2018) because of the  
ceeegov2020.pdf   205 23.06.2020   09:30:21206  CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020 
 2 
 
Figure 1: Rohingya Refugee from Myanmar to Bangladesh 
 
 
Figure 2: Destroyed Villages in Rakhine and Refugee sites in Bangladesh 
                                                 
2 https://www.statista.com/chart/16109/who-are-the-rohingya-refugees-in-bangladesh/ 
 
ceeegov2020.pdf   206 23.06.2020   09:30:21CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020  207 
 trust of authority towards a rebellious minority wa s low and vice versa due to the role of British in 
the colonial period as they used different minor gr oups against ethnic Burmans. Each and every state 
has a historical background of its ow n and has had an influence of colonizing nations, which combines 
both general ideology and particular policies to format general and economic ideology (Johnson, 
1967). Counter- modernization movement’s results– religious, linguistic groups rebel and demand a 
return to fundamentalism (Hoselitz, 1961). However, secularization is a process, transition from 
prescriptive to principle society and does not mean that religion disappears. 
 The oppression towards Rohingya was brutal and turned into genocide and this brutality amount to a 
vulgar violation of their human rights (Knuters,  2018) in Myanmar. As Myanmar governments have 
estranged Rohingya through nationalistic and religious polic ies, the study is to uncover the role of 
ICT in the governance of refugees. 
 
4. Refugee and ICT- Global Depiction 
 
The world has witnessed an enormous number of people than ever after World War II. About 
250 million of migrants all over the world 60 milli on are refugees. According to the reports that has 
been published by different research and human rights organizations around the world put pressure 
on the issue that “refugee crisis” is only the prob lem of middle eastern and European countries are 
facing enormous challenges due to refugee influx  however the numbers of refugees are hosted by 
many developing countries of the world. The refugee crisis is well known due to the scale of human 
tragedy and public awareness with massive media coverage. Overall, more than 134 million people 
across the world need humanitarian assistance and protection – and more funding than ever before 
(Human Rights Watch, 2019). According to the report of the Financial Tracking system, about 135.3 
million people need humanitarian support while in 2009, the fund required USD 9 billion for 
assistance but received only the USD 7 billion. Wh en we are talking about the year 2018, the fund 
required USD 25.2 billion and received only USD 14.6 billion (OCHA, 2019), and this gap widens gradually and creating risk and anxiety to th e leaders of the world in the coming future. 
 Global and local actors, including GOs, NGOs, a nd other humanitarian organizations are working 
together as a team to respond to the issue of refugees to support them from different stripes. Information and communication technology are working a significant role in this digital era of technology during their journey from citizens to become a refugee. A smart mobile phone is an 
integral piece of kit for millions of refugees as th ey are moving one to another place. ICT provides 
compliance to refugees for social inclusion that favorable to empowermen t “to fully participate in 
society and control their own destinies” (Warschauer, 2003).  
   
The global mobile phone is sort changing the la ndscape of technology and development, so, the 
phrasing of mobile having to reproduce the technological reproduction of the 21st century is pretty popular and by common and definitely applies to serve like refugee cam ps where people have to settle 
down, communities have sort developed their infras tructure needed for like LAN line, computer 
laboratory, mobile phone, etc. In 2016 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 
connecting refugees, how the internet and mobile call connectivity can improve refugee well-being 
and transform humanitarian action, and they reported  93 percent refugees to  have access to some 
level of digital and mobile access.                       Filippo Grandi, the United Nations Hig h Commissioner for Refugees said “Most importantly, 
connectivity can help broaden the opportunities for refugees to improve their own lives and pursue a 
vision of a future that would otherwise be denied to  them” and “Most importantly, connectivity can 
ceeegov2020.pdf   207 23.06.2020   09:30:21208  CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020 
 help broaden the opportunities for refugees to im prove their own lives and pursue a vision of a future 
that would otherwise be denied to them”.  
 
 
Figure 3: Refugees vs. Global Population: Mobile Network Coverage (UNHCR, 2016) 
 
“Refugees deem connectivity to b e a critical survival tool in their da ily lives and are willing to make 
large sacrifices to get and stay connected” (UNHCR, 2016, p -15). 
 
According to the report publishe d by UNHCR in 2016 revealed that mobile phone and internet access 
is worth, not only to connect with loved ones, but also  for their safety and sec urity like food, shelter, 
and water. The study also found that access to m obile phone depends on the affordability while 
refugees are in urban parts tend to have parallel  access to mobile like other urban peoples. But for 
them who are in the rural region, the scenario is ve ry unlike. Where only one has mobile in five and 
one has 3G access in six that is considerably lowe r for them at large. The findings originated at a 
moment while the world witnessed an enormou s number of people who are driven by war and 
persecution than any time of world history. At the end of 2018, 70.8 million people were globally 
displaced, of whom 2-9 million were a refugee. Confr onted by the persistent need, the results of the 
study suggested further investments in three key areas, which composed the basis of a new UNHCR 
Global Strategy for Connectivity for Refugees. Thes e comprise i. increasing  the accessibility of 
mobile networks, ii. improving affordability and iii.  providing access to training, digital content, and 
services (UNHCR, 2016).  
 
People are rural settings also have some access to internet connectivity to some degree, and costs and 
barriers surprising. UNHCR identifies a signif icant portion (two-third) of financial resources 
available to many refugees are being spent to call and the call stays connected. So that sort of helps 
the landscape what is happening many of these co mmunities. So, all these represent a landscape 
portion possibility and an opportunity for developmen t cross-different sector. This relevant to help 
the education to security and also opens to the doo r to the conservation about the changing fabric of 
these place’s communities to the society that performing across the migratory journeys and the cultural norms and practices that are emerging and intend them within an across the technological landscape. However, there are still a few challenges that still exist among the refugees, i.e., literacy 
on technology, access, and usages (Mason and Buchmann, 2016).     
  
20%10% 7% 5%63%
61%
10% 10%31% 34%17%
29%
90% 89%62% 61%
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
Refugees Global
PopRefugees Global
PopRefugees Global
Pop
Rural Urban Total
3G
2G
No Coverage
ceeegov2020.pdf   208 23.06.2020   09:30:21CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020  209 
 5. Refugee and ICT- Bangladesh Depiction 
 
5.1. Refugee and Food Security: Role of ICT  
 
The refugee influx in 2017 generates a perilous situation for both the refugee and the government of 
Bangladesh. Bangladesh is facing several challenges  to uplift the economy from developing one to 
middle income with steady economic growth. With the development of a multi-dimensional aspect, 
we have to move forward concerning many aspects to ensure the well-being of the citizen of Bangladesh. Though Bangladesh is now self-sufficient in food production still there is a limitation to 
equal distributions of income and foods. The refuge fled from Myanmar is in a hazardous and unsafe 
condition even in Bangladesh at that time due to  food, shelter, and security. Refugees are found 
vulnerable and exclusively dependent on humanitarian assistance (REVA-2). Influx reduces the scope 
of income generation for unskilled labors in a hi ghly competitive labor market that leads them for 
external aid for main income. 
 
World Food Program (WFP) and Food and Agriculture  Organization (FAO) are leading, along with 
about 30, other national and internati onal organizations to ensure the food security for the refugees. 
More than 880000 people are directly connected w ithin the general food service that is provided in 
34 refugee camps. However, the unregistered re fugees are found most vulnerable who came before 
influx (WFP, REVA-2, 2018). The food service is providing by in-kind or e-voucher and complementary food items. About 65% of refuges at  the end of March 2019 are now under e-voucher 
service. Though in-kind foods are life-saving, for di versified diets, an e-voucher is programmed to be 
implemented within December 2019 while they also need  fuel, health, light/electricity, and access to 
safe drinking water, which are also crucial (NPM 13, 2018).       
 
The following baskets of in-kind food items are di stributed two cycle per-month from 19 scattered 
points of distribution through 32 camps.    
  
 
 
Family Size and Persons Number of Basket* Receive 
Small Size (1-3) Persons One Basket  
Medium Size (4-7) Persons Two Baskets 
Large Size (8-11) Persons Three Baskets 
Very large Size (11+ Persons) Four Baskets 
Table 1: Different Family size and received items 
* One Basket=Rice 30Kg, Pluses 9 Kg, Fortified Vegetable Oil 3 Litre 
 
WFP is, with the cooperation of a range of food sec urity partners, trying to enhance the dietary 
diversity for most vulnerable people like children up to 5, elderly, disabled people, pregnant, people 
with chronic illness and lactating mothers who are getting in-kind blanket food assistance complemented by vouchers for fresh food item s i.e., fish, egg, vegetables, and spice.
 WFP has 
planned, through a biometric debit card, to transfor m all the refugees from in-kind food assistance to 
e-voucher. A refugee can use the debit card (SCOPE ) to have a range of food items from private 
shops contracted by WFP while the debit cards are monthly credited.  There are 10 e-voucher outlets, which will be increased to 21 at the end of 2019, and 24 shops while one is for 5000 to 20000 households for seven camps.  To ensure the diversity of food and nutritional 
security, they have been offered twenty food item s, among them twelve compulsory items are given 
at a fixed price, set before by negotiation, and ei ght flexible items traders sold by choice.  
ceeegov2020.pdf   209 23.06.2020   09:30:22210  CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020 
  
Figure 4: E-Voucher System 
         
5.2. Technology in Gender and Development: 
 
ICTs in development in refugee camps and thinking about gender has a pretty sort of the top level in 
these structures. We are aware of the role of mobi le phones and sort of changing the landscape of 
technology and development so the phrasing of mobile phones having leapfrogged being the 
technological leapfrog of the 21st century pretty popular and quite common. ICT also contributes to 
greater refugee empowerment of mobile-based technology, especially using social media (Andrade 
and Doolin, 2015), and other purposes also help the governaning process on the refugee camps. A 
senior woman of a family was given the SCOPE card is sued by the WFP, but the control and use of 
the card implemented by the male person and entire  decision are made by the male, still, women are 
struggling to be empowered within the house-hold decision making(UNHCR-WFP, 2019). The REVA-2 reveals the prevailing precarious circum stances surrounding the refugees: the absence of 
resources and inadequate income generating opport unities degrades their situation further. Overall, 
food related coping has improved during 2018 and –is found to be more dominant among newly 
arrived refugees as compared to the registered refugees (WFP:REVA-2, 2018). “Offline constrain ts 
and incentives still appear to frame the nature  of online interaction much more than generally 
acknowledged and it is, therefore, important to see and understand the realities of marginalization in which internet use is embedded and complex tapes try of a socio-economic crisis that frames it 
(Iwilade, 2015). ”   
 
5.3. Migration Integration Governan ce and Justice in Refugee Camp 
 
The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) is always resp ectful of international human rights law and 
treaties all along. They also showed their gene rosity in every aspect of national and international 
human rights issues. Bangladesh is not familiar w ith the refugee issue; however, it had started to 
receive Rohingya after its independence, but this turn into a dramatic one in 2017 when the persecution and ethnic cleansing started at Rakhine state by the Myanmar government.   The latest beckon of aggression was termed as “ ethnic cleansing ” (OHCHR, 2017), however, 
triggered the massive Rohingya refugees influx in Bangladesh and many of them are biometrically 
redistricted and given identity cards by the Im migration and Passport Department of Bangladesh (Oh, 
2017) and providing-shelter, relief and medical se rvice (Khatun and Kamruzzaman, 2018).  However, 
ceeegov2020.pdf   210 23.06.2020   09:30:22CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020  211 
 with the cooperation of local and global agencies government respond to the crisis, but it is evident 
that contemporary life-saving funding is not sust ainable and sufficient for programming and 
humanitarian actions. It is crucial to initiate a more development-oriented approach; to build the 
national resilience and sustain the degree and value of service delivered (Mason and Buchmann, 
2016).      It was the largest human displacement in the 21st  century in that region. Bangladesh has done a 
tremendous success in immediate sc ale-up, and partnership with other humanitarian organization and 
community, to deliver support and shield for savi ng the life of the refugees (UNHCR-WFP, 2019). 
Refugees are governed, including habitation and m ovement by the Foreigners Act of 1946 (Article 
3) because Bangladesh neither a countersigned of the 1951 Refugee Convention nor the 1967 Protocol 
concerning the Status of Refugees and does not have  a refugee law.  Foreigners Act empowered the 
Government to retain them in prescribed place and ex ecute movement restrictions on them until they 
obtain permission to travel, mentioning the valid re ason. Refugees are allowed to go outside of the 
cams to doctors and courts with prior approval by camp administrators (CICs).  Bangladesh sang in different global human rights treaties that indirectly support the Rohingya refugees in humanitarian aspects; however, there is a limitation that they are not enforceable in a local 
court by domestic law for their misconduct that made questions in the issue of local security (Khatun 
and Kamruzzaman, 2018).  
5.4. ICT and Refugee Family Unification 
 
The Ministry of Home Affairs of the GoB conducted a biometric registration of the refugees who had 
been here and were undocumented before the incu rsion and the new arrival who came in 2017. The 
process ended in June 2018 and registered 1.2 million refugees have been given an individual MOHA 
card. The primary challenge was the missing link betw een the individuals and his/her family members 
that were crucial for assistan ce at the household level.  
 UNHCR has started to complemen t MOHA’s registration, in associ ation with Refugee, Relief & 
Repatriation Commissioner (RRRC), for support and shield purposes and to tie every individual to a 
family. In March 2018, 876000 persons and/or 203407 households had been calculated and connected 
to a family and was given a Family Card with a Family Counting Number (FCN) when their housings 
were geotagged (UNHCR-WFP, 2019). However, late r these cards (MOHA and FCN) has been 
replaced by a Smart Card with a household ID nu mber when MoHA and UNHCR started a combined 
registration in June 2018 at five registration sites, where previous registration took place, for updating 
biodata and biometrics for the next three years in cluding iris scan to amalgamate and modify some 
of the adequacies of earlier registration. Already 43 percent refugee people are registered under these 
by the end of June 2019, which is equal to  374,000 persons and 82,000 refugee households.     
 Once officially registered, refugees receive a Smar t Card with a household identification to replace 
both, the MOHA and FCN card. As of 30 June 2019, about 43 percent of the refugee population had 
been officially registered, the equivalent of about 374,000 individual refugees and 82,000 refugee 
households (UNHCR-WFP, 2019). It is also eviden t that the use of social media like Whatsapp, 
and/or Facebook messenger, in a new society mostly used  by refugees, as an efficient, cost effective 
and favorite due to easy access to communicate w ith their family members, relatives and get back 
home (Vernon, Deriche, and Eisenhauer, 2016 , and AbuJarour & Krasnova, 2017). 
 
  
ceeegov2020.pdf   211 23.06.2020   09:30:22212  CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020 
 5.5. Refugee, Terrorism and Homeland Security Governance of Bangladesh 
 
The concept of terrorism identified that the terrorist has had a clear goal for every attack that they 
performed. It is also found that they believed in vi olence to coerce the polity to change as do not like 
the current institutional structure of the existing so ciety. However, they claimed they do not have any 
alternative choice. Techfugees is an umbrella or ganization that works on refugee-related issues, Mike 
Butcher in September 2015 developed this. It ha s created a novel media la ndscape and became a 
central site for those working in networking and exchange in the site.    There is a focus on the ICT that conducive for recei ving and supporting refugees who are fled from 
their homeland and living in a camp in the host count ry. ICT refers to a digital device and systems 
which are accessible to everyone. The main techno logy that used, for information and communication 
technology, by the refugee is the internet because it is cheap and easy to access. ICT is crucial for 
them during their distress journey from home to the host country. It also enables them to maintain contact with their relatives and stabilize a degree of  their insecure and uncer tain situation (Mason and 
Buchmann, 2016).     The most serious issue is that as the refugees are not supposed to have any job in the law of the land 
of the host country but they have given free food a nd many basic items that even not available to the 
host community. In this process, their consume habit was changed without any income generating behaviors; however, its humanitarian issue after all. Through this way, the lifestyle that they are 
enjoying it will be heartened that they don’t want to lo se and try to maintain at any means that crate 
threat to host country due to the funding crisis can create an unstable situation where we need to take 
several initiatives for integrati on resettlement and repatriation. Howe ver, ICT based identification is 
a strong mechanism to trace and track anybody if he /she create any threat to the host community and 
country as well as refugees. 
 
5.6. ICT for Sensitization or Understanding the Education and Languages 
 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for Development is a new avenue and creates a 
new eco-system that combines ICT and development theory to expedited the speed, intensity, and 
diversity of this arena that wasn’t ever before. ICT plays a decisive role in educating refugees and 
access to the various resources of languages. Educat ion on (local) languages is a key to communicate 
with the local groups, officials, and others to peop le during the journey of a refugee. It also helps 
them to maintain their daily life in a hosting country. Education through ICT also helps them to participate in further educational programs that help them in their daily life to be asylum seeks or to 
resettle elsewhere. To overcome the challenges of accessibility on education and other basic services 
has alleviated by the intervention of ICT for refuge es in different parts of the world (AbuJarour & 
Krasnova, 2018). However, it is valuable to provide  electronic educational materials but inadequate 
without inclusive teaching support (Dahya, 2016) to achieve the ultimate goal of the refuge.  
5.7. ICT for Consolidation System and the Work of NGOs 
 
Refugee camps are the places where the situations ar e changing in every moment for several reasons. 
ICT can be helpful for a place where the situations are changing rapidly and to capture the needs of 
the targeted people that easily shape the governance  landscape. NGOs are using different software 
that helping them to organize their work more ef fectively and promoting accountability in service 
delivery. They use many devices, i.e., mobile, table ts to conduct their assessment survey, evaluating 
and processing the responses, and sharing with other humanitarian local and international 
ceeegov2020.pdf   212 23.06.2020   09:30:22CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020  213 
 organizations that can be helpful for refugees and for them to arrange and deliver the services. It is 
also helpful for the bodies who are working in th at area to respond to the needs and demands of the 
refugees. Whatsapp, imo, viber, and/or facebook messenger also useful tools for the volunteers, 
workers to track them to each other during the proce ss of any new service of product delivery in the 
refugee camps.            
6. Conclusion 
 The government of developing countries still has seve ral challenges that they are facing during their 
transition concerning social, economic, and political . Bangladesh is running smoothly, from the last 
decade, with steady economic growth in the way to middle-income country albeit crisis is there. 
Rohingya refugee has appeared a serious crisis  while Bangladesh itself a high densely populated 
country of the world. Due to the global and regional refugee crisis, we discuss the role of ICT in 
refugee governance as most of the refugee is hoste d by the developing countries. Research on the 
governance of refugees can help to develop a wa y to find the management and solution of the crisis 
that the refugee and host countries are facing. Governance of refugees can also be complemented by researchers to work on the different contexts and pe rspectives to identify the characteristics that can 
inter-play between technology and refugee to advise a solution to the existing social problems. ICT based service management equipped the regional and global humanitarian organization to become effective and efficient in their service delivery with transparency and accountability. However, there 
are a lot of challenges in ICT- education, trai ning, outreach, trust, and data protection but working 
with an existing structure, incr ease tech access; responsible data pra ctice and collaboration with the 
different stakeholders and groups can overcome the crisis and complement effective governance of refugees in a country that has no such previous experience. 
           
7. References 
[1] ABUJAROUR, S. and KRASNOVA, H., Understanding the role of ICTs in promoting social 
inclusion: The case of Syrian refugees in Germ any, In Proceedings of the European Conference 
on Information, 2017. 
 [2] ABUJAROUR, S. and KRASNOVA, H., E-Learning as a means of social inclusion: The case 
of Syrian refugees in Germany. In Proceedings of the Americas Conference on Information Systems, 2018. 
 
[3] AHSAN, U.,  A.K.M. “Rohingya Crisis in Myanmar: Seeking Justice for the ‘Stateless’, Journal 
of Contemporary Criminal Justice. Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 285-301, 2016. 
 [4] ANDRADE, A. D. and DOOLIN, B., I nformation and Communication Technology and the 
Social Inclusion of Refugees, MIS Quarterly, (40: 2) pp. 405-416. 2016. 
 [5] DAHYA, N., Education in Crisis and C onflict: How Can Technology Make a Difference – A 
Landscape Review, 2016. 
 [6] HOLZER, E., "What happens to law in a refugee camp?." Law & Society Review 47.4 (2013): 
837-872. 
 
ceeegov2020.pdf   213 23.06.2020   09:30:22214  CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020 
 [7] HOSELITZ, B., Tradition, Values and Soci o-Economic Development, Duke University 
Commonwealth Study Center, p 90-113, 1961. 
 [8]  IWILADE, A., New Spaces, New Interactions? Young People’s Online Social Networks and 
Gender Relations in Africa, Gender, T echnology and Development, 19:1, 70-
90, 2015, DOI: 10.1177/0971852414561613 
 [9] JOHNSON, H. G., The Ideology of Economic Policy in New States” in Harry G. Johnson (ed.) 
Economic Nationalism in Old a nd New States Chicago, University of Chicago Press. pp. 124-
141, 1967. 
 [10] KHATUN, F. and KAMRUZZAMAN, M., Fisc al Implications of Rohingya Crisis for 
Bangladesh, Center for Policy Dialogue (CPD), 2018.  
 [11] KIPGEN, N., Myanmar: a political history. Oxford University Press, 2016.  [12] KLINKEN, G. van, AUNG, S.M.T., The Contenti ous Politics of Anti-Muslim Scapegoating in 
Myanmar, Journal of Contemporary Asia, 47:3, 353-375, 2017.  
 [13] KNUTERS, S. , Political Buddhism and the Exclusion of Rohingya In Myanmar, Master’s 
Thesis in Human Rights, Uppsala University. Norway, 2018.  
 [14] LEIDER, J., Rohingya: The History of a Muslim  Identity in Myanmar. Southeast Asia Online 
Publication 2018. 
 
[15] MASON, B. and BUCHMANN, D., ICT4 Refugee, GIZ, Berlin, Germany, 2016. 
 [16]  MILTON, A.H., RAHMAN, M. (et. al), Trap ped in Statelessness: Rohingya Refugees in 
Bangladesh, International Journal of Environmenta l Research and Public Health, MDPI, 2017. 
 [17] OCHA, Financial Tracking Service. 2019. Retr ieved from: http://interactive.unocha.org/ 
publication/globalhumanitarianoverview/ (accessed on 09-12-2019). 
 [18] OHCHR. Darker and more dangerous: High Commissioner updates the Human Rights Council 
on human rights issues in 40 countries. Gene va: Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), 2017. Retrieved from: 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=22041 (Accessed 
on 30-12- 2018). 
 [19] Oh, S., Surveillance and Control: The Encamp ment and Biometric Identification of Rohingya 
Refugees in Bangladesh. ISEAS Perspective 93. Singapore: ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute 2017. 
 [20] SIDDIQUI, H., Rohingya: The Forgotten People.  Retrieved from: https://www.islamicity.org/ 
2698/rohingya-the-forgotten-people/?AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1 Accessed on 1 December 2018. 
 [21] UNHCR, UNHCR-WFP, Joint Assessment Mission (JAM) Report 2019. 
 
ceeegov2020.pdf   214 23.06.2020   09:30:22CEE e|Dem and e|Gov Days 2020  215 
 [22] UNHCR, Connecting Refugees-How Internet and Mobile Connectivity can Improve Refugee 
Well-Being and Transform Humanitarian Action, 2016.   
 [23] VERNON, A., DERICHE, K. and EISENHAUER, S., Connecting refugees —how Internet and 
mobile connectivity can improve refugee well -being and transform humanitarian action. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNHCR. 2016. 
 [24] WARSCHAUER, M., Technology and social inclusion: Rethinking the digital divide. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.  
 [25] WFP, Rohingya Emergency Vulnerability Assessment- 2, Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh 2018.  
 
[26]  Needs and Population Monitoring (NPM), Government of Bangladesh, Round 13, November 
2018  
 
ceeegov2020.pdf   215 23.06.2020   09:30:22