How to Be Visible in Student Politics: Performativity
and the Digital Public Space in Bangladesh
JULIAN KUTTIG AND BERT SUYKENS
In Bangladeshi student politics, political performances in public spaces play an essential
role in establishing patronage relationships and determining local authority structures.As Thomas Blom Hansen has famously argued, “visibility means everything ”in such a
context. With the emergence of social networking sites like Facebook, new digital
public spaces have appeared. Focusing on ruling-party student activists at Rajshahi Uni-versity, this article examines how student politicians in Bangladesh utilize Facebook to
become visible in their everyday politicking. It shows how longstanding performative rep-
ertoires in the nondigital public space have gained a new salience through performancesin the digital public space. It is those digital spaces that allow the performer to rearticulate
even mundane everyday events as political performances. As these new digital public
spaces impact the politics of visibility, it is crucial to integrate them in our efforts tounderstand local politics in South Asia and beyond.
Keywords: Bangladesh, digital public space, Facebook, political performance, social
media, South Asia, student politics
Anyone who has studied local politics and formation of local leadership in India
(and beyond) will know that visibility means everything —that a cause may be
enunciated, a protest be staged, and an action performed in order to provide
a stage whereupon an emerging leader or ambitious man can make himself
available as a focus of attention, trust or affection. (Hansen 2004 , 22)
THE NOTION OF VISIBILITY is a central element of local politics in Bangladesh, and to
produce visibility, politicians and activists engage in what Thomas Blom Hansen
(2004 ) has coined “permanent performance. ”When walking in the streets of Dhaka or
other towns in the country, one cannot miss the numerous faces of local politicians
staring down from uncountable posters, banners, and billboards that so ubiquitously
mark the city- and townscapes. Entire public spaces, including memorials, advertisementbillboards, and statues are regularly captured and utilized by diligent party workers tobuild their public image and to display their commitment to the party and its leaders
before important religious, historical, or political events (Kuttig, 2020 ).“They just
want to introduce themselves to the neighborhood ”or“they just want to highlight them-
selves ”is a typical response by surrounding shopkeepers or occasional passersby when
Julian Kuttig ( julian.kuttig@ugent.be ) is PhD Fellow in the Department of Con ﬂict and Develop-
ment Studies at Ghent University. Bert Suykens ( bert.suykens@ugent.be ) is Associate Professor in
the Department of Con ﬂict and Development Studies at Ghent University.The Journal of Asian Studies page 1 of 32, 2020.
© The Association for Asian Studies, Inc., 2020 doi:10.1017/S0021911819001839
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,asked about the posters in their neighborhood. The same is true for the numerous polit-
ical processions, demonstrations, political councils, and hartals (strikes) that, to the
chagrin of the general public, take place almost on a daily basis and block importantmotorways for hours, leading to the further exacerbation of already bad traf ﬁc conditions.
In Bangladesh, political student organizations have traditionally been at the forefront
of public political performances like processions or blockades. For Hansen ( 2004 , 24), it is
precisely these “performances and spectacles in public spaces —from the central square to
the street corner in the slum, from speeches to images, ”that we should move to the center
of our attention. What Hansen was not able to anticipate at that time, however, was thereinvention of the public space by the Internet, speci ﬁcally with the rise of social media.
The same year Hansen ’s chapter was published ( 2004 ), Mark Zuckerberg launched
the social media platform Facebook, which would become the most successful socialnetworking site with approximately 1.8 billion monthly active users worldwide. In
many societies, Facebook has become a signi ﬁcant part of people ’s everyday routines
of social interaction (Miller et al. 2016 ) and has fundamentally changed modes of sociality
as well as our traditional understanding of public space. As a result of a global process ofdigitalization, the increasing pervasiveness of social media platforms is not limited to
Western societies anymore but has gradually captured millions of people in the Global
South. The social and political impact of the newly appropriated digital public spacesremains widely under-researched.
With the advent of affordable smartphones from China and mobile 2G and 3G Inter-
net subscriptions in Bangladesh, access to the Internet and the use of Facebook have pro-liferated in recent years, and Facebook has been gradually integrated into political
campaigning and political communication (Haque 2015 ; Shawon 2016 ). Political
parties and especially individual politicians increasingly use Facebook to build their polit-ical image. Most popular among the younger generations —particularly university
students —Facebook constitutes an integral part of their everyday routines. Within this
context, student politicians have appropriated Facebook as a tool to engage in campuspolitics. One student politician explains:
[In Bangladesh, student] politics has become Facebook-centric. Everything has
become dependent on Facebook. Without Facebook, politics is not working
anymore in current times.
In this article, we argue that Facebook, as a digital public space, has become a central
platform for student politicians to employ visibility politics in Bangladesh. Student poli-ticians in Bangladesh have long engaged in public displays or performances of power,commitment, and control. While the country is known for its street politics, street politics
has now also moved online. The new digital public space in the form of Facebook has its
own functionality and scales of sociality that offer new avenues for politicians and partiesto engage in political performances. In this article, we show not only the intricate linkages
between of ﬂine and online political performances but also how mundane, everyday
events can gain political traction when performed in the digital public space. Relatingthis element back to Hansen ( 2004 ), Facebook allows for the expansion of the political
spectacle to the everyday, as everyday events are rearticulated in the digital public
space to appear as spectacles.2 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,Moreover, while Facebook is to some degree a simple extension of of ﬂine political
performativity, it also allows student politicians to actively create and manipulateimages and text to enhance their visibility, providing the opportunity for the activereinterpretation of events in the nondigital public space. We argue this by unpacking
the repertoires that have become central to this visibility and use these to trace how con-
nections between online and of ﬂine public space are negotiated. Finally, we highlight the
way the digital public space maintains a number of silences, more speci ﬁcally around
what type of violence can be made visible.
What is too early to call, however, is whether the digital public space will really trans-
form politics in Bangladesh. Our tentative answer would be that while student politicians
no longer can do without Facebook, it has not led to such transformation yet. Of course,
this has also simply to do with the age of most (more senior) politicians, making their useof social media quite distinct from that of the digital natives performing on Facebook.
Moreover, as one of the authors ’ﬁeld research during the Bangladesh Chhatra League
(BCL) Rajshahi University council selections of December 2016 shows, not only issuch a selection process highly opaque but also street politics might still be the foremostcriteria for selecting student leadership. In this case, students associated with violent
struggles against Islami Chhatra Shibir were rewarded with the top leadership positions.
While these struggles were of course reposted on Facebook, these posts probably onlyhad a secondary importance vis-à-vis the actual violent clashes with Shibir. However, as
we also will show, in factional struggles within the Rajshahi University BCL, Facebook
might play a bigger role, as more senior student leaders do consume the social mediacontent uploaded by their juniors. As such, online public performances are aimed
mainly at internal party and student political consumption, with more limited impact
on the general student audience or —while it helps to bolster the position of student
leaders in their, often rural, home constituencies —the wider public. While this article
offers unique ﬁndings regarding the use of Facebook for everyday politicking, additional
research on the party-political elite consumption of political performances, both onlineand of ﬂine, would provide useful insights and a fuller understanding of the complexity
of performative politics.
This article is the direct outcome of ﬁeldwork conducted from October to December
2016 in Rajshahi by the ﬁrst author. The Facebook behavior of individual student politi-
cians was analyzed, focusing for ethical reasons exclusively on publicly available Facebook
proﬁles and posts in the form of written statements, imagery, or videos and the objectives
attached to them. Most of the Facebook pro ﬁles of these student politicians are public.
We conducted ﬁfteen semi-structured key informant interviews with student politicians
at all levels, ranging from simple activist to senior leadership, at Rajshahi University, with
whom we discussed their Facebook pro ﬁles in general and speci ﬁc posts in particular.
1
We selected the interlocutors based on a variety of characteristics to ensure different
perspectives. Most important for us was their position in the party hierarchy, whether
they came from Rajshahi or elsewhere, the public availability of their Facebook pro ﬁles,
1The photographs used in this article are all from the publicly available Facebook pro ﬁles of the
ﬁfteen interlocutors from whom we have also obtained the consent to use their material.
However, we have decided to withhold their names if not absolutely necessary for the argumentand just mention their position in the party hierarchy.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 3
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,and their willingness to participate in an interview. We combined the data with more
informal focus group and tea shack discussions with local political leaders, general stu-dents, university professors, and university administrators. This research is also embed-ded in a larger research project on provincial town politics in Bangladesh, in which
student politics plays an important role and for which additional ﬁeldwork was conducted
between 2015 and 2017. The research is also informed by previous research on studentpolitics in Dhaka and Chittagong conducted between 2011 and 2014 by the second
author. We decided to focus on Rajshahi University because it is the second largest
and arguably second most important university for student politics in Bangladesh, afterDhaka University. However, there has been relatively little research done on student
politics beyond Dhaka.
Moreover, and while more comparative research would be necessary to corroborate
this point fully, the physical distance of a town like Rajshahi to the political center Dhaka
makes the use of Facebook even more crucial. Given Dhaka ’s historical importance, pres-
tigious name, and central location, politicians take close notice of what student politiciansare doing there. Awami League (AL) MPs or other senior politicians often try to connectwith promising BCL activists from their constituency or region. The BCL Central Com-
mittee also is mostly dominated by students from Dhaka University. As a result, what is
happening at Dhaka University is under the magnifying glass; this is further expedited byDhaka student journalists contributing campus news more frequently to national news-
papers. Student activists from other universities, and certainly those outside Dhaka,
are at a clear disadvantage. To reach their audience and be noticed by political leaderswho often reside in Dhaka, student activists in Rajshahi and other secondary cities
have to outperform their Dhaka counterparts. Facebook to some extent allows them
to bridge this spatial gap between metropolis and “provincial ”ormofussil town.
As the provincial and administrative capital of the eponymous district and division,
Rajshahi is located in what Ruud ( 2019 , 269) calls “middle Bangladesh. ”Considering
the extreme centralization in Bangladesh, however, mofussil towns are the urban hinter-
land; they are the “middle ”that bridges the gap between the “poor”and“uncivil ”rural
areas and the “progressive ”and “modern ”metropolis Dhaka, which is itself not
without mofussil character (Hoek 2012 ).
Rajshahi University is the second university in Bangladesh, and its student politics is
closely linked to the local authority structures (Kuttig 2019 ). Rajshahi is on the one hand
exemplary for a mofussil university town in Bangladesh, while on the other hand unique,
given the importance of educational institutions as part of its socioeconomic fabric, whichbestowed the city with the moniker “City of Education. ”While in Chittagong a major
economic factor is the port, in Sylhet it is remittances, and in Khulna it is a thriving busi-
ness community, Rajshahi ’s economy is largely attuned to its vast number of educational
institutions. After Dhaka University, Rajshahi University enjoys one of the best reputa-tions among public universities in Bangladesh and attracts students from all over the
country, particularly those who failed to be granted admission to Dhaka University. Polit-
ical student leaders from Rajshahi University thus consider themselves as part of an elitegroup, but inferior to their Dhaka counterparts. While they take up an important position
within the local power structure, however, they struggle for recognition and in ﬂuence in
the capital and political center Dhaka, which is vital for securing post-graduation oppor-tunities. The importance of student politics and the long distance to Dhaka (six to eight4 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,hours by bus), which complicates a politics of visibility in Dhaka, makes Rajshahi an ideal
case study for examining the Facebook use of student politicians.
The rest of this article is organized as follows: First we outline our conceptual
approach, bringing two sets of literature together, namely more theoretical work on
social networking sites and public space, and the literature on performative politics.
Then we provide the necessary context to understand the role and functioning ofstudent politics in Bangladesh. In the third section, we analyze our ﬁeldwork ﬁndings
and explore the use of Facebook by student politicians based on our conceptual
premise. Based on our analysis of the content posted by student politicians, we singleout four main performative repertoires: participation, networks, benevolence, and
violence. We will argue that these not only highlight political activities but also help to
establish patronage relationships and local authority structures. Notable in this contextis the act of rearticulation between of ﬂine and online public space where Facebook
politics alters practices of doing of ﬂine politics, speci ﬁcally concerning power relations.
P
OLITICAL PERFORMANCE AND FACEBOOK AS A DIGITAL PUBLIC SPACE
Political performativity plays a crucial role in Bangladesh to access patronage net-
works in a political system where access to state resources, especially coveted government
jobs, is contingent on the commitment to the ruling party (Suykens 2018 ; Suykens and
Islam 2013 ). Our notion of performative politics is indebted to the work of anthropolo-
gists like Victor Turner ( 1974 ), Georges Balandier ( 1980 ), and Clifford Geertz ( 1980 ). In
Geertz ’s(1980 , 13) “theatre state, ”the performance was the state as “power served pomp
and not pomp power. ”Hansen ( 2001 ,2004 ) makes a similar argument in his work on the
Shiv Sena . He concludes that they never really had a programmatic orientation nor a
coherent ideological framework, but “that performance is what the Sena really is ”
(Hansen 2004 , 23). For Hansen, “[p]olitical performativity comprises …the construction
of images and spectacles, forms of speech, dress and public behavior that promotes theidentity of a movement or party, de ﬁnes its members and promotes its cause or world-
view”(Hansen 2004 , 23). Thus, the act of representation is central to the analyses of
the formation of political identities. Simply put, it is the performance that “make politics
visible ”(Esherick 2007 , 243) and it is these performances and spectacles in public spaces
that we must move to the center of our attention (Hansen 2004 ).
Political performances can take many different forms —be it in forms of state rituals
like parades (Kong and Yeoh 1997 ); court trials (Kaviraj 2007 ); political speeches and
election campaigns (Heder 2007 ; McLeod 1999 ); or protest movements and political pro-
cessions (Jaoul 2007 ; Suykens and Islam 2013 ). These move from state spectacles (Geertz
1980 ) to contentious performances (Tilly 2008 ; Tilly and Tarrow 2015 ) and highly individ-
ualized performances (Strauss and Cruise O ’Brien 2007 ). Ultimately, the primary objec-
tive of a political performance is to create a positive reaction by the audience; therefore,
“much needs to go into making the performance intelligible to those target audiences ”
(Strauss and Cruise O ’Brien
2007 , 3). As Tilly and Tarrow ( 2006 , 16) have argued in
the case of collective action and contentious politics, repertoires —“claims making
routines ”—play a crucial role in making performances intelligible.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 5
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,When Hansen ( 2004 , 23) speaks of political performances, he talks about the con-
struction of images, media events, and spectacles, but also “a certain linguistic style or
conceptual vocabulary, a certain way of dressing and acting in public. ”As compared to
Schechner ( 2004 ), Hansen ’s notion of political performance is more inclusive of subtle
everyday performances, in contrast to narrow conceptualizations that conceive perfor-
mance merely as “actions pertaining to ritual, the theatrical and the staged ”(Hansen
2004 , 23). For Hansen, however, the performance is still bound to a public space as a
stage to perform for an audience. Here Veena Das ’s(2007 , 7) notion of the everyday
becomes useful, as does her contention that we should not only look at the spectacular(event), but rather try to understand how the event is “attached ”to the everyday, as
she stresses the “mutual absorption ”of the (violent) event and the everyday. As we will
point out in more detail below, Facebook transcends the physical public space andallows individuals to rearticulate mundane everyday events that take place in private
spaces to become a (spectacular) performance by mediatizing these events through
imagery in the digital public space. Through Facebook, the everyday becomes evermore absorbed in the spectacle of student politics in Bangladesh.
Apart from repertoires and audiences, public space —as the stage for political perfor-
mances —takes a central role in analyses of political performances. We contend not only
that Facebook offers an alternative digital public space but also that photography orimagery is a crucial mediator for reproducing of ﬂine performances online. Walter Ben-
jamin ( 2008 ,2 1–22) famously wrote about the interaction of performance and audience,
as mediated by reproduction:
[T]echnical reproduction can place the copy of the original in situations which
the original itself cannot attain. Above all, it enables the original to meet the
recipient halfway, whether in the form of a photograph or in that of a gramo-phone record. …It might be stated as a general formula that the technology
of reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the sphere of tradition.
By replicating the work many times over, it substitutes a mass existence for aunique existence. And in permitting the reproduction to reach the recipientin his or her own situation, it actualizes [reactivates] that which is reproduced.
Reproduction of a performance, thus, does not permit the audience to experience
the performance in its original. Benjamin ( 2008 , 22) further posits that reproduction
effectively depreciates the authority, and authenticity of the original, and its ability to
provide “historical testimony, ”as part of a loss of the “aura”of the original performance
(see also Auslander 2016 ). His idea of actualization or reactivation is geared toward the
moment of the beholder ’s reception of the work or performance. We will show that visual
imagery on Facebook reactivates nondigital political performances in the digital public
space across time and space. We further show how the everyday (Das 2007 ) becomes
activated in the ﬁrst place as a political performance, de facto creating authority
through Facebook. Facebook, as a new technology of reproduction, however, provides
individuals with more control over the form, time, and scale of the reproduction. Inthis article, we mostly focus on the strategies of the individual conferrers and the way
they intend to “rearticulate ”the spectacular political performance and the mundane
everyday events.6 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,By rearticulation, we mean a conscious effort not simply to portray or translate
events —either mundane or spectacular in themselves —on and to the digital public
space, but in doing so reinterpreting them, offering new meanings. In our case, rearticu-lation thus points toward the reproduction of events online, in which this reproduction is
used to perform individualized visibility. In a sense, rearticulation is akin to citation. As
Constantine Nakassis ( 2016 , 24), in his discussion of college youth style in South India,
argues: “citations alter what they reanimate and thus also transformatively entangle the
act and agent of citation with what and who is cited. ”While such citational acts (see
Butler 1993 ) are also present in the Bangladesh student context, citations point toward
individuals ’or groups ’appropriation of events, styles, or performative repertoires
derived from another context (e.g., movies or mastani [gangster] styles).
2In contrast,
rearticulation points toward the reanimation and transformation of the exact sameevent or act, often by the same individual or group. It can thus be argued to be a form
of auto-citation in which new meanings can be provided by the reproduction of of ﬂine
acts or events in an online public space. To summarize, we argue that Facebook doesnot merely reproduce, but offers its individual users an opportunity to rearticulate a per-formance, which becomes reactivated in the context of the recipient. This warrants a
more in-depth review of the functionality of a social media platform like Facebook as
an online public space.
The notion of the online public space was ﬁrst systematically examined by Boyd and
Ellison ( 2007 ). In a critical early engagement with the topic, they refer to social media
platforms as social networking sites and de ﬁne these as “‘networked publics ’that
support sociability, just as unmediated public spaces do ”(Boyd and Ellison 2007 , 221).
The degree to which content is shared, occupying a space between “traditional
broadcast and private dyadic communication ”(Miller et al. 2016 , 9) is important when
thinking about the notion of public space in social networking sites like Facebook. As
we will see, when connected to political performativity, this necessitates a closer look
at the multiple levels on which it is performed, as well as providing insight into its pro-jected audience. It moreover allows us to take on board Das ’s(2004 , 248 –49) critique
of Hansen as being too much ﬁxated on theatrical spectacles in the public space. She sug-
gests that we should rather descend into the everyday. As we will show, Facebook can
provide insights into the interlinkages between the everyday and the spectacle, as wellas the process through which the everyday becomes a spectacle. The collective and
the individual, as well as the political and the personal, become compounded in a way
that can elevate seemingly mundane personal posts of the everyday to spectacularpolitical performances (see Enli and Skogerbø 2013 ).
To make this connection, we aim to show how the nondigital interlaces with and is
rearticulated in the digital public space. In our analysis of Facebook performativity, thedistribution of imagery is central. Social media has effectively introduced the visualinto daily human communication “at the expense of oral and textual modes ”(Miller
et al. 2016 , xvi). During the Arab Spring in Egypt, for example, predominantly gory
imagery and videos of violence and sacri ﬁce became the focus of collective dissent and
2Mastaans are violent strongmen who often combine criminal activities with close-knit relations to
local and/or national politicians. They are similar to goondas , a term that is prominent in other parts
of South Asia.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 7
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,commiseration (Howard and Hussain 2011 , 38). Student leaders in Bangladesh perpet-
uate the surging trend of visual use of social media by overwhelmingly posting photo-graphic content on Facebook, thereby supporting Miller ’s claim that “the vast majority
of all photography today is social media photography ”(Miller et al. 2016 , 156). The spe-
ciﬁc dissemination of imagery on Facebook makes for the bulk of our analysis. Photog-
raphy and imagery have a meaning in the speci ﬁc context of their creation. By posting
these visual images on Facebook, their meaning can be rearticulated by compressing
space, time, and scale —or, as Benjamin ( 2008 ) would say, they would turn political. As
we will show below, a mundane and seemingly nonpolitical visual image may changeits meaning when a student leader posts it on Facebook as part of his “impression man-
agement ”(Boyd 2008 ).
This demands a close look at the speci ﬁcities of social media in particular contexts.
We agree with Miller ( 2011 ) about the need to study the “regional and particular usage ”
of social media. For him, “Facebook is only the aggregate of its regional and particular
usage ”(Miller 2011 , 163). Neha Kumar ( 2014 , 1123), in her work on social media in
India, pursues Miller ’s argument and expresses the need to draw more attention to
context-speci ﬁc social media practices in the developing world, taking into account the
rapidly progressing penetration of social media in the Global South.
Moreover, while Facebook ’s contributions to political dynamics and processes of
social change have sparked increasing attention, this also has been somewhat one-sided,
as research has, in particular, focused on global or national political agendas. The
so-called “Facebook elections ”that made Barack Obama president of the United
States in 2008 (Andrighetti 2016 ; Nations 2016 ; Vitak et al. 2011 ) and Narendra Modi
prime minister of India in 2014 (Biju 2017 ), or the so-called “Twitter Revolutions ”
during the Arab Spring (Alexander and Aouragh 2014 ; Howard and Hussain 2011; Ste-
panova 2011 ; Wolfsfeld, Segev, and Sheafer 2013 ) and in Iran (Gaffney 2010 ; Jenkins
2013 ), as well as the global protests inspired by #Occupy Wall Street (Jenkins 2013 ;
Juris 2012 ), are just the most prominent examples. While our case study contributes to
this emerging research agenda, we explicitly want to depart from the dominant focuson high politics by looking at the way much more mundane political activism is being
shaped by and is shaping Facebook. We do this by looking at student politics in one
town in Bangladesh.
STUDENT POLITICS AND POLITICAL CULTURE IN BANGLADESH
Political student organizations have played an important role in the historical devel-
opment of South Asia in general and in the politics of Bangladesh in particular. Student
politics across South Asia has taken various forms in recent years, often diverging from a
somewhat romanticized ideal of European 1960s student movements against imperialismand for democratic space. In Pakistan, political activism has fueled political dissent in the
past forty years, being one of the main actors in the 2007 marches for an independent
judiciary and media (Mullick 2008 ), while in Karachi student groups —often in connec-
tion with political parties —are prominently involved in maintaining a violent “ordered
disorder ”(Gayer 2007 ,2014 ). While being lauded for bringing about political change
and democracy, political student groups in Nepal ’s post-transition period have become8 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,mere organizational wings of mainstream political parties patronized by powerful political
leaders (Snellinger 2018 ). In India as well, students played a crucial role in the struggle
for independence and in recent years have increasingly spearheaded political movementsagainst certain policies and injustices (e.g., Justice for Rohith, the Hok Kolorob move-
ment, and the Jawaharlal Nehru University protests), becoming an essential part of
India ’s thriving democracy. On the other hand, political student leaders in provincial
India often act as dalals (brokers) or dadas (bullies) and shape local political processes
beyond their university campus, effectively curbing democratic space (S. Kumar 2012 ).
We would still maintain that, in comparison to the rest of the region, student politics
in Bangladesh takes up a more central role in organizing political life, which is closely con-
nected to Bangladesh ’s unparalleled, long struggle for independence and democracy, as
well as its unique political system. Student groups were at the vanguard of many criticalpolitical movements, such as the language movement of 1952, the struggle for indepen-
dence in 1971, and the installation of democracy in 1991. Not surprisingly, political
student organizations have become a breeding ground for future politicians. Many distin-guished politicians in Bangladesh today have their roots in student politics. Since thereturn to democracy in the 1990s, student politics has remained a decisive factor in
the overall political dynamics of the country (Andersen 2013 ; Ruud 2010 ).
After independence, Bangladesh was initially governed under a dominant party-
system, which was later succeeded by two military-backed presidential regimes until
democracy was established in 1991. Since the installation of democracy, the political land-
scape has been dominated by two political parties, AL and the Bangladesh NationalistParty (BNP). Politics in Bangladesh, however, is highly personalized and based mainly
on kinship ties (Ruud and Islam 2016 ). Both parties, AL and BNP, are under the rule
of women leaders, whose claim to the party leadership is based on their family heritage:AL is ruled by Sheikh Hasina, the daughter of the assassinated Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
(“the father of the nation ”), and BNP is controlled by Khaleda Zia, the wife of assassi-
nated former military ruler Ziaur Rahman (Kochanek 2000 ; Van Schendel 2009 ).
Since 1991, elections have been ﬁercely contested by the two parties, traditionally
accompanied by large-scale processions and hartals that have often turned violent.
Despite the confrontational nature of politics in Bangladesh, political power has
rotated between the two parties until recently. BNP won the ﬁrst national elections,
AL the second, and so on. Only in the last national elections in 2014 was AL able to
prevail for a second term in power. International commentators argue that this has
given rise to an increasingly authoritarian bent toward a one-party state (InternationalCrisis Group 2015 ; Maihack 2015 ). This was further corroborated in the most recent
elections in 2018, in which the ruling AL bagged 288 out of 300 seats in a highly con-
trolled election marked by widespread vote rigging. Bangladesh ’s politics is dominated
by a winner-takes-all mentality, which leaves the opposition with almost no room tovoice their opinion formally (Hasan 2006 ; International Crisis Group 2015 ; Kochanek
2000 ; Moniruzzaman 2009 ; Suykens 2017 ).
In contemporary Bangladesh, political student organizations are not independent,
democratically elected organizations but are integrated into a party-state system
(Suykens 2017 ). The three most important political student organizations are BCL, the
student wing of AL; Jatiyotabadi Chhatra Dal, the student wing of BNP; and IslamiChhatra Shibir, the student wing of the Islamist party Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 9
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,After every national election, the student wing of the winning party takes over campuses
and tries to exert complete control. Political leaders of the opposing party are pushed out,and their activities are banned from campus. At times, that leads to violent clashesbetween the new and the incumbent activists, but such incidents have become rare, as
the police side with the student wing of the party in power. By engaging in so-called seat-
politics, where the allocation of a place in the student dormitories or “halls”is made con-
tingent on the participation in student politics, student wings have a large capacity for the
mobilization of followers.
Student wings are essential for political parties because they can generate muscle
power for political work, like processions or hartals . According to our data, student orga-
nizations were involved in about one-third of events of political violence in Bangladesh
between 2003 and 2013; in some urban areas like Rajshahi, student groups were involvedin more than half of all violent events. Intra-party clashes have become especially
common, as different factions, backed by local political patrons, MPs, or even ministers,
try to gain control over lucrative leadership positions. Our data indicates that for somegroups —including BCL —this internal violence is even more prevalent than violence
between student groups of different political colors (Suykens and Islam 2015 ).
In a country where job opportunities are limited, becoming a student leader is a lucra-
tive stepping stone to a political career, a government job, or a position as a successful busi-nessman. Much scholarly research on youth and student politics in South Asia has recently
focused on the construction of world-views and imaginaries as well as students ’aspirations.
By exploring the motivations for students to become politically involved, these studieshave looked at student and youth politics as a “process of aspiration and social becoming ”
(Andersen 2016 , 421). Most prominent is Craig Jeffrey ’s(2010 ) work on student activism
and politics in India. His concept of “time-uses ”highlights the complex relationships
between organizations and student activists and the reasons for which students become
engaged in politics. In our case, the online performances by student activists are a key
way to overcome the anxieties of uncertain futures so eloquently described by Jeffrey.Based on Jeffrey ’s work, Andersen ( 2016 , 428) explores the role of time-use in the com-
petition for leadership positions at Dhaka University, showing that how time is used
“becomes a normative symbol of authenticity, loyalty and dedication, and a commodity
to be negotiated in the everyday operations of the organization. ”This becomes crucial
for our analysis of the use of Facebook in everyday student politicking, not only as a
means to document the time used but also as a citational practice that enables students
to rearticulate this everyday time-use independent of spatial-temporal constraints of alive performance or spectacle. Displaying a commitment to the party (AL) and establishing
patronage relationships during one ’s student times became increasingly bene ﬁcial after AL
secured its third consecutive term in power. Because of its violent, corrupt, and sometimescriminal nature, student politics in Bangladesh today has a negative public image and isgenerally connected to what Ruud ( 2001 ,2014 ) has called “dirty politics. ”
S
TAGING POLITICS THROUGH FACEBOOK :PERFORMANCE IN THE DIGITAL PUBLIC SPACE
Not only did Facebook appear to be omnipresent when we were doing research on
campus, but it also proved more insightful than local newspapers as we tried to stay10 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,informed about political activities and new developments on the university campus and in
the city. While considered too petty to be reported by the local media, small public eventsare neatly documented on student politicians ’Facebook pages. The social networking site
has become a valuable tool to engage in everyday campus politics —at least for those
activists af ﬁliated with the ruling party.
It is important to note that during our stay, the vast majority of student activists
belonging to the opposition (Chhatra Dal, Chhatra Shibir) were either in hiding, disguised
their political identity, or were reluctant to engage in any public display of their political
activities, as they feared legal consequences as well as harassment by the police or thestudent activists of the ruling party. This also applied to public displays on the Internet,
particularly Facebook, since the 2013 amendment of the Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) Act section 57 signi ﬁcantly impairs the freedom of speech on the Inter-
net under the pretext of preventing defamation —for instance, the stipulation that offend-
ers receive seven to fourteen years in prison. This amendment has led to a range of
politically motivated cases against opposition members, journalists, and academics —some-
times based on Facebook posts. This fear has intensi ﬁed further with the newly enacted
Digital Security Act of 2018, which imposes even more severe restrictions on the
freedom of expression on the Internet, allowing for a maximum ten-year prison sentence
for“spreading propaganda against Bangladesh ’s Liberation War, the national anthem and
national ﬂag using digital devices. Repeated offenses carry the maximum penalty of life
imprisonment ”(Amnesty International 2018 ). While in the rest of our analysis we
mainly discuss the enabling qualities of Facebook for ruling-party student activists, it isclear that Facebook also allows for a form of surveillance. Moreover, while government-
defying tactics during street agitations were often used to show one ’s commitment to
the opposition party in the hope of being rewarded after the next electoral cycle, such per-formances are largely absent from Facebook. It is quite clear that the government antic-
ipated the potential of Facebook as a site of contention and tried to close it down. If
students do create potentially controversial posts, they have to face the consequences.
Even without of ﬁcial prohibition, many students stated that they would not dare to
post anything critical about the ruling party, explaining that everyone has at least a few
student leaders of the ruling party in their friend list and that they had to fear a
serious backlash in the form of losing their seat in the student hall, being arrested, orbecoming a victim of extortion or violence as a direct consequence of their comments.
This fear is not unwarranted. In one speci ﬁc incident at Rajshahi University, for instance,
a student activist from a leftist student group posted a series of critical comments againstthe construction of the Rampal power plant in the Sundarbans on Facebook. In his posts,
he used defamatory language to warn Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina that she might lose
her power over this issue and end up like her father. He continued insulting AL bystating, inter alia, “I would not even write Awami League on a dog ’s skin, as it [the
dog] would feel ashamed. ”This defamation of their leader, which is arguably punishable
by law under the ICT Act, was not taken lightly by BCL activists. As a result, the author of
the post was arrested, expelled from his student hall, and later banned from campus.After his release from jail, he went into hiding out of fear. BCL student leaders of his
student hall con ﬁrmed to us that there would have been “bloodshed ”if the police had
not“rescued ”the author by arresting him the very same night. After the incident, the
same BCL unit organized a public gathering in front of the hall, and the hall presidentHow to Be Visible in Student Politics 11
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,delivered a speech proclaiming that his unit would not tolerate such comments and
behavior on Facebook. Images of that political performance, in turn, were postedagain on Facebook, not only displaying the claim to control and authority but alsomarking a commitment to the party leadership by performing the application of the
laws passed by their government.
As a result, the Facebook pages of opposition activists were almost entirely con-
strained to private posts. We also have no prior records of Facebook use by these
groups when their party was in power. BNP was in power until 2006; Facebook was
launched worldwide the same year, while Internet penetration in Bangladesh reachedonly 1 percent. Hence, our research is predominantly based on the Facebook activities
of the BCL student activists.
All the student leaders and activists we interviewed were in their early twenties to
early thirties and came from lower- to middle-income families. About half were from Raj-
shahi, while the other half came from all over the country. Each had personal reasons for
having joined BCL. Some needed a place in the student dormitory; others came from anAwami League family background; others were involved in student politics from earlierschool years on, or joined to increase their chances of getting a lucrative government job
or other bene ﬁts like money, or to simply avoid being harassed by another BCL leader. All
of them, however, belonged to an aspiring middle class that had been using Facebooksince their teenage years.
Student BCL politicians use Facebook in multiple ways for their political activities.
In an interview, one student activist summarized his use of Facebook in student politics asfollows:
One of the easiest ways to communicate is through social networking sites. On
Facebook, I have more than 6,500 friends and followers, and most of them arepolitical. Some of them are juniors from my department, relatives, and other
mutual friends. So, its in ﬂuence is bigger than anything. When I am organizing
a program, it automatically will be highlighted, and I can also show the demandand importance of that program. And they [friends and followers] can alsounderstand that I am active in politics. Not everybody has time to go through
the newspapers every day. Facebook is working as my own personal newspaper.
And its in ﬂuence is huge.
This large number of friends and followers is not unusual for student activists in Ban-
gladesh. Many of our interlocutors were concerned that Facebook does not allow you tosend a friend request to a pro ﬁle that has more than 5,000 friends; only the user with the
5,000 friends can send a request. This has led many student activists to maintain two
Facebook pro ﬁles. The high number of friends and followers, indicating a broad reach,
and the “public ”nature of most pro ﬁles emphasize the importance of the platform as
a public space. At the same time, most friends and followers of student politicians are
other activists from the same party, of ﬂine friends, and family. Facebook, as a result of
these characteristics, is thus a stage upon where student activists perform not primarilyfor the general public but speci ﬁcally for their own Facebook audience. Facebook has
also become a useful tool for many nonlocal student activists to communicate their polit-
ical activities to their family, friends, and political leaders in their home localities.12 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,Notwithstanding the bad reputation of student politics in Bangladesh, signaling one ’s
afﬁliation with student politics can uplift the social standing of one ’s entire family, and it
can also pave the way for student politicians to engage in politics after returning home.Almost all aspiring student politicians share the same dream to one day become MP for
their home constituency. Facebook is thus a convenient tool to display in ﬂuence and
commitment to politics and the party.
Like in Hansen ’s permanent performances in nondigital public spaces, visibility
remains the key to understanding Facebook use by student activists. A student politician
explained this in a nutshell: “Through Facebook, we can display our political work.
Without this, it is not possible to let people know that I am involved in politics. ”Political
activists and student politicians have traditionally used posters and lea ﬂets to perform
their allegiance to the party, but posters and lea ﬂets are expensive and limited in
reach. Facebook allows them to spread the information on a larger scale for free.
In the same way that it becomes an expedient repository for researchers to observe
the strategies and performances employed by student politicians —indeed as a “personal
newspaper ”—for other student leaders and (as students at least hope) for more senior
politicians it offers an index of the activities of individual activists. The question
remains, however, whether or not senior leaders follow the Facebook activities of
junior activists. The overwhelming majority of our interviewees were con ﬁdent that
senior leaders monitor —and should monitor —the Facebook activities of student activ-
ists. According to them, senior leaders regularly comment on or like the content they
post on their Facebook pages. In some instances, more senior leaders can even bedirectly approached by using the Messenger function. And indeed, not only did the
then BCL university president broadcast his own performances, but as a senior
student leader, he was also the target audience of many Facebook performances byjunior activists. When asked whether or not he monitors the Facebook activities of his
junior leaders, he explained:
Of course, I follow my juniors on Facebook. When I follow them, I also follow
their activities. Otherwise, events may go unnoticed. This helps me to rate theirperformance as a political activist. My performance is also rated the same way by
my seniors, who mark my career. I can also follow my seniors. All this helps me
to enrich my knowledge and to gain a sense of right and wrong. It also helps meto handle situations and to plan an upcoming event.
As we have mentioned before, imagery has become an especially powerful instru-
ment for student politicians to enhance visibility and to convey a variety of content to dif-ferent audiences. In the context of Facebook, this allows for sequencing, tagging, and
commenting, which provides the performer much more control over the message that
is broadcast. It allows the performer to digitally rearticulate a performance of party com-mitment in the nondigital public space.
Still, and without wanting to underplay the importance of Facebook, the platforms
have not (yet) radically altered the terms of political performativity; the digital publicspace remains closely connected to the nondigital. Facebook performativity is a re ﬂection
or perhaps a manifestation of the everyday politicking on campus. What it has done,
however, is increase the performative impact of mundane events through theirHow to Be Visible in Student Politics 13
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,rearticulation. In doing so, it is key to connect these mundane events to repertoires that
can be understood by the audience within wider idioms of commitment to the party. It isto these repertoires we turn next.
T
HEMUNDANE SPECTACLE OF PERFORMATIVE REPERTOIRES
Repertoires point us toward shared forms of actions and idioms that are recognizable
forms of political action, in the ﬁrst place for other student politicians, but also having
traction among a wider public. They draw attention to underlying assumptions aboutwhat it means to be a student politician and allow, within the framework of performativity,
for improvisation within the structuring repertoires. As such, these repertoires are indeed
shared between a digital and a nondigital public space and highlight the intimate connec-tions between the two. At the same time, and given its recent nature, Facebook perform-
ativity is also a space of improvisation that allows for a digital reactivation and
rearticulation of performative events in the nondigital public space. As we have men-tioned above, Das ’s(2007 ) notion of the everyday helps us to think through the way
mundane activities can be rearticulated and become spectacles via the careful use of
visual imagery of past events in the digital public space. We build our analysis aroundfour core repertoires that structure our students ’political performativity: participation,
networks, violence and self-sacri ﬁce, and benevolence. While some of these repertoires
of course coalesce, we keep them apart for analytical reasons.
Participation
The depiction of political processions and rallies appears to be the single most com-
monly recurring image posted by student politicians. This is hardly surprising; politicalprocessions or rallies belong to the main repertoires adopted by political parties in Ban-gladesh, either in the form of rituals when commemorating historical events and celebrat-
ing birthdays of important leaders or in the form of protests. They are critical events in
which the capacity to organize manpower is tested and appraised. Political student orga-nizations either participate in large joint rallies together with the mother party or they
organize their own processions on campus. In larger rallies, the different party wings
and units, carrying banners, approach the meeting point from different directions andare often welcomed and announced through loudspeakers upon their arrival, which
makes it easy for the party leadership to determine the mobilization capabilities of
each unit. Every unit leader, in turn, attempts to mobilize as many followers as possibleto signal his power, in ﬂuence, and commitment to the party and the patron. Often the
different units are in competition with each other over the preferential treatment of
their patron, sometimes leading to violence. The same applies to campus-based proces-
sions, where the president and general secretary of the Chhatra League University Com-mittee carefully monitor the mobilization capacities of the hall (dormitory) committees.
Participation is thus a display of commitment not only to the party but also to a particular
patron. For unit leaders, it is vital to ensure the participation of activists to signal theirvalue to the patron and to establish or strengthen patronage relationships.
Many student politicians, especially lower-level activists, post pictures of proces-
sions to prove their participation; more s enior leaders also post about successfully14 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,organized rallies to show their c ommitment to the central leaders. Figure 1 illustrates
such a post made by a student leader from Rajshahi University. The rally was orga-
nized by the BCL to celebrate Sheikh Hasina ’s birthday. He thought the post on
his timeline could help him to advance his career aspirations within the party, andstated:
[I]t is important. When I run for the president post in the next council, they
[national and local party leaders] will see whether I was active in political
Figure 1. BCL procession on Rajshahi University campus to celebrate PM Sheikh
Hasina ’s birthday (BCL leader 1 2016 ).3
3The interlocutors have granted us the permission to use the photos from their Facebook pages.
Also, the screenshots were taken from public Facebook pages, so we have decided not to disguisewho is in them. However, the sources have been anonymized in the list of references to protect theinterlocutors ’privacy.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 15
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,programs, which were organized on campus. They will see what my position was,
whether I was on the front in a leading position or not, and so on.
As he indicated, apart from merely proving one ’s participation and commitment, it is
also important to highlight one ’s speci ﬁc position within a procession. The front row is
reserved for senior leaders and those close to the president and general secretary ofthe unit. By posting these images on his timeline, the student activist not only conveysthe general message about the celebration of Sheikh Hasina ’s birthday, a ritual reiterated
yearly to consolidate her authority, but also engages in a “particular performance. ”By
depicting his participation and his position within the procession, as well as his physicalproximity to senior leaders, he signals his commitment to the party and his position within
the party hierarchy. While the depiction of processions is thus predominantly a reproduc-
tive effort, the selection of images to highlight one ’s position is an effort to rearticulate the
event —to offer an interpretation centering on the particularity of the individual perfor-
mance that might have gotten lost in the melee of the original procession.
Also, for senior leaders like the president of the university unit, Facebook remains a
useful tool to demonstrate their capacity to mobilize students to their patron outside the
university and other central leaders. The then BCL president of Rajshahi University
mentioned earlier, for instance, posted an image and video of a rally that was organizedto protest against Islamic terrorism. According to him:
The post is about spreading awareness against terrorism. The video highlights
our [Rajshahi University Unit] position against terrorism. A picture may not
clearly express the level of our participation. The video of seven minutesexpresses the number of people who attended it, so that it can inspire others
to join too.
For him, it is important to express his capacity to mobilize students. With the poten-
tial to rearticulate a nondigital public performance, Facebook allows users to conveymessages precisely, in this case about the number of people who attended a rally. By
using Facebook, senior student leaders can spread images and videos of performances
beyond the university campus, depicting their capacity to mobilize and de facto individ-ualizing the performance. In contrast to the previous student, who used photographs to
pick out his own role, the BCL president, more interested in showing the extent of the
procession, opted for video. This highlights the particularity of the rearticulations,which, while falling under the same repertoire, differ in their interpretation of the
performance.
How important participation and thus the Facebook performance of participation is
for one ’s political aspirations becomes clear in how the former Rajshahi University BCL
president himself uses the platform to determine and monitor the activities of his junior
activists and the consequences of unsatisfactory performances:
Yes, it [their activity] has to be checked to know how ef ﬁcient they are. If I see
that activists and leaders from a hall unit are not suf ﬁciently working, I call the
respective president and ask him to be more active around his unit, to be more
involved. A unit once became inactive while I was busy with running the16 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,committee. Their motive was to make me look bad as a leader. I threatened
them that I would replace all the committee members with new ones. Thisworked, and they complied.
Visibility and participation in party activities have long been essential for gaining priv-
ileged access to patronage networks and state resources. Rearticulating performances of
participation in the nondigital public space to the digital public space —in this case, Face-
book —makes it easier for student activists to become more visible to senior leaders as
individuals. While it is dif ﬁcult for senior leaders to single out individual participants,
even when they are present at a procession, Facebook enables activists to make them-
selves visible to the leaders by rearticulating the event as an individual performance,which, when reaching the recipient —in this case, the senior leader —becomes reacti-
vated as a performance. Speci ﬁc functionalities of Facebook help with this. By
“tagging ”a senior leader in a post, for example, an activist can ensure that the leader
will be noti ﬁed; the post appears on his or her timeline and thus becomes visible to
the leader ’s“friends ”as well. Performing one ’s participation in political programs on
Facebook and directing that performance at multiple audiences —roughly those below,
above, and on the same level as the performer —is crucial for student politicians who
want to display their individual commitment, build patronage networks, and exude cred-
ibility and authority. As such, Facebook serves as an extension of already existing political
dynamics but promotes a politics of individual visibility.
Networks
Closely related to the display of participation is the repertoire of performing net-
works on Facebook. While participation is key for building networks, showing networks
in itself helps to invigorate existing networks or build new ones. In their research on thesocial networking site Friendster, Donath and Boyd ( 2004 ) suggest that the public artic-
ulation of friendship links serves as an important identity signal that helps people navigate
the so-called “networked social world, ”in which an extended or certain network may
serve to validate the identity information presented in the pro ﬁles. They identify impres-
sion formation as one of the main reasons why users choose particular friends. In our
case, the display of networks on Facebook also serves as an identity marker that can con-
tribute to determining one ’si nﬂuence. Student politicians not only display their networks
through their publicly available “friends ”or“followers ”lists but also actively perform net-
works, mostly by posting images that depict seemingly close relationships with senior
leaders, in which physical proximity appears as a crucial marker. Unlike participation inprocessions and protests, where the performative or spectacular character is built intothe original (nondigital) action, the (nondigital) events that become crucial in performing
networks in the digital public space do not share this clear-cut spectacular aspect and are
often quite mundane. Here Facebook becomes a platform to improvise on student per-formativity in ways that were not directly available before.
While patronage networks are essential for gaining access to facilities and state
resources, the display of these networks helps student politicians navigate through thesocial and political world. By performing networks through imagery on Facebook, polit-
ical student leaders establish authority and signal factional af ﬁliation as well as their place
in the hierarchy on campus and their political aspirations, regardless of the actual depthHow to Be Visible in Student Politics 17
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,of the patronage relationship. The public display of connections can also lead to the dete-
rioration of relations, acting as a “catalyst for social drama ”(Boyd and Ellison 2007 , 220).
As such, the image is both an empty and a value-laden container. Regardless of its initialintention, the reproduction-as-rearticulation of the picture-taking moment provides new
meaning partly disconnected from the (nondigital) social context in which it was taken. It
thus becomes articulated as a performance when posted on Facebook and becomes acti-vated when reaching the recipient in his or her speci ﬁc context, which can be reinter-
preted using repertoires available within campus politics, in which connections to
senior politicians are considered key.
Figure 2 , for instance, was chosen as a pro ﬁle picture by one of our interviewees. In
the picture, he shakes hands with the MP from his home constituency. For him, the ratio-
nale behind the post is simple:
The local leaders of my campus will be able to know that I am not only involved in
politics here but also involved in the politics of my hometown. They will be able to
know that I am connected with a high-pro ﬁle leader. This is also a message to my
hometown people. By seeing this photo, they will be able to know about my con-nection to the MP . So, both groups will be able to understand my position.
As is clear from the picture format, the picture was edited to show only the student
politician and the MP, lifting it out of the context in which it was taken and rearticulating
it as an individual performance of networks. A casual handshake during a political
program, meticulously documented by a follower or friend, then becomes a political per-formance on Facebook, highlighting the individual ’s high-level networks.
Figure 2. BCL leader shaking the hand of an AL MP (BCL leader 2 2016 ).18 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,Another example of this is the image in ﬁgure 3 . Here, the student leader merely
stands in the background when a high-pro ﬁle leader passes by. The student politician
who is depicted in the background explains:
The thing is that in current times everything has become Facebook-centric. …
Those you are connected with and those who follow me and those who are in
my group, they feel con ﬁdent and they think I am connected with those
senior leaders and I have their blessing. So, they are impressed by this picture.
Again, the sequence of events registered in the picture itself is relatively opaque. To
what extent the physical proximity of the student leader to the high-pro ﬁle leader, sug-
gested in the picture, is re ﬂected in reality is unclear. Yet, it leaves the impression, at
least for the people in his group, that they should feel con ﬁdent about the relationships
their leader can build on. In fact, 147 people liked the picture. Many left comments
drawing parallels between the grandeur of the central leader with the white punjabee
and the aspiring student leader behind in the black punjabee , indicating the attributes
and talents they share linked to expectations that one day the protégé will succeed in
his master ’s footsteps:
In the image (white punjabee ), the idol of today ’s younger generation is leading
the country. Another one (black punjabee ) will lead the nation in the future.
Either here or there. The elderly say, if someone has the ability he cannot be
suppressed for long. If not here then there, you will de ﬁnitely come to power. …
Figure 3. Visit of a senior AL leader with BCL leaders in the background (BCL leader
32016 ).How to Be Visible in Student Politics 19
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,Again, the digital public space allows student politicians to create the impression of
connections in ways that the physical public space does not.
The performing of networks, however, can also appear in profoundly mundane,
everyday images, which are made almost spectacular as a result. As we have pointed
out above, Facebook enables the individual to rearticulate mundane, everyday events,
which become activated as spectacular political performances in the digital publicspace through imagery.
We asked one of our interviewees which recent post he deemed most important for
his political career. Surprisingly, he chose a seemingly unspectacular image of a restaurantvisit (see ﬁgure 4 ). For him, the post was important because the image shows how he has
Figure 4. A senior AL leader taking lunch with Rajshahi University BCL leaders in a
restaurant (BCL leader 4 2016 ).20 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,lunch with two top local senior party leaders. His “friends ”will be able to see this and
assume that he maintains close relations with them. This helps students across hierar-chies, both with those hierarchically below them in the student group and with morehigh-level leaders. So, according to one student politician:
[W]hen those senior leaders are posting this [or are tagged in the post], it is
reaching to their network and to other senior leaders with whom I did not
meet yet. This post gives me the opportunity to make myself known to themand will thus allow me to get some facilities [political shelter, protection,
resources, inducements] from them if I need any.
Another (more junior) student politician pointed us toward a post where he is sur-
rounded by senior student leaders of the university in what appears to be an informal
evening meeting among friends (see ﬁgure 5 ), explaining:
I was with the president and the general secretary of the university unit. And in
this picture, I was very close to them. So, when someone sees this, they willassume that I have a very good connection with them. It also expresses my
activeness in politics.
Student politicians indeed do not always intentionally perform networks through
public posts on Facebook, and we should refrain from overstating their in ﬂuence, yet
the student politicians interviewed were remarkably conscious of and strategic about
the posts ’effects and the multiple nature of a post ’s audience. They understand that dis-
playing proximity and putatively close relations with senior leaders is vital for them to
claim authority and attract more followers. Moreover, they are aware that tagging or
being tagged in a post by a senior leader makes it easier for them to expand their networks
Figure 5. BCL activists sitting together with their president and general secretary on
Rajshahi University campus (BCL leader 5 2016 ).How to Be Visible in Student Politics 21
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,and to build patronage relations for better access to party bene ﬁts and state resources.
Essentially, Facebook as a social networking site does what it was meant to do, that is,bringing people together and creating networks in speci ﬁc regional, social, and political
contexts, which in this case are dominated by patronage and performance, as well as vio-
lence. Performing networks is the most pronounced example among the four repertoires
where the strategic use of imagery on Facebook de facto transcends the divide betweenthe mundane everydayness and the spectacular. Facebook thus not only serves as a tech-
nological extension to rearticulate and reactivate already existing political performances
but also offers the public space for individuals to articulate and essentially activateprivate, mundane, everyday events that previously lacked the stage and the audience
to qualify as performances; these become “spectacular ”political performances.
Violence and Self-Sacri ﬁce
Notwithstanding the central role of violence in student politics, the depiction of vio-
lence is largely absent from student politicians ’public Facebook posts. The public depic-
tion of violence on Facebook, speci ﬁcally factional violence, was generally rejected by the
activists, as it would shed a “negative light ”on the party and the student organization. The
imagery of violence indicating one ’s participation in factional ﬁghting was perceived as a
step too far, as it would put pressure on the party to punish the perpetrators. Those
student activists with a so-called party “cadre ”(that is, violent) image were commonly
known, based on rumors of their previous activities. While, on the one hand, the party
intends to maintain intraparty cohesion and a “clean ”public image, on the other hand
its (street) politics highly depend on such “cadre ”activists. Thus, the party usually will
not react favorably toward a public promotion of factional violence on Facebook, while
violence as such is not necessarily discouraged.
Two exceptions to this “public silence ”on violence, however, need to be delineated.
Theﬁrst relates to violence directed at the Islamist Jamaat-e-Islami party and its student
wing Chhatra Shibir. The ruling party has branded members of both organizations as ter-
rorists and war criminals. In Rajshahi, a stronghold of both Jamaat and Shibir, both sides
have been involved in heavy clashes over the control of the university campus that some-times resulted in severe injuries and even deaths on both sides. Battle victories are thus
celebrated and commemorated on Facebook by BCL activists. Posting imagery of partic-
ipation in this type of violence supports an activist ’s aspiration for a party-political career
or party bene ﬁts. The risk taken when participating in the ﬁght against Shibir portrays
their commitment to the party. This line of argument is expressed in ﬁgure 6 , where a
student politician highlights his participation in a violent clash with Shibir by usingsimple photo-editing tools to single himself out in the images in a Facebook post.When asked about the post, the student activist explained:
It was on the 2nd of October 2012. It was the ﬁrst direct ﬁght with Shibir in
recent history. We fought against them, and we removed them from campus.
So, we celebrate this day. These are the images of different actions during
that clash. They also show my participation in that con ﬂict. I posted this to
promote and highlight myself, and as I fought against Shibir, it de ﬁnitely gives
me some credit. Shibir dominates this area, so when I am ﬁghting against
them, it gives me an extra value in Awami League politics.22 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,This was further corroborated during the Rajshahi University BCL Council selec-
tions. Participation in the struggle against Shibir was one of the key criteria for selectingthe next president and general secretary. Moreover, the party handed over special hon-orary scarves for those who had proven themselves in the struggle against Shibir.
The second type of violent image that is frequently shown is that referring to victim-
hood or self-sacri ﬁce. In countless posts, student politicians nurture the self-sacri ﬁce and
victimhood paradigm that has become an inherent part of AL ’s historical narrative (see
Suykens 2018 ). On every anniversary of the killing of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman or the
attempt on the life of Sheikh Hasina, countless gory images are posted on Facebookby student politicians to commemorate these incidents. These depictions of gory
images stress the narrative of commitment through victimhood and self-sacri ﬁce.
Apart from historical sacri ﬁces, student politicians also use images to emphasize indi-
vidual self-sacri ﬁce when they become victims of political violence. Some years ago, the
then BCL general secretary of Rajshahi University was ambushed by Shibir activists.
They beat him unconscious with a hammer, cut off his index ﬁnger, and severed both
of his Achilles tendons, and left him severely injured on the side of the road. Shortlyafter the incident, one of his supporters circulated the collage in ﬁgure 7 on Facebook:
a gory depiction of the horri ﬁc injuries suffered by the victim. The victim himself,
however, had a propensity for violence. In various previous clashes, he starred as agunman in newspaper images and YouTube videos. Later he was also charged with
and brie ﬂy arrested for criminal activities, including robbery, which made him a liability
for the party. His performance of victimhood, not only through speech acts and
Figure 6. A BCL leader highlighting his participation in a violent clash between BCL
and Shibir (BCL leader 6 2016 ).How to Be Visible in Student Politics 23
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,storytelling but also through gory imagery on Facebook that translated into the notion of
self-sacri ﬁce, however, successfully restored his claim to a party career and his access to
party-state resources.
When he was jailed on robbery charges in 2016, this image was reposted by many of
his followers and BCL activists at Rajshahi University who demanded his release. One ofthe student activists who reposted the collage explained:
By this post, people can understand how bad Shibir politics is. So, the general
people will come to hate them. This post also expresses his [the then BCLgeneral secretary ’s] dedication to the party, but now he is in jail. Why? He
was indicted on a robbery charge. Why was he arrested even after sacri ﬁcing
a lot? That ’s why everybody shares this, to set him free.
BCL student politicians at Rajshahi University had assimilated the notion of performing
victimhood in the form of self-sacri ﬁce as a way to show one ’s commitment or dedication
to the party. In various discussions, activists expressed a sense of entitlement for taking
Figure 7. A collage depicting the injuries of a BCL leader after a Shibir ambush (BCL
leader 7 2016 ).24 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,risks and potentially sacri ﬁcing their health in the ﬁght against Shibir. Unsurprisingly, the
“victimized ”former general secretary was set free on bail after only three days and was
bestowed an honorary scarf for his dedication in the ﬁght against Shibir.
Facebook does not radically alter the role violence plays in the nondigital public space.
At the same time, while one ’s capacity for violence is an essential marker of political
employability, and exploits of violence do take place in the public space and feature in sto-rytelling, violence cannot be openly displayed or showcased. Self-sacri ﬁce, on the other
hand, is the prime repertoire with which to showcase one ’s commitment to the party. Face-
book allows student activists to distribute images of sacri ﬁce more ef ﬁciently and enables
the individual activist to rearticulate the message in another temporal context. Reactivating
a public performance of self-sacri ﬁce, especially before a party council or during a time of
personal hardship, puts the party under pressure to provide favors or remuneration to keepparty cadres motivated to engage in (violent) party activities.
In the end, the performance of violence, of ﬂine as well as online, is a balancing act.
On the one hand, it is a crucial element for building patronage relationships with a localparty leader who is eager to appropriate violent capacities and to show commitment tothe party in general. On the other hand, the student activist must make sure not to aggra-
vate further the already strained public image of student politics and thereby undermine
his party ’s claims to legitimacy.
Benevolence
Benevolence is to a certain extent the antidote to the violence discussed above. The
public image of student politics or politics in general in Bangladesh has become very neg-
ative in the past few decades and is commonly characterized as being “dirty, ”“corrupt, ”
and“violent. ”As already mentioned, student politicians are especially widely feared and
are notorious for using violence to exert control. Unsurprisingly, it has become a popular
practice among politicians to engage in performances of benevolence to regain credibility
and, more importantly, legitimacy. Student politicians are no exception, and performingbenevolence on Facebook has become a core category in their repertoire of everydayFacebook performativity.
Interestingly, we found images of this speci ﬁc act of benevolence on each pro ﬁle we
examined. One example is the common practice of organizing social and religious pro-grams, like Iftar parties during Ramadan. A student leader who posted about the
event on his timeline asserted:
I posted it to show people that we, the Chhatra League guys, are not only
involved in bad things, but we also participate in social and religious programs.It gives a positive impression of us.
In another popular post with 380 likes, Rajshahi BCL activists distributed relief
materials in the form of money, food, and medicine to ﬂood-affected communities (see
ﬁgure 8 ). One of the student activists involved explained:
People think that Chhatra League is a bad organization and that we cannot do any-
thing positive. So, I feel that my friends and those who are known to me can see
that Chhatra League is not only doing bad things, but we are also doing good stuff.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 25
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,Facebook thus offers a stage on which student politicians perform benevolence, dis-
playing the professed positive side of student politics to their friends and families in an
attempt to regain public legitimacy. Again, much could be said about the actual act of dis-tribution itself and the way student leaders very clearly pointed out in whose name they
were dealing out the relief goods (a senior city Awami League leader). In this case, Face-
book played a crucial role in the reactivation of the original performance across space.Without Facebook, the act would only have been visible to the ﬂood-affected victims,
that is, far away from the students ’crucial audience —the people of Rajshahi city and
the party leadership in Dhaka. Facebook thus allows student leaders to appropriate
Figure 8. Rajshahi University BCL unit delivering and distributing relief materials to
people in ﬂood-affected areas (BCL leader 8 2016 ).26 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,images of benevolence and use the platform as a stage to target relevant audiences, de
facto magnifying these gestures as real media events. It should also not come as a surprisethat the student who posted it also added a number of pictures highlighting his own con-tribution and presence, again an example of the scope for individualizing rearticulations
we discussed above.
Although more research is needed to con ﬁrm this, we would hypothesize that acts of
benevolence have become a more pronounced element of student politics since the rise
of social media, as without a public platform to post about these events, they would have
been nearly invisible. This begs the question of whether the introduction of Facebookinto BCL politics may in the future actively modify the collective and individual strategies
of everyday politicking and give rise to new, creative repertoires of performance in the
nondigital public space.
C
ONCLUSION
Student politicians in Bangladesh have become highly adept at using Facebook as a
performative tool. They use the digital public space consciously and strategically to make
themselves visible; in local politics, according to Hansen ( 2004 , 22), “visibility means
everything. ”For student activists, Facebook has become the prime channel to rearticu-
late not only spectacular performances but also mundane events to display power,
control, and commitment in order to mark individual claims to authority and access to
state resources. Essentially, Facebook is foremost a stage for individual student activiststo perform their commitment and usefulness to the party. It provides individual visibility
in times when the competition over party positions is ﬁerce and the bene ﬁts, as well as the
access to state resources, are limited.
For our male student politician informants, the personal Facebook post has indeed
become political. This also resonates with the nature of Facebook, as it re ﬂects the
mundane everyday life of individuals, mostly in the form of photography, while at the
same time constituting a public space. The move to the digital space allows student pol-iticians to effectively transform the everyday into a performance, the mundane into a
spectacle. It also allows them to create a double performance wherein a performance
in the nondigital public space —a procession on campus, for example —is rearticulated
through the use of the digital public space. While not explored fully in this paper, new
messages —tags, captions, and storylines —can be attached and new audiences can be
reached. Given the sequencing and longevity of posts (in a “timeline ”), Facebook
allows the making of meaningful connections between posts, both by performers andtheir audience, as well as across time and space. Facebook as a digital public space is
determined by its design and functionality, where space, time, and scale become
compressed.
On a more general level, we have sought to highlight the proposition that today ’s
concept of everyday performative politics needs to transcend the traditional conceptions
of public space. Thus, we propose that when Hansen ( 2004 , 24) asserts that we should
move public spaces “from the central square to the street corner in the slum ”to the
center of our attention, we need to also shift our attention to the performances in the
new digital public spaces. Facebook has established alternative public spaces whereHow to Be Visible in Student Politics 27
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,individuals can engage in everyday political performances and strategically target multi-
ple audiences. This does not mean, however, that the digital alternative has replacedphysical performances on the streets and squares. After all, it was primarily the physicalprotests in the streets and squares of Egypt and Tunisia that in the end brought about
political change, and scarcely the performances on Facebook or Twitter. This corre-
sponds with Benjamin ’s(2008 ) notion of a certain loss of aura and depreciation of authen-
ticity and authority of the original performance when it is technologically reproduced.
The authenticity of Facebook in particular, with its highly individualized functionality
in which performances can be distorted or fabricated to serve the political visibility ofthe individual, is often put into question. Yet, we believe it is imperative to include
digital public spaces in our analysis of the everyday political performances in local politics
in the Global South.
With the increasing access to the Internet and the rapid spread of social media plat-
forms like Facebook in the Global South, those digital spaces need to be considered in
order to understand local politics in South Asia and beyond. If visibility is everythingin local politics, then the digital public space matters more than ever; however, itremains to be seen whether and how these digital public spaces potentially will
produce new repertoires of performance and thus actively contribute to a change in
local political dynamics.
List of References
A
LEXANDER ,ANNE, and M IRIYAM AOURAGH . 2014. “Egypt ’sU n ﬁnished Revolution: The
Role of the Media Revisited. ”International Journal of Communication 8:890 –915.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL . 2018. “Bangladesh: New Digital Security Act Imposes Danger-
ous Restrictions on Freedom of Expression. ”https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/
news/2018/09/bangladesh-new-digital-security-act-imposes-dangerous-restrictions-
on-freedom-of-expression/ (accessed January 16, 2019).
ANDERSEN ,M ORTEN KOCH. 2013. “The Politics of Politics: Youth Mobilization, Aspirations
and the Threat of Violence at Dhaka University. ”PhD thesis, Roskilde University.
—— . 2016. “Time-Use, Activism and the Making of Future. ”South Asia: Journal of
South Asian Studies 39(2):415 –29.
ANDRIGHETTI ,TRACI. 2016. “How Facebook Has Changed Politics. ”Lifewire , October 19.
https://www.lifewire.com/facebook-and-politics-1240558 (accessed February 7,
2017).
AUSLANDER ,PHILIP. 2016. “Reactivation: Performance, Mediatization, and the Present
Moment. ”InInterfaces of Performance , eds. Maria Chatzichristodoulou and
Janis Jefferies, 81 –95. Farnham, UK: Ashgate.
BALANDIER ,G EORGES . 1980. Le pouvoir sur scènes [The power on stage]. Paris:
Baudrillard.
BCL L EADER 1[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, September 29 (accessed January
20, 2019).
BCL L EADER 2[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, August 4 (accessed January 20,
2019).28 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,BCL L EADER 3[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, September 17 (accessed January
20, 2019).
BCL L EADER 4[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, October 1 (accessed January 20,
2019).
BCL L EADER 5[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, August 1 (accessed January 20,
2019).
BCL L EADER 6[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, October 2 (accessed January 20,
2019).
BCL L EADER 7[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, September 8 (accessed January
20, 2019).
BCL L EADER 8[NAME REDACTED ]. 2016. Facebook post, August 31 (accessed January 20,
2019).
BENJAMIN ,WALTER . 2008. The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological Reproducibility,
and Other Writings on Media . Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
BIJU, P. R. 2017. Political Internet: State and Politics in the Age of Social Media .
New York: Routledge.
BOYD,DANAH . 2008. “Why Youth (Heart) Social Network Sites: The Role of Networked
Publics in Teenage Social Life. ”InYouth, Identity, and Digital Media , ed.
David Buckingham, 119 –42. John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation
Series on Digital Media and Learning. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
BOYD,D ANAH M., and N ICOLE B. E LLISON . 2007. “Social Network Sites: De ﬁnition,
History, and Scholarship. ”Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 13(1):
210–30.
BUTLER ,JUDITH . 1993. Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex. ”New York:
Routledge.
DAS,VEENA . 2004. “The Signature of the State: The Paradox of Illegibility. ”InAnthropol-
ogy in the Margins of the State , eds. Veena Das and Deborah Poole, 225 –52. Santa
Fe: School of American Research Press.
—— . 2007. Life and Words: Violence and the Descent into the Ordinary . Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
DONATH , J., and D. B OYD. 2004. “Public Displays of Connection. ”BT Technology Journal
22(4):71 –82.
ENLI,GUNNSARA, and E LISKOGERBØ . 2013. “Personalized Campaigns in Party-Centred
Politics. ”Information, Communication & Society 16(5):757 –74.
ESHERICK ,JOSEPH W. 2007. “Afterword: The Heisenberg Principle of Political Perfor-
mance. ”InStaging Politics: Power and Performance in Asia and Africa , eds. Julia
C. Strauss and Donal B. Cruise O ’Brien, 243 –50. London: I.B. Tauris.
GAFFNEY ,DEVIN. 2010. “#iranElection: Quantifying Online Activism. ”InProceedings of
the Web Science Conference .http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.
1.1.630.7927 (accessed September 2, 2019).
GAYER,L AURENT . 2007. “Guns, Slums, and ‘Yellow Devils ’: A Genealogy of Urban
Conﬂicts in Karachi, Pakistan. ”Modern Asian Studies 41(3):515 –44.
—— . 2014. Karachi: Ordered Disorder and the Struggle for the City . New York: Oxford
University Press.
GEERTZ ,CLIFFORD . 1980. Negara: The Theatre State in Nineteenth-Century Bali . Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
HANSEN ,THOMAS BLOM. 2001. Wages of Violence: Naming and Identity in Postcolonial
Bombay . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 29
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,—— . 2004. “Politics as Permanent Performance: The Production of Political Authority in
the Locality. ”InThe Politics of Cultural Mobilization in India , eds. John Zavos,
Andrew Wyatt, and Vernon Marston Hewitt, 19 –36. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
HAQUE ,A .N .M .N URAL. 2015. “Social Media in City Corporation Elections. ”Daily Sun
(Dhaka), May 5. http://www.daily-sun.com/arcprint/details/41975/Social-media-in-
citycorporation-elections/2015-05-05 (accessed September 2, 2019).
HASAN,M ANZOOR , ed. 2006. The State of Governance in Bangladesh 2006: Knowledge,
Perceptions, Reality . Dhaka: Centre for Governance Studies, BRAC University
and BRAC Research and Evaluation Division.
HEDER ,STEVE. 2007. “Political Theatre in the 2003 Cambodian Elections: State, Democ-
racy and Conciliation in Historical Perspective. ”InStaging Politics: Power and
Performance in Asia and Africa , eds. Julia C. Strauss and Donal B. Cruise
O’Brien, 151 –72. London: I.B. Tauris.
HOEK,LOTTE. 2012. “Mofussil Metropolis: Civil Sites, Uncivil Cinema and Provinciality in
Dhaka City. ”Ethnography 13(1):28 –42.
HOWARD ,PHILIP N., and M UZAMMIL M. H USSAIN . 2011. “The Upheavals in Egypt and
Tunisia: The Role of Digital Media. ”Journal of Democracy 22(3):35 –48.
INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP. 2015. Mapping Bangladesh ’s Political Crisis . Brussels.
JAOUL,NICOLAS . 2007. “Dalit Processions: Street Politics and Democratization in India. ”
InStaging Politics: Power and Performance in Asia and Africa , eds. Julia C. Strauss
and Donal B. Cruise O ’Brien, 173 –93. London: I.B. Tauris.
JEFFREY ,CRAIG. 2010. Timepass: Youth, Class, and the Politics of Waiting in India . Stan-
ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
JENKINS ,HENRY. 2013. “Twitter Revolutions? ”Spreadable Media .http://spreadablemedia.
org/essays/jenkins/#.WnhdTmaZNAZ (accessed February 6, 2018).
JURIS,JEFFREY S. 2012. “Reﬂections on #Occupy Everywhere: Social Media, Public Space,
and Emerging Logics of Aggregation. ”American Ethnologist 39(2):259 –79.
KAVIRAJ ,SUDIPTA . 2007. “The Politics of Performance: Gandhi ’s Trial Read as Theatre. ”In
Staging Politics: Power and Performance in Asia and Africa , eds. Julia C. Strauss and
Donal B. Cruise O ’Brien, 71 –89. London: I.B. Tauris.
KOCHANEK ,STANLEY A. 2000. “Governance, Patronage Politics, and Democratic Transi-
tion in Bangladesh. ”Asian Survey 40(3):530 –50.
KONG,LILY, and B RENDA S. A. Y EOH. 1997. “The Construction of National Identity
through the Production of Ritual and Spectacle: An Analysis of National Day
Parades in Singapore. ”Political Geography 16(3):213 –39.
KUMAR ,NEHA. 2014. “Facebook for Self-Empowerment? A Study of Facebook Adoption
in Urban India. ”New Media & Society 16(7):1122 –37.
KUMAR ,SATENDRA . 2012. “Ethnography of Youth Politics: Leaders, Brokers and Morality
in a Provincial University in Western Uttar Pradesh. ”History and Sociology of South
Asia 6(1):41 –70.
KUTTIG ,JULIAN . 2019. “Urban Political Machines and Student Politics in ‘Middle ’Bangla-
desh: Violent Party Labor in Rajshahi City. ”Critical Asian Studies 51(3):403 –18.
—— . 2020. “Posters, Politics, and Power: Mediated Materialisation of Public Authority in
Bangladesh Party Politics. ”South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies 43(6).
MAIHACK ,H ENRIK . 2015. Entwicklung vor demokratie: Bangladesch auf dem weg zum
“Singapur-Modell ”?[Development before democracy: Bangladesh on the way to
the“Singapore Model ”?]. Berlin: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, Referat Asien und
Paziﬁk.30 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,MCLEOD,JAMES R. 1999. “The Sociodrama of Presidential Politics: Rhetoric, Ritual, and
Power in the Era of Teledemocracy. ”American Anthropologist 101(2):359 –73.
MILLER ,DANIEL . 2011. Tales from Facebook . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
MILLER ,DANIEL ,ELISABETH COSTA,NELLHAYNES ,TOMMCDONALD ,RAZVAN NICOLESCU ,
JOLYNNA SINANAN ,JULIANO SPYER,SHRIRAM VENKATRAMAN , and X INYUAN WANG. 2016.
How the World Changed Social Media . London: UCL Press.
MONIRUZZAMAN , M. 2009. “Party Politics and Political Violence in Bangladesh: Issues,
Manifestation and Consequences. ”South Asian Survey 16(1):81 –99.
MULLICK ,HAIDER A. H. 2008. “Towards a Civic Culture: Student Activism and Political
Dissent in Pakistan. ”Georgetown Journal of International Affairs 9(2):5 –12.
NAKASSIS ,CONSTANTINE V. 2016. Doing Style: Youth and Mass Mediation in South India .
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
NATIONS ,D ANIEL . 2016. “How President Obama Used Web 2.0 to Run for President. ”
Lifewire , October 18. https://www.lifewire.com/barack-obama-web-2-0-3486613
(accessed February 7, 2017).
RUUD,ARILD ENGELSEN . 2001. “Talking Dirty about Politics: A View from a Bengali
Village. ”InThe Everyday State and Society in Modern India , eds. C. J. Fuller
and Véronique Bénéï, 115 –36. London: C. Hurst.
—— . 2010. “To Create a Crowd: Student Leaders in Dhaka. ”InPower and In ﬂuence in
India: Bosses, Lords and Captains , eds. Pamela G. Price and Arild Engelsen Ruud,
70–95. New Delhi: Routledge.
—— . 2014. “The Political Bully in Bangladesh. ”InPatronage as Politics in South Asia ,
ed. Anastasia Piliavsky, 303 –25. New Delhi: Cambridge University Press.
—— . 2019. “The Politics of Contracting in Provincial Bangladesh. ”InThe Wild East:
Criminal Political Economies in South Asia , eds. Barbara Harriss-White and
Lucia Michelutti, 262 –87. London: UCL Press.
RUUD,ARILD ENGELSEN , and M OHAMMAD MOZAHIDUL ISLAM. 2016. “Political Dynasty
Formation in Bangladesh. ”South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies 39(2):401 –14.
SCHECHNER ,RICHARD . 2004. Performance Theory . London: Routledge.
SHAWON ,ANAET. 2016. “AL Post Seekers Turn to FB for Campaign. ”Daily Observer
(Dhaka), October 6. http://www.observerbd.com/details.php?id=37002 (accessed
September 12, 2019).
SNELLINGER ,AMANDA THÉRÈSE . 2018. Making New Nepal: From Student Activism to
Mainstream Politics . Seattle: University of Washington Press.
STEPANOVA ,EKATERINA . 2011. “The Role of Information Communication Technologies in
the‘Arab Spring. ’”PONARS Eurasia 15(159):1 –6.http://www.ponarseurasia.com/
sites/default/ ﬁles/policy-memos-pdf/pepm_159.pdf (accessed September 12, 2019).
STRAUSS ,JULIA C., and D ONAL B. C RUISE O’BRIEN. 2007. “Introduction. ”InStaging
Politics: Power and Performance in Asia and Africa , eds. Julia C. Strauss and
Donal B. Cruise O ’Brien, 1 –14. London: I.B. Tauris.
SUYKENS ,BERT. 2017. “The Bangladesh Party-State: A Diachronic Comparative Analysis
of Party-Political Regimes. ”Commonwealth & Comparative Politics 55(2):187 –213.
—— . 2018. “‘A Hundred Per Cent Good Man Cannot Do Politics ’: Violent Self-Sacri ﬁce,
Student Authority, and Party-State Integration in Bangladesh. ”Modern Asian
Studies 52(3):883 –916.
SUYKENS ,BERT, and A YNUL ISLAM. 2013. “Hartal as a Complex Political Performance:
General Strikes and the Organisation of (Local) Power in Bangladesh. ”Contribu-
tions to Indian Sociology 47(1):61 –83.How to Be Visible in Student Politics 31
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,—— . 2015. The Distribution of Political Violence in Bangladesh (2002 –2013) . Ghent:
Conﬂict Research Group.
TILLY,C HARLES . 2008. Contentious Performances . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
TILLY,CHARLES , and S IDNEY G. T ARROW . 2006. Contentious Politics . Boulder, Colo.: Par-
adigm Publishers.
—— . 2015. Contentious Politics . New York: Oxford University Press.
TURNER ,VICTOR . 1974. Dramas, Fields, and Metaphors: Symbolic Action in Human
Society . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
VANSCHENDEL ,W ILLEM . 2009. A History of Bangladesh . Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
VITAK,JESSICA ,PAUL ZUBE,A NDREW SMOCK ,C ALEB T. C ARR,N ICOLE ELLISON , and
CLIFF LAMPE . 2011. “It’s Complicated: Facebook Users ’Political Participation in
the 2008 Election. ”Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 14(3):
107–14.
WOLFSFELD ,GADI,ELADSEGEV, and T AMIR SHEAFER . 2013. “Social Media and the Arab
Spring: Politics Comes First. ”International Journal of Press/Politics 18(2):115 –37.32 Julian Kuttig and Bert Suykens
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms . https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911819001839Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core . Gothenburg University Library , on 28 Jan 2020 at 15:57:01 , subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,