Vanessa HerringshawPROGRAMME LEARNING REPORTJANUARY 2018
Increasing citizen voice and 
government responsiveness: what 
does success really look like, and 
who decides?  2
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides?  Author
Vanessa Herringshaw  was formerly Director of the Transparency and Accountability Initiative, Director of Advocacy 
for the Natural Resources Governance Initiative, and Head of Economic Policy for Save the Children UK. Now 
freelance, she can be contacted at ness.herringshaw@gmail.com . 
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Miguel Loureiro for reviewing an early version of this report, and to Rosie McGee, Duncan Edwards and 
Karen Brock of Making All Voices Count’s research, evidence and learning component.
Reference and copyright
IDS requests due acknowledgement and quotes from this publication to be referenced as:
Herringshaw, V. (2018) Increasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really look like, 
and who decides?, Making All Voices Count Programme Learning Report, Brighton: IDS  
© The Institute of Development Studies 2018FRONT COVER IMAGE:  Citizens delivering feedback on local government services via the Game My Village platform in Indonesia. © Anastasia-Areti Gavrili3
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides? Contents
Summary   4
About this programme learning report 5
Introduction   5
Participatory policy- and strategy-making: citizen involvement to set  
overall direction and rules 6
Participatory budgeting: citizen involvement to plan and allocate public budgets 8
Citizen feedback to improve service delivery via reporting platforms 9
Conclusions  10
Recommendations 11
References   124
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides?  Summary 
Narratives in the field of information and communications technology (ICT) for 
governance are full of claims, of either enormous success or almost none. But 
understanding ‘success’ and ‘failure’ depends on how these are framed. Research 
supported by Making All Voices Count suggests that different actors can seek very 
different goals from the same ICT-enabled interventions – some stated, some not.
This programme learning report proposes two important dimensions for framing 
variations in visions of success for ICT-enabled governance interventions: (1) the 
kind of change in governance systems sought (‘functional’, ‘instrumental’, 
‘transformative’ and ‘no change’); and (2) the vision of the ideal citizen–state 
relationship. It applies this framing to three areas where ICTs are being used, at least 
on paper, to encourage and channel citizen voice into governance processes, and to 
improve government responsiveness in return: participatory policy- and strategy-
making; participatory budgeting; and citizen feedback to improve service delivery. 
In terms of the kind of change in governance systems sought, much of the rhetoric 
touts the use of ICTs as inherently ‘transformative’. However, findings suggest that it 
has mostly been deployed in ‘functional’, ‘instrumental’ and ‘no change’ ways. That 
said, the possibility of ICT-enabled ‘transformative’ change appears somewhat higher 
when citizens have more direct control over outcomes, and more online and offline 
processes are mixed and used in ways that foster collective, rather than individualised, 
inputs, deliberation and answerability. 
In terms of the vision of the state–citizen relationship, the findings show great 
variation in outcomes sought regarding the kinds and levels of participatory 
democracy, who this should benefit, the ideal size of the state, and the desired stability 
of actor groups and decision-making structures. 
The evidence suggests that the use of ICTs may have the potential to support change, 
including transformative change, but only when the political goals of key actors are 
pre-structured to support this. The choice of ICTs does matter to the effectiveness of 
this support, as does the way in which they are used. But overall, ICTs do not appear 
to be inherently ‘generative’ of change. They are, rather, ‘reflective’, ‘enabling’ or 
‘amplifying’ of existing political agendas and levels of commitment.
The recommendations of this report focus on the need to understand deeply and 
face the realities of these varying agendas and visions of success at the start of 
intervention planning, and throughout implementation as they evolve over time. This 
imperative should remain undiminished, regardless of any rhetoric of the inherently 
transformative or ‘democratising’ nature of ICTs, and of interventions to strengthen 
citizen voice and government responsiveness more broadly. 5
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides? About this programme learning 
report
1 See also: Herringshaw (2017a, 2017 b).
2 These definitions largely originate in the work of Cornwall and Gaventa (2001) and Gaventa (2004), and are used in the Making All 
Voices Count event report written by Edwards, Brock and McGee (2016). The ‘no change’ agenda is this author’s addition. It is 
noted that there may also be additional aims / kinds of change sought by some actors, which move beyond ‘no change’ into the 
deliberately ‘manipulative and controlling’ (e.g. the use of ‘citizen voice–government responsiveness’ interventions to identify 
and monitor anti-government activists, their manipulation by trolls and bots to distort public opinion). These are not covered 
here, since they did not feature heavily in the Making All Voices Count literature, but early investigations suggest they should be on 
the analytic agendas of key players in future. See, for example, Treré (2016).Making All Voices Count was a grant-making 
programme supporting ‘tech for accountable 
governance initiatives’, which are defined as “projects, 
programmes and campaigns which use information 
and communications technologies (ICTs) in initiatives 
intended to increase transparency and improve 
government accountability to citizens” (Brock, Shutt 
and Ashlin 2016: 4). Making All Voices Count also supported research about what works in accountable 
governance, and why. 
This report’s author, Vanessa Herringshaw, was invited 
by Making All Voices Count to review and reflect on 
the programme’s research findings on government 
responsiveness in tech for accountable governance 
initiatives. This is one of three pieces she has written 
for the programme.1
Introduction 
Narratives in the ICT-for-governance field are full of 
claims for either enormous success, or almost none. 
But understanding ‘success’ and ‘failure’ depends 
on how they are framed. Looking at the findings from 
research supported by Making All Voices Count, the 
reality seems to be that different actors can seek 
very different outcomes from the same ICT-enabled 
interventions. These visions of success can be seen as 
variations within two important dimensions: 
1. The kind of change in governance systems  that is 
being sought. There are several distinct kinds of 
change,2 which range across:
• ‘functional’  change – improving existing 
governance systems, especially service delivery, 
in ways that frame citizens as relating to 
governance processes as ‘users’, where their role 
is mostly limited to giving feedback on how well 
service delivery is working  
• ‘instrumental’  change – also focused on 
improving existing governance systems, but here, 
citizens are framed as ‘choosers’ of services and 
priorities, and are thus expected to give a little 
more input than ‘users’; this is often limited to 
choosing from the presented options only 
• ‘transformative’  change – changing governance 
systems themselves, i.e. the relationships, 
processes and rules. This can potentially be at all levels and in all activities of government, 
typically within frameworks that stress mutual 
rights, responsibility and accountability. Citizens 
are seen as relating to governance processes as 
‘makers and shapers’, i.e. not just choosing from 
what is offered, but changing the rules, setting 
the agenda and even changing the balance of 
power
• ‘no change’  – not seeking any change in 
reality, whatever the rhetoric might be. This 
includes instances where ICT-for-governance 
programmes are initiated on the surface, but 
there is no real intention to make an actual 
change; the aim may be to ‘game’ the process 
for gains that include legitimacy, resources or 
profile.
2. The vision of the ideal state–citizen relationship.  
This may include positions on a range of spectra, 
including: 
• the kind of state sought, particularly the kind 
and level of participatory democracy  and who 
this should benefit – from direct democracy, 
representational democracy and patronage 
systems to no democracy / autocracy – either for 
public good or personal gain 
• the ideal size of the state , ranging from large to 
minimalist6
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides?  • the desired  stability of actor groups and 
decision-making structures , from static, often 
institutionalised groups and processes expected 
to continue over long time frames, to fluid, 
ever-changing networks expected to arise and 
dissolve as issues and contexts change.
Based on findings from research supported by Making 
All Voices Count, this report explores these varying visions of success and their implications in three 
fields where ICTs are being used, at least on paper, to 
encourage and channel citizen voice into government 
and governance processes, and to improve government 
responsiveness in return. These three fields are: 
participatory policy- and strategy-making; participatory 
budgeting; and citizen feedback to improve service 
delivery. 
Participatory policy- and strategy-
making: citizen involvement to set 
overall direction and rules
This is perhaps the area where differences in the aims 
and visions of success come into sharpest relief. These 
differences can be seen in the ‘what’, the ‘how’ and the 
‘who’ of decision-making. 
At the most ‘transformative’ end of the spectrum, ICT-
enabled participatory policy- and strategy-making: 
• addresses the big policy and strategy decisions, 
such as strategic social, economic and political 
priorities, who owns and controls resources, and 
how decisions get made
• involves processes that allow for intense discursive 
and propositional engagement by citizens, rather 
than shallow ‘clicktivism’
• includes genuine responsiveness by governments to 
citizen inputs, and the full disclosure of how and why 
these inputs are incorporated or not
• involves, vitally, processes which ensure that all 
citizens have the genuine means to participate 
– including proactive outreach to the most 
marginalised groups – and that all views are equally 
valued. 
But what might appear to be ‘transformative’ processes 
on paper can be easily be made ‘instrumental’, 
‘functional’ or even ‘no action’ if the content concerns 
marginal issues, the participative processes are 
shallow, government responsiveness is weak and 
opaque, and / or ultimate decision-making remains in 
the hands of the elite, established few. 
To explore these variations, it is useful to look at three 
examples with markedly contrasting outcomes, taken 
from the multi-country Voice and Chatter  study of ICT-
mediated citizen engagement: the ‘Decidem Barcelona’ 
open city government developments in Spain, and two 
national policy-making processes from Brazil. Spain 
Barcelona is a strong member of the Open Source 
City movement. It launched its ambitious online 
participation platform, Decidem Barcelona, in February 
2016 with the plan that it “become[s] the axis of all 
decision making of the city, where the citizens have 
a personal profile through which they can propose, 
engage with, and monitor all the activities, topics etc. 
that they might be interested in” (Peña-López 2017: 6). 
The aim was to use open, collaborative processes 
both to design the platform and in policy and planning 
decision-making, and to mix both online and offline 
face-to-face deliberations, where results from the latter 
are fed into the portal. It has been used as a supporting 
tool, for example to draft the city’s 2016–19 strategic 
plan. 
In terms of the vision of the state–citizen relationship, 
this approach is very much based on a ‘direct 
democracy’ model and on diminishing the role of 
intermediaries, both in government and outside, in 
favour of direct, individual engagement. Some are also 
seeking to move away from static or stable definitions 
of roles and groups, to “rhizomatic, autonomous self-
organisation of citizenry” (Aragón et al. 2016: 6) and 
‘liquid democracy’, where citizens and civic groups 
come together temporarily to work on particular 
proposals and issues, but without establishing formal 
partnerships (Peña-López 2017).
It is vital to note that the movement and platform 
developed in the wake of the ‘15M’ protests of May 
2011, which arose from deep disillusionment with 
traditional politics. According to Peña-López, the 
protests fomented “horizontal communication, 
extra-representative and extra-institutional ways of 
organising ... weaving a dense but distributed network 
of activists” (2017: 3). Some of these activists formed 7
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides? new political parties and, in 2015, were elected into 
eight municipal governments, bringing their hacker and 
direct democracy ethos with them. It is this existing 
political context that seems to have driven the use of 
technology for ‘transformative’ change aims.
Brazil   
Two initiatives in Brazil, which are a little further back 
in recent history, offer important lessons. In 2009, the 
Ministry of Justice wanted to develop the ‘Marco Civil’ 
or ‘Internet Bill of Rights’ using, in part, digital means 
to strengthen citizen participation in its development. 
With an academic partner (the Centre for Technology 
and Society of the Getulio Vargas Foundation), it 
created an online open blog space to do this at two 
stages: to provide input to inform the drafting of the 
text before it was written; and to comment on the draft 
bill. The Ministry also held offline meetings.
In 2011, the Ministry of Culture wanted to reform 
the Copyright Law. Inspired partly by the Marco Civil 
example, it too developed an online deliberative space 
to allow public comment. This was only for the second 
phase (i.e. to provide comments on the draft bill).
Both platforms were, at first, seen as successful in 
facilitating citizen participation, at least by those able 
to use the technology. But what is most striking about 
these two examples is that although their technical 
features varied somewhat, much more important were 
the broader political processes going on beyond the 
platforms, as in Spain.  
In the Marco Civil case, “the draft text prepared by 
the executive officials [of the Ministry of Justice] was 
altered at the stage it was debated in Parliament – 
as elected officials bowed to pressure from Internet 
intermediary and creative industry lobbies to water 
down key provisions of the draft bill” (Gurumurthy et 
al. 2017a: 36). But the bill was passed, and was still 
seen as coming as least ‘halfway’ towards meeting 
the demands from citizens, voiced through the online 
consultation. 
However, in the Copyright Reform case, just as the 
first draft bill (based partly on the online consultation) 
was about to be tabled, a political shift occurred 
and the Minister of Culture was replaced. The new 
Minister ordered another round of ‘consultations’, 
and participation through the platform was made 
much more difficult; this now required the completion 
of complex registration forms, and every proposal 
had to be backed by a justification based in local or 
international legislation. Though the ICT-enabled 
platform gave a veneer of consultation, contributions on this second round of consultations were, 
unsurprisingly, a mere 2% of those for the first. 
Ultimately, no new law was enacted. This seems a 
strong case of a ‘no change’ agenda coming in halfway 
through the overall process. 
These examples, although only from two countries, 
demonstrate the range of possible outcomes from 
ICT-enabled participatory policy-making that Loureiro 
et al. (2016) outline: from ‘no change’, i.e. government 
hearing what citizens say but not acting; through 
‘functional’ and ‘instrumental’ responsiveness, i.e. 
governments listening and acting on what they 
hear within prescribed limits; to some degree of 
‘transformative’ change, involving co-creation between 
citizens and govern, which Loureiro et al. (2016) label 
‘concertation’. 
The examples show that online processes can indeed 
improve participation, especially if they are designed 
to foster collective deliberation, openness is hard-
wired into them and they are combined with offline 
consultations whose content are also made public. 
Then, they have the potential to deliver some of the 
following practical results (see Kira, Ruiz and Valente 
2017):
• bringing new ideas to the debate, ideally including 
those from new voices
• making different stakeholders’ positions clear and 
public, by identifying actors and their opinions
• helping new communities to form
• helping to legitimise positions where there is new 
consensus
• overcoming bureaucratic barriers
• archiving knowledge online
• making text available for the construction of other 
texts, such as legal drafts
• improving debates, if the mechanisms are designed 
and run to foster two-way and simultaneous debate, 
both between citizens, and between citizens and 
government. 
But the Brazil examples also highlight that however 
online processes are initially framed, they may not be 
the key decision-making fora, or determine the ultimate 
results. Here, the key factors determining whether 
policy developed online reflected citizen input and was 
acted upon were still the agendas and unity of civil 
society and, even more importantly, the agendas and 
commitment of powerful actors within and outside 
government. 8
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides?  Participatory budgeting: citizen 
involvement to plan and allocate 
public budgets
Like participatory policy- and strategy-making 
initiatives, ICT-enabled participatory budgeting 
initiatives also vary in their stated aims and 
approaches. In reality, many are structured to be 
largely ‘instrumental’, i.e. they are about getting the 
existing system to work better, by getting citizens’ 
contributions and giving them responsibilities. There is 
the potential to be slightly more ‘transformative’ where 
there are spaces for new groups to form and significant 
budgets are up for allocation. But generally, they are 
most often linked to participatory state–citizen models 
that are framed as representational democracies, where 
state agents frame the inputs that citizens can give and 
retain the right to make any final decisions. 
However, there is the potential for these processes to 
aim more towards a ‘direct democracy’ model, with 
fewer intermediaries and citizens expressing direct 
opinions and choices. But the impacts may be limited 
when these can be characterised as ‘islands’ of direct 
democracy within a broader ‘sea’ of representational 
democracy, where citizen involvement is only permitted 
in relatively small and prescribed areas of local 
and municipal government budgets. It should also 
be noted that although such models can relate to 
representational or direct democracy on paper, both 
may be operating among the realities of political and 
other patronage systems operating at different levels.
When looking at the impact of ICT-enabled 
participatory budgeting interventions, evaluations often 
focus on ‘citizen voice’. This includes consideration 
of inclusion (i.e. who can and cannot participate) and 
the quality of participation (e.g. whether it includes 
one-way inputs or two-way discussions, and ‘thin’ or 
‘thick’ engagement) (Leighninger 2016). But to assess 
whether such interventions are bringing ‘functional’, 
‘instrumental’, ‘transformative’ success or ‘no change’, 
two other factors – which are seemingly obvious, 
but often more neglected – also need consideration: 
whether the government actually responds to / acts 
on the inputs given by citizens (so that final budget 
priorities actually reflect citizen views); and whether 
new processes, mindsets, power configurations or 
even rules are left in place as a result of the planning 
process. 
It is illuminating to explore these factors and kinds 
of success in relation to the longstanding practical 
example of participatory budgeting in Indonesia, where 
it is known as musrenbang and has been operating since 2000, becoming formalised in 2004. Research 
by Kota Kita, an Indonesian non-governmental 
organisation (NGO), summarised by Feruglio and 
Rifai (2017), compares six municipalities and shows 
that where there is willingness in governments to 
respond and citizens to participate, ‘instrumental’ 
success has been possible in terms of citizens as 
‘choosers’, influencing the allocation of assigned 
budgets. However, any ‘transformative’ changes to 
power structures remain limited, partly because the 
government retains the vast majority of decision-
making power, and partly because it remains difficult 
for citizens to track the extent to which their inputs 
are incorporated into budgets and fulfilled in terms of 
actual spending. 
ICT has added value to the musrenbang by enabling 
digital mapping of citizen needs, which Kota Kita 
undertakes as an intermediary and feeds into budget 
deliberations. But so far, citizens’ participation is mostly 
achieved offline. “Generally speaking”, write Feruglio 
and Rifai, “initiatives that seek to channel participation 
through the Internet are not being used because of 
low digital literacy and Internet use”.  Even when 
citizens have been given online options, so far “they 
overwhelmingly chose phone calls or direct interaction, 
rather than online methods or even SMS” (2017: 12). 
So technology is currently supporting participation to 
some extent. But the researchers suggest that the basic 
structures of the budget process, especially the clarity 
of budget ceilings and allocations at the neighbourhood 
level, are more crucial in reflecting genuine government 
commitment to local control, and to enabling real local 
decision-making and monitoring of outcomes. 
Long experience of participatory budgeting in 
Indonesia generates particularly important learning 
about the vital importance of considering dynamics 
over time and scale. Participation using technology is a 
new norm that is still evolving and still being contested. 
It is likely that the dynamics of ICT use will change as 
younger, more tech-savvy citizens enter the fray. This 
might prompt a rapid lean towards digital processes, 
and this is when care is needed to ensure the 
technology is additive: that its use does not undermine 
existing participation and response processes by 
replacing existing ones, which are collective, discursive 
and face to face, with those that are individual, input-
only and online-only. Negotiation, social capital and 
trust all matter (Gurumurthy et al. 2017b and c).9
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides? But, at the same time, Feruglio and Rifai note 
two other trends: an evolution in participatory 
budgeting in Indonesia “from a substantive and 
truly democratic process to a merely procedural 
one” (2017: 8), as it has been formalised and 
spread across the country; and a disillusioned 
youth moving away from engagement in formal 
governance processes. With donor and NGO attention being redirected away from participatory 
budgeting, now that that has been codified in policy, 
future impact seems to rely on the level of genuine 
commitment – of governments and of citizens – to 
real participatory processes and impacts. It does 
not appear that technology ‘creates’ this willingness 
or commitment. So where will the driver for this 
come from in future?   
Citizen feedback to improve service 
delivery via reporting platforms
ICT-enabled platforms to encourage and channel the 
sharing of citizen feedback to government to improve 
service delivery have been a key area of e-governance 
initiatives to date. Though the rhetoric and aims of 
many implementers may be for ‘transformative’ impact, 
most platforms are actually structured to be largely 
‘functional’; citizens are only given the option to give 
feedback on how services are operating as ‘users’, 
not ‘choosers’ between options, let alone ‘makers and 
shapers’ of the services. Such approaches are most 
often linked to state–citizen models that are framed 
as representational democracies or even benign 
autocracies, where state agents frame and delimit the 
kind of inputs that citizens can make, undertake the 
analysis, and make the decisions.
Even in this minimalist interpretation of what citizens’ 
roles in service improvement should be, a key challenge 
has been getting significant levels of citizen use of such 
ICT-enabled reporting platforms. Predictably, it has 
been most difficult to include the most marginalised 
and least powerful – those that might most need to use 
them to get a productive response from government 
(see Hrynick and Waldman 2017). 
Strategies to overcome this suggest the need for 
an extensive mix of online and offline outreach, to 
understand the barriers and try to overcome them. 
But there are absolute limits to this where potential 
users have a powerful negative sense of the agendas 
of government: where they fear reprisal for reporting 
failures, or where they justifiably lack trust that the 
government or service provider will actually respond to 
their inputs (see Welle, Williams and Pearce 2016).
Where citizens are willing and able to give voice, where 
government willingness to respond already exists, and 
where the social and institutional design of both the 
citizen-voice and government-response mechanisms 
match and integrate into the existing social and 
institutional systems, such ICT-based reporting 
platforms have been shown to produce functional 
improvements, by increasing citizen voice and ‘closing the feedback loop’ – generating actual responses to 
citizen inputs (see Peixoto and Fox 2016; Welle et al. 
2016). 
However one challenging finding from the two 
empirically based comparative studies cited above, 
is that the majority of interventions failed in linking 
stronger citizen voice to stronger governance 
responses: only three of the seven interventions in the 
rural water sector, reported on by Welle et al. (2016) 
achieved improvements in both citizen reporting 
and government response; and only seven of the 23 
interventions in Peixoto and Fox’s study achieved 
“tangible service delivery agency action in more than 
half of cases” (2016: 30).
But an even more shocking finding is that both analyses 
conclude that strengthening citizen voice through 
these platforms does not seem to improve government 
responsiveness unless the government actors are 
already motivated to respond. For Welle et al. (2016), 
this is reflected by the finding that successful initiatives 
required government service providers to play core 
roles in running and funding the reporting, processing 
and response mechanisms, whereas externally run 
crowdsourcing models were much less successful. 
Peixoto and Fox (2016) find that, in the majority of 
cases, the use of citizen voice as feedback has yet to 
influence the willingness  of government policy-makers 
and senior managers to respond to citizen reports. 
It works only to build their capacity  to do so where 
this willingness already exists . In other words, these 
kinds of voice platforms do not seem to incentivise 
or motivate increased government responsiveness, 
but rather, as Peixoto and Fox say, “make a technical 
contribution to a policy problem that to some degree 
has already been addressed” (2016: 36). This is a 
serious challenge to the theories of change of many 
ICT-enabled voice and feedback platforms.  
Where individual citizens’ reports and government 
responses / non-responses are published, this might 
be expected to strengthen the pressure for downward 10
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides?  accountability to citizens. So it is even more surprising 
to find that the empirical results show no pattern when 
looking at the relationship between the disclosure / 
non-disclosure of feedback and government 
responsiveness. As Peixoto and Fox note, “public 
disclosure of feedback does not seem to lead – per se  
– to increased responsiveness from providers” (2016: 
32). 
It appears that pre-existing levels of government 
willingness to respond are key in terms of achieving a 
functional impact from voice feedback platforms, i.e. 
tangible improvements to service delivery. This fosters 
the realisation that for reporting platforms to achieve 
even limited functional impacts where this willingness 
does not exist, it may be necessary to invest first in 
other transformative interventions – ones that increase 
government willingness to respond to citizens.
These findings strongly suggest the need to fully 
investigate, understand and be realistic about the 
change agendas and levels of genuine commitment among government actors, both before investing 
in ICT-enabled feedback platforms and throughout 
implementation. This may include the need for 
concrete indications of such commitment, such as 
the investment of government resources and the 
integration of new approaches into core government 
systems. For a framework to examine the core 
components required in interventions to strengthen 
citizen voice–government responsiveness, see 
Herringshaw (2017a).
Understanding underlying agendas may be especially 
important when they include a drive towards a 
minimalist state and an increasing role for the private 
sector in service delivery. Aside from governance 
systems and state–citizen relations, some actors’ 
visions of success may have more to do with accessing 
markets and gathering free or cheap market research, 
especially where the private sector retains control of 
the information from and about service users (see for 
example, Gurumurthy et al. 2017a and b).  
Conclusions
Findings from Making All Voices Count suggest that 
the aims and outcomes for ICT-enabled citizen voice –
government responsiveness interventions can vary 
greatly within the two framing dimensions suggested 
here. 
Firstly, in terms of the kind of change in governance 
systems sought , though much of the rhetoric of ICT 
use touts it as inherently ‘transformative’, in reality, it 
has mostly been deployed in ‘functional’, ‘instrumental’ 
and ‘no change’ ways. That said, findings from research 
supported by Making All Voices Count seem to suggest 
that the possibility of ICT-enabled transformative 
change is somewhat higher when citizens have more 
direct control over the outcomes, and when online 
and offline processes are mixed and used in ways 
that foster collective, rather than individualised, 
deliberation, monitoring and answerability. 
Secondly, in terms of the vision of the ideal state–citizen 
relationship , the findings show great variation in the 
kinds and levels of participatory democracy sought 
and who this should benefit, the ideal size of the state, and the desired stability of actor groups and decision-
making structures.  Along both dimensions, sometimes 
the desired outcomes are overtly stated, sometimes 
not. 
What stands out from all this is the conundrum of cause 
and effect: do the key elements for change come from 
the processes of participation generated by the use of 
ICTs? Or do they lie as preconditions that must already 
be in place, arising from other political dynamics and 
not connected to the ICT-enabled process, to allow the 
latter to work in transformative ways?
The evidence from the research reviewed for this report 
points more towards the latter: that the use of ICTs 
may have the potential to support change, including 
transformative change, but only when the political 
goals of key actors are pre-structured to support this. 
The choice of ICTs does matter to the effectiveness 
of this support, as does the way in which they are 
used. But overall, ICTs do not appear to be inherently 
‘generative’ of change. They are, rather, ‘reflective’, 
‘enabling’ or ‘amplifying’ of the existing political These findings strongly suggest the need to fully investigate, understand and 
be realistic about the change agendas and levels of genuine commitment 
among government actors, both before investing in ICT-enabled feedback 
platforms and throughout implementation. 11
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides? agendas and levels of commitment of citizens, to some 
extent – but also of powerful actors within and outside 
government. 
The need to understand and face the realities of these 
varying agendas and visions of success is vital to any citizen voice–government responsiveness intervention, 
as is tracking their evolution over time. This imperative 
should remain undiminished, regardless of any rhetoric 
of the inherently transformative or ‘democratising’ 
nature of ICTs.
Recommendations
In terms of implications for future programming, 
research and funding, these findings suggest the need 
for the following:
• Much more robust analysis and realism about the 
different change agendas and visions of success of 
all the actors key to any accountability initiative, and 
those who hold sway over them – the stated and 
the unstated. Really understanding these agendas 
is likely to entail significant investment, both before 
any intervention is planned and while tracking it with 
keen intelligence over time.  
• Where genuine commitment to strengthening 
citizen voice and government responsiveness exists, 
stakeholders may benefit from exploring the extent 
to which they can design any initiative or process 
to incorporate more ‘transformative’ – or at least 
more ‘instrumental’ – aims and approaches into 
their initiatives, rather than more typical but limited 
‘functional’ impacts. This could happen by involving 
citizens in the design of processes, as well as their 
implementation; by building spaces for ‘thicker’ and 
less prescribed inputs from citizens, which give them 
a role in agenda-setting and a space for collective 
interaction, discussion and community formation 
(while avoiding ‘atomising’ citizens and their power); 
by giving citizens more direct control over resources 
and outcomes; and by building direct answerability 
from governments into a mix of online and offline 
spaces. • Conversely, where pre-existing government 
willingness and commitment are in doubt, activists 
and funders may benefit from greater caution 
about any theory of change where the use of ICT 
to channel citizen feedback or voice is expected to 
‘nudge’, let alone create, greater or more sustained 
commitment and willingness from government. 
There is a need to realise that the evidence suggests 
this is extremely difficult to achieve where counter 
political forces are at work.  
• To work well, citizen voice–government 
responsiveness interventions require a great 
deal of mutual understanding, trust and ongoing 
negotiation between the key actors essential to their 
success. Greater investment is needed to clarify 
and build these shared agendas at the start, and 
to maintain them over time in the face of inevitable 
challenges. The scale of investment in the online and 
offline time, spaces and processes needed to achieve 
this may be on par with, if not more than, that 
spent on any online tool or platform development 
and implementation. Such investments may need 
to be heavy up front, well before ICT design, and 
they are likely to need to continue throughout 
implementation as actors change and the context 
evolves.  
 ICTs do not appear to be inherently ‘generative’ of change. They are, rather, 
‘reflective’, ‘enabling’ or ‘amplifying’ of the existing political agendas and 
levels of commitment of citizens, to some extent – but also of powerful actors 
within and outside government.12
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides?  References 
Aragón, P .; Calleja-López, A.; Gómez, V.; Kaltenbrunner, 
A.; Laniado, D.; Manca, M.; Monterde, A. and Bria, 
F. (2016) D2.5 Networked Models of Democracy , 
D-CENT, https://dcentproject.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2016/06/D2.5-1.pdf  (accessed 11 January 
2018)
Brock, K.; Shutt, C. and Ashlin, A. (2016) Learning 
for Change in Accountable Governance Programming , 
Making All Voices Count Programme Learning Review, 
Brighton: IDS, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/
handle/123456789/12196  (accessed 12 January 
2018)
Cornwall, A. and Gaventa, J. (2001) From Users to 
Choosers and Makers and Shapers: Repositioning 
Participation in Social Policy , IDS Working Paper 127, 
Brighton: IDS
Edwards, D.; Brock, K. and McGee, R. (2016) 
Transforming Governance: What Role for 
Technologies? , Making All Voices Count Event 
Report, Brighton: IDS, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/
opendocs/handle/123456789/11675  (acccessed 
12 January 2018)
Feruglio, F. and Rifai, A. (2017) Participatory 
Budgeting in Indonesia: Past, Present and Future , 
Making All Voices Count Practice Paper, Brighton: IDS, 
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/  
123456789/12733  (accessed 12 January 2018)
Gaventa, J. (2004) ‘Towards Participatory Governance: 
Assessing the Transformative Possibilities’, in S. Hickey 
and G. Mohan (eds), Participation: From Tyranny 
to Transformation – Exploring New Approaches to 
Participation in Development , London: Zed Books
Gurumurthy, A.; Bharthur, D. and Chami, N. (2017a) 
Voice or Chatter: Making ICTs Work for Transformative 
Citizen Engagement , Making All Voices Count Research 
Report, Brighton: IDS, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/
opendocs/handle/123456789/13205  (accessed 
12 January 2018)
Gurumurthy, A.; Bharthur, D. and Chami, N. (2017b) A 
Citizenship in Crisis: Voice, Welfare and Other 
Contestations in the Digital State , Voice or Chatter 
Research Brief, Bengaluru: IT for Change, https://
opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/  
13009  (accessed 12 January 2018)
Gurumurthy, A.; Bharthur, D. and Chami, N. (2017c) 
Democratic Accountability in the Digital Age , Voice 
and Chatter Research Brief, Bengaluru: IT for Change, 
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/  
123456789/13010  (accessed 12 January 2018)Herringshaw, V. (2017a) Addressing Failure in ICT-
enabled ‘Citizen Voice – Government Responsiveness’ 
Interventions: Unpacking Core Assumptions and 
Essential Components , Making All Voices Count 
Programme Learning Report, Brighton: IDS, https://
opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/  
123456789/13442  (accessed 12 January 2018)
Herringshaw, V. (2017b) ‘Are You Doing What’s 
Needed to Get the State to Respond to Its Citizens? Or 
Are You Part of the Problem?’, Making All Voices Count 
Blog, 23 October, www.makingallvoicescount.org/
blog/whats-needed-get-state-respond-citizens-part-
problem  (accessed 9 January 2018)
Hrynick, T. and Waldman, L. (2017) ICT-facilitated 
Accountability and Engagement in Health Systems: 
A Review of Making All Voices Count mHealth for 
Accountability Projects , Making All Voices Count 
Research Report, Brighton: IDS, https://opendocs.
ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/13075  
(accessed 12 January 2018)
Kira, B.; Ruiz, J. and Valente, M. (2017) A Tale of Two 
Consultations: Online Participatory Practices in Brazil , 
Voice and Chatter Research Brief, Bengaluru: IT for 
Change, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/
handle/123456789/13010  (accessed 12 January 
2018)
Leighninger, M. (2016) Transforming Governance: 
How Can Technology Help Reshape Democracy? , 
Making All Voices Count Research Briefing, Brighton: 
IDS, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/
handle/123456789/11738  (accessed 12 January 
2018)
Loureiro, M; Cassim, A.; Darko, T; Katera, L. and 
Salome, N. (2016) ‘When Does the State Listen?’, IDS 
Bulletin  47.1: 55–68, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/
opendocs/handle/123456789/7690  (accessed 
12 January 2018)
Peixoto, T. and Fox, J. (2016) ‘When Does ICT-enabled 
Citizen Voice Lead to Government Responsiveness?’, 
IDS Bulletin   47.1: 23–40, https://opendocs.ids.
ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/7687  (accessed 
12 January 2018) 
Peña-Lopez, I. (2017) Citizen Participation and 
the Rise of the Open Source City in Spain , Voice 
or Chatter Research Brief, Bengaluru: IT for 
Change, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/
handle/123456789/13006  (accessed 12 January 
2018)  13
PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides? Treré, E. (2016) ‘The Dark Side of Digital Politics: 
Understanding the Algorithmic Manufacturing of 
Consent and the Hindering of Online Dissidence’, IDS 
Bulletin  47.1: 127–138, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/
opendocs/handle/123456789/7697  (accessed 12 
January 2018)   Welle, K.; Williams, J. and Pearce, J. (2016) ‘ICTs Help 
Citizens Voice Concerns Over Water – Or Do They?’, 
IDS Bulletin  47.1: 41–54, https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/
opendocs/handle/123456789/7689  (accessed 12 
January 2018)PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORTIncreasing citizen voice and government responsiveness: what does success really 
look like, and who decides?  PROGRAMME 
LEARNING REPORT
About Making All Voices Count
Making All Voices Count is a programme working towards a world in which open, effective and participatory 
governance is the norm and not the exception. It focuses global attention on creative and cutting-edge solutions 
to transform the relationship between citizens and their governments. The programme is inspired by and supports 
the goals of the Open Government Partnership.
Making All Voices Count is supported by the UK Department for International Development (DFID), the US Agency 
for International Development (USAID), the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) and 
the Omidyar Network, and is implemented by a consortium consisting of Hivos, IDS and Ushahidi.
Research, Evidence and Learning component
The programme’s Research, Evidence and Learning component, managed by IDS, contributes to improving 
performance and practice, and builds an evidence base in the field of citizen voice, government responsiveness, 
transparency and accountability (T&A) and technology for T&A (Tech4T&A).
Web www.makingallvoicescount.org
Email  info@makingallvoicescount.org
Twitter @allvoicescount
Disclaimer: This document has been produced with the financial support of the Omidyar Network, SIDA, UK aid 
from the UK Government, and USAID. The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the official 
policies of our funders.
This work is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
licence, which permits unrestricted use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original authors 
and source are credited. http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode
Implemented by:IDS_Mas ter Logo
EDITING  : KAREN BROCK ( K.BROCK@IDS.AC.UK) AND TIM WOODS (T.WOODS@GREENINK.CO.UK)    LAYOUT  : GREEN INK ( WWW.GREENINK.CO.UK ) 
