Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=riad20
Innovation and Development
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/riad20
Innovation in development cooperation: emerging
trajectories and implications for inclusive
sustainable development in the 21st century
Ana Lu ísa Silva
To cite this article:  Ana Lu ísa Silva (2020): Innovation in development cooperation: emerging
trajectories and implications for inclusive sustainable development in the 21st century, Innovation
and Development, DOI: 10.1080/2157930X.2020.1807100
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/2157930X.2020.1807100
Published online: 20 Aug 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 6
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Innovation in development cooperation: emerging
trajectories and implications for inclusive sustainabledevelopment in the 21st century
Ana Luísa Silva
Centre for African and Development Studies (CEsA), Lisbon School of Economics and Management (ISEG) –
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
ABSTRACT
In the past twenty years, innovation has slowly, but steadily, become
an important presence in development cooperation discourse and
practice. The ambitious UN 2030 Sustainable Development
Agenda has accelerated this trend, providing a strong framework
for the main argument in favour of an innovation agenda forinternational development: without new ideas and innovative
solutions, solving the current global development challenges will
not be possible. Although this innovation-push is in line with awider predominant view of innovation as an inherently positive
force of progress, that alone does not explain when, how, and
why innovation becomes a key topic in the ﬁeld. This paper seeks
toﬁll this gap in the literature, providing an initial overview of
innovation in development cooperation in the post-2000s. Itargues, ﬁrstly, that innovation has always been part
of international development policy and practice. Secondly, it linksthe recent strengthening of the innovation discourse to three
trends in the systemic transformation of the ﬁeld: the triumph of
metrics-based agendas, the ICTs and digitalization revolutions,
and the role of private sector actors. It concludes by critically
assessing the implications of this narrative in changing the politics
of innovation towards more inclusive sustainable development
policies and practices.KEYWORDS
inclusive innovation;
development cooperation;
social innovation; MDGs;SDGs
1. Introduction
As an organizational ﬁeld, and as a sub-ﬁ eld of international relations with roots in the
post-World War II period, international development cooperation was for long equated
with international aid and Oﬃ cial Development Assistance (ODA). This is no longer
the case. Development cooperation has evolved in the complexity of actors involved,ﬁnancial ﬂows available, and approaches taken, leading increasingly to what authors
labelled the ‘beyond aid ’narrative (Gore 2013 ; Janus, Klingebiel, and Paulo 2015 ; Mawds-
ley2015 ). The Development Cooperation Forum (under the United Nations Economic
and Social Council) notes that an activity can be de ﬁned as development cooperation
when meeting the following four criteria: (1) it aims explicitly to support national or
© 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT Ana Luísa Silva analuisasilva@phd.iseg.ulisboa.pt, https://www.linkedin.com/in/analuisals/INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT
https://doi.org/10.1080/2157930X.2020.1807100international development priorities; (2) it is not driven by pro ﬁt; (3) it discriminates in
favour of developing countries; and (4) it is based on cooperative relationships that
seek to enhance developing country ownership (Alonso and Glennie 2015 ). This broad
deﬁnition encompasses several possibilities that go in fact ‘beyond aid ’and beyond the tra-
ditionally hierarchical, one-way relationship between (mostly western/northern) donors
and developing (southern) countries.
In the past twenty years, innovation has strengthened its presence in development
cooperation discourse and practice. This trend follows a wider tendency to promote ‘inno-
vation ’in diﬀerent policy contexts, from business, science, and technology to government
and civil society (Godin and Vinck 2017 ). However, although the innovation agenda
seems to be gaining ground in the ﬁeld, there has so far been little academic debate on
the topic, particularly in comparison with past debates on innovation for development
(STEPS Centre 2010 ) and with research on humanitarian innovation (Bloom and Betts
2013 ; Scott-Smith 2016 ).
The number of initiatives exclusively dedicated to ﬁnding innovative solutions for
international development problems has grown continuously since the early 2000s andit has particularly increased around the launch of the 2030 Sustainable DevelopmentAgenda in 2015. Donors (mostly ‘traditional ’western donors), international non-govern-
mental organizations (NGOs), and United Nations (UN) agencies have established theirown innovation o ﬃces/labs and/or incorporated innovation principles into their manage-
ment procedures and methodologies. In 2014, a group of donors and private sector organ-
izations, including the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), the UK
Department for International Development (DFID), the Omidyar Network, and Unilever,launched the Global Innovation Fund, an innovative ﬁnancing mechanism using venture
capital strategies to support innovations for the world ’s most vulnerable, with a funding
pledge of more than 200 million USD over ﬁve years.
1The Global Innovation Exchange
(GIE), a ‘global development tech platform for innovations, funding, and insights ’2estab-
lished in 2015 and supported by USAID, the Australian Department of Foreign Assistance
and Trade (Australian Aid), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, and the Korea Inter-
national Cooperation Agency (KOICA), currently has a database of more than 1,000funding opportunities for global development innovations, which represent more than
500 million USD of cumulative funding, and more than 1.3 billion USD of past funding
history. Between December 2018 and June 2019, the platform saw a ‘105%+ increase in
the cumulative amount of funding and a 57% increase in total funding opportunities ’
(GIE 2019 , 9).
Despite what one might think when browsing through these multiplying innovation
pledges and initiatives, usually framed within the challenges of sustainable development
and the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (IDIA 2015 ; Mulgan 2016 ; UNDP
2016 ; Voegtlin and Scherer 2017 ), innovation is not a new topic in development theory,
policy, or practice. With a constant presence in development cooperation since its onset
in the post-World War II period, innovation was part of an important debate in the
1970s, when the Sussex Manifesto and the Alternative Technology movement both
exposed how global science, technology, and innovation (STI) policies reproduce inequal-ities and power asymmetries in access to knowledge and technology (Kaplinsky 2011 ;
Chataway, Hanlin, and Kaplinsky 2014 ). Similarly, southern donors engaging in South-
South cooperation, such as India, China, South Africa, and Brazil, have long placed2 A. L. SILVAtechnology transfer and exchange, as well as capacity building and skills upgradation,
among their cooperation modalities of choice (Sidiropoulos et al. 2015 ; Chaturvedi
2017 ; Mawdsley, Fourie, and Nauta 2019 ).
How does the current innovation narrative appear in development cooperation dis-
course? What implications does this narrative have for development policy and practice?How does it relate to an also growing inclusive sustainable development agenda? The
innovation discourse promoted by the current narrative is not homogenous. It takesvarious forms, deals with numerous and diverse development issues, and is scattered
across multiple development actors. This multitude of perspectives and meanings
makes it for a di ﬃcult start when attempting to understand the implications of the inno-
vation narrative for development policy and practice within an inclusive sustainable devel-
opment agenda:
.Innovation in development cooperation is sometimes presented as systemic, organis-
ational, process innovation which primarily aims to change how aid is delivered and
how development interventions are managed. Examples are the establishment of
multi-actor partnerships such as Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, which has changed the
way vaccines are procured and delivered in low- and middle-income countries3or
the rise in cash-transfers as an aid delivery mechanism, both in humanitarian
(Harvey 2016 ) and development settings.4
.Innovation in development cooperation is also commonly understood as new products,
technologies, and services created to solve international development problems, par-
ticularly those aﬀ ecting the poorest and most vulnerable populations. Innovations
directed at improving access to health care are good examples, from mHealth products
to motorcycle ambulances (Howitt et al. 2012 ).
.Finally, innovation in development cooperation has also been more widely interpreted
astechnology-led economic change, science-based push for economic growth , fol-
lowing the classic evolutionary economics tradition in innovation studies (UN Millen-nium Project 2005 ; OECD 2012 ; Unger 2018 ).
This paper is a ﬁrst attempt to re ﬂect upon and critically assess the current innovation
narrative, how it contributes to an inclusive sustainable development agenda, what role dodiﬀerent development actors have, and what avenues are there for further research. The
current dominant innovation narrative in development cooperation appears to replicatethe established innovation mantra that ‘innovation is always good ’(Godin and Vinck
2017 ): innovative solutions are the catalyst needed to solve global sustainable development
challenges and thus initiatives are geared towards supporting social entrepreneurs in thedevelopment, testing, and scaling up of these solutions (e.g. Du ﬂo and Kremer 2015 ;I D I A
2015 ;G I E 2019 ). But for long innovation has been debated, discussed, and implemented as
public policy, one which reinforces unequal global structures of power not only when itcomes to distributing the bene ﬁts of innovation, but also in itsknowledge production pro-
cesses (STEPS Centre 2010 ; Papaioannou 2011 ; Levidow and Papaioannou 2018 ). It is
therefore important to understand how this narrative contributes to changing the actualpolitics of innovation or if it merely ﬁts the wider techno-managerialist tendency in devel-
opment cooperation which in fact depoliticizes development policy and practice (Yanguas2018 ).INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 32. Methodology
Given the lack of academic debate on the topic addressed by this paper (Bloom and Faul-
kner 2016 ; Ramalingam and Bound 2016 ) and given the importance of policy documents
and grey literature in development studies and in the analysis of development discourse(Gasper and Apthorpe 1996 ; Faille 2011 ), policy documents and grey literature constitute
the main sources of analysis in this paper. These documents were selected by web brows-
ing, starting with UN agencies and bilateral donors members of the International Devel-
opment Innovation Alliance (IDIA), and using a snowball approach, as systematic reviewstend to be less appropriate to identify documents of this nature (Greenhalgh and Peacock
2005 ). To be selected, the documents had to ful ﬁl two requirements: (a) they must be pub-
lished between 2000 and 2019 by an international development cooperation actor (for
example, multilateral organizations, bilateral donors or NGOs); (b) and their key focusmust be on the topic of innovation.
A total of twenty- ﬁve documents were selected using this method between October
2018 and October 2019. Document analysis was done concurrently to document selectionand the documents were primarily analysed to identify de ﬁnitions of innovation in an
international development context. Of the twenty- ﬁve documents selected ( Table 3 ,
section 4), the majority (14) were published by multilateral organizations (UN agenciesand the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD), four (4)
were published by international NGOs or NGO coalitions, three (3) were published by
western bilateral donors, three (3) were published by donor coalitions and one (1) waspublished by a think tank. The documents are reports, guides and tools for policy
makers, reviews, and surveys. The documents were read and analysed to look for inno-
vation de ﬁnitions, organized, and coded using MAXQDA2018 software.
This approach has its limitations. One important limitation is the fact that the
search was conducted in English only. Another limitation, and perhaps the key limit-
ation of this paper, is that its analysis is focused on a narrow document selection,
published by western bilateral donors, multilateral institutions, international NGOs(based in the Global North), and western think tanks. It therefore excludes other
increasingly important development cooperation actors, such as southern donors,
southern civil society, and the private sector. Nonetheless, the goal of this paper isto conduct a ﬁrst overview of the topic and it does include an overview of the per-
spectives of southern donors on innovation (sub-section 4.2).
3. A short history of innovation in international development cooperation
(from economic to human development)
Innovation is not a new theme in development cooperation. In fact, innovation has been
closely linked to international development discourse and policy since the onset of the
international development cooperation system as we understand it today, during thepost-World War II period; arguably, the international aid system was, itself, a major inno-
vation of international relations during the twentieth century (Ramalingam 2013 ).
However, innovation has not always been at the centre of the debate and various develop-
ment actors have interpreted it di ﬀerently. Between the 1950s and 1990s, innovation in
international development cooperation was broadly approached in two di ﬀerent ways4 A. L. SILVA(STEPS Centre 2010 ; Chaminade et al. 2011 ): (a) innovation as technological change for
economic growth; and (b) social innovation to address the needs of the poor in developing
countries, i.e. the shortcomings of mainstream economic development. Acknowledgingthe co-existence of these two conceptualisations of innovation for development overtime helps analyzing innovation in development discourse since the year 2000.
On the one hand, innovation as technological change, the foundation of industrializ-
ation, economic growth, and ultimately modern development, the ‘innovation for
growth ’perspective (Schot and Steinmueller 2018 ), has been a main argument in develop-
ment economics and catch-up theories since the 1950s. Dominant STI policies in inter-national development cooperation have long argued for technology transfer andtechnical support, following the assumption that the required knowledge base already
exists to allow developing countries to ‘jump ’stages of growth and ‘catch-up ’with
other more advanced economies (Unger 2018 ). This perspective in practice is evident
in the strategies of multilateral organizations, western donors in OECD ’s Development
Assistance Committee (OECD-DAC), and South-South cooperation. For example, the
development of in-country technological capacity was one of the foundations ofimport-substitution industrialization theories spearheaded by the United Nations Econ-omic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) in the 1950s, taken
up by government policy in Latin America and Africa until discouraged by the neoliberal
agenda in the 1980s (Cimoli 2005 ). In the ﬁeld of agriculture, technology transfer was one
of the key features of the various initiatives from bilateral donors, UN agencies, and private
foundations that formed the so-called Green Revolution in the developing world in the
1960s and 1970s (Cullather 2004 ). This view echoes the classic perspective on innovation,
the one which gained prominence in the 1960s and stems from the work of early twentieth
century economist Joseph A. Schumpeter, who saw innovation as the independent
phenomenon that produces change in capitalism. Innovation scholar Jan Fagerbergnotes that Schumpeter had initially simply called innovation ‘development ’(Fagerberg
2003 , 131). In this academic tradition, which in ﬂuenced and continues to greatly
inﬂuence STI public policy, research on innovation is thus closely linked to research on
industrialization, technology-led change, and economic growth.
On the other hand, innovation in international development has also been interpreted
as the search for solutions for speci ﬁc problems faced by developing countries, namely
their poor populations, who remain excluded from mainstream development processes.This perspective is closer to social innovation theory
5, which, in its 1970s revival, has
encompassed the grand challenges narrative; innovation which is environmentally andsocially conscious contributes to solving problems that endanger the planet and humanexistence, and contributes to addressing social needs (particularly the needs of the poor
and marginalized) that are unmet by the market (Howaldt et al. 2014 ; Edwards-Schachter
and Wallace 2017 ). Historically, this perspective also represents a reaction to global ‘inno-
vation for growth ’STI policies, which, as initially criticized by a group of academics and
researchers in the 1970s Sussex Manifesto, typically favour the needs of rich countries andrich consumers, ignore the path-dependent characteristics of knowledge creation, and do
not allow for the creation of endogenous innovation capacity in developing countries(STEPS Centre 2010 ; Kaplinsky 2011 ; Papaioannou 2014 ). The Alternative Technology
Movement, inspired by Ernst Schumacher ’s 1973 book Small is Beautiful (Schumacher
1980 ),which argued for the development of a ﬀordable technologies for poorerINNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 5populations, favouring small-scale production and businesses, is perhaps the best-known
example that ﬁts this perspective on innovation for development. Until recently, this per-
spective remained somewhat on the side lines of donor priorities, being more evident on
the practices of NGOs, which see themselves as precursors of alternative developmentmodels and addressing the needs of the poor (Lewis and Kanji 2009 ; Fowler 2011 ).
These two perspectives re ﬂect a wider debate on what development is and/or should be,
as well as what role international development cooperation should have in promoting suchdevelopment. It has been well-documented and well-debated that development
cooperation agendas over the decades have promoted di ﬀerent views of development:
from catch-up and economic growth in the 1950s to human development and poverty
reduction from the 1990s until today, as well as ‘Washington Consensus ’liberalization
policies in the 1980s (Verweij 2017 ; H.-J. Chang 2009 ). An analysis of development dis-
course over time has shown that development themes, topics and concepts, includinginnovation, (re)appear cyclically as key concepts for policy and practice (Heeks, Foster,
and Nugroho 2014 ). Similarly, the ‘innovation for growth ’and social innovation perspec-
tives are not conﬁ ned to a speciﬁ c time period in terms of theory, discourse, and practice,
although the ﬁrst slightly precedes the latter. The two views co-exist, promoted by di ﬀerent
actors at di ﬀerent times.
4. De ﬁning innovation for development after the year 2000
4.1. The dominant innovation narrative
After the year 2000, innovation (in particular the innovation and technology hybrid
concept ‘technovation ’) becomes more prominent as a main topic in development
cooperation discourse and as a key concern of development practitioners (Heeks 2014 ;
Ingram and Lord 2019 , 30). Technology already appears in the UN resolution text for
the Millennium Agenda (UN 2000 ); the UN 2030 Sustainable Development resolution
(UN 2015 ) largely expands on the topic. Not only technology increases its frequency, inno-
vation, science , and knowledge also become a strong presence in the document ( Table 1 ).
During a coding exercise of these four terms in the UN 2030 Sustainable Developmentresolution ( Table 2 ), not only an increase in utilization frequency was observed
6, but
we can see that terms are used in relation to one another: particularly science, innovation,
and knowledge in relation to technology; and science in relation to innovation (and vice-
versa).
Initiatives dedicated to fostering innovation in the sector have multiplied (Mulgan
2016 ), especially around the launch of the post-2015 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(Figure 1 ).
So how is innovation in development cooperation de ﬁned in this period? Does the
apparently increasing weight of the topic in international development discourse meana consensus has been reached regarding what one refers to by ‘innovation for develop-
ment ’? The answer is not straightforward, and it naturally re ﬂects the ambiguities, fragi-
lities and current status of the development cooperation system (H.-J. Chang 2009 ), as well
as the identity, motivations and priorities of di ﬀerent development actors, namely donors
(Stokke 2019 ). An analysis of 25 policy documents, grey literature and reports by UN
Agencies, NGOs, think tanks, bilateral donors, and other international organizations6 A. L. SILVA(Table 3 ) shows that the two perspectives identiﬁ ed in the previous section persist,
although the social innovation perspective seems to prevail, particularly as the UN Sus-
tainable Development Agenda gets closer.
The ‘innovation for growth ’perspective is stronger in reports by international multilat-
eral organizations advising on STI policies for developing countries (UN Millennium
Project 2005 ; UNCTAD 2007 ; OECD 2012 ) and in the priorities of some bilateral
donors, who have de ﬁned support to research and development (R&D) capacity develop-
ment as a priority (Sida 2013 ). For example, the 2005 UN Millennium Project report Inno-
vation: applying knowledge in development states that
Developing countries need to adopt strategies to improve their infrastructure in ways that
promote the technological development necessary for sustained economic growth. (UN Mil-lennium Project 2005,2 )
Similarly, a 2012 OECD discussion paper entitled Innovation for Development: a discus-
sion of the issues and an overview of work of the OECD Directorate for Science, Technol-ogy and Industry argues that ‘the build-up of innovation capacities has played a central
role in the growth dynamics of successful developing countries ’(OECD 2012 , 4).
Finally, an evaluation report by the Swedish International Development Agency (Sida)of its research cooperation projects notes that
Innovation and knowledge are crucial factors for economic development, in high as well as
low-income countries. This has been the growing understanding and trend in recent years,which also permeates the direction for development cooperation. (Sida 2013,2 )
However, the ‘innovation for growth ’perspective described in the previous paragraph is
not the perspective that prevails in policy briefs and reports by most bilateral donors
(e.g. US Global Development Lab 2015 ), multilateral organizations (e.g. UNDP 2018 ),
NGOs (Bond, SIX, and Oxfam 2016 ; Whitehead 2016 ), philanthropies or coalitions of
development partners dedicated to fostering ‘innovation for development’ (IDIA 2015 ).
Innovation in international development is more commonly de ﬁned as the implemen-
tation at scale of new technologies, products, services, processes, business/organiz-
ational/social models, partnerships, and ﬁnancing mechanisms that address complex
development problems in developing nations, with a particular focus on the problemsfaced by the poor (Steed 2010 ;I D I A 2015 ; Bond, SIX, and Oxfam 2016 ; Ramalingam
and Bound 2016 ). This prevailing de ﬁnition is much closer to the social innovation per-
spective: it involves innovating to ﬁnd solutions for the problems of developing nations
(particularly its poorer populations) and, at the same time, innovating the internationalaid system (e.g. transform how development cooperation is done).
The current agenda is closely linked to the challenges of globalization and sustainable
development, following the grand challenges narrative that was already prevalent in the
Table 1. Comparison of coded segments with terms science, technology, knowledge, and innovation in
theMillennium Declaration and the Transforming Our World texts.
Code SystemTotal coded segments
Science Technology Knowledge Innovation
Millennium Declaration 0 3 0 0 3
Transforming Our World 16 26 11 17 70INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 71970s social innovation theories. In addition, applying a ‘social innovation ’label to the
dominant de ﬁnition doesn ’t mean that technology is not a big component of the inno-
vation for development agenda. In his analysis of four key documents prepared in the
process towards the post-2015 agenda, Heeks notes that in all documents there is ‘a
strong recognition of the importance of technology within development ’and also aTable 2. Relations between coded segments in the Transforming Our World text.
Code System Total coded segmentsScience Technology Knowledge Innovation
N % N % N % N %
Science 16 - - 13 81% 4 25% 10 63%
Technology 26 13 50% - - 7 27% 11 42%
Knowledge 11 4 36% 7 64% - - 3 27%
Innovation 17 10 59% 11 65% 3 18% - -
Figure 1. Innovation in international development initiatives: timeline 2000 –2018.8 A. L. SILVArecognition that data and information are key for evidence-based decisions in develop-
ment (Heeks 2014 , 11). The analysis of the UN resolution texts for the two agendas
post-2000s presented earlier in this paper supports these ﬁndings (cf. Tables 1 and2).
The social innovation label thus provides a better lens to understand the directionality
of the innovation discourse in development cooperation, which is less geared towardsTable 3. List of documents analysed for innovation for development perspectives.
Publication
Year Institution Publication Title
Multilateral Organisations
2005 United Nations Development Program
(UNDP), Millennium ProjectInnovation: applying knowledge in development
2007 United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD)The Least Developed Countries Report 2007 –
Knowledge, Technological Learning and Innovation forDevelopment
2010 World Bank Innovation Policy –A Guide for Developing Countries
2012 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)Innovation for Development: a discussion of the issues
and an overview of work of the OECD Directorate forScience, Technology and Industry
2013 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)Innovation and Inclusive Development
2014 United Nations Children ’s Fund (UNICEF) Innovation Annual Report 2014
2014 United Nations O ﬃce for the Coordination of
Humanitarian A ﬀairs (OCHA)Humanitarian Innovation: The State of the Art
2014 United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD)Innovation policy tools for inclusive development
2015 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)Scaling up Inclusive Innovation
2015 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)Innovation Policies for Inclusive Growth
2015 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Innovation for 2030: Innovation Facility, 2015 Year in
Review
2017 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)Making innovation bene ﬁt all: Policies for inclusive
growth
2017 United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD)New Innovation Approaches to Support the
Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
2018 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Moon Shoots & Puddle Jumps –Innovation for the
Sustainable Development Goals
Bilateral Donors
2012 Development Innovation Ventures, United
States Agency for InternationalDevelopment (USAID)Which Innovations Reach More Than 100,000 or One
Million People? Evidence from the DevelopmentInnovation Ventures Portfolio
2013 Swedish International Development Agency
(Sida)Innovation for growth, Evaluation summary: Support to
Innovation Systems and Clusters within Sida ’s Research
Cooperation
2015 Global Development Lab, United States
Agency for International Development(USAID)2015 The Lab Year in Review: Accelerating development
through science, technology, innovation andpartnership
Coalitions of donors
2015 International Development Innovation
Alliance (IDIA)A Call for Innovation in International Development
2017 International Development Innovation
Alliance (IDIA)Insights on Scaling Innovation
2019 Global Innovation Exchange (GIE) Global Innovation Landscape Q2 2019
NGOs and Think Tanks
2015 Oxfam Unlocking Innovation
2016 Nesta Innovation for International Development
2016 Bond, Social Innovation Exchange (SIX) and
OxfamAn introduction to social innovation for NGOs
2016 Bond The Innovation Audit Big Picture 2016
2016 Australian Council for International
Development (ACFID)Innovation for ImpactINNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 9changing the productive structure using technological change to add value and create
economic growth, in a classic evolutionary economics and neo-Schumpeterian view of
innovation, and much more concerned about using technology to solve social problemsand contribute to human development e ﬀorts and sustainable development goals, as
inscribed in the UN Sustainable Development Agenda.
4.2. South-South cooperation perspectives
Due to the methodology adopted in this paper (cf. section 2), the perspectives of southern
donors remain largely excluded from the inno vation narrative analysed above. Although
South-South cooperation is as old as North –South cooperation, it has di ﬀerent historical
and ideological roots, linked to non-alignm ent and solidarity among newly independent
nations, which has naturally in ﬂuenced its approaches, including views on innovation. For
decades, South-South cooperation ha s remained in the side-lines of North –South cooperation,
but the past two decades have seen an increase in the relevance of South-South cooperation,
not just in terms of increasing ﬁnancial ﬂuxes, but also in terms of geopolitical shifts, with
emerging economies like China, India, Brazil, and South Africa intensifying their development
cooperation e ﬀorts (Mawdsley 2012;G o r e 2013; Sidiropoulos et al. 2015).
The best example of South-South cooperation growth in magnitude and relevance is the
increasing role of China as Africa ’s trade and development partner, providing alternative
development ﬁnancing ﬂuxes to traditional conditionality-bound development ﬁnance,
which have been much discussed (Liu and Dunford 2016 ; UNDP 2017 ). Development
cooperation has become a key part of China ’s foreign policy, providing a justi ﬁcation
for its Belt and Road Initiative launched in 2013 and leading to the launch of China ’s Inter-
national Development Cooperation Agency in 2018 (Huang and Wei 2015 ). India has tra-
ditionally used bilateral and regional cooperation agreements to collaborate with
developing country partners in science and technology, in a mutual bene ﬁt perspective
(Chaturvedi 2017 ), leveraging especially from the leading role of its Information and Com-
munication Technologies (ICTs) sector (Joseph 2004 ; Kumar and Joseph 2005 ). Brazil has
used its experience in developing agrobusiness technology for tropical climates as a basis
for its development cooperation e ﬀorts with Portuguese-speaking African countries, led by
its Agricultural Research Corporation, Embrapa (Cabral 2016 ; Shankland and Gonçalves
2016 ).
Ojo et al. ( 2008 ) note that South-South cooperation (and even triangular South –North-
South cooperation) agreements have increased since 2003, many in the area of e-appli-
cations (e-learning and e-government for example) and focusing on capacity developmentprogrammes, experience sharing and trade, involving private sector companies, univer-
sities, and governmental institutions. Brazil, South Africa, India, and China are all regional
leaders in South-South cooperation e ﬀorts who have put both technology transfer, knowl-
edge sharing, and knowledge creation from an ‘innovation
 and technology for economic
growth ’perspective at the centre of their development cooperation agendas.
5. Understanding the last two decades of dominant innovation for
development narrative
The rise of the innovation discourse in development cooperation and the prevalent social
innovation perspective can be interpreted as a direct consequence of the transformation of10 A. L. SILVAthe international aid system over the past two decades. International development
cooperation and its traditional actors (OECD-DAC donors, UN agencies, NGOs) are at
a crossroads, facing an identity crisis exposed by the non-aid fuelled development suc-cesses of East Asian economies and a heated debate over aid e ﬀectiveness, particularly
in Africa (Ramalingam 2013 ; Mawdsley 2015 ), made more urgent by negative economic
consequences of the 2008/2009 ﬁnancial crisis. In the past couple of decades, the sector
has witnessed the establishment of new actors (southern donors, philanthropies, privatesector companies) and new ﬁnancing mechanisms which challenge the way the sector
functions and the way development cooperation is done. Development cooperation isno longer synonym with aid and ODA provided largely in a North –South direction; the
development cooperation relationships between countries have become more complex
and the idea of moving ‘beyond aid ’has emerged (Gore 2013 ; Mawdsley, Savage, and
Kim 2014 ).
These game-changing trends in development cooperation have contributed to the rise of
the innovation agenda in two ways, as analysed in a recent case study of innovation spaces in
UN agencies (Bloom and Faulkner 2016 ). Initially, they led to a generic call to innovate the
system itself: inward innovation , i.e. innovation directed at the development cooperation
system itself (actors, approaches, and mechanisms), to respond to the external pressures
that are transforming the international aid system. On a second phase, they contributed
to a push to produce innovations for development: outward innovation , i.e. innovation
directed at solving complex development problems, focusing on the problems of the key
beneﬁciaries of development cooperation programmes, the most vulnerable and margina-
lized, to search for alternative solutions for the problems of the poor in developing countries.
Fundamentally, this combination of inward and outward innovation re ﬂects a will to
promote e ﬃciency, impact, and value for money through novel technical solutions,
while the focus on pro-poor innovation reinforces the inclusive aspirations of the
sector, which is traditionally not primarily concerned with the creation of economicvalue (Janus, Klingebiel, and Paulo 2015 ). Within the wider transformation in the
sector, three major trends have particularly contributed to shape this innovationagenda: the triumph of metrics-based agendas, technology advances (especially theICTs and digitalization revolutions), and the renewed role of private sector actors in inter-
national development cooperation.
5.1. Metrics, results, managerialism, and ‘value for money ’
The advent of the UN Millennium Agenda in the early 2000s and its Millennium Devel-
opment Goals (MDGs) (UN 2000 ) represented the ﬁrst global political commitment to an
ambitious poverty reduction and social development agenda for developing nations. The
MDGs marked a turn towards metrics-based development agendas and strongly contrib-
uted to shaping the current view on innovation for development, while providing the
initial framework to justify the current call for innovation in international development,as expressed in the 2005 report Innovation: applying knowledge in development by the Mil-
lennium Project ’s Taskforce for STI (UN Millennium Project 2005 ):
Meeting the Goals will require a substantial reorientation of development policies to focus on
key sources of economic growth, including those associated with the use of new andINNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 11established scienti ﬁc and technological knowledge and related institutional adjustments.
Countries will need to recognize the bene ﬁts from advances in science and technology and
develop strategies to harness the explosion in new knowledge. (1)
Public expenditure in developing countries, including R&D expenditure, was thus geared
towards services and infrastructure that contributed to achieving the MDGs, i.e. provide
universal primary education, reduce maternal, neonatal, and child mortality rates, andhalving extreme poverty (Altenburg 2011 , 37).
In addition, the results-based, ‘Value for Money ’(VfM) approaches agenda adopted by
many donor strategies since 2010 (a consequence of post-2008/2009 ﬁnancial crisis aus-
terity) reinforces the prioritization of quanti ﬁable, measurable interventions (Yanguas
2018 ) that can show greater impact, i.e. that show the value created by the money invested.
The VfM agenda in aid reform is itself a consequence of a wider and long-rising trend inpublic administration best encompassed by the term ‘New Public Management ’. With
origins in the US in the early 1970s (but now spread widely to other western capitalist
democracies), this trend, which follows the managerial logics that see traditional admin-
istration as inherently inadequate, argues for an uncritical acceptance and integration ofbusiness logics and methods in public administration (Gulrajani 2011 ).
5.2. ICTs, digitalization, and data
The ICTs and digital revolutions have become undeniably one of the fastest growing trans-
forming trends of the past decade. The 2016 World Bank Development Report was
devoted to Digital Dividends and notes that ‘the internet and related technologies have
reached developing countries much faster than previous technological innovations ’
(The World Bank 2016 , 5). Mobile penetration rates across regions and country income
groups is much less unequal than income itself: Sub-Saharan Africa has the lowest rate
at 73%, against a 98% rate in high-income countries (p.6). And naturally, the development
cooperation sector did not ignore the potential of the new technologies available and soonstarted harnessing their potential for development interventions. The challenges these newtechnologies posed to development practice soon became evident and collaboration
between donors and practitioners on the topic increased steadily over the past two
decades ( Figure 2 ), in a trajectory similar to the innovation initiatives traced in
Figure 1 , increasing in intensity as the post-2015 agenda approaches.
Advances in ICTs and digital technologies have in turn led to a data revolution which
has made it possible for the metrics-based agendas to come into e ﬀect. The data and
mobile revolution thus appear as related concepts to ‘technovation ’in development dis-
course, particularly after 2010, contributing to a growing notion of open development(Heeks 2014 ) and also (in theory) easing knowledge/information sharing.
5.3. The rise of private sector actors in development cooperation
Finally, the renewed role of private sector actors has been key to the innovation-push in
international development. The two large global health initiatives Gavi, the Vaccine Alli-
ance, and the Grand Challenges for Global Health (both in the early 2000s) were bothstrongly backed by big philanthropy, namely the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.The collaborative donor platform International Development Innovation Alliance12 A. L. SILVA(IDIA), founded in 2015, is an initiative of another big philanthropy organization, the
Rockefeller Foundation. Major pharmaceutical companies like GsK are playing a promi-
nent role developing new vaccines, partnering with governments and international NGOs,
Figure 2. Digital technology and international development timeline, 2000 –2017. Retrieved from
https://digitalprinciples.org/about/ , accessed on 14/12/2019 and reproduced unaltered under Creative
Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International.INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 13as well as ﬁnancing research.7The number of tech entrepreneurs entering the world of
international development is unprecedent and deserving the attention of traditional devel-
opment practitioners and donors alike (A. M. Chang 2019 ; R. Csíkszentmihályi and Rodri-
gues 2018 ; Kumar 2019 ), while helping spread an entrepreneurial view of social change.
OECD-DAC donors are not external to these developments. In fact, the re-focus on
economic growth by many donors has been accompanied by a reshaping of the waydonors work with the private sector as an active development partner (Mawdsley 2015 ,
344). Donors are thus actively involving private sector partners in development strategies
for economic development, which also means embracing business and investment
approaches for development. And as in the Schumpeterian tradition, the (individual,private) entrepreneur remains the innovator by excellence.
6. Innovation and inclusive sustainable development: implications for
research, policy, and practice
The notion of inclusive sustainable development is related to two of the key debates
around the consequences and shortcomings of the capitalist development model and glo-
balization processes which have experienced an accelerated growth after World War II:inequality (not only between countries but within countries) and environmental sustain-
ability (Kopnina 2016 ). Innovation policies that prioritize R&D which is ‘large in scale,
capital intensive in nature and destructive of the environment ’have contributed to the
uncoupling of economic growth and social and economic development, and consequently
played a role in the persistence of global poverty (Chataway, Hanlin, and Kaplinsky 2014 ,
34). ‘Inclusive Development ’and ‘Environment and Sustainability ’are thus, and unsur-
prisingly, also amongst the issues expanding signiﬁ cantly in international development
cooperation discourse for this period (Heeks 2014 ).
In light of global sustainable development challenges, authors have argued that trans-
formational innovation policies need to replace traditional growth-centred innovationpolicies (Schot and Steinmueller 2018 ). Innovation policies which respond to the need
for innovating responsibly, considering the transition towards an inclusive and environ-mentally sustainable development model, must also be concerned with issues such asdirection, distribution, and diversity in innovation (STEPS Centre 2010 ). These policies
must therefore be able to answer questions such as ‘what innovation, for whom, by whom ’.
Transformational innovation policies are guided by social and environmental goals,
approaching innovation as an iterative open-ended process which involves actors fromthe public, private, and third sectors, multidisciplinary by nature. Because the challenges
are global and the mainstream capitalist development model is experiencing a systemic
crisis, there is a push to welcome a diversity of perspectives in innovation policy andoverall development models, opening space for an e ﬀective participation of all countries
and di ﬀerent players in the process. As inclusive innovation scholar Theo Papaioannou
observes (Papaioannou 2018 ), the current discussion di ﬀers from the 1970s arguments
because it goes beyond a distributive justice lens (i.e. STI must be available for di ﬀusion
among all countries so that all can reap the bene ﬁts it brings), to a relational justice
imperative (i.e. there is a need to challenge the processes of knowledge and innovationproduction to e ﬀectively change the power dynamics in STI policies for developing
countries).14 A. L. SILVATo its core, Papaioannou ’s distributive vs. relational justice argument is less about sup-
porting the development of technical solutions for global social and environmental pro-
blems and how to deploy these solutions following a distributive justice imperative, andmore about changing the politics of innovation following a relational justice argument.Thus, the author concludes that inclusive innovation ‘cannot be achieved unless the
social relations of innovative production are recognised, democratised and equalised ’
(p.96), which will only happen when those currently excluded from these processes areable to eﬀ ectively participate. This implies a change in current
hierarchies and oppressions in the relations of knowledge generation and utilisation for the
meeting of basic needs. It also implies an absence of unequal structures such as IPRs [ Intel-
lectual Property Rights ] and the development of better institutional frameworks of interaction
and knowledge sharing. (96)
So how does the current innovation agenda in international development cooperation
address the politics of innovation and how does it contribute to a more inclusive inno-
vation agenda for sustainable development? It is so far unclear how this mainstreaminnovation agenda contributes to changing the politics of innovation towards an
inclusive sustainable development model. It seems to embrace the view that the entre-
preneur, or in this case the social entrepreneur, is the actor best placed to innovate andﬁnd the best solutions in a market-based economy. Thus, among the recent innovation
initiatives by multilateral donors (see Figure 1 )w es e ev e n t u r ec a p i t a l - i n s p i r e d
approaches, such as USAID ’s Development Innovation Ventures (which later
evolved to USAID Global Development Lab), UNICEF ’s Innovation (Venture) Fund
(within UNICEF ’s Innovation O ﬃce) and the multi-donor Global Innovation Fund.
UN agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and the UnitedNations Development Program (UNDP) are establishing start-up incubators and accel-erator programmes within their innovation programmes
8; international NGOs are
partnering with impact investors, tech companies, and big philanthropy to innovatefor impact at scale.
9The Global Innovation Exchange platform is openly directed at
supporting social entrepreneurs.10‘Investment ’,‘impact ’,‘eﬀective ’,‘results/evidence
based ’,a n d ‘value for money ’are all terms brought from the business sector that are
ubiquitous in the framing of these initiatives, much like other policies and programmesby western bilateral donors (Gulrajani 2011 ; Mawdsley 2015 ;B l a c ka n dB r i g h t 2016 ).
The focus is thus on the solutions and not on addressing the power dynamics and
existing knowledge generation inequalities that are at play in the politics of innovation,
as this text from IDIA ’sw e b s i t em a k e sc l e a r :
In 2015, IDIA members articulated six principles they collectively agreed were important in
facilitating innovation in international development.
These are:(1) Invest in locally-driven solutions
(2) Take intelligent risks(3) Use evidence to drive decision-making(4) Fail fast and iterate(5) Facilitate collaboration and co-creation across sectors(6) Identify scalable solutionsINNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 15These principles help inform the collaboration that innovation requires. Governments, the
private sector, civil society, academia, development institutions, and donors need to worktogether more than ever before –crossing traditional boundaries –to discover, fund, and
scale new solutions and tap the energy of innovation needed to reduce poverty at scale.Action now can hasten the day when the Sustainable Development Goals will be met andbillions of people will embrace each new day with opportunities not previously thoughtpossible ’.
11
At the level of their intention, these innovation initiatives do follow a tradition of
inclusive innovation in the non-pro ﬁt and aid sectors, as creators of bottom-up ‘grass-
roots’ innovation or global public goods (Chataway, Hanlin, and Kaplinsky 2014 ). In prac-
tice, however, the level of inclusiveness of a speci ﬁc innovation or even innovation policies
can be analysed at di ﬀerent levels; from intention, consumption, and impact, all the way to
structural inclusiveness (Heeks, Foster, and Nugroho 2014 ). And structural inclusiveness
can only happen within a system that has changed its STI politics following a relational
justice imperative (Papaioannou 2018 ). From this perspective, the innovation, knowledge
sharing, and technological/institutional capacity building practices of South-South
cooperation, with stronger roots in solidarity among nations, appears to be more open
to partnerships based on mutual bene ﬁts and its innovation and technology cooperation
initiatives might be more mindful of the structural problems of developing countries, thus
following a more relational than distributive justice imperative as a result.
Many questions remain unaddressed on this topic and are open for further research.
Further investigation is needed to understand, for example, how these innovation narra-tives eﬀ ectively translate into the practices of the di ﬀerent development actors and how
can these practices be evaluated when it comes to their level of inclusiveness and contri-
bution to sustainable development. Authors have highlighted that, as developing countries
build and strengthen their national innovation systems, non-governmental actors anddevelopment cooperation initiatives can continue playing a role as drivers of change, par-
ticularly in the delivery of public goods, products and services for the poor (Altenburg
2011 ; Chataway, Hanlin, and Kaplinsky 2014 ). But can these initiatives integrate multiple
development actors and e ﬀectively enact SDG Goal 17 (Building a Global Partnership for
Development)? What role can triangular cooperation (South –North-South) play in sup-
porting the development innovation capacity of developing countries? How can the devel-opment sector conciliate its poverty reduction and social development focus with globalsustainable development e ﬀorts in its innovation agenda and how does this agenda
relate to transformative innovation policies propositions?
7. Conclusion
Innovation has become a recurring theme in development cooperation discourse over the
past twenty years, although few studies have devoted enough attention to this topic. The
goal of this paper was to trace how this narrative appeared and to re ﬂect upon its impli-
cations for development practice and inclusive sustainable development transitions. Inno-
vation is not a new topic in the sector, which has not only always seen itself as naturally
innovative but has also actively promoted innovation and technology: either as drivers ofeconomic growth or as the key to solve the social and human development problems of thepoorest populations.16 A. L. SILVATwenty- ﬁve policy documents published between 2000 and 2019 by multilateral organ-
izations, western bilateral donors and international NGOs were analysed for innovation
deﬁnitions. The document analysis showed that, in the post-2000s, innovation is more
commonly de ﬁned as the implementation at scale of new technologies, products, services,
processes, business/organizational/social models, partnerships and ﬁnancing mechanisms
that address complex development problems in developing nations, with a particular focuson the problems faced by the poor. The rise of this innovation discourse, closer to socialinnovation perspectives, can be connected to the systemic transformation of development
cooperation, particularly to three trends in this transformation: the triumph of metrics-
based agendas, the ICTs and digitalization revolutions, and the renewed role of privatesector actors in international development.
It is so far unclear how this innovation agenda contributes to changing structural
inequality in the politics of innovation. This ﬁrst analysis suggests its focus is on develop-
ing solutions and not on addressing the power dynamics and existing knowledge gener-
ation inequalities that are at play in the politics of innovation. Further investigation is
required to understand how innovation narratives in development cooperation e ﬀectively
translate into the practices of the di ﬀerent development actors and how they can follow a
relational justice imperative, and thus contribute to a more inclusive sustainable develop-
ment model.
Notes
1.https://www.cgdev.org/blog/unga-dispatch-launch-new-global-innovation-fund , accessed on
01/06/2020.
2.https://www.globalinnovationexchange.org/about , accessed on 15/12/2019.
3.https://www.gavi.org/our-alliance/about , accessed on 15/12/2019.
4.https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/2019/11/25/20973151/givedirectly-basic-income-
kenya-study-stimulus , accessed on 15/12/2019.
5. Although social innovation is today usually presented as a relatively new research ﬁeld (Pol
and Ville 2009; Edwards-Schachter and Wallace 2017; Caulier-Grice and Mulgan 2010 ),
another stream of research argues that social innovation actually precedes by 200 years theinnovation studies tradition, and has roots not in economics or science and technology,but in the history of religion, sociology, and political economy (Godin and Vinck 2017).
6. The increase in frequency of the terms must be analysed with caution, since both texts have
very di ﬀerent lengths. The Millennium Declaration has a total of 2,217 words and the Trans-
forming our World text has a total of 10,717 words. All text analysis was done usingMAXQDA2018 software.
7.https://www.gsk.com/en-gb/about-us/save-the-children-partnership/ , accessed on 15/12/
2019.
8.http://www.fao.org/innovation/en/,accessed on 15/06/2020 / https://acceleratorlabs.undp.
org/,accessed on 15/06/2020.
9.https://www.savethechildren.org/us/what-we-do/innovation/innovation-accelerator ,
accessed on 05/06/2020.
10.https://www.globalinnovationexchange.org/home/about ,accessed on 05/06/2020.
11.https://www.idiainnovation.org/innovation ,accessed on 20/06/2020.
Acknowledgements
A much earlier version of this paper was presented at the Annual Conference of the UK Develop-ment Studies Association 2019, in Milton Keynes, UK. I would like to thank panel convenor Prof.INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 17Theo Papaioannou (The Open University, UK) and other conference participants, who provided
important insights to further develop the main argument. I would also like to thank my supervisorProf. Luís Mah (ISEG-ULisboa), and my colleague and researcher Luís Bernardo (ISEG-ULisboa),
for reviewing this work at various stages. Finally, I would like to thank the three anonymous
reviewers and the journal editor, Prof K. J. Joseph, whose constructive comments have greatlyimproved the manuscript.
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by the University of Lisbon under its PhD Scholarship Program(BD2017); and FCT, I.P., the Portuguese national funding agency for science, research andtechnology, under the Project UIDB/04521/2020.
ORCID
Ana Luísa Silva http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8844-0403
References
Alonso, José Antonio, and Jonathan Glennie. 2015. “What Is Development Cooperation ?”
1. Development Cooperation Forum Policy Briefs.
Altenburg, Tilman. 2011. “Bulding Inclusive Innovation Systems in Developing Countries:
Challenges for IS Research. ”InHandbook of Innovation Systems and Developing Countries ,
edited by Bengt-Ake Lundvall, K. J. Joseph, Cristina Chaminade, and Jan Vang, 33 –56.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Black, David, and Ben O. Bright. 2016 .“International Development and the Private Sector : The
Ambiguities of ‘Partnership ’.”International Journal 71 (I): 144 –166.
Bloom, Louise, and Alexander Betts. 2013 .“The Two Worlds of Humanitarian Innovation. ”94.
Refugee Studies Centre Working Paper Series.
Bloom, Louise, and Romily Faulkner. 2016. “Innovation Spaces : Lessons from the United Nations
Innovation Spaces : Lessons from the United Nations. ”Third World Quarterly 37 (8): 1369 –
1385.
Bond, SIX, and Oxfam. 2016 .“An Introduction to Social Innovation for NGOs. ”
Cabral, Lidia. 2016 .“Brazil and International Development Cooperation: ‘A Model in Waiting. ’”
https://www.ids.ac.uk/opinions/brazil-and-international-development-cooperation-a-model-in-waiting/ .
Caulier-Grice, Julie, and Geo ﬀMulgan. 2010 .“The Open Book of Social Innovation. ”Vol. 30.
Chaminade, Cristina, Bengt-Ake Lundvall, Jan Vang, and K. J. Joseph. 2011 .“Designing Innovation
Policies for Development: Towards a Systemic Experimentation-Based Approach. ”InHandbook
of Innovation Systems and Developing Countries , edited by Bengt-Ake Lundvall, K. J. Joseph,
Cristina Chaminade, and Jan Vang, 360 –379. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Chang, Ha-Joon. 2009 .“Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark: How Development Has
Disappeared from Today ’s‘Developm
ent’ Discourse. ”Working Paper.
Chang, Ann Mei. 2019. Lean Impact: How to Innovate for Radically Greater Social Good . Hoboken,
New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Chataway, Joanna, Rebecca Hanlin, and Raphael Kaplinsky. 2014 .“Inclusive Innovation: An
Architecture for Policy Development. ”Innovation and Development 4 (1): 33 –54.18 A. L. SILVAChaturvedi, Sachin. 2017. “The Development Compact: A Theoretical Construct for South-South
Cooperation. ”International Studies I (53): 15 –43.
Cimoli, Mario. 2005 .Heterogeneidad Estructural, Asimetrías Tecnológicas y Crecimiento En
América Latina . MPRA Paper. University Library of Munich, Germany. https://EconPapers.
repec.org/RePEc:pra:mprapa:3832 .
Csíkszentmihályi, Christopher, and Gemma Rodrigues. 2018 .“Social Tech Ecosystems in Sub-
Saharan Africa. ”
Cullather, Nick. 2004. “Miracles of Modernization: The Green Revolution and the Apotheosis of
Technology*. ”Diplomatic History 28 (2): 227 –254.
Duﬂo, Esther, and Michael Kremer. 2015. “Which Innovations Reach More Than 100,000 or One
Million People? Evidence from the Development Innovation Ventures Portfolio. ”
Edwards-Schachter, Mónica, and Matthew L. Wallace. 2017 .“‘Shaken, but Not Stirred ’: Sixty Years
of Deﬁning Social Innovation. ”Technological Forecasting and Social Change 119: 64 –79.
Fagerberg, Jan. 2003 .“Schumpeter and the Revival of Evolutionary Economics: An Appraisal of the
Literature. ”Journal of Evolutionary Economics 13 (2): 125 –159.
Faille, Dimitri della. 2011 .“Discourse Analysis in International Development Studies: Mapping
Some Contemporary Contributions. ”Journal of Multicultural Discourses 6 (3): 215 –235.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17447143.2011.594512 .
Fowler, Alan. 2011. “Development NGOs. ”InThe Oxford Handbook of Civil Society, edited by
Michael Edwards, 42 –54. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gasper, Des, and Raymond Apthorpe. 1996 .“Discours e Analysis and Policy Discourse. ”InArguing
Development Policy –Frames And Discourses , edited by Das Gasper, and Raymond Apthorpe, 1 –
15. London: Frank Cass.
GIE. 2019. “Global Development Innovation Landscape Q2 2019. ”
Godin, Benoît, and Dominique Vinck. 2017. “Introduction: Innovation –from the Forbidden to a
Cliché. ”InCritical Studies of Innovation. Alternative Approaches to the Pro-Innovation Bias ,
edited by Benoît Godin, and Dominique Vinck, 2 –14. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Gore, Charles. 2013 .“Introduction to the New Development Cooperation Landscape: Actors,
Approaches, Architecture. ”Journal of International Development 25: 769 –786.
Greenhalgh, Trisha, and Richard Peacock. 2005 .“Eﬀectiveness and E ﬃciency of Search Methods in
Systematic Reviews of Complex Evidence: Audit of Primary Sources. ”BMJ 331 (7524): 1064 –1065.
Gulrajani, Nilima. 2011 .“Transcending the Great Foreign Aid Debate: Managerialism, Radicalism
and the Search for Aid E ﬀectiveness. ”Third World Quarterly 32 (2): 199 –216.
Harvey, Paul. 2016 .“Cash Transfers: A Simple Innovation That Is Transforming the Humanitarian
System. ”InInnovation for International Development –Navigating the Paths and Pitfalls, edited
by Ben Ramalingam, and Kirsten Bound, 171 –181. London: Nesta.
Heeks, Richard. 2014. “From the MDGs to the Post-2015 Agenda: Analysing Changing
Development Priorities. ”56. Development Informatics. Manchester.
Heeks, Richard, Christopher Foster, and Yanuar Nugroho. 2014. “New Models of Inclusive
Innovation for Development. ”Innovation and Development 4 (2): 175 –185.
Howaldt, J., A. Butzin, D. Domanski, and C. Kaletka. 2014. Theoretical Approaches to Social
Innovation –A Critical Literature Review . A Deliverable of the Project: ‘Social Innovation:
Driving Force of Social Change ’(SI-DRIVE).
Howitt, Peter, Ara Darzi, Guang-zhong Yang, Hutan Ashra ﬁ, Rifat Atun, James Barlow, Alex
Blakemore, et al. 2012. “Technologies for Global Health. ”Lancet 380: 507 –535.
Huang, Meibo, and Xiaohui Wei. 2015. “The Chinese Foreign Aid Management System and Its
Reform. ”InInstitutional Architecture and Development: Responses from Emerging Powers ,e d i t e d
by Elizabeth Sidiropoulos, Jorge A. Pérez Pineda, Sachin Chaturvedi, and Thomas Fues. SAIIA.
IDIA. 2015 .“A Call for Innovation in International Development. ”
Ingram, George, and Kristin M. Lord. 2019 .“Global Development Disrupted: Findings from a
Survey of 93 Leaders. ”
Janus, Heiner, Stephan Klingebiel, and Sebastian Paulo. 2015. “Beyond Aid: A Conceptual
Perspective on the Transformation of Development Cooperation. ”Journal of International
Development 27 (1): 155 –169.INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 19Joseph, K. J. 2004 .“Transforming Digital Divide into Digital Dividend: The Role of South-South
Cooperation in ICTs. ”76/2004. RIS Discussion Papers.
Kaplinsky, Raphael. 2011. “Schumacher Meets Schumpeter: Appropriate Technology below the
Radar. ”Research Policy 40 (2): 193 –203.
Kopnina, Helen. 2016 .“The Victims of Unsustainability: A Challenge to Sustainable Development
Goals. ”International Journal of Sustainable Development & World Ecology 23 (2): 113 –121.
Kumar, Raj. 2019 .The Business of Changing the World: How Billionaires, Tech Disrupters, and
Social Entrepreneurs Are Transforming the Global Aid Industry . Boston: Beacon Press.
Kumar, Nagesh, and K. J. Joseph. 2005 .“Export of Software and Business Process Outsourcing from
Developing Countries: Lessons from the Indian Experience. ”Asia-Paci ﬁc Trade and Investment
Review 1 (1): 91 –110.
Levidow, Les, and Theo Papaioannou. 2018 .“Which Inclusive Innovation? Competing Normative
Assumptions Around Social Justice. ”Innovation and Development 8 (2): 209 –226.
Lewis, David, and Nazneen Kanji. 2009. Non-Governmental Organizations and Development .
New York: Routledge.
Liu, Weidong, and Michael Dunford. 2016. “Inclusive Globalization: Unpacking China ’s Belt and
Road Initiative. ”Area Development and Policy 1 (3): 323 –340.
Mawdsley, Emma. 2012 .From Recipients to Donors: Emerging Powers and the Changing
Development Landscape . London: Zed Books.
Mawdsley, Emma. 2015 .“DFID, the Private Sector and the Re-Centring of an Economic Growth
Agenda in International Development. ”Global Society 29 (3): 339 –358.
Mawdsley, Emma, Elsje Fourie, and Wiebe Nauta, eds. 2019. Researching South-South Development
Cooperation . London: Routledge.
Mawdsley, Emma, Laura Savage, and Sung-mi Kim. 2014 .“A‘Post-Aid World ’? Paradigm Shift in
Foreign Aid and Development Cooperation at the 2011 Busan High Level Forum. ”The
Geographical Journal 180 (1): 27 –38.
Mulgan, Geo ﬀ.2016 .“The Path Ahead: Development as Innovation. ”InInnovation for
International Development –Navigating the Paths and Pitfalls, 216 –227. London: Nesta.
OECD. 2012 .“Innovation for Development: A Discussion of the Issues and an Overview of Work of
the OECD Directorate for Science, Technology, and Industry. ”
Ojo, Adegboyega, Tomasz Janowski, Rilwan Basanya, and Mike Reed. 2008 .“Developing and
Harnessing Software Technology in the South: The Roles of China, India, Brazil, and South
Africa. ”UNU-WIDER Research Paper No. 2008/89.
Papaioannou, Theo. 2011 .“Technological Innovation, Global Justice and Politics of Development. ”
Progress in Development Studies 11 (4): 321 –338.
Papaioannou, Theo. 2014 .“How Inclusive Can Innovation and Development Be in the Twenty-
First Century? ”Innovation and Development 4 (2): 187 –202.
Papaioannou, Theo. 2018. Inclusive Innovation for Development: Meeting the Demands of Justice
through Public Action . Abingdon: Routledge.
Pol, Eduardo, and Simon Ville. 2009. “Social Innovation: Buzz Word or Enduring Term? ”Journal
of Socio-Economics 38 (6): 878 –885.
Ramalingam, Ben. 2013 .Aid on the Edge of Chaos: Rethinking International Cooperation in a
Complex World . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ramalingam, Ben, and Kirsten Bound. 2016 .Innovation for International Development –
Navigating the Paths and Pitfalls . London: Nesta.
Schot, Johan, and W. Edward Steinmueller. 2018. “Thre e Frames for Innovation Policy: R&D,
Systems of Innovation and Transformative Change. ”Research Policy 47 (9): 1554 –1567.
Schumacher, Ernst. 1980 .Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as If People Mattered . Lisboa,
Portugal: Dom Quixote.
Scott-Smith, Tom. 2016. “Humanitarian Neophilia : The ‘Innovation Turn ’and Its Implications. ”
Third World Quarterly 37 (12): 2229 –2251.
Shankland, Alex, and Euclides Gonçalves. 2016. “Imagining Agricultural Development in South –
South Cooperation: The Contestation and Transformation of ProSAVANA. ”World
Development 81: 35 –46.20 A. L. SILVASida. 2013. “Innovation for Growth. ”
Sidiropoulos, Elizabeth, Jorge A. Pérez Pineda, Sachin Chaturvedi, and Thomas Fues, eds. 2015 .
Institutional Architecture & Development: Responses from Emerging Powers . Auckland Park:
SAIIA.
Steed, Ian. 2010 .“Cambridge and International Development 2010. ”
STEPS Centre. 2010. Innovation, Sustainability, Development: A New Manifesto . Brighton.
Stokke, Olav. 2019 .International Development Assistance: Policy Drivers and Performance. EADI
Globa . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave MacMillan.
UN. 2000. “United Nations Millennium Declaration (Resolution 55/2). ”
UN. 2015. “Transforming Our World (Resolution 70/1). ”
UNCTAD. 2007. The Least Developed Countries Report 2007: Knowledge, Technological Learning
and Innovation for Development .
UNDP. 2016. “Innovation for 2030 –UNDP Innovation Facility, 2015 Year in Review. ”
UNDP. 2017. “The Economic Development Along the Belt and Road. ”
UNDP. 2018. “Moon Shots & Puddle Jumps. ”
Unger, Corinna R. 2018 .International Development: A Postwar History . London: Bloomsbury
Academic.
UN Millennium Project. 2005. “Innovation: Applying Knowledge in Development. ”
US Global Development Lab. 2015 .“2015 The Lab Year in Review: Accelerating Development
through Science, Technology, Innovation and Partnership. ”
Verweij, Marco. 2017 .“A Cultural Theory of How to Aid Development. ”InAid, Thechnology and
Development: The Lessons From Nepal , edited by Dipak Gyawali, Michael Thompson, and Marco
Verweij, 13 –25. New York, NY: Routledge.
Voegtlin, Christian, and Andreas Georg Scherer. 2017 .“Respo nsible Innovation and the Innovation
of Responsibility: Governing Sustainable Development in a Globalized World. ”Journal of
Business Ethics 143 (2): 227 –243.
Whitehead, James. 2016 .“Innovation for Impact: How Australian NGOs Nurture and Scale up New
Ideas. ”
The World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016 –Digital Dividends . Washington, DC.
Yanguas, Pablo. 2018. Why We Lie about Aid: Development and the Messy Politics of Change .
London: Zed Books.INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT 21