Many countries in sub-Saharan Africa identify technology as a viable complementary 
tool to improve learning outcomes in primary and secondary education.
New research evidence from The Gambia suggests that a student-centered 
computer-assisted learning (CAL) program signiﬁcantly improves student performance 
and teaching eﬀectiveness in secondary schools.
Policy action to complement traditional pedagogical methods with interactive 
technology in classrooms can help countries translate their gains in access to 
education into greater achievements in learning and skills. INNOVATION IN EDUCATION
IMPROVING LEARNING OUTCOMES THROUGH 
ICT TECHNOLOGYWORLD BANK POLICY BRIEF
Photo: NJCTL
Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure AuthorizedInnovation in Education - World Bank Africa Brief1WHAT IS THE ISSUE?
The remarkable progress toward universal schooling in primary and secondary education in many sub-
Saharan African countries has not translated into expected gains in quality learning and skills.
1. HIGH ACCESS BUT LOW LEARNING 
Over the last two decades, countries in sub-Saharan 
Africa have dramatically improved educational 
enrollment exceeding 97 percent enrollment rate 
in primary education in 2017. The gross enrollment 
ratio in secondary education has also increased 
from 13 percent to nearly 43 percent between 
1970 and 2014, according to World Bank data. Yet, 
overall quality of learning and student performance 
in mathematics and science remain quite low in 
comparison with economically similar countries 
around the world.
2. YOUTHFUL POPULATION BUT 
INADEQUATE SKILLS 
According to the United Nations, three-quarter of Africa’s population is young (below 35) and the 
number is likely to double by 2055, generating 
potential economic opportunities associated 
with a growing working-age population. 
However, a recent World Bank’s study suggests 
that the workforce in sub-Saharan Africa is still 
among the least skilled in the world, hindering 
policy efforts to reap off the benefits of a 
demographic dividend.
3. TECHNOLOGY AS A PANACEA? 
Just as in other regions of the world, countries in 
sub-Saharan Africa are considering innovative 
ways to match progress in universal schooling 
with the quality of learning. One area that is 
increasingly gaining attention is the use of ICT 
technology in the classroom environment.
TECHNOLOGY IN THE CLASSROOM AND LEARNING: 
WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM THE GAMBIA?
In 2012, The Gambia pioneered in Africa the implementation of a new pedagogical innovation called the 
Progressive Science Initiative® (PSI®) and Progressive Mathematics Initiative® (PMI®), which incorporates 
technology directly into standard teaching and learning methods. The PSI-PMI program is gaining 
traction across the region, with other dozen countries having already adopted or lining up to adopt it. 
In order to guide policy for both the adoption and its implementation, World Bank researchers worked 
with the Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education of The Gambia to carefully evaluate the impact of 
the program. This Policy Brief presents the main finding of this research and discusses its implications 
for policy in The Gambia and beyond.
BACKGROUND
In 2012, the Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education of The Gambia, with the support of the World 
Bank, partnered with the New Jersey Center for Teaching and Learning (NJCTL) to implement PSI-PMI 
as a pilot project in 24 secondary schools in the country (8 Lower Secondary and 16 Upper Secondary). 
Amid concerns of poor student performance, the PSI-PMI program seeks to improve learning through 
increased interactions, effective teaching, active student participation, and better monitoring.
The PSI-PMI technology integrates an interactive whiteboard (IWB) with smart responders into teaching 
and learning. The IWB allows teachers to develop digital course content and, with internet access, 
can foster teacher collaboration through peer review of teaching material. The smart responders are Innovation in Education - World Bank Africa Brief2wireless handheld devices that allow 
multiple students to simultaneously provide 
responses that teachers can monitor 
and track in via the IWB. This innovation 
also allows teachers to track students’ 
comprehension in real-time, and enables 
them to make necessary adjustments, which 
is an innovation compared to the traditional 
setting where only one student at a time 
can respond to a question. By design, the 
PSI-PMI program fosters a student-centered 
learning experience with recurrent short 
assignments and a collaboration-friendly 
seating arrangement.
To study the impacts of the CAL program 
on student learning, researchers focused 
on senior secondary pilot schools where 
students participated in the PSI-PMI 
program (see Figure 1). More specifically, 
they assessed the performance of 12th 
grade students on the West African 
Senior School Certificate Examination 
(WASSCE), the compulsory high-school exit 
examination. These students were exposed 
to the program for three years, starting 
in the 10th grade. The WASSCE is taken 
at grade 12 and determines placement in 
tertiary institutions. Given that the selection 
of the pilot schools was not random, the 
researchers relied on a non-experimental 
research design approach to evaluate the 
impact of the PSI-PMI program.PSI-PMI IMPLEMENTATION TIMELINE
AUGUST 2012
Teacher training session 1
JANUARY 2013
PSI-PMI instruction in pilot 
schools
SPRING 2013
Roll-out expanded to 
additional schools
AUGUST 2013
Teacher training session 4
APRIL 2014
Training of cohort 2 by 
cohort 1 teachers (session 5)
SPRING 2016
Cohorts 1 and 2 students 
took the WASSCE
2018
Gambian trainers provided 
training in Rwanda 
(February), Nigeria (August), 
and Niger (October)
Present Pilot program continues and is ready to scale up.DECEMBER 2012
Teacher training session 2
APRIL 2013
Teacher training session 3
JUNE 2013
Upper basic students in 
cohort 1 took a modified 
GABECE
JANUARY 2014
One school from cohort 2 
began instruction
SPRING 2015
Cohort 1 students took the 
WASSCE
SPRING 2017
Cohort 2 students took 
the WASSCE
Map 1: PSI-PMI Program Schools (Senior Secondary Schools) in The Gambia
Source: Blimpo et al. (2020) - ForthcomingInnovation in Education - World Bank Africa Brief3STUDY DESIGN 
To estimate the impacts of the PSI-PMI program on learning 
outcomes, the research team aimed to examine variations in 
student performance that are credibly attributable to the PSI-PMI 
intervention. Focusing on the 12th grade students in the 16 pilot 
secondary schools, the team created two control groups of  a 
priori comparable students, one from within the same schools 
and another from set of comparable schools. They applied 
a Propensity Score Matching (PSM) approach to school-level 
administrative data and generated from a sample of 55 eligible 
secondary institutions a group of 16 schools that are comparable 
to the PSI-PMI schools (see Figure 2). The PSM method was the 
best method the researchers could use given the circumstances. 
While the researchers can ensure that the program students are 
comparable to the non-program ones using the available data, 
the PSM provides no guarantee to account for unobservable 
characteristics.
To attenuate this problem and identify the learning impacts of the 
PSI-PMI program, the researchers proceeded in several steps. 
First, they used other survey data they collected, including student-
level data, as additional information in the matching process. This 
allowed them to create two control groups – one with students 
in the PSI-PMI schools who did not participate in the pilot and 
another control with students from the non-program matched 
schools. The former addresses potential bias that may stem from 
differences in school characteristics. Second the researchers 
conducted two separate but complementary evaluations. Before 
students took the WASSCE, they did one set of evaluation using 
the researchers’ designed exam (pre analysis plan). Then, using 
the WASSCE exam scores, they replicated the analysis when it 
became available to check for consistency of program impacts 
and to contrast outcomes between treated and control group students. In both research designs, they 
control for student and school level covariates. Third and finally, they used two different statistical estimation 
methods to conduct the analysis. The results were consistent across these variations, raising confidence that 
the findings likely to be causal.
Although the PSI-PMI program is exclusively designed for mathematics and science subjects (biology, 
chemistry, and physics), the program evaluation focused only on mathematics and English. One reason is 
that the two subjects are the only compulsory subjects for all students and are therefore less likely to suffer 
from the selection bias stemming from students’ preferences and abilities. Another reason is that student 
performance in these two subjects is the main determinant of admission into tertiary institutions. Also, looking 
at the impact of a STEM-focused program on a non-STEM subject such as English could be useful to further 
inform the role of technology in overall learning, cross-subject learning externalities, and teaching.
To better understand the dynamics behind their quantitative analysis, the researchers conducted additional 
consultations though unstructured  interviews and focus group interviews with different stakeholders including 
students, teachers, principals,  and administrators at the ministry of education.Figure 1: PSI-PMI Schools and Non-PSI-PMI 
Schools before and after Matching :
Source: Blimpo et al. (2020) - Forthcoming4
3
2
1
0
0             0.2           0.4           0.6           0.8            1.0Distribution
School Quality Index
PSI-PMI program school                     Non PSI-PMI school
4
3
2
1
0
0             0.2           0.4           0.6           0.8            1.0Distribution
School Quality Index
PSI-PMI program school                     Non PSI-PMI schoolInnovation in Education - World Bank Africa Brief4KEY FINDINGS
The implementation of the PSI-PMI program, a Computer-Assisted-Learning technology for mathematics 
and science subjects, positively influenced students’ learning outcomes in secondary schools across 
The Gambia.
1. The PSI-PMI program significantly improved student performance.
 ÆThe PSI-PMI program led to a 9.2 percentage points increases in students’ average score in 
mathematics (or a 46 percent increase);
 ÆAn increase of 15 percentage points (a threefold increase) in the share of students who obtained 
credit in both mathematics and English, a criterion for college admission in The Gambia;
 ÆThe PSI-PMI program, a STEM-designated technology, improved student’s English score by 3.87 
percentage points, suggesting that IT technology influences overall learning.
2. But these gains in learning were largely driven by high-performing Students at the baseline. 
 ÆThe impact is positive and significant only for students who performed at the credit threshold and 
above in mathematics in their 9th grade certification exam (Figure 2);
 ÆThis particular outcome holds is irrespective of gender and socioeconomic background of the 
students, provided that they have solid background at the baseline.
The stakeholders were generally satisfied with the PSI-PMI program despite a number of implementation 
challenges and technical constraints.
3. School principals, teachers, and students have highly positive views about the program
 ÆResults from the qualitative survey and focus group discussions indicate that school administrators, 
teachers, students, and officials from the Ministry of education are highly welcoming with the 
program;
 ÆAbout 80 and 95 percent of math and science 
teachers, respectively, who used the PSI-PMI 
technology in their classrooms believe that it 
improved teaching effectiveness and learning.
4. But a number of challenges prevent the PSI-PMI 
from being used in its full potential.
 ÆGaps between the contents and the official 
curriculum, as well as the alignment with how 
students are traditionally evaluated were reported 
as challenges;
 ÆTimely maintenance of equipment was lacking  
as equipment breakdown persisted to such an 
extent as to disrupt program implementation in 
some schools;
 ÆFew collaboration and peer review among 
teachers due to limited internet and reliable 
electricity supply;
 ÆMost schools lacked collaboration-friendly round 
tables for students as the existing tables were 
designed for the traditional teaching approachFigure 2: Impact of PSI-PMI on sub-groups of 
12-grade students
Impact of PSI-PMI Program on Students with Varied Baseline Performance
2
1
0
-1
Credit and Above                              Pass                                                        Fail
Math score at 9th grade exit exam (GABECE)Impact on 12th grade math exit exam (WASSCE)
Source: Blimpo et al. (2020) - ForthcomingInnovation in Education - World Bank Africa Brief5POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
The findings from this study are encouraging and point to several policy levers that can further amplify 
its effectiveness. 
1. Program implementation should take precaution to allow for careful evaluation along the way to 
allow for timely adjustment and promote learning by doing. It is therefore critical to carefully document 
(with reliable data) the implementation process and, if possible, to consider a Randomized Control Trial 
design to allow for more rigorous evaluation to help adjust the program when needed and promote 
learning by doing.
2. The content of the PSI-PMI require continuous efforts to align with the existing curriculum and 
student evaluations. Many teachers reported that the content was not sufficiently adapted and there 
may be a need to adjust it to match the existing Gambian curriculum on which the WASSCE is based.
3. To address the variation of the impact on students and ensure that the program benefits all students, 
the implementers should monitor the implementation at the classroom level, set up classroom peer 
observations, exchange visits among teachers within and across schools. 
4. More generally, experience sharing among countries (administrators and teachers) can help 
countries avoid challenges experienced elsewhere. 
5. A highly responsive technical support unit per school (or group of schools) to handle technical 
glitches or replace defective equipment is needed to ensure implementation continuity.
6. The experience from The Gambia demonstrates that reliable electricity is essential for smooth 
implementation. Therefore, countries should consider school-level investments in redundancies in 
energy supply such as backup generators or solar panels.
Photo: NJCTLABOUT THIS RESEARCH
The background research paper for this policy brief was co-authored by
 ÆMoussa P. Blimpo, Senior Economist, Africa Chief Economist Office,  World Bank
 ÆOusman Gajigo, Manager, Research Department, African Development Bank
 ÆRyoko Tomita, Senior Economist, Education Global Practice,  World Bank
 ÆSolomon Owusu, PhD Fellow, United Nations University – MERIT
 ÆYanbin Xu, PhD student, Georgetown University
The Full Paper Is Available Under the Title “Technology in the Classroom and Learning Secondary 
Schools” and is forthcoming as a World Bank Policy Research Working Paper. For more information you 
contact the corresponding author Moussa P Blimpo  at mblimpo@worldbank.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank The Ministry of Basic and Secondary Education of the Gambia, Meskerem 
Mulatu and Tanya June Savrimootoo of the World Bank for facilitating this study; Robert Goodman and 
his colleagues at the New Jersey Center for Teaching and Learning (NJCTL) for the implementation; 
Souleymane Soumahoro, Beatrice A. Berman, and Rajesh Sharma for their support in producing this 
policy brief. All errors are those of the authors. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed 
in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or 
those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.