 
  
Emerging Issues Report   
 
 
 
  
 
Leaving No One Behind in 
a Digital World  
Kevin Hernandez and Tony Roberts  
Digital and Technology Cluster  
Institute of Development Studies  
November  2018  
  About this report  
The K4D Emerging Issues report series highlights research and emerging evidence to policy -
makers to help inform policies that are more resilient to the future. K4D staff researchers work with 
thematic experts and DFID to identify w here new or emerging research can inform and influence 
policy.  
This report is based on eleven days of desk -based research.  
K4D services are provided by a consortium of leading organisations working in international 
development, led by the Institute of De velopment Studies (IDS), with Education Development 
Trust, Itad, University of Leeds Nuffield Centre for International Health and Development, Liverpool 
School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), University of Birmingham International Development 
Department (IDD)  and the University of Manchester Humanitarian and Conflict Response Institute 
(HCRI).  
For any enquiries, please contact helpdesk@k4d.info.  
Acknowledgements  
We thank the following experts who voluntarily provided suggestions for relevant literature or othe r 
advice to the author to support the preparation of this report.  The content of the report does not 
necessarily reflect the opinions of any of the experts consulted.  
 Rachel Grant, DFID  
 Leah Gaffney, DFID  
Suggested citation  
Hernandez, K. and Roberts, T.  (2018).  Leaving No One Behind in a Digital World. K4D Emerging 
Issues  Report.  Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.  
Copyright  
This  report was prepared for the UK Government’s Department for International Development 
(DFID) and its partners in sup port of pro -poor programmes. It is licensed for non -commercial 
purposes only. K4D cannot be held responsible for errors or any consequences arising from the 
use of information contained in this report. Any views and opinions expressed do not necessarily 
reflect those of DFID, K4D or any other contributing  organisation . © DFID - Crown copyright 2018.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Contents  
 
 
1. Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  1 
2. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  3 
3. Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 4 
4. Literature Review: Key Concepts  ................................ ................................ ..... 5 
 Poverty in a Digital World  ................................ ................................ .................  5 
 Leaving No One Behind  ................................ ................................ ...................  6 
 The Law of Amplification  ................................ ................................ ..................  6 
 Digital Dividends  ................................ ................................ ...............................  8 
 Digital Divides  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 8 
 Gender Digital Divide ................................ ................................ ......................  13 
5. Evidence Review: Key Focal Areas  ................................ ................................  14 
 Government  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 14 
 Private Sector  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 18 
 Civil Society  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 20 
 Digital Futures  ................................ ................................ ................................  21 
6. Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 23 
7. References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  24 
 
 1 1. Summary   
In an increasingly digital world , relatively privileged people are able to use their access to mobile 
and internet technologies to access clear digital dividends  including remote acce ss to health and 
education information, financial inclusion and digital pathways to economic and political 
empowerment. However , already disadvantaged people have less access , agency and ability to 
reap these digital dividends , and are being left further a nd further behind. One  third of the world’s 
population do not own a mobile phone , and 50% of the global population have no internet. A series 
of digital divides is adding new digital dimensions to poverty in the twentieth century. This is not a 
binary divi de: new classes of technology access and connectivity experience are leading to a range 
of different digital inclusions and exclusions. These digital dimensions of poverty often reflect, 
reproduce and amplify gender, racial and caste/class divides. As the relatively privileged upgrade 
to the latest generation of smartphones and connectivity speeds, and as ever more aspects of 
social, economic, and political life move online , the digitally disadvantaged experience widening 
inequalities . Development professio nals require new diagnostic tools to  analyse  the digital access 
and everyday technology practices of those being left behind in their area of work. New research 
is necessary to understand the development implications in this dynamic space , including the 
impact of artificial intelligence  (AI) on governance and work automation on employment and 
growth.  
 
Key points covered in this literature review include:   
 The digital revolution coincided with major reductions in extreme poverty during the 
Millennium Develop ment Goal ( MDG ) era. Whether digital technologies contributed to 
poverty reduction is contested.  
 A key criticism of the MDGs was that MDG targets focused attention on the “low-
hanging fruit ” rather than th ose most in need , and most at risk of being left behind.  
 To address this failing the Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs ) require 
development actors to specifically target the most marginalised in order to ensure that 
this time we “leave no one behind .” 
 World Bank and private sector approaches to digital development will deliver clear 
digital dividends to this same low -hanging fruit , but cannot reach those with little or no 
income .  
 Government and civil society actors will have to step in to specifically target the most 
marginalised , in order to avoid repe ating this  failing of the MDGs.  
 Technology on its own cannot solve social, political, or economic issues but can only 
amplify existing human capacity and intent . 
 Digital development actors must then identify and build the existing human capacity 
and inten t of the most marginalised as a pre -condition for their development use of 
technology.  
 Non-digital and digital element s will need to be blended in multi -dimensional 
programmes that are grounded in the felt needs and expressed priorities of those being 
left behind.  
 2 The second half of this report reviews evidence of these digital dimensions of poverty in four key 
domains : government, private sector , civil society, and digital futures . This section demonstrates 
how the use of digital technologies amplifies ex isting social and economic disparities , with 
particular refer ence to those being left behind. Key points include : 
 e-Government  deliver s substantial efficiency and cost savings , but making service 
provision digital by default  significantly disadvantage s the least connected.   
 e-Governance enables citizen s to remotely participate in online policy decision s that 
affect their lives , but the voices of the most connected are the most heard .  
 The private sector i s key to delivering digital dividends at scale , including via mobile 
money  and online commerce . However , there is no profit motive to include those with 
least  income .  
 Civil society is also increasingly turning to digital technologies to engage with 
beneficiaries. Whilst there are many positive examples of u sing digital technologies for 
women’s empowerment and social inclusion, even when digital initiatives explicit aim 
to reduce  poverty, the y can unwittingly amplify existing (dis)advantage and leave the 
poorest behind.  
 The law of amplification also holds tr ue for the future of work . Whether or not jobs are 
lost during the next wave of automation, the increasing use of digital technology in work  
reduces the employability and earning potential of the unconnected .  
This literature review identified  a wealth of examples of digital dividends coexisting with digital 
divides . In an increasingly digital world , existing (dis)advantage is being amplified in ways that give 
rise to new digital dimensions of poverty. Marginalis ed and vulnerable groups are least  able to 
afford or apply the latest technology or highest connectivity speeds. As government, private sector 
and civil society organi sation s move more of the services and initiatives online, the unconnected 
and the least connected are being left further behind. Avoid ing this requires a reorient ation of  digital 
development to “put the last first. ” Development i nitiatives need to blend non -digital and digital 
elements in order to: (a) build the capacity and intent of the digitally disadvantaged (including their 
individu al and collective agency, organis ational capacity and political direction) ; (b) expand the 
capacity and intent of those already providing digital dividends to the most marginalised ; and (c) 
curtail the capacity and intent of authoritarian and other malicio us actors using digital technologies 
to manipulate elections and otherwise distort governance and discourse.   
To our knowledge , this is the first literature review on leaving no one behind in a digital world . Finite 
restraints meant that we were not able to go as far or as deep as we would have wished. Dedicated 
literature reviews on digital gender, digital disability and on AI and the future of work are warranted. 
Among areas identified in which further research are  necessary in clude : (i) understand ing more 
about the everyday technology practices, access and connectivity experiences, and digital 
literacies of the least connected and unconnected ; and (ii) understand ing more about the new  
digital dimensions of poverty experienced by those with intersectional  disadvantages, especially 
women, the disabled and the digitally illiterate.  3 2. Introduction  
This literature review is designed to help development professionals to better understand exactly 
how poverty is changing in an increasingly digital world , with a pa rticular focus on the implications 
of those changes for the sustainable development goal of leaving no one behind . 
Since 2005 t he number of people using the internet worldwide has quadrupled to four billion. Two 
thirds of the world’s population now own a m obile device1. The use of these new d igital 
technologies has enabled exciting  new possibilities for social and economic development. Mobile 
and internet technologies are being used , among other things, to increase income and employment 
opportunities , impro ve civic participation and governance, enhance the provision of healthcare and 
education, and include more women, people living with disabilities, and rural populations in 
development processes.  However , 3.6 billion people still have no access to the inter net2. One third 
of humanity has no mobile phone. The least  connected  are rendered relat ively disadvantaged to 
the precise  extent that the most connected  are advantaged by their use of digital technologies.  It 
is also the case that as information, communica tion and service access increasingly become s 
“digital by default ,” those citizens who are the least connected  risk becoming digitally marginalis ed.  
The evidence shows that those fortunate enough to secure access to mobile money, mobile health 
information,  and online employment opportunities are able to experience clear digital dividends.  
However , unequal patterns of technology access and digital literacies create digital divides, which  
are experienced by many others. Although some —including  many poor peopl e—are able to 
access digital dividends, the unconnected  poor experience a n increasing gap between themselves 
and those enjoying access to the latest digital technologies.  
This literature review presents evidence that this relative digital (dis)advantage e xists both between 
countries and between different demographic groups within countries. In rural populations where 
cellular and broadband connectivity are not available , there is no possibility of digital dividends. 
Those on the very lowest income are leas t able to afford smartphones and broadband or mobile 
data connectivity. Women in general are digitally disadvantaged  in relation to men. People living 
with disabilities or who are not print literate in the language used in software applications also 
experi ence this new digital dimension of poverty . The literature review suggests that we should 
expect these structural dimensions of digital (dis)advantage to intersect and overlap , such that 
urban, professional men experience an amplification  of their existing  privilege, whilst rural, disabled 
women experience an amplification  of their relative disadvantage. The existing research literature 
provides significant evidence of the digital disadvantage experienced by women, rural 
communities, and citizens on low inc ome. More research is necessary to substantiate the 
anecdotal evidence that senior citizens, people living with d isabilities and other marginalis ed 
groups experience similar digital disadvantage.  
Although the literature provided clear evidence that use of  digital technology amplifies both 
dividends and divides , there is little existing research that adequately explains how these divides 
change people’s experience of poverty , or what policy or practice lessons arise. The everyday 
technology practices of the  least  connected  are not well understood, which makes designing 
appropriate development programmes impossible. There is no value in developing smartphone 
apps or SMS platforms for populations that use WhatsApp and Facebook Free Basics. There is 
                                                   
1 We Are Social 2018 https://wearesocial.com/us/blog/2018/01/g lobal -digital -report -2018  
2 We Are Social 2018 https://wearesocial.com/us/blog/2018/01/global -digital -report -2018  4 insufficien t research on the everyday digital lives and technology pract ices of the unconnected and 
least  connected. Further research with non -users and minimal users of digital technologies is 
necessary to better understand what digital resources, skills and interes ts should inform digital 
programmes. Better diagnostic tools are also needed to help participants and development 
professionals assess the digital landscape in specific countries or target populations.  
The digital terrain of development is changing so rap idly that more research is necessary to assess 
the development implications of technologies on the horizon. Digitalisation is impacting on almost 
every aspect of e conomic, social and political  life, and yet we have insufficient knowledge about 
the developm ent implications of technologies such as artificial intelligence, workplace automation, 
the internet of things, facial recognit ion and biometric IDs. Digitalis ation is bringing digital dividends 
in the form of workplace efficiencies, new forms of transpare ncy and inclusion, as well as whole 
new digital industries. The potential for instant citizen access to information and services , and the 
reduction in scope for bribery and corruption , are substantial. At the same time, as the Cambridge 
Analytic examples r emind us, corporate and government use of data for micro surveillance and 
profiling, disinformation and media manipulation raises urgent new concerns for digital governance 
and democracy. The rapid pace of technological change makes the need for further re search in 
digital work and frontier technologies an ongoing priority.  
The remaining sections of this report are as follows. Section three  will detail the methodology 
adopted in this literature review. Section four reviews keys concepts for understanding how poverty 
is changing in an increasingly digital world , as well as what this means for the leaving no one 
behind agenda. We review Kentaro Toyama’s  amplification  thesis  in order to understand exactly 
what technology can and can never do. We then review th e concepts of digital dividends and digital 
divides , before looking at the relationship between digital and gender , as well the evidence around 
other intersecting dimensions of disadvantage including income and disability. Having reviewed 
the conceptual li terature, section five reviews evidence from three sectors —state, private sector 
and civil society —and looks at the future of work and “frontier technologies .” The final section pulls 
together the narrative that arises from the review and concludes that, i n an increasingly digital 
world, leaving no one behind can only be achieved by putting the last first,  and by designing 
bespoke “blended ” programmes that combine both digital and analogue (offline and online) 
development approaches. The research evidence s uggests that technology is an ineffective 
substitute where existing human capacity and intent are absent or weak. Therefore , identifying 
(and building) such capacity and intent are necessary “analogue complements ” that must precede 
any digital development interventions. The most marginalised groups, included the disabled and 
rural women, have the most to gain from technology use. Ensuring that they do not continue to be 
left behind will require bespoke interventions sustained over the medium -to-long term to  first build 
the necessary human capacity and organisational intent that is a pre -requisite for all digital 
development.  
3. Methodology  
Due to time and resource limitations, this literature review is designed to be illustrative of an 
emerging landscape and do es not intend to be extensive or exhaustive. A purposeful sample of 
15 semi -structured key informant interviews with DFID staff was carried out in order to identify focal 
issues and determine the scope of the review. Early drafts were shared with a smaller  number of 
DFID staff , and the scope and focus was repeatedly adapted as appropriate. This informed several 
iterations of desk research , in which keyword searches were conducted on each of the ten review 
topics that emerged. Google Scholar, key reports for warded by DFID and snowball references 5 from identified sources identified several thousand potential sources. Over 200 pieces of literature 
that were most closely aligned with the scope and focus of the research were reviewed and  
analy sed. Over 100 are cit ed in this review. The review identified a number of gaps and promising 
areas for future research. A more systematic literature review  is warranted , that allows time to 
develop key areas in greater detail.  
4. Literature Review: Key Concepts   
Poverty in a Dig ital World  
Poverty is changing rapidly. Over one billion people have escaped extreme poverty since 19903 
and another person escapes it every second.4 Since the World Wide Web was launched in 1991 , 
mobile and internet technology have spread faster than any previous technologies in history. The 
dramatic reduction in extreme poverty has coincided with the uptake of mobile and internet 
technologies. Despite the claims sometimes made that mobile phone penetration or internet 
adoption drives economic growth, any causal relationship is contested. A recent literature review 
by Galperin and Viecens (2017 , p. 315)  found that stu dies that are often wrongly  cited as evidence 
of a causal relationship between ICT adoption and economic growth or poverty reduction —
includin g Qiang , Rossotto, and Kimura  (2009 )—suffer  from flaws that limit their validity . This is  
because they do not account for the possibility that economic growth could be causing ICT 
adoption, that growth and adoption could simultaneously cause each other, or  that they may both 
be caused by a third variable (e.g. good governance). Some studies (Katz & Koutroumpis , 2012; 
Koutroumpis , 2009) have found the presence of threshold effects – that ICT adoption only has a 
positive effect on economic growth after a sign ificant portion of a country’s population adopts them 
(Galperin & Viecens, 2017 ). The authors conclude that “while the evidence indicates that advanced 
economies are reaping significant benefits from internet investments, the returns for less advanced 
econ omies, and in particular for the fight against poverty in these regions, remains uncertain”  
(Galperin & Viecens , 2017 , p. 315). Due to this uncertainty, this literature review does not take the 
direction of causation between ICT and poverty reduction as gi ven – nor is it centrally concerned 
with this claimed relationship. Instead, the review focuses on how the experience of poverty is 
changing in an increasingly digital world, one in which mobile phones and the internet are rapidly 
diffusing and increasingl y becom ing the preferred —sometimes  the default —medium  by which 
political, civic, economic, social, and everyday activities are carried out.  
Although there is a well -established narrative and evidence of digital dividends  and digital divides  
which are rev iewed here, there is less research evidence about how and why the two phenomenon 
coexist , and what the appropriate policy and practice responses are. Much of the existing literature 
is diminished in value by being the product of either digital evangelists or digital pessimists , and 
lacks the theoretical content th at is necessary to understand  the relationship between digital 
technologies and development impacts ( Unwin , 2017; Walsham , 2013; Zheng , Hatakka, Sahay, & 
Andersson , 2018). There is a great deal of macro -economic research literature , but very few 
ground -level studies showing how digitisation is affect ing the experience of poverty by those at risk 
of being left behind. This review brings together evidence across four areas (governance, the 
private sec tor, civil society and digital futures) to illustrate how inability to access and make 
effective use of digital technologies has becom e a new dimension of poverty , with particular 
                                                   
3 http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/overview  
4 https://worldpoverty.io/  6 implications for those at risk of being left behind. The next sub -section wi ll discuss the genesis of 
the “Leave No One Behind ” agenda and its r elation to digital development.  
Leaving No One Behind  
Poverty reduction during the period of the Millennium Develop Goals (2000 -2015) was truly 
impressive in many respects. One common crit icism of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
is that the targets focused development attention on the “low hanging fruit ,” meaning those that 
were nearest to escaping poverty as opposed to the poorest (Burns , Howard, Lopez -Franco, 
Shahrokh, & Wheeler , 2013; Stuart & Samman , 2017 ; UNICEF , 2015). The poorest children gained 
the least , and as others improved they were left further behind relative to other children in their 
countries (UNICEF , 2015). Evidence shows that those left furthest behind are often t he most 
marginalised , “including ethnic minorities, indigenous peoples, refugees and migrants ” (UNDP , 
2016 , p. iii).  Whilst better -off groups have ma de significant gains, marginalis ed groups still face 
basic deprivations , including: lack of voice, discrim ination, exclusion, and prejudice ( UNDP , 2016). 
Moreover, these groups are often the most difficult to reach geographically, socially, politically, and 
economically.  
In order to avoid repeating the mistakes of the MDGs, the Sustainable Development Goals ( SDGs) 
included a cross -cutting commitment to “Leave No One Behind ,” by prioritising the most 
marginalis ed.5 The commitment to prioritis e the poorest has precedents in the existing literature, 
including in the title of Robert  Chambers’ (1983) book , Rural De velopment: Putting the Last First. 
There is an apparent clash between the aim of some governments, corporations and development 
agencies to reach citizens with “digital first ” or “digital by default ” programming , and the SDG aim 
to put the poorest first , because the poorest are least likely to have the capacity to make effective 
use of digital services. Digital service provision enables agencies to reach the digital low hanging 
fruit of people experiencing some aspects of disadvantage , but who have mobile o r internet 
connectivity. This , however , again excludes those left behind by the MDGs and suggests that 
multiple channels (including offline and analogue channels) will be need to combined in “blended ” 
digital/analogue programmes in order to leave no one be hind.  
This section has covered the concept of leave no  one behind. The MDGs incentivis ed reaching 
citizens that were easy -to-reach , rather than the most in need. If digital development is to avoid 
repeating these results , it will have to develop strategie s that specifically target the hard -to-reach. 
The following section examines how the use of digital technologies in development contains an 
inherent danger of amplifying existing social and economic disadvantage.     
The Law of Amplification  
It is common t o come across claims such as “technology empowers women ” or “technology 
increases accountability .” However, technology has no independent will and so cannot be the 
cause of anything. The ex -head of Microsoft Research, Kentaro Toyama  (2011) , argues 
convinci ngly that technology has no transformative capacity in and of itself , and that technology 
use can only amplify existing human capacity and intent: it cannot act as a substitute where human 
capacity and intent do not exist . The following example illustrates  his point:  
Research has shown that while technology (namely computers) can improve outcomes in 
schools, it only does so in well -run schools with good teachers and struggles to mimic 
                                                   
5 https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/201 6/leaving -no-one-behind  7 positive outcomes in schools struggling with the basics of education … I n all cases, good 
(normally richer) schools do better, while bad schools do worse.  (Warschauer, Knobel, & 
Slone, 2004, as cited in Toyama , 2011 , p. 2 )  
Technology can amplify both positive and negative capacity and intent. This thesis hold s true not 
only f or digital development interventions , but also for market -based technology diffusion (e.g. 
mobile phones and the internet). Market -based technology diffusion provides preferential access 
to the newest and highest capacity versions of any technology to thos e with the largest disposable 
income – and leaves behind those with the l east disposable income. Even when they own a mobile 
phone , those on the lowest incomes are disadvantage d because  device ownership does  not equal  
being able to keep it charged with ele ctricity, topped up with call and data credit, and repaired 
when damaged (Faith , 2018). Again , existing capacity and intent is key. Even if a corporation or 
government provided the same phone to every citizen , disparities in capacity to make “effective 
use” (Gurstein , 2003) of technology would still shape development outcomes , as illustrated in the 
following quote:  
Even if differential access to technology could be countered through a universal allocation 
of technology, disparities among people, such as be tter education, refined social skills, and 
influential connections all translate to a greater ability for the better -off to use technology 
for their own purposes … The greater one’s skills and capacities, the more value 
technology has. (Toyama , 2011 , pp. 3-4) 
Moreover, Toyama also warns that even when technology is provided, it is not safe to  assume that 
the most marginalis ed will intend to —or have the motivation to —make  use of technologies in 
educational or empowering ways , rather than for entertaining or “frivolous ” purposes. Instead, a 
person’s use of technology is likely to reflect their previous habits, self -esteem, or sense of agency, 
which may be deeply rooted in “a lifelong lack of experience with situations where effort leads to 
better circumstances ” (Toyama, 2011, p.  4).  
Stated otherwise , “Technology is merely a tool that multiplies human capacity in the direction of 
human intent ,” rather than a substitute for them (Toyama , 2011 , p. 3). Thus, digital technologies 
may “amplify the impact of good (and bad ) policies ” (World Bank , 2016 , p. 4). It is therefore 
important to ensure that digital development policies avoid amplifying existing inequalities and 
leaving  marginali sed people behind. Moreover, because intent is directional (it can be benign or 
malicious), technology in the hands of governments or corporation s with malicious intent and 
sufficient capacity can present new governance risks , such as the proliferation of disinformation , 
electoral manipulation  or intrusive surveillance. More research is necessary to understand how 
these new digital threats impact on development  and the least powerful citizens . 
Given the above, doing digital development in a way that leaves no one behind requires three 
courses of action: (i) identify existing capacity and (good) intent on the ground and amplify it; (ii) 
seek to build capacity and intent (e.g. organisational capacity and political will) where they are 
lacking; and (iii) curtail or mitigate the use of technology by those with malicious intent and high 
capacit y.  
This section has covered the concept of amplification , which states  that technology on its own 
cannot solve social, political, or economic issues but can only amplify existing human capacity and 
intent. This makes key the identification and nurturing o f existing capacity and intent . Moreover, 
amplification theory lends weight to the argument that —all other things being equal —introducing  
technology in places with high levels of existing disparities is likely to amplify those disparities. The 8 leave no one  behind agenda therefore requires that we specifically prioriti se work with the most 
marginalis ed and excluded , and seek opportunities to amplify their existing capacity and intent. 
The following section examines the idea of digital dividends , as popularis ed in the 2016 World 
Deve lopment Report . 
Digital Dividends  
The World Development Report (WDR) 2016 has the title Digital Dividends , and provides examples 
of multiple ways in which the use of digital technology can be leveraged to reduce poverty, increase 
income and empower citizens  (World Bank , 2016) . It argues that this is possible through three 
main mechanisms: (i) inclusion  – bringing  down transaction and information costs and overcoming 
physical barriers to reach remote populations; (ii) efficiency  – automating  existing processes can 
bring down costs of existent services and transactions; and (iii) innovation  – digital  platforms can 
scale rapidly at near zero marginal cost. The positive development impacts , or “digital dividends ,” 
include: economic growt h, job creation, increased productivity, access to digital services, increased 
participation and feedback, and improved public sector capability ( World Bank , 2016).  
To maximis e these digital dividends , the World Bank recommends that countries put in place  
“analogue complements ,” including : (i) regulation to promote competition ; (ii) accountable 
institutions ; and (iii) digitally -skilled populations. The World Bank argues that failure to put these 
analogue complements in place will result in countries fallin g furthe r behind. The  WDR 2016 also 
warns that “these benefits are neither automatic nor assured ” (World Bank , 2016 , p. 11). It argues 
that a lthough “digital technologies have spread rapidly in much of the world  [,] digital dividends … 
have lagged behind. [They] have boosted growth, expanded opportunities, and improved service 
delivery. Yet their aggregate impact has fallen sh ort and is unevenly distributed”  (World Bank , 
2016, p.  2). 
The 2016 World Development Report recognises that digital dividends are un evenly spread and 
that some people are being left behind ( World Bank,  2016). The WDR does not provide an 
adequate framework for addressing these challenges. The World Bank’s model relies on digital 
technology stimulating economic growth and competition tha t progressively drives technology 
prices down , such that over time increasing poor sections of the population are included. This 
approach, by design , intends to reach the poorest last. This is at odds with the Sustainable 
Development Goal of putting the po orest first in order to leave no one behind . There is no doubt 
that competition and the market mechanism are enabling the private sector to extend digital 
dividends to progressively more people, including millions of poor  people. The problem is that the 
profit motive will always steer corporations towards the low -hanging fruit , as it can only ser ve 
profitable markets. It cannot serve those with out disposable incomes , or those living outside the 
cash economy.  
This section has reviewed the concept of digital dividends and has argued that the profit motive 
and the market mechanism is insufficient to meet the SDG goal of leaving no one behind. Later 
sections will examine the role of the state and civil society actors in reaching the parts that the 
market cannot serve. In the next section we examine the “digital divide ” literature , in order to better 
understand exactly who is being left behind .  
Digital Divides  
The term digital divide  in its simple st form refers to the binary division between people who own, 
or do  not own, digital devices such as mobile phones or computers. It is also used to refer to the 9 binary division between people who are connected to the internet and mobile phone networks and 
those who are unconnected. This binary understanding of access or i nclusion has been subject to 
increasing scrutiny in recent years and the literature has sought to go “beyond access ” to develop 
a multi -dimensional understanding of digital divides , as illustrated in Table 1 (United Nations , 
2018).   
Divide  Description  
Access It starts with access or the lack thereof: although Internet penetration has increased, it continues 
to be a key barrier as more people globally remain offline rather than online.  
Affordability  The gap between rich and poor affects affordability of I CTs and serves as an important 
difference  in adoption within countries as much as between them . 
Age Older people are generally using ICTs to a lesser extent than younger populations, despite the  
notion that they could benefit from online social and health  services . 
Bandwidth  International bandwidth and the capacity to transmit and receive information over networks  
varies greatly between countries but also within them, limiting potential useful endeavours . 
Content  Relevant content in local language(s) is important to stimulate adoption . 
Disability  Those with disabilities face additional hurdles to use ICTs if webs ites are not compliant with web 
accessibility guidelines . 
Education  Like social divides, education and literacy rates are fundament al challenge s to bridge digital 
divides . 
Gender  There is a small but persistent difference in online usage between men and women . 
Migration  Migrants may not possess the same levels of digital skills as the population in their new countr y 
and if they do, may be subje ct to content and language divides . 
Location  Rural and remote areas are often at a disadvantage in terms of s peed and quality of services 
as compared to their urban counterparts . 
Mobile  Mobile devices provide opportunities to bridge the access gap b ut ca n also introduce new forms 
of divides in terms of technology, speed and usage . 
Speed  The gap between basic and broadband access is creating a new divide as speed is important 
to reap the full benefits of a digital society . 
Useful usage  What people do wit h their access is a key difference in whether users take full advantage of 
ICTs,  such as e -government services . 
Note: The above table is intended to be illustrative and not exhaustive  
Table 1 . Digital Divides.  Source: U nited Nations  (2018 , p. 34)   
Digita l divide scholars argue that digital divides can both reflect and reproduce social and economic 
disparities. There are spatial, socio -economic, and material digital divides (Ramalingam & 
Hernandez , 2016). Given that internet and mobile infrastructure is di sproportionally concentrated 
in areas with the most buying power, disparities in ICT infrastructure often reflect economic and 
rural-urban disparities. As a result , people in urban areas are more likely to be connected than 10 people in rural areas , and withi n urban areas there are often divides between affluent centres and 
inner -city neighbo urhoods (McKinsey Global Institute , 2014). There are also divides between 
device owners. Most new users now get their first taste of the internet via mobile phones. 
Smartp hones are faster  and provide more function s than feature phones. However , mobile phones 
are less suited to some complex tasks than computers. “Digital by default ” and mobile -only 
approaches risk leaving the poorest behind. Moreover, the digital divide is n ot about income alone. 
Evidence shows that digital divides exist along dimensions of ethnicity, gender, education level, 
caste, disability and age ( Goggin , 2017 ; May, 2012). In the same way that offline marginalis ation 
is often experienced in multiple and overlapping ways, so are digital divides , which make 
individuals with multiple marginalis ed identities even more likely to be offline (Robinson et al. , 
2015).  
Digital divides are not binary.  Rather than neat divisions of usage between owners and non -
owner s of technology, there is evidence of the emergence of distinct classes of technology access 
and connectivity that mirror socio -economic classes , as illustrated in Table 2.  
Class of  
technology  
access  Employment  Device  Connectivity  Experience  
Upper class  Independently  
wealthy or  
urban salaried  
professional  Latest  
smartphone   Post-paid monthly  
mobile contracts  with 
maximum  gigabit / 
month  data; unlimited  
calls and texts  
 Wi-Fi at home and  at 
work   Connected by  default to 
all the  fastest available  
services  
 Uses Internet  
extensively  
 Not frugal  
Middle class  Teacher,  
civil servant,  
shopkeeper  Previous  
generation of  
smartphone   Post-paid midrange  
monthly  package of 
calls and text with  
limited data  
 Wi-Fi at work and  
coffee shops, but  not 
at home   Always able to call  and 
text 
 Uses web mainly  on Wi -
Fi 
 Uses mobile data  mainly 
for instant  messaging  
 Frugal with mobile  data 
Working class  Manual worker  Feature phone  
with 
touchscreen  
and Internet  
capability   Prepaid call credit  
 Unlimited texts  
 Limited data  
 No Wi -Fi access   Text rather than  voice 
calls 
 Frugal with  data (instant  
messaging only)  
 Internet limited to  
Facebook and free  
basics  
Underclass  Unpaid work,  
unemployed,  
underemployed,  
informal work  No phone or  
basic phone,  
with a non -
touchscreen  
and physical  
keyboard   Prepaid , but often  
has no credit  
 Phone often not  
charged  
 No data  
 No Wi -Fi access   Unconnected by  default  
 Frugal with voice  calls – 
mainly  passive recipient  
of calls and texts  
Table 2. Class of Technology Access . Source: Roberts and Hernandez (2017 , p. 17 ) 
 11 Classe s of c onnectivity range from a “digital  underclass ”, disconnected by default with limited 
airtime and no mobile data , to a “digital upper class ” with the latest iPhone, unlimited mobile data 
and Wi-Fi at home and at work. Several levels of intermediate acc ess and connectivity exist 
between these extremes (Roberts & Hernandez , 2017 ). This resonates with Qiu’s (2009) research 
with marginalised migrant workers in China and his concept of “working class technologies .” It also 
builds on research by de Lanerolle (2017), which found that “less connected ” South Africans 
experienced “fragile connectivity ” and had to adopt “frugal practices ” to manage the limited 
connectivity that they could afford. Further research to understand the everyday technology 
practices of t he least  connected and unconnected are a necessary precursor to their successful 
incorporation into digital development programmes.  
Digital divides are not static.  The landscape of technology access and connectivity is fluid. Even 
if it we imagine a future  date when all those now left behind own  a mobile phone and internet 
connection, by that time the most advantaged will have moved on to the next generation of 
technology , and corporate and government providers will be designing  services to m ake use of 
every new function . This persistence of  relative  digital poverty points to the need to develop 
multiple channels  of service delivery for non -users and users of different generations of technology , 
in order that no one is left behind. Research shows that althou gh absolute divides in broadband 
access have decreased between countries , as more countries get fibre -optic connections, the 
relative divides in broadband speeds have actually increased (Hilbert , 2013) . This means users in 
developing countries (a nd especia lly LDCs) have relatively low levels of access that significantly 
limit the activities they can undertake online relative to OECD countries , making the digital divide 
a moving target (UNCTAD , 2017).  
Statistics overstate  the extent of global connectivity.  The widely -cited figure of four billion 
people no w connected to the internet demand s closer scrutiny. The United Nations International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) data , which the figure is based on, counts “internet users ” as 
anyone accessing the interne t once or more in the last three months (ITU , 2014). This frequency 
would seem inadequate to substantively benefit from digital dividends , and certainly bears little 
comparison to frequency of access by urban elites. The ITU measure of “connected ” also fai ls to 
discriminate between levels, speeds or qualities of access. A n urban professional may experience 
“accessing the internet ” as surfing websites, stream ing video and send ing emails and photos via 
their smartphone , using Wi-Fi or cellular data. However , for someone in a remote area on a low 
income , “accessing the internet ” may mean searching for a weak and intermittent cellular signal to 
access SMS or a text -only version of Facebook Free Basics on a feature phone. Both count equally 
as having internet acc ess for statistical purposes but the internet experience is radically different , 
as are the potential development application s that are made possible. It is equally unclear how 
reliable claimed social media user figures are. Facebook deleted half a billion  fake accounts in the 
first quarter of 2018 alone  – more  than a quarter of its claimed active user base6. Significant gaps 
exist in our understanding of the size of the digital divide even at this aggregate national and binary 
level.  Further research is ne cessary to better understand the real connectivity experiences and 
daily technology practices of the least connected , if designers are to accurately tailor new service 
provision to enable their meaningful inclusion.  
A blended approach is necessary , in whic h technology may not be the first step.  The 
research evidence is clear that access to a mobile phone or the internet is an i nsufficient condition 
for realis ing development impact. Other resources need to be in place —including  digital literacy, 
                                                   
6 https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2018/05/enforcement -numbers/  12 disposable i ncome, and agency —in order to make “effective use ” of technology access in order to 
secure digital dividends.  Understandably , industry sources like the GSMA7 tend towards a 
technology -first approach in which technology access is seen as a prerequisite to m obile -enabled 
education, entrepreneurship, and health outcomes. However , Toyama’s (201 5) law of amplification 
suggests that —especially  for those at risk of being left behind —a capacity -first approach is most 
likely to deliver development outcomes. Expandin g technology provision without an understanding 
of the multi -dimensional nature of the digital divide comes with the risk that digital divides in access 
are bridged without the necessary capacities to translate access into digital dividends. 
Development pr ofessionals currently lack sufficient diagnostic tools to enable analysis of these 
capacity issues and the underlying social, political and economic factors that result in current 
technology use amplifying existing divides. One diagnostic tool that can hel p practi tioners and 
researchers better analyse the multiple barriers to meaningful use of digital technologies is 
Roberts ’ (2017) “5 ‘A’s of Technology Access ,” as illustrated in Figure 1  (see also Roberts & 
Hernandez , 2017) .  
 
Figure 1. The 5 ‘A’s of Tec hnology Ac cess. Source : Roberts (2017 )  
More research is necessary to understand the multiple dimensions of the digital divide and how 
differential capacity and intent work to amplify existing inequalities.  
Digital divides are not static , but relative div ides have proven to be persistent . People 
experience a range of barriers to technology access and to translating access into digital dividends. 
Different classes of technology access are emerging which place real limits on meaningful 
inclusion  in digital d evelopment initiatives for marginalised groups . These digital divide s reflect, 
reproduce , and amplify existing social and economic divides.  The poorest and most margin alised 
                                                   
7 https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelop ment/  
13 are the least likely to access digital technologies and the most likely to be left  behind.  The next 
sub-section focuses on one dimension of the digital divide – the gender digital divide.  
Gender Digital Divide  
There is ample evidence that the use of mobile phones can contribute positively to women’s 
economic and political empowerment ( Buskens , 2015; Buskens & Webb , 2009 , 2014 ; Gillwald , 
2010; GSMA , 2012; Gurumurthy , 2004; Sambuli , Brandusescu, & Brudvig , 2018). The use of 
mobile phones is valued by many women “by making them feel safer and more connected, and 
[providing ] access to inform ation, services and life -enhancing opportunities like health information, 
financial services and employment opportunities, often for the first time ” (GSMA , 2018 , p. 2). 
However, many women are being left behind; in low and middle income countries women hav e 
less access to digital technology than men and “unequal access to mobile technology threatens to 
exacerbate the inequalities women already experience ” (GSMA , 2018 , p. 2). On average , women 
in developing countries are 10% less likely to own mobile phones than men and even when they 
do own them , they are 26% less likely to use them to access the internet. This varies 
geographically. In Asia, women are 70% less likely to use the mobile internet than men (GSMA , 
2018 , p. 3 ).  
Barriers to mobile phone ownership  affect women disproportionately  (GSMA , 2018). Cost 
remains the biggest barrier, but they also face barriers related to digital literacy, language literacy, 
safety and security. Women are less likely to be aware of the mobile internet, its relevance to the ir 
lives and to lack digital literacy. Social norms regarding what is acceptable behavio ur often hinder 
women from owning a mobile device or going online , and may shape their ability to overcome 
education and literacy barriers to getting online ( GSMA, 2018 ). The nature of the gender digital 
divide is about more than just technology access  – it is multi -dimensional in nature , and analysis 
requires more than just counting women with access to technology. Addressing the gender digital 
divide will require addre ssing the underlying gendered social norms and power imbalances that 
act as barriers to women accessing digital dividends .   
The gender digital divide is intersectional.  The social category of women is multi -dimensional. 
The experience of an urban professi onal woman is likely to be distinct from that of a rural disabled 
woman. The broader development literature has begun to reflect the idea that multiple overlapping 
disadvantages make some women’s lives particularly deprived (Burns et al. , 2013; Gender & 
Development Network , 2017). Critical internet scholars have begun to document the ways in which 
the internet is a site of intersecting (dis)advantages ( Noble , 2018 ; Noble & Tynes , 2016). However, 
to date the digital development literature has lagged behind a nd mainly focuses on divides based 
on singular identities (e.g. gender, class, etc.). One example of how gender and rural disadvantage 
overlap in digital development is that although urban women in Brazil are 2% less likely to use the 
mobile internet than a man, women in rural areas are 32% less likely (GSMA , 2018 , p. 16 ). More 
research needs to be done to better understand the digital lives of women facing mul tiple forms of 
oppression , as these women are most at risk of bein g left behind.  A dedicated liter ature review on 
this subject is recommended to identify more relevant knowledge and analysis .  
This concludes the conceptual literature review. We have seen that absolute poverty has 
decreased , but that relative poverty has increased during the digital age . Use of digital technologies 
can amplify people ’s ability to secure digital dividends including economic growth, women’s 
empowerment and organi sational efficiencies. However , the already privileged are  
disproportionately reaping the benefits and a digital  divide is continuing to grow between their 
experience and th ose of the unconnected and digitally deprived. Digital technologies have thus 14 added new dimensions to poverty. More research needs to be carried out to understand the digital 
disadvantage being a mplified among rural women, the disabled and those on the lowest incomes.  
The next section contains an evidence review of four areas , to illustrate how these concepts help 
us to understand practical development settings.  
5. Evidence Review: Key Focal Areas  
The next four section s contain  an evidence review of four areas relevant to the changing nature of 
poverty in an increasingly digital world: government, private sector , and civil society, as well as an 
overview of digital futures. We use these four focal a reas to examine the practical ways in which 
offline disparities are being amplified online by rapid digiti sation  of key areas of life. This section 
shows how the use of digital technologies amplifies existing social and economic disparities , with 
particula r reference to those being left behind. The focal areas are intended to be illustrative rather 
than exhaustive . Additional time would enable a deeper review and analysis of key sectors or 
applications.   
Government  
Digital governance initiatives are someti mes categorised as e-Government or e-Governance. 
According to this distinction , the term e-Government  refers to government -initiated (top -down) 
applications of digital technologies to deliver government information and services electronically. 
e-Government  is often concerned with achieving efficiency and cost savings and refers to the 
apparatus of governmentality. e -Governance , by contrast , is more often initiated by civil -society 
actors (bottom -up) and is often concerned with using digital technologies to enable more 
transparent and participatory forms of decision -making between citizens and governors (Riley , 
2003).  
e-Government:  Most governments now have website “portals ” through which they provide 
information and services to citizens, accessible using co mputer s and mobile phones via the 
internet. These services are often uni -directional (government to citizens), but increasingly they 
can be interactive, used to solicit citizen input and to provide feedback in ways that “close the 
feedback l oop” (Gigler & Bailur , 2014). e -Government can range from communicating government 
decisions, laws, and policies rules and regulations , to interactive online services by means of which 
citizens can obtain licenses  and visas , pay taxes, and report service defects and corr uption.   
 
“Governments are increasingly utilizing digital technologies  to deliver advanced electronic and 
mobile services aimed at bringing benefits to all people ” (United Nations , 2016 , p. 79). All UN 
member states have at least a national portal. Citize ns of 140 countries can now register an 
account to access more advanced facilities including paying utilities (140), submitting income taxes 
(139), register businesses (126), applying for social protection program mes (91), birth certificates 
(86), ID cards  (59), and pay ing fines (11). Performing these activities online can provide digital 
dividends for government and citizens by reducing the time it takes to carry out transactions, 
reducing staff costs, and removing opportunities for inefficiencies, bribery  and corruption. The 
number of countries providing online or mobile educational services doubled to 176 in the last two 
years , as did the number providing online or mobile health services (U nited Nations , 2018). Eighty 
percent of countries now have website s with information on services targeted to at least one 
vulnerable group , and the number of countries providing online services to the poor nearly tripled 
from 47 in 2016 to 120 in 2018 (U nited Nations , 2018).    15  
Marginali sed citizens are least able to mak e effective us e of e-Government services.  They 
are least likely to be connected, to be aware of services , or have the necessary digital literacy to 
make meaningful use of such services. As government services become “digital by default ” there 
is growing ev idence that the most marginalised are being left behind. A recent study on e -
Government by the U nited Nations  (2018) found that although there has been steady progress 
regarding improving online e-government and service provision across all regions (albeit  with gaps 
between rich and poor countries), there is a negative correlation between digital use and exclusion. 
It found that digital technologies offer both the opportunities of e -inclusion , and introduce the risk 
of digital divides. The survey states tha t:  
there has been a steady increase in the number of country websites with information about 
specific programmes benefiting women and children, persons with disabilities, older 
persons, indigenous people, and people living in poverty ... which increases t he risk that 
vulnerable groups without I nternet access will fall further behind in the rapidly progressing 
digital society . (United Nations , 2018 , p.  xxiv) 
“Digital -first” strategies run the risk of leaving behind the most marginalis ed. “Digital First” 
and “Digital by default ” strategies unconsciously repeat  the MDG error of reaching the “low-
hanging -fruit” at the expense of those in most need. The U nited Nations (United Nations , 2018) 
warns against emerging digital -first and digital -by-default approaches which privilege the most 
connected and lock out the least connected. The report warns  that although  digital IDs , for 
example, are providing more remote access to government services  for those who have them , the 
already marginali sed are least likely to obta in digital IDs and therefore risk falling further behind. 
The report concludes that “the public sector is inadvertently creating new digital divides by 
advancing e -government services at the expense of those who cannot take advantage of them ” 
(United Nations, 2018 , p. 38). Th e use of technology in this way amplifies existing divides, adding 
a new digital dimension to poverty. Digital -first and digital -by-default services add new advantages 
to the already relatively advantaged , and runs contrary to SDG commi tment, made by all 
governments, to tailor services first to those most  in need.  
Where public service delivery i s electronically mediated , there can be a substantial digital dividend 
in the form of cost -savings and speed of delivery. At the same time , the ability to verbally discuss 
or dispute can be a significant loss – especially to those with low literacy levels. Nigerian 
immigration requires citizens travel ling internationally to notify the government via its National 
Immigration Service (NIS) web porta l. However, Nigerian women, those living in rural areas , and 
those with low levels of education, disproportionately lack connectivity and the necessary digital 
literacy (Okun ola, Rowley, & Johnson , 2017). Automating service delivery has been found to 
impro ve cost -efficiencies , but to effectively exclude beneficiaries without the means (devices, 
digital literacy or agency) to electronically dispute eligibility decisions (Eubanks 2018). Examples 
of digital -only service delivery in developing countries are sca rce, but are accelerating as 
governments continue to digiti se their processes and services. More research is needed to 
understand how, in an increasingly digital world, rapid digitali sation of government services is 
changing the nature of poverty for peopl e trying to access entitlements and services.  
e-Governance  refers to the use of mobile and internet technologies by citizens to take a more 
active role in corporate or state decision -making. Examples include contributing to public 
consultations or policy development processes, participatory online budgeting, or even 
crowdsourcing constitution writing – as happened in Iceland (Landemore , 2014). e -Governance is 
often motivated by the aspiration to increase inclusion and participation in policy, decision -maki ng 16 processes and service desi gn and delivery. In their ideal  form, e-Governance platforms can help 
generate a shift in power , where citizens are enabled to determine priorities and co -construct 
solutions with government. Making government, corporate and de velopment agency data open to 
all citizens is seen as an important means to share knowledge and learning and increas e 
transparency and accountability. The Open Government Partnership (OGP , 2018) has taken a 
lead in this respect. However , the question s of “Open to Whom? ”, “Open for What? ” and “Open to 
What End? ” arise , as a limited number of people have the technical skills and connectivity 
necessary to make effective use of open data , and governments are open to limited outcomes 
(Gurstein , 2011).   
Few Open  Data initiative s actively promote the inclusion of the most excluded  (Web 
Foundation , 2017). The Open Government Partnership is a well -known governance initiative with 
the goal that “governments genuinely serve their citizens, rather than serving themselv es” (OGP , 
2018 , p. 10 ). Over 70 governments have signed up to the Open Government Partnership to 
increase accountability and act on policy reform. However , the Web Foundation  (2017)  finds that 
although use of open data is equipping some citizens with the i nformation and evidence they need 
to demand change, “few open data initiatives actively promote inclusion ” (p. 20 ). While the better -
off, better -equipped and better -skilled are able to amplify their relative advantage with digital 
technology, people with l ow incomes, literacy and little political power are left behind. It is also the 
case that marginali sed groups are less likely to be consulted in the design of data policies and 
initiatives , or to be accounted for in official stats in the form of disaggrega ted data ( Web 
Foundation, 2017 ). If trends are not reversed, existing power imbalances will be amplified in an 
increasingly digital world, impairing the ability of marginali sed citizens to advocate for and demand 
change.  
In an increasingly digital world, governance  will be increasingly mediated by technology.  
Making All Voices Count (MAVC) was a five -year programme of more than 140 digital innovation 
and research projects in 12 countries , exploring the role of technology to improve transparency 
and account ability in governance. The synthesis report found that project designs frequently 
overestimated citizen’s digital access and digital literacy levels , and that “the drive to digiti se the 
processes of governance threaten[ed] to deepen the disenfranchisement and disempowerment of  
those who … can’t … engage with ICTs and tech -enabled forms of governance ” (McGee , Edwards , 
Anderson, Hudson, & Feruglio , 2018 , p. 22). Participatory digital budgeting, for example, was found 
to “exclude the voices of the digitally ma rginali sed and increase the risks of co -option of the 
relatively powerless by those who already enjoy relative power and influence ” (McGee et al., 2018, 
p. 17). In other words, digital participatory budgeting was found to amplify disparities between by 
providing the better off with digital dividends while the least well experienced a growing digital 
divides and a sense of being left behind.   
The MAVC final report evidenced that use of digital “solutions ” was insufficient, but that where 
political will and capacity did exist then the introduction of technology was able to add value. This 
resonates with Toyama’s (2015) amplification theory.  This is true whether the government’s intent 
is positive or negative. There is growing evidence from MAVC and beyond tha t in places where 
governments and powerful actors have malign intent, new technologies amplify their capacity for 
surveillance, repression and the manufact ure of consent (McGee et al ., 2018). The World 
Development Report makes a related point when its stat es that “in the absence of accountable 
institutions, [digital technology can] amplify the voice of elites, which can result in policy capture 
and greater state control”  (World Bank , 2016 , p. 3).  17 Digital technologies are being used to manipulate voting beh aviour.  Social media is an 
increasingly important arena for policy debates especially , leading up to elections (Woolley & 
Howard , 2017). Governments, military units, terrorists groups, special interest groups and political 
aspirants have spent at least hal f a billion pounds trying to manipulate this space by hiring troll and 
bot armies to shape behaviour and influence voting  (Bradshaw & Howard , 2018). Critical media 
skills are not taught in many schools and research suggests that the least well -off may be m ost 
vulnerable to misinformation , by virtue of reliance on “zero-rated ” internet services like Facebook’s 
Free Basics. These services lack the ability to follow links in order to assess article validity (Global 
Voices , 2017). In developing countries , disinformation is also increasingly spread over chat 
applications like WhatsApp, Telegram and WeChat (Brad shaw & Howard , 2018). Corporations 
have tried to expand their market share in developing countries , by zero -rating popular apps like 
Facebook Free Basics (Lyons , 2016). The re is very little empirical research evidence about the 
ways in which these changes are affecting governance, political empowerment and the ability of 
marginali sed groups to participate in public discourse and policy debates. Further resea rch is 
necessary in this area.   
Crowdsourcing is amplifying relatively powerful voices.  Crowdsourcing platforms have 
increasingly been used for an array of development functions , including : corruption reporting 
(Kukutschka , 2016; The Engine Room , 2012) ; election violence reporting ( Makinen & Wangu 
Kuira , 2008; Moreno , Garrison, & Bhat, 2017 ; Roberts & Marchais , 2017) ; and humanitarian “crisis 
mapping ” (Gao , Barbier, & Goolsby,  2011; Meier , 2012). The I Paid a Bribe  corruption crowdsourcing 
app in India has  received over 160,000 reports of bribery , amounting to over £320 million  in bribes 
since 2010.8 Crowdsourced mapping using the Ushaidi and Aggie platforms has been effectively 
used to monitor election violence in Kenya, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, and Ghana (R oberts & Marchais , 
2017). However, research shows that social media crowdsourcing amplifies already powerful 
voices , while already disadvantaged individuals go underreported or remain invisible – amplifying 
existing divides (Kukutschka , 2016; Roberts & Marchais , 2017 ; The Engine Room , 2012).  
Marginalised voices are least likely to be heard.  In an increasingly digital world it is important 
to remember that digital platforms systematically over -represent specific demographics and 
exclude others. Digitally -enabled voting ( such as in Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil) and digital citizen 
engagement initiatives (such as U -Report in Uganda) tend to be dominated by young, educated, 
relatively wealthy, males ( Berdou & Lopes, 2015, as cited in World Bank, 2016, p. 16 ). e-
Governance participation is highly correlated with university education, employment, urban 
residence, male ge nder, and broadband access; EU c itizens in the top 20% of income distribution 
are 45 times more likely to participate online than the bottom 20% ( World Bank,  2016). Digital 
technology reliance amplifies disparities by both benefiting some (disproportionately the better off) 
voices and silencing marginali sed and excluded ones. Digital development initiatives need to be 
alert to the possibility of exclu ding “those who do not Tweet. ” A study of a South African SMS 
platform for reporting water and sanitation grievances found that although elderly, disabled, and 
infirm individuals in a township faced significant barriers in accessing water and sanitation se rvices, 
they also lacked the technical capacities to communicate their issues via mobile devices , thus 
preventing their participation (Hill , 2015).  
This section has demonstrated  that e-government and e -governance initiatives have provided 
clear digital di vidends , especially for those with the best access and most capacity to use digital 
                                                   
8 http://ipaidabribe.com/#gsc.tab=0  18 technologies. However , across a range of applications and setting s, the evidence also shows that 
that digital divides have been amplified and that those already left behind  are now experiencing a 
new digital dimension of poverty.  
Private Sector  
The private sector has played a major and valuable role in extending mobile telecommunications , 
connectivity infrastructure and digital services to the majority of the world’s populat ion. It continues 
to be at the forefront of research and development , innovating new digital products and services. 
However, Jaiswal (2008) and others have argued that although there may be a profitable market 
in the middle and lower middle sections of the  pyramid, those living at the very bottom of the 
pyramid (the extreme poor) cannot be profitable for the private sector , as they have insufficient 
income to meet even their basic needs. While the private sector can be expected to extend digital 
dividends t o many millions more, tho se benefiting will be primarily the “low-hanging  fruit,” rather 
than those at most risk of being left behind. The examples in this section illustrate how the private 
sector is enabling millions of people to access digital dividends , as well as identifying who is being 
left behind.  
Mobile money use extend s digital dividends to previously underserved populations. Digital 
technologies have helped companies to achieve lower transaction costs and to overcome 
geographical barriers to rea ch many marginali sed communities ( World Bank,  2016). This has led 
to the proliferation of new ways to offer services to the poor digitally. Two thirds of Kenya, Rwanda, 
Tanzania, and Uganda are now “financially included ” via mobile money (GSMA , 2017).  M-Kopa 
has connected over half a million off -grid African homes with solar power using a combination of 
“pay as you go ” mobile payments and photovoltaic panels with sensors.9 However , research shows 
that cash deposits for solar panels and the requirement to h ave a mobile phone prevent the very 
poorest from gaining energy access via this channel (Atela , 2017). When it comes to mobile 
savings, researchers Dubus and Van Hove (2017) found that those who would benefit most (the 
poorest, non -educated, and women) hav e the least access and are the least likely to use the 
service. Given that mobile money is becoming a platform to other services like mobile -insurance, 
mobile -credit and savings and mobile -solar power in an increasing digital world, it is a matter of 
conce rn that this is another area where the most excluded are experiencing a new digital 
dimension to their existing poverty and where existing divides are unwittingly becoming amplified.  
Digital services are often more expensive for the poorest. Pay-as-you-go mobile call and data 
charges are generally more expensive per minute and per gigabyte than monthly contracts , and 
many of the most expensive countries in which to use a mobile phone are located in the global 
South (A4AI , 2017). A recent analysis of mobile money pricing practices by researchers at 
Innovations for Poverty Action found that the majority of mobile money providers had regressive 
pricing policies , in which the smaller the transaction, the more that is paid in percentage terms 
(Holloway, Rouse, & Cook , 2017). It seems that in an increasingly digital world, when the poor are 
digitally included, they are included on disadvantageous terms compared to the better off.  
e-Commerce is enabling a range of digital dividends.  These include reducing coordinat ion 
costs, boosting efficiency, accelerating innovation, expanding markets internationally for SMEs, 
creating jobs and helping us all find cheaper products online ( World Bank,  2016). UNCTAD (2017 , 
                                                   
9 http://www.m -kopa.com/  19 p. 28) finds that products and services are increasingly pu rchased and delivered using electronic 
networks but the digital economy is spreading unevenly. Although over 70% of the population 
purchases goods and services online in several developed countries, only 2% of citizens do in 
LDCs , and SMEs are less likely to sell online than national and multinational firms ( UNCTAD, 
2017 ). The report warns that “policymaking at the national and international levels needs to 
mitigate the risk that digitali zation could widen existing divides and create new gaps ” (UNCTAD , 
2017 , p. iii). These divides exist between countries and within countries , since rural areas tend to 
suffer from smaller markets and logistical difficulties. Beyond geographical disparities, disparities 
related to age, income, availability of internet signal, language and digital literacy, access to 
broadband, and gender have been identified as divides relevant to e -commerce adoption in 
developing countries ( Kshetri, 2018; UNCTAD , 2017) and UNCTAD (2017) warns of the 
amplification of income disparities if these  divides are not addressed. Beyond simple access to 
mobile networks, 3G and 4G networks have been identified as particularly important to access 
“more sophisticated and value -added content ” (UNCTAD, 2017, p. 17) for businesses, but the 
diffusion of mobile and fixed -line broadband have lagged behind 2G networks. The 2016 WDR 
argues that widespread internet adoption is a prerequisite to the value of e -commerce in 
developing countries due to network effects.  
Developing countries lack data on e -commerce (UNCTA D, 2017). China is one developing 
country with an emerging e -commerce sector where data is available , and thus serves as a rare 
case study for how e -commerce is changing the experience of poverty in developing countries. 
China has the most internet users a nd the fastest growing e -commerce sector in the world (Wang , 
Lau, & Gong , 2016). The amount of WeChat users initiating purchases via the app doubled from 
2015 to 2016. It is estimated that by 2020, 31% of retail sales in China will be online (The 
Economist , 2017). Although rates of adoption have been increasing across all segments of the 
Chinese population, online shoppers were found to be disproportionately well educated, male, 
wealthier, and between the ages of 20 -30 (Cai , 2016). Previous studies have fou nd that Chinese 
rural to urban migrants are less likely to use the internet than people who have lived in urban cities 
their whole lives (Zhu & Chen , 2012). Although rural areas account for 43% of China’s population, 
less than 10% of all Ali Baba e -marketp lace shipments were made to rural areas (Kshetri , 2018). 
If these patterns hold true for other countries , we might anticipate e -commerce delivering 
increasing advantages to already -privileged urban, educated, men whilst amplifying the relative 
disadvantage  of poor, rural women.  
This section has shown how private sector services are providing citizens with clear digital 
dividends including financial inclusion, energy security, and access to services or goods that they 
might not otherwise access , and at chea per prices. However, enjoying these dividends requires 
access to a mobile phones , mobile credit, and an ability to pay fees. It is easy to forget that a full 
one third of humanity does not have a mobile phone and 50% have no internet access  – many  
others l ack the dispo sable income necessary to afford  these digital dividends  even when they are 
available . Little research in this area has been concerned with the c hanging experience of poverty 
for those who are not users of new digital services. Understanding m ore about exactly who is 
excluded , and why , would be of benefit to private sector providers as well as to development sector 
professionals seeking not -for-profit alternatives.  Having considered government and private sector 
programmes , the next section loo ks at civil society initiatives.  20 Civil Society  
The use of technology in development is as old as international development itself.  In 
President Truman’s 1949 inaugural address he promised to transfer the advanced technologies  
from the USA  to developing cou ntries , and established the first technical assistance programme. 
In the intervening seventy years the focus of technology transfer programmes  has included tractors 
and farm machinery, seed varieties and chemical fertilisers, trains and planes (Worsley , 2005). In 
the digital era we have seen civil society organisations  promote and fund : telecentres, laptops -in-
schools, open government data, crisis mapping, market price platforms, mHealth apps, and now 
drones and the blockchain. This section will review evid ence of the civil society contribution to the 
changing nature of poverty in a digital world.  
In the 1990s the telecentre was the first posterchild of ICT for Development (ICT4D).  
Telecentres were places in rural or deprived locations where those on low inc ome could access 
digital dividends via internet access, printing and scanning services. Often funded by grants, 
telecentres struggled to become independently financially sustainable (Toyama , 2011). Many 
became financially sustainable only by charging fees that made them unaffordable to the originally 
intended beneficiaries. Thousands went bankrupt and closed down. Moreover, research suggests 
that telecentre users were disproportionately educated men who could speak English ( Toyama, 
2011 ). Thus , telecentres had a tendency to amplify existing experiences of offline disparities 
between relatively better off (even within rural and poor population s) and the least well off whom 
may experience multiple forms of oppression ( for example,  poor indigenous rural women w ho do 
not speak the languages that dominate internet content).  
There was a point in the 2010s where it seemed like there was a mobile app for everything.  
Whatever the development problem, someone was organi sing a one -day hackathon to solve it with 
an app,  and developing countries were awash with people piloting them. mHealth apps were 
particularly overblown. In 2012 , the Ugandan Ministry of Health became so overwhelmed by a tidal 
wave of app developers demanding the time of health officials that they impos ed a complete 
moratorium on all mobile health apps (Greeley , Lucas, Chai, & Cummins , 2013). One study looking 
at the mHealth landscape in Bangladesh found that university students were most likely to be 
aware of and use online health information , whilst the poorest women were the least likely (Bloom 
Berdou , Stand ing, Guo, & Labrique,  2017). Such mHealth evaluations have found that the apps 
tended to amplify the capabilities of the already advantaged , with the most marginali sed left behind.  
The increasing us e of mobile technology, including by the poor, has stimulated interest in using 
mobile apps and SMS -based systems to create accountability feedback loops between donors and 
citizens (McGee et al ., 2018). A DFID -funded , seven country pilot aiming to improve  beneficiary 
feedback for maternal and child health projects found that for those who provided feedback, the 
programme provided digital dividends in the form of “real-time adaptation of projects to the needs 
of their target groups and context ” (Feedback Me chanisms, 2016, p. 1).  However, women tended 
to have their access to mobiles mediated by men and lack ed digital literacy , with the result that 
they were underrepresented in calls (Feedback Mechanisms , 2016). Women in the pilot 
experienced not just access d ivides but also divides regarding literacy, autonomy, and gender 
norms, lending w eight to the suggestion that a multi -dimensional analysis is necessary to a 
comprehensive understanding of digital disadvantage. In places where these divides were 
pervasive, face-to-face feedback mechanisms were preferred by beneficiaries , and one of the key 
findings from the pilot was that providing blended initiatives (offline and online) aided inclusion.  21 This section has shown that even when development agencies devise dig ital initiatives with the 
explicit intent of reducing poverty, the use of digital technologies can unwittingly amplify existing 
advantage , leaving the poor even further behind. It also provided more evidence that digital 
development initiatives that seek t o put the last first need to use blended approaches that 
incorporate analogue methods alongside digital technologies. More research is necessary to help 
development professionals to accurately diagnose existing levels of (dis)advantage and digital 
literaci es, in order to facilitate appropriate interventions.  
The next section looks to the future : it will examine the horizon of digital development , to assess 
early evidence about the next wave of digital technologies that are likely to affect the changing 
experience of poverty in an increasingly digital world.  
Digital Futures  
The future of work will be increasingly virtual, digiti sed, automated and robotic. Employers 
are increasingly using new information and communication technologies and global digital 
netw orks to usher in virtual organisations. This makes possible the outsourcing of back office 
processing and microwork to destinations like India, the Philippines and South Africa . This has 
provided digital dividends for women and people with disabilities to work from home and at flexible 
times convenient to them. However, there are concerns that this work is often poor ly paid and 
precarious in nature. According to a United Nations study , workers tend to lack overtime 
compensation, maternity/paternity leave, s ick leave, health or insurance, are not protected by 
minimum wage law, and are unable to bargain collectively (UNCTAD , 2017). There is growing 
concern that as more companies contract workers online, there could be a race to the bottom, 
further depressing w ages and conditions on these platforms. There are risks that the temporary 
and unstable nature of these opportunities may trap the poor in poverty, especially if it is their only 
source of income  (DFID , 2018).  
Many new digitally -enabled jobs are themselve s likely to be susceptible to automation.  
Given the low -skilled and repetitive “click-based ” nature of much of the data entry work offered on 
micro work platforms, these jobs are susceptible to automation in the near future . The fact that the 
majority of t he work available on these platforms requires fluency in English means there is also 
concern regarding the demographics that will be (dis)advantaged (World Bank , 2015). In an 
increasingly digital world, online work platforms like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk a nd Samasource 
will provide digital dividends for many , but there are also significant risks that they become 
platforms for digital exploitation where low wages and poor employment conditions do not 
represent “decent work ” (SDG 8). The use of digital work p latforms can be interpreted as amplify ing 
corporations’ capacity and intent to identify and contract the cheapest available global workforce.  
The next wave of automation technologies could make millions of workers redundant.  
Artificial intelligence and ma chine learning are making it possible to replace workers with robots 
and computer -controlled automated processes (B rynjolfsson & McAfee , 2014; Cowen , 2013; 
Hernandez , Faith, Prieto Martín , & Ramalingam , 2016). The use of these technologies by the 
private s ector will make  it possible to automate routine manual and cognitive  tasks, meaning that 
not just blue -collar but white -collar jobs are at risk of  disappear ing (World Bank,  2016).  There is 
also growing evidence that low -skill work is most vulnerable to aut omation ( World Bank,  2016) in 
ways that wi ll amplify the existing advantage of the highly educated , as the following quote from 
Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014 , p. 11 ) illustrates:  22 There’s never been a better time to be a worker with special skills or the r ight education, 
because these people can use technology to create and capture value. However, there’s 
never been a worse time to be a worker with only “ordinary ” skills and abilities to offer, 
because computers, robots, and other digital technologies are a cquiring these skills and 
abilities at an extraordinary rate.  
Developing countries may be worst -affected by automation. Low skilled jobs in agriculture, 
textiles and industry will be the most susceptible. According to the 2016 World Development 
Report, th e impact of the next wave of work automation may be felt hardest in developing countries 
where two thirds of all jobs are vulnerable to automation – and as high as 85% in Ethiopia. These 
figures are contested , with some scholars arguing that these estimate s have been overstated 
(Kapoor , Sawada, Latortue, & Cabrol , 2018). Others argue that whether automation results in net 
job losses or not, it will still amplify earning disparities between employees with high and low skill 
levels (Acemoglu & Restrepo , 2018) . Much of the research attention thus far has focused on the 
private sector. However, a s structures are digitis ed, these effects are likely to go beyond the private 
sector. For example, the introduction of Intelligent Transport Systems based on big data an d real -
time tracking in one Indian state -run transport system made five entire divisional offices redundant , 
employing up to 400 people including an entire layer of management (Rakesh , Heeks, 
Chattapadhyay, & Foster ,  2018). We can not know for certain  what  the outcomes for the future of 
work will be —how many jobs will be automated and how lives will be affected —and any predictions 
are necessarily speculative . Further research is necessary to collate and analyse the experience 
of early adopters , in order to draw out lessons for other countries.  
Automation will negatively affect women most of all.  World Bank research suggests that 
women in developing countries will be hardest hit of all ( World Bank,  2016). Women tend to be 
employed in low skill and less produ ctive sectors , giving rise to concern that automation, premature 
deindustriali sation and reshoring will disproportionately affect women (Faith , 2017). For example, 
over nine million people work in the textile, clothing and footwear sector in South East Asi an 
countries  – over 70% of whom are young women with low education levels. A study found that 
88% of textile jobs in Cambodia and 86% in Vietnam are at risk of automation , as well as 89% of 
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) call centre staff in the Philip pines  – an industry that 
disproportionately employees women (Chang , Rynhart, & Huynh , 2016). Further work is needed 
to better understand the gender implications of automation , as well as for others at risk of being 
left behind.   
New ‘Frontier Technologies ’ may have dramatic impacts on the changing nature of poverty. 
Beyond mobile phones and the internet, development actors are in deploying “frontier 
technologies ” to improve development outcomes (Ramalingam , Hernandez, Prieto Martin, & Faith , 
2016). Emergin g frontier technologies , such as 3D printing, drones, artificial intelligence and 
blockchain , are increasingly presented as potential solutions to development challenges. The 
United Nations has argued that at a structural level , “if policy -makers are not p roactive 
technological disruption can entrench inequality, further marginali ze the poorest, and fuel 
reactionary movements against open societies and economies ” (UNCTAD , 2018 , p. iii). However, 
to date, little research attention has focused on the implicat ions of using frontier technologies for 
those at risk of being left behind. The blockchain, for example, has been presented by major 
development actors such a s the World Bank  as a “disrupter of gender inequality, ” and inequality 
in general due to a democra tising of transactions (Hammond & Young , 2018). History shows that 
these type of claims are not new. As early as 1991, some were referring to the internet as “the 
great equali ser” (Rheingold , 1991). However, as the examples in this literature review ha ve 
evidenced , digital technologies have spread unevenly and their use has disproportionately 23 amplified the voices of the already advantaged. There is no clear reason to think that blockchain , 
or any other new technology , will be any different.  
This section ha s argued that the claims for digital dividends currently being made for frontier 
technologies deserve critical evaluation . Like all of the digital technologies discussed in the review , 
frontier technologies have potential both to produce digital dividends and digital divides. More 
critical research is necessary to assess in which contexts and under what conditions such frontier 
technologies hold the potential to close digital divides and amplify the ability of those currently left 
behind to realise their fu ll potential.  
6. Conclusion  
This report has presented an extended literature review designed to answer the question of how 
the experience of poverty is changing in an increasingly digital world, and what the implications 
are for the leave no one behind agend a. We have used t he law of amplification and the concepts 
of digital dividends and digital divides as a conceptual lens to interpret the existing l iterature .  
The review provided evidence – over a wide range of applications and contexts – that the use of 
mobile phones and the internet i s adding new digital dimensions to the experience of poverty , 
including (a) amplifying the disadvantage of the most marginali sed by excluding them from 
technology -enabled digital dividends, and (b)  amplifying the advantage of  the already privileged 
by enabling them to secure digital dividends . The overall effect is to widen the social and economic 
divide between the unconnected and the most connected. Newly forming classes of technology 
access have widely different capacities to make effective use of digital technology for development , 
with the effect of amplifying pre -existing social and economi c divides. Given the co -existence  of 
digital dividends and digital divides, how do development actors make technological choices that 
avoid amplifying relative poverty and that leave no one behind?  
There is nothing inevitable about these trends. These outcomes are not determined by the 
technology itself, but rather by the capacity and intent of human actors , which can then be amplif ied 
by using digital technology . If the distribution of capacity is determined by market -forces alone then 
the already privileged will continue to be the early adopters of each new generation of technology , 
and the under -privileged will continue to be left behi nd. Achieving the goal of leaving no one behind 
requires the political will to prioritise building the capacity and intent of those that are being left 
behind . Although picking the low -hanging  fruit allows programme managers to scale -up sooner, 
and report higher beneficiary -counts and value -for-money , this is not compatible with “putting the 
last first ” or leaving no one behind . Repeating the error of the MDGs  would be at the expense of 
the most marginalised.  
In an increasingly digital world, unless policy  and practice is consciously designed to address the 
specific needs of the most deprived, then the use of digital technologies risks excluding and further 
disadvantaging those already being left behind. If it did become politically possible to work with 
those at most risk of being left behind, then this  literature review provides evidence that meeting 
the needs of these groups requires a blended approach  that uses non -digital as well as digital 
approaches. Such blended, multi -channel, and multi -dimensional programmes offer the best 
prospect of enabling currently marginali sed groups to amplify their capacity and intent and to 
secure digital dividends.  24 Further research is necessary  in a number of areas identified by the literature review. In order 
to (a) addr ess the identified digital dimensions of poverty, (b) enable those currently being left 
behind to secure digital dividends, and so (c) close the digital divide, we need to:  
 Understand more about the connectivity experiences, technology practices, digital 
literacies, needs and priorities of those currently being left behind . 
 Understand more about the digital dimensions of poverty experienced by those 
experiencing intersectional disadvantages, especially women, the disabled and the 
digitally illiterate.  
 Develop new diagnostic tools to assess digital access barriers, opportunities and 
approaches , and design both analogue and digital development initiatives tailored to 
specific realities.     
7. References   
Acemoglu, D. , & Restrepo, P.  (2018) . Artificial intellig ence, automation and work (NBER Working 
Paper No. 24196 ). Cambridge, MA: The National Bureau of Economic Research. 
doi:10.3386/w24196  
Atela, J. (2017 , March 27 ). How can solar power be part of transformations to sustainability in 
Kenya? [Online blog post]. Retrieved from  https://steps -centre.org/blog/how -can-solar -
power -transformations -sustainability -kenya/   
A4AI . (2018) . 2018 Affordability report . Washington, DC: Alliance for Affordable Internet. Retrieved 
from http://1e8q 3q16vyc81g8l3h3md6q5f5e -wpengine.netdna -ssl.com/wp -
content/uploads/2018/10/A4AI -2018 -Affordability -Report.pdf  
Bloom, G., Berdou, E., Standing, H., Guo, Z., & Labrique, A.  (2017) . ICTs and the challenge of health 
system transition in low and middle -income countries . Globalization and Health , 13(56). 
doi:10.1186/s12992 -017-0276 -y 
Bradshaw, S. , & Howard, P. (2018) . Challenging truth and trust: A global inventory of organized 
social media manipulation  (Working Paper 2018.1) . Oxford, UK: Project on Computational 
Propaganda, Oxford Internet Institute. Retrieved from  http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/wp -
content/uploads/sites /93/2018/07/ct2018.pdf  
Brynjolfsson, E. , & McAfee, A. (2014) . The second machine age. New York , NY: W.W. Norton & 
Company Inc.  
Burns, D. Howard, J. , Lopez -Franco, E. , Shahrokh, T. , & Wheeler, J. (2013 ). Work with us: How 
people and organisations can catal yse sustainable change . Brighton, UK: Institute of  
Development  Studies . Retrieved from   
www.ids.ac.uk/files/dmfile/Workwithus_How peopleandorganisationscancatalysesustainabl
echangeFINAL.pdf  
Buskens, I. (2015) . ICT and gender . In R. Mansell et al. (Eds .), International Encyclopaedia of digital 
communications and society . London , UK:  Wiley and Sons.  
Buskens, I. , & Webb, A. ( Eds.) (200 9). African women and ICTs. London , UK:  Zed Books .  25 Buskens, I. , & Webb, A. ( Eds.) (2014) . Women and ICT in Africa and the Middle East.  London , UK:  
Zed Books . 
Cai, Y. (2016 ). Consumers’ adoption of online shopping in China. In I. Lee (Ed.)  Encyclop aedia of  
e-commerce development, implementation, and management . Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference (IGI Global). doi:10.4018/978 -1-4666 -9787 -4.ch111  
Chang, J. -H., Rynhart, G. , & Huynh, P. (2016) . ASEAN in transformation: How technology is 
changing jobs and enterprises.  Geneva: I nternational Labour Organization.  
Chambers, R. (1983) . Rural development: Putting the last first . Harlow , UK: Prentice Hall.  
Cowen, T. (2013) . Average is over. New York , NY: Penguin Group . 
de Lanerolle, I., Walton, M., & Schoon, A. (2017). Izolo: Mobile diaries of the less connected  (MAVC 
Research Report ). Brighton: Institute of Development Studies . Retrieved from   
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/13348   
DFID . (2018). The changing n ature of work (Unpublished Policy Brief ). UK: Department for 
International Development.   
Dubus, A ., & Van Hove, L . (2017) . M-PESA and financial inclusi on in Kenya: Of paying comes 
saving?  (Working Paper). France: Centre pour la Communication Scientifique Directe 
(CCSD). Retrieved from  https://hal.archives -ouvertes.fr/hal -01591200/do cument  
Eubanks, V. (2018) . Automating inequality: How high -tech tools profile, police, and punish the poor  
(1st Ed.). New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.  Faith, B. (2017) . Automation, women, and the 
future of work (The Impact Initiative Rapid Response Brief ing). Brighton, UK: Institute of 
Development Studies . Retrieved from:   
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/13126  
Faith, B. (2018) . Gender, mobile, and mobile intern et: Maintenance affordances, capabilities and 
structural inequalities: Mobile phone use by low-income women . Information Technolog ies 
& International Development, 14 : 66–88. 
Feedback Mechanisms . (2016) . Using beneficiary feedback to improve development pro grammes: 
findings from a multi -country pilot  (Report) . UK: World Vision, INTRAC, Social Impact Lab, 
and CDA.  
Galperin, H., & Viecens, F. (2017). Connected for development? Theory and evidence about the 
impact of internet technologies on poverty alleviation . Development Policy Review, 35 (3): 
315–336. doi:10.1111/dpr.12210  
Gao, H. , Barbier, G. , & Goolsby, R. (2011) . Harnessing the crowdsourcing power of social media for 
disaster relief. IEEE Intelligent System s, 26(3): 10 –14. 
Gender & Development Network . (2017 ). Intersectionality: Reflections from the Gender & 
Development Network  (GADN Thinkpieces ). London: Action Aid.  Retrieved from   
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/536c4ee8e4b0b60bc6ca7c74/t/5a130e9d53450a0a
bd9c0f8f/1511198367912/Intersectionality+GADN+thinkpiece+November+2017.pdf  26 Gigler, B. , & Bailur, S. (Eds.) (2014) . Closing the feedback loop: Can technology bridge the 
accountability gap?  (Directions in Development ). Washington , DC:  World Bank.  Retrieved 
from https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/18408  
Gillwald, A. (2010) . Gender assessment of ICT access and usage in Africa  (Volume One 2010 Policy 
Paper 5) . Research ICT Africa, University of Cape Town.  Retrieved from   
https://www.ictworks.org/sites/default/files/uploaded_pics/2009/Gender_Paper_Sept_2010.
pdf  
Global Voices . (2017 , July 28 ). Philippines: On Facebook’s free version, fake news is even harder 
to spot [Online  article ]. Retrieved from  https://globalvoices.org/2017/07/28/philippines -on-
facebooks -free-version -fake-news -is-even -harder -to-spot/  
Goggin, G. (2017) . Disability and digital inequalities: Rethinking digital divides with disability theory. 
In G. W. Muschert & M. Ragnedda (Eds.),  Theorizing digital divides  (pp. 69 –80). New York, 
NY: Routledge .  
Greeley, M., Lucas, H., Chai, J., & Cummins, M. (2013 ). Introduction: Real time monitoring for the 
most vulnerable – investing in common guidance for equity and quality. IDS Bulletin , 44(2): 
1–14. doi:10.1111/1759 -5436.12012  
GSMA . (2012). Women and mobile: A global opportunity - a study on the mobile phone gender gap 
in low and middle -incom e countries  (Report).  London : GSMA.  Retrieved from 
https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -
content/uploads/2013/01/GSMA_ Women_and_Mobile -A_Global_Opportunity.pdf   
GSMA . (2017) . 2017 state of the industry report on mobile money  (Report) . London: GSMA. 
Retrieved from  https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -
content/uploads/2018/05/GSMA_2017_State_of_the_Industry_Report_on_Mobile_Money_
Full_Report.pdf   
GSMA . (2018) . Connected women: The mobile gender gap report 2018  (Report). London: GSMA. 
Retrieved from  https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp -
content/uploads/2018/04/GSMA_The_Mobi le_Gender_Gap_Report_2018_32pp_WEBv7.pdf  
Gurstein, M. (2003) . Effective use: A community informatics guide beyond the digital divide . First 
Monday, 8 (12). doi:10.5210/fm.v8i12.1107  
Gurstein, M. (2011) . Open data: Empowering the empowered or effective data for everyone? First 
Monday, 16 (2). doi:10.5210/fm.v16i2.3316     
Gurumurthy, A. (2004) . Gender and ICTs  (BRIDGE  overview report).  Brighton, UK:  Institute of 
Development Studies . Retrieved from   
http://www.bridge.ids.ac.uk/sites/bridge.ids.ac.uk/files/reports/CEP -ICTs -OR.pdf   
Hammond, A., & Young, D. (2018 , July 03) . Can blockchain disrupt gender inequality? [Online b log 
post] . Retrieved from  http://blogs.worldbank.org/psd/can -blockchain -disrupt -gender -
inequality    
Hernan dez, K., Faith, B., Prieto Martín, P., & Ramalingam, B. (2016). The impact of digital 
technology on economic growth and productivity, and its implications for employment and 27 equality: An evidence review  (IDS Evidence Report No. 207). Brighton, UK: Institut e of 
Development Studies . 
Hilbert, M. (2013). Technological information inequality as an incessantly moving target: The 
redistribution of information and communication capacities between 1986 and 2010. Journal 
of the Association for Information Science and  Technology, 65 (4): 821–835. 
doi:10.1002/asi.23020  
Hill, W. C.  (2015). E -Governance: Silencing vulnerable populations . Procedia Engineering, 107 : 
181–185. doi: 10.1016/j.proeng.2015.06.072  
Holloway, K., Rouse, R., & Cook, W.  (2017 , June 06) . How do mobile money fee structures impact 
the poor? [Online blog post]. Retrieved from  https://www.poverty -action.org/blog/how -do-
mobile -money -fee-structures -impact -poor  
ITU. (2014 ). Manual for measuring ICT access and use by households . Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union. Retrieved from  https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu -d/opb/ind/D -IND-
ITCMEAS -2014 -PDF-E.pdf   
Jaiswal, A.  K. (2008). The fortune at the bottom or the middle of the pyramid? Innovations: Technology, 
governanc e, globalization . MIT Press, 3 (1): 85–100. doi: 10.1162/itgg.2008.3.1.85  
Katz, R. , & Koutroumpis, P. ( 2012 ). The economic impact of telecommunications in 
Senegal . Communications and Strategies , 86(2nd Q.): 21–42. 
Kapoor, K., Sawada, Y., Latortue, A., & Cabrol, M. (2018 ). The future of work: Regional perspectives  
Report) . Washington, DC: African Development Bank Group, Asian Development Bank, 
European Bank for Rescontruction and Development, and Inter -American Development 
Bank.  Retrieved from   
https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Publications/The -Future -of-Work -
regional_perspectives.pdf   
Koutroumpis, P. ( 2009 ). The economic impact of broadband on growth: A simultaneous 
approach . Telecommunications Policy , 33(9): 471 –485. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2009.07.004  
Kshetri, N. (2018 ). Rural e -commerce in developing countries. IT Professional , 20(2): 91–95. 
doi:10.1109/MITP.2018.021921657  
Kukutschka, R.  M. B. (2016) . Technology against corruption: The potent ial of online corruption -
reporting apps and other platforms  (U4 Expert Answer 20 ). Norway: Anti -Corruption 
Resource Centre . Retrieved from https://www.u4.no/publications/technology -against -
corruption -the-potential -of-online -corruption -reporting -apps -and-other -platforms.pdf   
Landemore, H. (2014) . Inclusive constitution -making: The Icelandic experiment . Journal  of Political 
Philosophy, 23 (2): 166–191. doi:10.1111/jopp.12032  
Lyons, D. (2016) . Innovations in mobile broadband pricing . Boston College Law School Faculty 
Papers , 92(3): 453 –492. Retrieved from   
https://lawdigitalcommons.bc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1755&context=lsfp    
Makinen, M. , & Wangu Kuira, M. (2008) . Social media and post-election crisis in Kenya . Information 
& Communication Technology – Africa , 13. 28 May, J.  D. (2012). Digital and other poverties: Exploring the connection in four East African countries.  
Information Technologies & International Development, 8 (2): 33–50. 
McGee, R. with Edwards, D. , Anderson, C. , Hudson, H. , & Feruglio, F. (2018) . Appropriating 
technology for accountability: Messages from Making All Voices Count  (MAVC  Research 
Report ). Brighton: Institute of Development Studies. Retrieved from  
https://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/bitstrea m/handle/123456789/13452/RR_Synth_Onlin
e_final.pdf   
McKinsey Global Institute . (2014) . Offline and falling behind: Barriers to internet adoption  (Report). 
McKinsey & Company. Retrieved from   
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/dotcom/client_service/high%20tech/pdfs/offli
ne_and_falling_behind_full_report.ashx    
Meier, P. (2012) . ‘Do Liberation Technologies Change the balance of power between repressive 
states and civil society? (Unpublished PhD thesis ). Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy , 
Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA . 
Noble, S.  U. (2018) . Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism . New Yo rk, NY: 
New York University Press.  
Noble, S.  U., & Tynes, B.  M. (Eds.) (2016) . The intersectional internet: Race, sex , class , and culture 
online . New York , NY:  Peter Lang Publishing.  
Moreno, A. , Garrison, P. , & Bhat, K. (2017) . WhatsApp for monitoring and response during critical 
events: Aggie in the Ghana 2016 election . Conference paper presented at  the 14th 
International Conference  for Crisis Response and Management, Albi , France.  
Okunola, O.  M., Rowley, J., & Johnson, F. (2017) . The multi -dimensional di gital divide: Perspectives 
from an e -government portal in Nigeria. Government Inf ormation  Quarterly, 34 (2): 329 –339.  
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2017.02.002  
OGP.  (2018) . The skeptic’s guide to open governm ent (Guide) . Washington, DC: Open Government 
Partnership.  Retrieved from   
https://www.opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/files/SKEPTICS -GUIDE_20180710.pdf    
Qiang, C.  Z., Rossotto, C.  M., & Kimura, K. (2009) . Economic impacts of broadband . In M. A. Khalil 
et al. (Eds.) , Information and communications for development 2009: Extending reach  and 
increasing impact  (Report) . Washington, DC: World Bank.  Retrieved f rom  
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/645821468337815208/pdf/487910PUB0EPI11
01Official0Use0Only1.pdf   
Qiu, J. L. (2009). Worki ng-class n etwork society: Communications technology and the i nformation 
have-less in urban China . Boston: MIT Press.  
Rakesh, V. , Heeks, R. , Chattapadhyay, S. , & Foster, C. (2018) . Big data and urban transportation 
in India: A Bengaluru bus corporation case study (GDI Development Informatics Working 
Paper  No. 72).  Manchester, UK: University of Manchester. Retrieved from   
http://hummedia.manchester.ac.uk/i nstitutes/gdi/publications/workingpapers/di/di_wp72.pdf   
Ramalingam, B. , & Hernandez, K. (2016) . The multiple forms of digital inequality . In ISSC, IDS and 
UNESCO (Eds.),  World social science report 2016 : Challenging inequalities: Pathways to a 29 just world  (pp. 68 –69). Paris: UNESCO  Publishing. Retrieved from   
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002459/245938e.pdf   
Ramalingam, B., Hernandez, K., Prieto Martin, P., & Faith, B. (2016 ). Ten frontier technologies for 
international development  (Report) . Brighton : Institute of Development Studies . Retrieved 
from http://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/12637   
Rheingold, H. (1991). The great equalizer.  Whole Earth Review . 
Riley, T. (2003) . e-Government vs e -Governance: Examining the difference in a changing public 
sector climate . Commonwealth Centre for Electronic Governance.  
Roberts, T. (2017 , May 02 ). Digital technology excludes [Online blog post]. Retrieved from  
http://www.appropriatingtechnology.org/?q=node/274   
Roberts, T., & Hernandez, K. (2017). The techno -centric gaze: Incorporating cit izen participation 
technologies into participatory governance processes in the Philippines  (MAVC  Research 
Report). Brighton: Institute of Development Studies. Retrieved from   
https:/ /opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/13344   
Roberts, T. , & Marchais, G. (2017) . Assessing the role of social media and digital technology in  
violence reporting  (IDS Working Paper  No. 492). Brighton: Institute of Development Studies . 
Retrieved fro m http://opendocs.ids.ac.uk/opendocs/handle/123456789/13161   
Robinson, L., Cotten, S. R., Ono, H., Quan -Haase, A., Mesch, G., Chen, W., & Stern, M. J. (2015) . 
Digital inequalities an d why they matter. Information, Communication & Society, 18 (5): 569–
582. doi:10.1080/1369118X.2015.1012532  
Sambuli, N., Brandusescu, A. , & Brudvig, I. (2018) . Advancing women’s rights online: Gaps and 
opportunities in policy and research  (Report).  London, UK: World Wide Web Foundation.  
Retrieved from  http://webfoun dation.org/docs/2018/08/Advancing -Womens -Rights -
Online_Gaps -and-Opportunities -in-Policy -and-Research.pdf   
Stuart, E. , & Samman, E. (2017) . Defining ‘leave no one behind’  (Briefing note) . London , UK : 
Overseas Development Institute.  Retrieved from   
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource -documents/11809.pdf   
The Economist . (2017 , October 26 ). The everywhere stores: Online retail is booming in China . The 
Econom ist. Retrieved from https://www.economist.com/special -report/2017/10/26/online -
retail -is-booming -in-china   
The Engine Room . (2012) . New technologies against petty corruption : Tactics and lessons from the 
2012 International Anti-Corruption Conference  (IACC)  (Report) . The Engine Room. 
Retrieved from  https://www.theengineroom.org/wp -content/uploads/2013/12/New -
Technologies -Against -Petty -Corruption.pdf   
Toyama, K. (2011) . Technology as an  amplifier in international development . Conference 
proceedings  at the  2011 iConference , Seattle, W A, USA . 
Toyama, K. (2015) . Geek h eresy: Rescuing social change from the cult of technology . New York, 
NY: Public Affairs.  30 UNDP . (2016) . Human development r eport 2016 . New York , NY:  United  Nations Development 
Programme.  Retrieved from   
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2016_human_development_report.pdf   
UNCTAD . (2017 ). Information economy report 2017: Digitalization, trade and development.  Geneva: 
United Nations. Retrieved from http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/ier2017_en.pdf   
UNCTAD . (2018 ). Technology and innovation report  2018 : Harnessing f rontier technologies for 
sustainab le development . Genev a: United Nations. Retrieved from   
http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/tir2018_en.pdf  
UNICEF. (2015). Progress for children: Beyond averages – learning from the MDGs (Progress for  
Children Report No. 11) . New York, NY: UNICEF. Retrieved from   
https://www.unicef.org/publications/index_82231.html   
United Nations. (2016). United Nations e -Government survey 2016: e -Government in support of 
sustainable development . New York, NY: United Nations. Retrieved from   
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN97453.pdf   
United Nati ons. (2018). United Nations e -Government survey 2018: Gearing e -Government to 
support transformation towards sustainable and resilient societies . New York, NY: United 
Nations. Retrieved from  https://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/E -
Government%20Survey%202018_FINAL.pdf  
Unwin, T. (2017) . Reclaiming information and communication technologies for development . Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.  
Walsham, G. (2013) . Development informatics in a changing world: Reflections from ICTD  
2010/2012 . Information Technologies & International Development, 9 (1): 49–54. 
Wang, K.  W., Lau, A., & Gong, F. (2016 ). How savvy, social shoppers are transforming Chinese e -
commerce  (Retail Survey ). McKinsey & Co mpany . Retrieved from   
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/retail/our -insights/how -savvy -social-shoppers -are-
transforming -chinese -e-commerce   
We Are Social . (2018 , January 30 ). Digital in 2018: World’s internet users pass the four billion users 
mark [Online blog post]. Retrieved from  https://wearesocial.com/us/blog/2018/01/global -
digital -report -2018   
Web Foundation . (2017) . Open data barometer: Global report , fourth edition . World Wide Web 
Foundation. Retrieved from https://opendatabarometer.org/doc/4thEdition/ODB -4thEdition -
GlobalReport.pdf  
Woolley, S.  C., & Howard, P.  N. (2017) . Computational propaganda worldwide: Executive summary  
(Working Paper No. 2017.11).  Oxford, UK: Oxford Internet Institute .  
World Bank . (2015) . The global opportunity in online outsourcing  (Report No. ACS14228) . 
Washington , DC: World Bank . Retrieved from   
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/138371468000900555/pdf/ACS14228 -ESW -
white -cover -P149016 -Box391478B -PUBLIC -World -Bank -Global -OO-Study -WB-Rpt-
FinalS.pdf     31 World Bank.  (2016). World d evelopment report 2016: Digital d ividends.  Washington, DC: World 
Bank. doi: 10.1596/978 -1-4648 -0671 -1 
Worsley, P. (2005) . Culture and development theory . In T. Skelton , & T. Allen ( Eds.), Culture and 
global change  (pp. 30 –42). London, UK : Routledge .  
Zheng, Y., Hatakka, M., Sahay, S., & Andersson, A. (2018) . Conceptualising development in 
information and communication technology for development ( ICT4D ). Information 
Technology for Devel opment , 24(1): 1–14. doi:10.1080/02681102.2017.1396020  
Zhu, S., & Chen, J. (2012 ). The digital divide in individual e -commerce utilization in China: R esults 
from a national survey. Information D evelopment , 29(1): 69–80. doi:10.1177/0266666912450168  