 
 
 
 
 
WIDER Working Paper 20 20/38 
 
 
 
Making agricultural value chains more inclusive 
through technology and innovation  
 
 
Reena das Nair and Namhla Landani * 
 
 
 
 
 
March  2020 
 
   
* Centre for Competition, Regulati on and Economic Development (CCRED), University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South 
Africa; corresponding author: reenadn@uj.ac.za . 
This study has been prepared within the UNU -WIDER project Southern  Africa – Towards inclusive economic development (SA -
TIED) . 
Copyright  ©  UNU -WIDER 20 20 
Information and requests: publications@wider.unu.edu  
ISSN 1798- 7237   ISBN 978- 92-9256- 795-8 
https ://doi.org/10.35188/UNU -WIDER/20 20/795- 8  
Typescript prepared by Luke Finley . 
The United Nations University World Institute for Development Economics Research provides economic analysis and policy 
advice with the aim of promoting sustainable a nd equitable development . The Institute began operation s in 1985 in Helsinki, 
Finland, as the first research and training  centre of the United Nations University. Today it is a unique blend of think tank, research 
institute, and UN agency —providing a range of services from policy advice to governments as well as freely available original 
research.  
The Institute is funded through income from an endowment fund with additional contributions to its work programme from 
Finland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom  as well as earmarked contributions for specific projects from a variety of donors . 
Katajanokanlaituri 6 B, 00160 Helsinki, Finland  
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author(s), and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Institute or th e United 
Nations University, nor the programme/project don ors. Abstract:  Some entry barriers  in agricultural and agro- processing value chains, particularly for 
small holder farmers and small /medium -sized  processors, can be overcome with innovation and 
technology adoption. Technologies and innovation in these sectors have been both radical and 
incremental, ranging widely through biotechnology ; production technologies ; automation in 
sorting, grading, and packaging ; and digital platforms and data -connected devices for market 
access. These technologies have enabled farmers in Africa to increase productivity and quality ; 
reduce costs ; meet standards ; improve access to finance, markets , and  information;  and facilitate 
payments. We  evaluate  the role of technology in South Africa n fresh fruit and selected processed 
food value chains in facilitating inclusive participation, while highlighting potential adverse effects 
for certain players. Recommendations for address ing the challeng es and building  capabilities to 
adopt new technologies are provided, emphasizing the role for public –private partnerships and an 
enabling regulatory environment . 
Key words:  innovation, technology, upgrading, value chains, agriculture, agro- processing, 
inclusive, capabilities  
JEL classification:  O13, O14, O30, O31, Q16  
Acknowledgements:  This working paper is part of Workstr eam 6: Regional Growth and 
Development, within the project ‘Southern Africa —Towards Inclusive Economic Development 
(SA-TIED)’, a three -year partnership between UNU -WIDER and the South African government 
aimed at improving understanding of regional value chains and supporting industrialization in the 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) region. We acknowledge UNU -WIDER and 
the South African Department of Trade and Industry for their support. ] 
 
 
 
  
1 1 Introduction  
In many African countries, agriculture and agro- processing have been identified as priority sectors 
with the potential to boost regional trade and investments, foster rapid industriali zation and 
economic diversification, create jobs , and eradicate hunger and poverty ( Annan et al.  2015; 
Hussein and Suttie 2016 ; NEPAD  2013). Given the continent’s rapidly expanding urban areas and 
population, and the availability of arable land, there is potential to increase food production. This 
could stimulate food exports, especially within the continent, and substitute imports that have 
increased as the population has grown (Annan et al. 2015). It could also allow for the development 
of the capabilities of food producers to participate more deeply in global food value chains.  
The potential for agri -businesses in food processing and horticulture , as ‘industries without 
smokestacks ’, to contribute to industriali zation and to grow jobs has been argued by Newfarmer  
et al. (2018: 2) to offer new opportunities for Africa’s future growth. Countries in Southern Africa 
have recogni zed the need to prioritize the agricultural sector and the role that small and medium -
sized  enterprises (SME), including small farmers and agro- process ors, can play in growing the 
sector ( Department of Trade and Industry  2017, 2018 ; Ministry of Industry and Commerce , 
Zimbabwe,  2019; Ministry of Trade and Industry , Namibia, 2015; Republic of Zambia  2018; 
SADC 2017).  
There are , however , high barriers to entry which limit the contestation and participation of new 
entrants and SMEs in agriculture and agro- processing value chains. High levels of concentration 
and vertical integration in these markets, particularly in agro -processing, mean a  few large firms 
with market power control most levels of value chains (Paremoer  2018). This creates barriers to 
entry for new players who are reliant on incumbents to access inputs or markets.  
In primary agriculture, the lack of appropriately adaptable s eeds and fertilizers, along with limited 
access to plant chemicals, are among the most fundamental challenges that smallholder farmers 
face in the region (Annan  et al. 2015; Tinsley and Agapitova  2018). Other challenges include  limited 
access to finance, skills , and training, along with the lack of infrastructure such as storage facilities 
and lack of access to market information (Hussein and Suttie  2016: International Finance 
Corporation 2017). Linking smallholder farmers  and SMEs to key routes to markets such as 
supermarkets is also a challenge , as suppliers need to meet basic phytosanitary and food quality 
standards, as well as the private standards of supermarkets ( das Nair et al.  2018; Gereffi and Lee 
2014; Hussein and Suttie 2016; Reardon et al. 2003). Small farmers and processors are also more 
exposed than larger players to the negative impacts of the r ecent occurrences of drought in the 
Southern Africa region (Davis and Vincent 2017; Nyasimi et al.  2014). There are further 
vulnerabilities linked with being located in rural areas (Annan et al. 2015; Dlodlo and Kalezhi  2015; 
Hussein and Suttie  2016). 
Innovation in agriculture and agro- processing value chains can play a major  role in overcoming 
some of these barriers, incorporating emerging farmers and agro -processors into regional and 
global value chains and potentially making these value chains more inclusive. Many challenges and 
barriers faced by SMEs can be addressed through innovation in technology and digital platforms. 
For instance, information service s can be provided digitally to farmers and processors on the best 
practices, certifications , and  standards required by regional and international supermarket chains. 
Mobile money platforms can be a way in which emerging farmers and su ppliers can be paid 
instantly to ease cash flow crunches and enable d to access credit and insurance products. Digital 
profiles can be created for verification purposes , and blockchain technology has developed to be 
able to provide real -time traceability and certification of products. This improves the transparency  
2 of suppliers to supermarket chains, improving the chances for SMEs to sustainably participate in 
value chain s. Digital tools can also greatly improve logistics systems in agro -processing value 
chains. Cloud computing, computing systems, connectivity, and open- source software have 
become more commonplace, and more affordable  and accessible. But technological innovation is  
not the only form that innovation can take . Innovation in business models and operations can also 
contribute to the growth and inclusion of players.  
It is important to highlight that innovation and technologi cal advances may have the opposite, and 
undesirable, effects. The y may widen the gap between established incumbents and new entrants 
or SMEs who cannot access or afford the technologies. Adverse incorporation may be an outcome 
also where firms are includ ed and integrated on negative terms (Hickey and Du Toit  2007; Ponte 
and Ewert  2009). For instance, studies on the impact of growing demand for oil palm in Indonesia 
have found that the way social relations and land ownership in the rural areas worked m eant that 
the potential of the crop may ultimately work against poor  smallholder farmers. The outcomes 
were very dependent on the terms  on which  the smallholders were included in oil palm production, 
whether there was institutional support for them , and the role of the state (McCarthy  2010).  
This working paper  evaluates the use of technology and innovation in agriculture and agro-
processing secto rs. Lessons are drawn from experiences in food value chains internationally and 
in other African countries. The lessons offer valuable insights as to how technology and innovation 
can be incorporated and supported in agro- processing value chains in the S outhern Africa  region. 
Following global value chain (GVC) principles, the paper draws on desktop research, as well as 
primary research undertaken by the Centre for Competition, Regulation and Economic 
Development  (CCRED ) that has involved interviews and workshops with relevant stakeholders 
in agricultural and agro- processing value chains, including for projects undertaken for the South 
African Department of Trade and Industry  (Chisoro- Dube and das Nair 2018)  and as part of a 
project funded by the UK’s Gl obal Challenges Research Fund  on ‘Innovation and Inclusive 
Industrialization in Agro- Processing’.1 
Section 2 explains how the GVC framework can be used as the conceptual framework through 
which to understand how technology and innovation can facilitate upgrading and build dynamic 
capabilities in value chains. In Section 3, a literature review is undertaken on the types of 
technologies in agriculture and agro- processing globally. Section 4 assesses how technology has 
facilitated the inclusion o f SMEs in different countries in Africa, especially East Africa. The role 
of technology and innovation in facilitating participation in fresh and processed food value chains 
South Africa is evaluated in Section 5. Section 6 concludes, identifying constraints to adopting 
technology in the region and offering lessons for policy interventions that could facilitate greater 
inclusion and participation.  
2 Conceptual framework  
Incorporating emerging farmers and SME agro -processors into global value chains requires  
significant capability building , as production, standards , and pricing are increasingly shaped by 
powerful lead firms ( Gereffi and Fernandez -Stark 2011; Humphrey and Schimtz  2002; Reardon et 
al. 2003). The same applies  to incorporating them into regional value chains (RVCs) , although the 
requirements for entry and participation are often lower in other African regions than they are in 
 
1 See https://iiap.info .  
3 GVCs . As such, RVCs are seen as offering stepping -stones into parti cipating in GVCs (Farole  
2015; Horner and Nadvi  2018). 
Growing urbani zation has led to the growth of modern retail formats such as  supermarket chains 
in Africa, particularly in Southern and East Africa. This has made them important routes to market 
for processed food products and other household consumables. Supermarkets often place pressure 
on suppliers with regard to the ability to supply the required volumes, maintain consistency, ensure 
quality , and contain costs of supplying products, among  other factors (das Nair and Chisoro- Dube  
2015,  2017; das Nair  et al. 2018; Ziba and Phiri, 2017). Compliance with  legal standards on quality 
and food safety is  absolutely critical for consumer health and safety. Private standards imposed by 
supermarkets further add to the requirements associated with  supply ing them,  and these, while still 
possibly desirable from consumers’ perspective , may impose barriers to SME participation in food 
systems. In other export -orient ated industries such as fresh fruit, lead firms in key consumer 
markets which are typically located in developed countries often control terms of trade (Chisoro-
Dube  et al. 2019). As such, governance and power relationships in interactions between retailers, 
lead firms , and suppliers  have implications for technological learning and the adoption of 
technologies for the upgrading of emerging farmers and SME agro -processors.  
The GVC  framework is a useful tool f or identify ing opportunities and challenges for technological 
upgrading and the development of capabilities by emerging farmers and agro -processors in the 
region. The framework considers governance and upgrading to assess global industries, with 
governance accounting for power relationships and their ability to determine the allocation and 
flow of resources in the value chain. Specificall y, governance describes how powerful lead firms, 
or groups  of lead firms as part of industry associations for instance, form the conditions for 
inclusion and exclusion in value chains, which subsequently control  the terms and location of value 
addition, distribution,  and capture ( Dallas  et al. 2019; Gereffi and Lee  2014). On the other hand, 
upgrading —which can be identified as process, product, functional , and chain upgrading —
explores how firms can improve competitiveness and change their position in the value chain 
(Gereffi and Lee  2014; Nkhonjera and das Nair  2018). 
The i nsertion of firms into value chains can facilitate the transfer of knowledge , allowing small 
firms to upgrade  and subsequently gain access to regional and global value chains (Morrison et al. 
2008). However, some studies on value chain governance which draw on innovation theory point 
out that the complexity and codifiability of information for upgrading, along with the existing 
capability of suppliers, determine s the transferability of knowledge The transferability of 
information influences the nature of the relationships that govern the value chains  (Gereffi  et al. 
2005; Guiliani et al. 2005; Lema  et al. 2018). Power asymmetries in the different forms of 
governance also affect knowledge transfers and upgrading in a value chain (Morrison  et al.  2008).  
Technology can facilitate access to and inclusion of firms into global or regional value chains by 
lowering barriers to entry and facilitating upgrading (see Section 3). For technological upgrading, 
emerging farmers and agro -processors need capabilities. Morrison et al. (2008) define technological 
capabilities as a set of ski lls, which can be technical, managerial , and organizational in nature, that 
enable firms to efficiently use the hardware (equipment) and software of technologies to sustain 
or improve a firm’s competitiveness. Capabilities can also be classified from a  functional 
perspective and by considering the degree of complexity of activities. These include investment, 
production, and linkage capabilities. ‘ Investment capabilities ’ refers  to the set of skills required 
prior to undertaking an investment. ‘ Production capabilities ’ refers  to the skills necessary for 
operating a plant with a given technology at the basic level, and its improvement over time. This 
includes process, product , and industrial engineering capabilities. Lastly, ‘ linkage capabilities ’ refers  
to skills that are required to establish technology linkages between firms , service suppliers , and  
4 interact with the science and technology infrastructures (Lall, 1990, 1992, 2001). All three are 
important for upgrading in agriculture and agro- processing , as discussed in Sections 3 and 4.  
Over the years, the literature has expanded to include dynamic capabilities. These are defined as 
‘the firm’s ability to integrate, build and reconfigure internal and external competencies to address 
rapidly changing environments’ (Kay  et al. 2018: 516). Dynamic capabilities can be viewed as only 
existing  at an advanced level of complexity , as they emphasi ze a firm’s ability to move beyond 
ordinary capabilities to partake in higher -level activities that give the firm  a competitive advantage 
and generate long -term Schumpeterian rents (Kay  et al. 2018).  
The development of technological capabilities and the ability of firms to absorb technological 
changes  is a function of a firm’s existing knowledge base and intensity of effort (Kim  2001; 
Morrison  et al.  2008). Given that tec hnology is tacit , and knowledge about  technologies is not 
accessible equally among  firms  or easy to duplicate and transfer between firms, the absorptive 
capacity also depends on a firm’s ability to convert tacit to explicit knowledge ( Kim 2001; Lall  
1992; Morrison  et al. 2008). The differences in absorptive capacities between firms may strengthen 
the market power of incumbents, making the gap between large firms and SMEs even larger.  
In essence, the fundamental approach of the GVC framework is to analyse how firms can 
potentially upgrade and acquire capabilities in order to participate or gain positions further up the 
value chain. However, as noted in Section 1 , small pla yers or certain groups can be adversely 
incorporated into  value chains (Hickey and Du Toit  2007; Ponte 2008). This means that firms may 
upgrade and participate at higher positions along the value chain without necessarily ‘ reaching a 
better deal’ (Ponte and Ewert  2009: 1, 3). As another example alongside  the oil palm one in Section 
1, in the wine industry in South Africa, functional and process upgrading to produce better -quality 
wine that is eligible for export  has simultaneously made farmers more vulnerable to risk and limited 
their rewards , as the costs associated with upgrading are high (Ponte  2008; Ponte and Ewert  2009).  
3 Literature review: innovation and technologies in agricultural and food value chains 
globally  
As discussed in Section 2, inclusion and upgrading in agricultural and food value chains can be 
facilitated by innovation and technology. Innovation can be defined as launch ing a new product, 
applying new methods , or acquiring new resources (Baregheh et al.  2012; Pignatti et al. 2015; 
Santovito et al. 2016). These activities can yield different types of innovation , including product, 
process, organizational , and market innovation ( Caraça et al. 2009 ; Lefebvre  et al. 2015). The key 
feature of innovation is that it enables the ‘ successful exploitation of ideas’  (Lefebvre  et al. 2015; 
3), and at a firm level, success means that innovative companies gain competitive advantages and 
economic benefits ( Hagedoom 1996 ; Schumpeter  1934). In particular, the adoption of 
technologies2 resulti ng from innovation has the potential to generate income, increase 
productivity, accelerate communication , and much more (Baregheh  et al. 2012; Pignatti et al. 2015; 
Santovito et al. 2016).  
Innovation can be classified as either radical or incremental in nature (Lefebvre  et al. 2015). Radical 
innovations result in fundamental changes to  the activities of a firm or industry and lead to a clear 
existing departure from existing practices . On the other hand, incremental innovations introduce 
 
2 There are many definitions of technologies;  however, this paper will here after refer to technologies generally as 
tangible tools and techniques that make production factors more efficient.   
5 relatively minor changes  that result  in little departure from existing practices ( Dewar and Dutton 
1986; Ettlie et al. 1984; Lefebvre  et al. 2015). Although technology and innovation in agriculture 
and agro- processing value chains continue  to advance, most developments are relatively 
incremental and characterized by a low degree of novelty ( Chisoro- Dube  et al. 2019; Salavou and 
Avlonitis  2008). These technologies can also be adaptations and applications of disruptive 
technologies in other industries that are adapted to agriculture and agro- processing.  
Technology disruptions globally have  occurred in areas that directly affect the production of 
agricultural products , including biotechnology, irrigation,  and precision farming methods 
(Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019). There have also been developments in sorting, packaging , and cold 
storage; and electronic certification and integrated data- sharing digital platforms (Chisoro- Dube  et 
al. 2019). In addition, i nformation and c ommunication technology (ICT)  and digital platforms 
have played a remarkable role in agricultural value chains , as these are spread into almost all 
socioeconomic activities and are accessible in most parts of the world —including rural areas with 
agricultural activities ( Lefebvre  et al. 2015; Santovito et al. 2016). ICT is also available to the poor, 
the uneducated,  and marginalized groups (Annan et al. 2015; Dlodlo and Kalezhi  2015; Singh  et 
al.). The ways in which technology positively enables agriculture and agro -processing around the 
world  are discussed below .3 Although there are numerous other technologies in this space (see 
Krishnan et al. 2020), the ones we discuss below have particular appl icability in the Southern Africa  
context, in terms of the agricultural products produced and the  growing conditions and challenges 
faced.  
3.1 Developing new varieties of produce and crops  
The use of new breeding technologies including gene editing, targeted epigenetic modifications , 
and the adoption of synthetic DNA components and artificial chromosomes significantly impacts 
the quality and productivity of fruit and vegetables  (Cell Press 2018) . This is because these genetic 
modifications a llow scientists to edit existing genes  which control many of a plant ’s key consumer 
traits. Given the global challenges of climate change , along with limited food security and 
sustainability, these technologies are important. They improve the ability of fruit and vegetables to 
adapt to climate change, as well as enhancing their ability to resist insects and diseases  (College of 
Agriculture and L ife Sciences 2012) . They also improve sustainability by increasing the yields 
obtained from a given piece of land, without the use of more inputs such as water, fertilizer , and  
other agricultural chemicals  (Best Food Facts 2015 ). Such technology is also critical in improving 
the appearanc e and taste of food. These technologies can allow farmers and processors to enter 
into and upgrade in regional or global value chains.  
3.2 Crop pest technologies  
There have been advances in technologies to control pests (insects, weeds , and  pathoge ns). An 
example of one such technology is the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Module , which links 
farmer weather data to actual pest risk to fight against crop pest damage. In particular, it uses 
weather technology through solar -powered wireless weather s tations to gather real -time 
temperature, humidity, rain , and leaf wetness data. The software then generates stepped risk levels 
to warn the farmer when these conditions are most likely to make plants vulnerable to pest 
development. The software uses the pest configuration and real -time data from orchard weather 
sensors , along with the updated pest development algorithms , to deliver the most accurate, 
orchard -specific risk assessment available  (Wines Vines Analytics  2011) . This technology is being 
 
3 Unless otherwise referenced , the following discussion is drawn from Chisoro -Dube and das Nair (2018).   
6 used f or stone fruits (peaches, apricots, cherries, plums, and prunes) as well as grapes, apples , and 
pears  (Rusnak 2013) . 
3.3 Smart water technologies and precision agriculture  
The impacts of climate change and water scarcity have resulted in the introducti on of smart 
irrigation technologies to save water. Such technologies include the adoption of fully automated 
drip irrigation systems, irrigation scheduling, and information on evapotranspiration rates and soil 
moisture  (Zappa 2014) . ‘Precision agriculture ’ refers to farming management based on observing 
(and responding to) intra -field variations. Farmers globally are adopting satellite imagery and 
advanced sensors, in order to optimize returns on inputs while preserving resources. High-
resoluti on crop sensors can be used to inform the application of the right amounts of irrigation or 
fertilizer , while optical sensors or drones can be used to identify crop health across the field (for 
example, by using infra red light). An u nderstand ing of crop variability, geolocated weather data, 
and precise sensors enables improved automated decision -making and complementary planting 
techniques  (Zappa 2014) . 
3.4 Agricultural robots  
Many firms are increasingly automating agricultural processes at the growing and processing level 
using agricultural robots also known as ‘ agbots’. At the growing level, agricultural processes such 
as harvesting, fruit picking, ploughing, soil maintenance, weeding, planting , and irrigation are being 
automated  (Zappa 2014) . At the processing level, production and packaging are also increasingly  
being  automated.  
3.5 Cold storage technologies and materials  
The ability to preserve the shelf -life and quality of fruit and vegetables, along with perishable agro -
processing  products , until they reach supermarket shelves  requires specific cooling technology. 
Innovation in cold chain logistics and technology enables growers, processors , and retailers to 
build faster and more flexible , precise , and transparent food supply chains. Increasing the speed 
of the supply chain enhances the freshness of the produce.  
Globally, companies are developing mobile cold chain technologies with lower  installation 
expenses than traditional refrigeration systems. These are highly adaptable energy -efficient 
refrigerated storage solutions for smallholder farmers aimed at reducing post -harvest losses, 
improving energy reliability , and enabling access  to markets. Cold chain tec hnologies have key 
benefits such as ensuring a fresh product, longer shelf -life, improved income stream , and enabling 
the farmer to harvest over a few days and deliver a large shipment rather than on a daily basis, 
resulting in less wasted time away fro m the farm. A UK -based firm, InspiraFarms ,4 for instance, 
has developed automated, controlled,  and remotely monitored refrigeration storage units that can 
be adapted in both size and specific layout to suit the needs of any farmer  (interview with 
Inspira Farms) . Data services, enabled by a remote sensing device and a centrali zed data 
management system, support customers with customer -specific configuration and optimization of 
their facility. They  also enable  remote supply chain data aggregation that is supplied to clients to 
support improved performance and predictive maintenance. Similarly, a USA -based company, 
Coolbot ,5 has developed a walk -in cooler, which is an electronic controller that conve rts a standard 
 
4 See www.inspirafarms.com . 
5 See www.storeitcold.com/build -walk -cooler -small-farm -free-download .   
7 air conditioner into a chilling unit. These and other innovations in cold storage and the cold chain 
have extended shelf -life and reduced wastage in fruit value chains.  
3.6 Smart materials in cold chain infrastructure  
Aside from the actual cold  storage infrastructure, the materials used in the construction of this 
infrastructure are also improving with technological developments. InspiraFarms, for instance, 
uses materials for structures that are lightweight, expandable , and fast and easy to install. Their 
cold storage and processing facilities are built with a laser -cut galvanized steel framework and high -
quality insulated panels to ensure superior durability and energy efficiency in any climatic 
conditions. All units are shipped as turn- key solutions, designed to be operational  and certification -
ready immediately after installation  with regard to food safety (interview with InspiraFarms) . 
3.7 Sensor technologies  
Sensor technologies are playing a vital role in food monitoring and detecting the freshness of 
produce. Examples of such technologies include electronic nose s, hyperspectral and multispectral 
imaging, RGB (red, green , and blue) camera s, microwave imaging, near infrared spectrometer, 
electrochemical sensors , and  calorimetric sensors. Apart from remotely monitoring food, sensor 
technologies are used for determining fruit ripeness and predicting the shelf-life of fruits and 
vegetables during transport ation. Ethylene is a key sensing parameter suitable for detecting volatile 
organic compounds in order to indicate ripening or decay of fruits and vegetables , and also to 
indicate if a commodity is near the end of its shelf -life (Wyman  2018). Such technologies are 
increasingly important to fruit growers who are exporting their produce across the world.  
3.8 Delayed r ipening technology (DRT) and r ipening c hambers  
There has been significant innovation in delaying the ripening of fruit so t hat farmers have the 
flexibility in marketing their goods and consumers are guaranteed ‘ fresh -from -the-garden’ 
produce. This means that farmers can ensure the best quality by wait ing until the fruit fully matures 
on the vine before plucking , and can access wider markets over greater distances. It also reduces 
post-harvest  loss and provides greater resilience during handling and transportation. The 
technology involved in delaying ripening includes the regulation of ethylene production (which 
causes ripening) by the fruit by ‘switching off’ or decreasing ethylene production through gene 
manipulation ( CropLife International 2016 ). 
Conversely, ripening chambers can be configured to speed up ripening at the desired time, and at 
the destination market, as well as to ripen the fruit to the point that it has the right colour, taste , 
and flavour. This can happen in chambers in which the atmosphere is controlled in terms of 
temperature ; humidi ty; and ethylene, oxygen , and carbon dioxide content. Again, this contributes 
to reductions in post -harvest  loss and ensures quality for the customer, all critical to effective  
participat ion in GVCs . 
3.9 Process automation,  machine learning, and a rtificial i ntelligence (AI)  
The automation of processes in the supply chain helps to make supply more reliable. Warehouse 
automation boosts service -level consistency and conformity to industry standards in areas such as 
pallet and carton quality , while machine learning and artificial intelligence improve  forecasting and 
automatic stock replenishment, among  other uses (Wyman 2018).  
   
8 3.10 ICT, the Internet of Things, digital platforms , and big data  
ICT allows the communication and transmission, electronic capture , and processing of 
information (Osterwalder  2002). It includes physical software and hardware as well as electronic 
technologies, resources , and techniques used to acquire, manage, store , and share infor mation and 
knowledge, and it is useful in  developing  online resources for effective task performance and to 
simplify the sharing of electronic data ( Boohene et al. 2015; Dlodlo and Kalezhi 2015; Singh  et al. 
2015). Digital platforms, along with the Internet of Things (IoT), allow for the real -time sharing 
of data. This involves various innovation techniques , such as the use of applications, blockchain 
technology , and Global Positioning Systems (GPS) , as discussed below.  
Blockchain  
Blockchain technologies enable end -to-end data transparency for fresh products , allowing all 
players in the chain to respond to customers’ demands. They  can allow for players in the value 
chain to access historical and real -time data linked to the product , such as timing (time of harvest, 
time in transport), location (its origin and the history of its journey from farm to fork) , or data on 
farming, la bour, environmental , and ethical practices and verifying standards (Kamilaris  et al. 2018; 
Chisoro- Dube  et al. 2019). Such technologies address the challenges related to limited data 
availability, the often poor quality of data in Africa, and the lack of interoperability resulting in 
high levels of manual intervention and paperwork.  
The decentralized nature and location of blockchain technology on a cloud database enables 
retailers to shar e data with customers on individual produce items . For instance, the consumer can 
scan a simple quick -response code on their smartphone, and then use an app to view every step 
of the purchased product along the supply chain.  A producer can collect and upload data on field 
location, growing conditions, soil and fertili zer use, harvest details , cold chain initiation, and the 
transportation history of their product (Chisoro- Dube  et al. 2019). Start -ups like Provenance, Arc -
Net, Bart. Digital , and Bext360 sell such traceability products for end customers (Kamilaris  et al. 
2018). 
Central to the use of blockchain technology is its ability to improve transparency  from growers to 
the consumer, which empowers producers to make better commercial decisions and fairly assess 
value and risks. At the grower level, a transparency system could capture and verify batch -level 
quality differentiators such as cold storage conditions, cultivars , and  flow of goods through the 
value chain. Particularly relevant to value -added products, a transparent value chain enables the 
documenting of people and processes, which may help to humani ze the story of the supplier, 
especially if it is an SME. Retailers also increasingly demand that producers provide transparency 
and new data such as carbon reporting. At an industry level, the decentrali zed aspect  of blockchain 
technology may also create the trust environment for carbon intensity information to be shared 
across the chain  while  maintaining the confidentiality of production information.  
Blockchain technology in value chains also brings about  other efficiencies. First, digitiz ing and 
sharing existing information removes the use of paper -based processes and enhances full value 
chain visibility. Second, digitaliz ed supply chains also create new financial opportunities by 
improving access to pr eferential lending rates. Decentrali zed technology supporting the  availability 
of granular, verified transparency data stored on a blockchain -backed system could stimulate 
financial innovations and lending. Because risk can be assessed at a more gr anular level, the existing 
financial mechanisms within the value chain can operate more efficiently. This creates potential 
for preferential financing based on verified farming practices and outcomes such as reduced 
carbon systems and land rights data. Third, blockchain technology can bring about dynamic 
insurance due to increas ed visibility of  crop risks. Fourth, there are improved quality signals  
9 through the use of product passports containing a complete history , from growing to export 
market , using the IoT. Blockchain can also enable the verification  of audits and certifier s. Lastly, 
blockchain technology creates social proof by facilitating the collection of new data points.  
The benefits of blockchain technology for small farmers and processors can be illustrated through 
services provided by companies like UK- based Provenance. Provenance has linked small players 
in developing countries with large retailers and brands such as the Co- op supermarket —the UK’s 
largest consumer co -operative. The technology has, for instance, helped to  link South- East Asi a’s 
fishing industry t o retailers by allowing the smart tagging of fish caught by fishermen providing 
verified social sustainability claims for export markets. The social and environmental conditions at 
the point of capture are verified through trusted local non- governmental organizations ( NGOs ) 
whose audit systems validate their compliance to an external standard. These standards include 
Fair Trade USA, Pole and Line Foundation Association m ember ship, and GPS (working with 
Seatracker data) (Provenance  2019) . Similarly, the Co- op has used Provenance software to track 
fresh produce and product claims from origin to supermarket. The Provenance app showcases the 
journey of fresh produce and its data through the supply chain, and links  this with system s data at 
a Co -op depot and retail outlet, building a real -time digital history for the fresh produce. The 
shopper  can, by scanning the product label,  access  product information, journeys,  and stories that 
have been  verified by the Provenance app.  
As part of the research for this study, CCRED engaged with Provenance UK to identify what 
opportunities there are for South Africa to use  this technology in the agriculture space. This is 
discussed in Section 5 below.  
However, there are also concerns around the use of such technology. Key challenges relate to 
issues of data protection, the standardization of data exchange , and the standardization of 
certification. We discuss some of these concerns below in the context of big data.  
Big data  
Retailers and consumer goods manufacturers are using large volumes of consumer data to better 
analyse and forecast changing demand patterns. This includes the gro wing use of platforms such 
as Google Cloud, Google Analytics , and Amazon Web services. These platforms enable better 
analytics, fact -based decision- making , and greater automation, resulting in more efficiencies in 
value chains (Goga and Paelo  2019a , 2019b).  
There are , however , concerns about how big firms access and use the data, and the anti -
competitive effects that may result. The use of big data can reinfor ce dominance due to network 
effects. Network effects imply that the value of a product or service increases as the number of 
users increases (Autorite de la Concurrence and Bundeskartellamt  2016). In a market with 
dominant players, the additional value cr eates a positive feedback loop whereby the biggest 
networks become even bigger. Eventually , users instinctively favour the dominant player, thus 
strengthening the position of dominant players in the market and increasing barriers to entry (Clark 
and Chatte rjee 1999).  
Analytics platforms make use of valuable information collated from various sources , such as 
customers, company websites , and loyalty cards, which often require a range of demographic data 
upon sign- up. A dominant firm is likely to have more website traffic and more customers who 
sign up for loyalty points. As such, they have more data , which  allow s them to generate more 
accurate analysis of market trends than their smaller counterparts. In so doing, the dominant firm 
may offer greater  value  and higher -quality products and services to customers. This added 
competitive advantage may increase the market share of the do minant player, resulting in a more  
10 concentrated market with greater barriers to entry (Autorite de la Concurrence and 
Bundeskartellamt  2016; Goga and Paelo  2019a). In addition, the extraction and use of customer 
data raises ethical concerns about consume r exploitation and infringement of data privacy (Goga 
and Paelo  2019a , 2019b).  
The dominance of vertically integrated platforms also raises concerns about abuse of power , as 
these platforms may exercise their market power and control over a key route to market , to the 
exclusion of smaller players. Large companies such as Amazon, Alibaba , and Takealot South Africa 
are retailers that sell their own brands of goods while  also acting as a route to market for third-
party suppliers to sell their goods (Goga and Paelo 2019a). These companies may use the data 
generated from the ir website traffic to inform their strategy for supplying goods, often leveraging 
their large integr ated manufacturing and logistics base , which at times excludes SME suppliers. For 
instance, the European Commission has opened a case to probe whether Amazon’s dual role as a 
retailer and merchant has anti -competitive effects  (European Commission 2019) . 
Platforms active in several markets may also leverage their dominance in one market to distort 
competition in another market where they do not have dominance (Pietro 2008). For instance, the 
European Commission has convicted Google for using its dominance i n general search to promote 
its comparison  shopping services, getting an undue advantage over rivals instead of competing on 
merits  (European Commission 2017) . Further, platforms such as Amazon which have significant 
market share in the automated assistant  market as well as in online retail may leverage their 
positions to gain an advantage. Currently, Amazon’s Alexa —which is a voice -controlled 
assistant —prioritizes Amazon- owned brands when making suggestions to users (Goga and Paelo 
2019a).  
4 How technolo gy has facilitated the inclusion of SMEs in food value chains in Africa  
There have been technological developments and innovations in agriculture and agro- processing 
value chains in Africa, especially in East Africa. These developments address some of the 
challenges in entering and staying competitive in agriculture and agro -processing value chains, 
along with the inclusion of previously disadvantaged and marginalized groups, such as SMEs and 
women. The discussion below considers  some of these  developments . For a comprehensive, 
recent publication on insights from East  Africa into disruptive technologies in agricultural value 
chains, see Krishnan et al. (2020). 
4.1 ICT technologies to provide financing solutions  
Limited access to finance for smallholder far mers and SME agro -processors remains one of the 
biggest challenges to participati on and growth in food value chains, particularly those situated in 
rural areas (International Finance Corporation 2017; Tinsley and Agapitova  2018). Although 
agriculture employs approx imately 65 per cent  of Africa’s population, and makes up 32  per cent  
of its GDP, less than 6  per cent  of bank lending in Africa goes to agriculture (FAO  2018). Formal 
sources of debt financing , including local and national banks  and microcredit institutions , find it 
difficult and costly to penetrate into the rural agriculture sectors due to distance from brick s-and-
mortar branch offices (Annan et al. 2015). Agriculture in  Africa is also prone to market risk, as 
prices fluctuate depending on productivity yields at particular times (Deichmann  et al.  2016; 
Samboko et al. 2018). Agricultural SMEs are often unable to provide the appropriate  business and 
financial management documents as collateral. They also often lack financial reporting capabilities 
and cannot afford to outsource services to get regular annual reports , business plans , and forecasts 
(Deichmann  et al.  2016; Samboko et al.  2018).   
11 There have been a number of innovative solutions in Africa that address some of these barriers to 
entry and improve access to finance for smallholder farmers  and rural -based agricultural business. 
Nigeria’s eWallet service, for example, allows registered smallholder farmers to transact with 
service providers and purchase agricultural inputs. Here , farmers use eWallet vouchers (through a 
mobile phone or a unique identification code) to purchase ferti lizers, seeds , and  other agricultural 
inputs from agro- dealers at half the cost, the other half being borne by the f ederal g overnment of 
Nigeria through input subsidies. This system makes it easier to ensure that inputs are supplied on 
time and in to the right hands , as the identification codes limit corruption (Annan et al.  2015).  
Kenya’s FarmDrive is a mobile platform which uses mobile technology and analytics to assess 
farmers’ risk profiles (Deichmann  et al.  2016; G SMA 2018b). The farmers can access this 
technology by using the short message service (SMS) to register ; thereafter , a comprehensive 
profile of a farm’s financial stability is created which is drawn from satellite images, weather 
forecasts, produc e buyers, agricultural dealers, and the farmers themselves.6 Financial institutions 
can then view the data and approve loans, and far mers receive the loan via M -Pesa, the ubiquitous 
mobile money transfer service in Kenya (Robb and Vilakazi 2015) . This particular technology has 
had a significant impact for female farmers , who typically have less access to financial services than 
male farmers in Kenya (G SMA 2018b). 
Mobile penetration has been growing rapidly in Afric a. In 2018, Sub -Saharan Africa had an 
estimated 456 million unique mobile subscribers, increasing by 20 million from 2017. Als o in 2018, 
239 million people, or 23 per cent  of the population, used mobile internet regularly.  It is estimated 
that b y 2025, half of the population in Sub- Saharan Africa will subscribe to mobile services (GSMA  
2019). There is therefore great potential for technologies leveraging this infrastructure to be 
introduced to address some of the barriers in agriculture in Africa.  
However, the availability and affordability of broadband coverage in all areas, particularly rural 
areas, is critical in ensuring that some of these technologies can be adopted. This is discussed in 
the context of South Africa  in Section 5 below. Related to this, the adoption of digital platforms 
and IoT technologies is also constrained by the high data prices that prevail in the region (Nhundu 
and Chin’anga 2017) . 
4.2 Digital and ICT technologies to improve market access  
Market  access is critical for suppliers of agricultural and processed products. The moderni zation 
of supermarket procurement systems and trading requirements in the region has placed pressure 
on smallholders to invest in and acquire capabilities that match thos e systems, as supermarkets 
grow and become an important route to market ( das Nair and Chisoro- Dube  2015; Gereffi and 
Lee 2016; Reardon et al.  2003). In most emerging economies, the shortage of critical agriculture 
infrastructure for storage, transportation , and warehousing of agriculture produce constrains small 
producers from reaching markets (Annan et al. 2015; Hussein an d Suttie  2016; Tinsley and 
Agapitova 2018). Agriculture SMEs also often do not have the production, processing , and  
packaging technologies to meet the standards of international markets. Similarly, agriculture SMEs 
struggle with consistent quality , reliable, and timely distribution. SMEs, especially if remotely 
located, often do not have access to relevant information about the demand and pricing of their 
products in national and international markets, limiting their reach to lower -margin and low -
volume local and regional markets (Hussein and Suttie 2016; Tinsley and Agapitova 2018).  
 
6 See www.ewb.ca/en/venture/farmdrive/#how.   
12 The application of appropriate digital technologies can help to address the lack of access to market 
information, including in terms of the ability of smaller enterpr ises to absorb and respond to 
market information. The web -based platform  Esoko  is an example of technology that has been 
used to facilitate the flow of market data. In Africa this company operates in Ghana, Kenya, 
Mauritius, Malawi, Uganda, Mozam bique , and Benin (van Schalkwyk  et al. 2017). SMS messaging 
is offered in multiple languages7 to gather and disseminate market data,  including pricing data , 
through mobile devices among farmers and traders in Africa (Narsalay  et al. 2012) . The platform 
also provides weather forecasts and crop production protocols (van Schalkwyk  et al. 2017). 
Subscribers pay a small fee to receive up to 10 SMS alerts per month and to upload buy and sell 
offers directly to the system. In addition, institutional users, such as agri -businesses, NGOs , and  
government agencies, can purchase a subscription and use the information to advise and train their 
local beneficiaries.  
Kenyan -based platform  Sokopepe  provides timely information about the price of commodities 
and farming practi ces, along with geolocations for storage facilities, suppliers of inputs , and 
extension services providers. This platform facilitates the trading of agricultural commodities. It is 
accessible online but c an also be used through SMS via  basic mobile phones.8 
Twiga Foods in Kenya is another mobile -based platform enabling  market access and information 
that links fruit  and vegetable  farmers in rural Kenya to small - and medium -sized vendors, outlets , 
and kiosks in urban Nairobi. This platform is able offer higher prices and a guaranteed market to 
farmers, and provides a reliable supply to vendors. It also helps to reduce post -harvest losses and 
waste , as it better matches demand with supply. Consumers also benefit , as they are able to buy 
fresher products at lower prices due to a more efficient supply chain. Farmers only need a feature 
phone to receive harvest receipts, and they si mply have to deliver their products to Twiga Foods 
collection centres. Thereafter they get an SMS receipt and settlement is completed within 24 hours 
using mobile money (GSMA  2018a). Vendors can place orders and pay using mobile money.  
Through their subsidiary platform Mergdata, Ghana -based company Farmerline provides 
traceability and farmer profile services, certification tracking, farm mapping, input distribution , 
and farmer education.9 Through this platform, users can tra ck produce from the farm all the way 
through the value chain by using a custom barcode that the platform creates. Users can also track 
the certification status of farmers, while  farmers are able to save and send voice message s that 
reinforce their know ledge on generally accepted practices, global sustainability standards, weather 
forecasts, prices , and agronomics tips. The platform also tracks where and when farming inputs 
are needed and how effective they are.  
Multinational companies also offer sim ilar platforms in Africa. In 2017, Mastercard launched a 
mobile marketplace for the East African region called 2Kuze that incorporates payment systems  
(Sishuba 2017) . The platform allows small farmers to co -ordinate sales, payments , and the 
distribution of crops. Buyers place orders in the app and farmers are able to notify buyers  if they 
can fulfil the order. Thereafter an agent picks up the produce and records its  weight to the app via 
Bluetooth. The agent then delivers the produce , and the farmer is paid through a mobile money 
platform.  
 
7 For instance, in Ghana messaging is in English and 12 other local dialects ( van Schalkwyk  et al. 2017).  
8 See www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/dimitra/pdf/dim_24_e_p18.pdf . 
9 See https://mergdata.com/industry .  
13 Such mobile -based platforms and apps are an easy way to greatly enhance the ability of smallholder 
farmers and agro -processors to access wider markets in Africa. These platforms , particularly the 
locally developed ones, are very responsive to local needs and challenges, and serve to reduce the 
information asymmetry in agricultural value chains. The barriers to establishing such platforms for 
local service providers in regions like East Africa appear to be surmountable , as evidenced by the 
multiple platforms that are emerging. The regulatory and competitive environment is important to 
ensure this and to encourage the entry and participation of such service providers. These 
environm ents are less open in countries like South Africa, where a very few mobile network 
operators and banks dominate, and where regulations are not favourable to new entrants. This is 
discussed in Section 6.  
4.3 Climate -smart technologies  
The research on climate c hange has identified several avenues through which climate variability 
will affect agriculture. These include rising temperatures, rising sea levels, increased snow -melt, 
change in the volume  and timing of water use for irrigation , and increased probability of extreme 
events. Since the SADC region is a semi- arid area, climate change has meant that it is often plagued 
by droughts (Davis and Vincent  2017). The frequency of weather - and climate -related disasters 
has increased since the 1970s, and S outhern Africa has become drier during the twentie th century 
(Davis and Vincent  2017), with several areas facing severe, debilitating drought. 
These droughts have meant that farmers have to change production mechanisms to include 
appropriate irrigation (where affordable), adopt drought -resistant seeds, and use more plant 
chemicals. Small farmers have inadequate capabilities to respond to and mitigate the risks of 
climate change. This is often because they have limited information about weather trends  and 
pattern s, are reliant on rainfall , and have limited access to irrigation facilities or resources to 
purchase these inputs (Mwangi and Ka riuki 2015; Nyasimi et al. 2014). Small farmers may also 
have limited access to drought -resistant seeds , as the ma jority in the region tend to use seeds 
retained from the previous years’ produce given that they cannot afford to buy new seeds (Mwangi 
and Kiriuki  2015).  
There have been multiple mechanisms and technologies employed to mitigate some of the risks 
associat ed with climate change ( Bucci  et al. 2018; Nyasimi et al. 2014; Tinsley and Agapitova  2018). 
For instance, in Kenya a small start -up called Illuminum Greenhouses supplies greenhouses and 
drip irrigation kits equipped with SMS -controlled solar -powered sensors (GSMA  2018a). The 
system allows smallholder farmers and farm owners to monitor an d regulate conditions remotely 
via SMS. The start -up claims that  by controlling water via irrigation schedules, farmers using their 
greenhouses can reduce water usage by up to 60 per cent (GSMA  2018a). The reported impact has 
been sig nificant —for 300 farmers using the technology, production increased by 70  per cent  while 
incomes increased by 60  per cent . Expansion into Uganda and Tanzania was also being considered  
(Bett , no date) . 
An agricultural technologies company in Kenya, Ujuzi Kilimo, assists small farmers with p recision 
farming  and data analytics , as well as  climate -smart farming.10 Ujuzi Kilimo uses sensor 
technologies to capture soil and farm data, which are subsequently used to advise on fertilizer, 
seeds, and best practice to maximize yields and for sustainable farming. The platform also provides  
insight on crop cycles an d weather patterns. In 2017, the start -up helped 200 rural farmers to 
increase productivity by 36  per cent  over one year through its US$20 package for complete soil 
 
10 See https://www.ujuzikilimo.com/index.html#home .  
14 analysis and $6 annual subscription. Flexible payment options through mobile money platform M-
Pesa make it more accessible to farmers in rural areas.11 
Ethiopia’s Agricultural Transformation Agency has developed the Ethiopian Soil Information 
System or EthioSIS. This system is a digital soil map analysing the country’s soils down to a 
resolution of 10 k m by 10 km which is updated regularly  (Annan et al. 2015). The system enables 
small farmers to obtain valuable information to improve their investment capabilities , in that they 
are able to asses s and identify which fertili zers, seeds , and other technological inputs would be the 
most profitable to inv est in given the soil characteristics. Results in the early stages of the 
implementation of the system suggested that the soil mapping resulted in yield improvement s of 
up to 65  per cent  as a result of  more informed use of fertili zers and better soil management  (ATA 
2016) . 
These innovations have helped participating small farmers to more effectively integrate into  
agricultural value chains and have increased their productivity and their income. Althoug h a 
comprehensive assessment of the full extent of such platforms is beyond the scope of this paper, 
a preliminary scoping suggests that many of these are in East African countries where there are a 
large number of smallholder farmers. Several, although not all, of these innovations are 
spearheaded by small tech start -ups and appear not to be widely adopted at a national level by 
governments. Governments in the Southern Africa  region in particular are for the  most part still 
focused on early-stage technologies, including primary mechani zation and inputs to the growing 
process (such as fertilizer and seeds subsidies).  There are lessons to be learnt in order that  
governments can also actively support the agricultural sector through enabling the use of such 
technologies or, at the very least, creating a conducive environment for start -ups to offer these 
services more widely.  
5 Technologies used in agriculture and agro -processing in South Africa  
Unlike East Africa, agricultural markets in South Africa and in other Southern African countries 
are typically highly concentrated and dominated by large, commercial farmers. A fringe of 
smallholder farmers mainly serves very narrow locali zed markets or communities. Markets in agro -
processing  value chains are also highly concentrated (Mtombeni  et al. 2019), in which a few, often 
multinational firms dominate. It is generally these large firms develop and adopt innovative 
systems and t echnologies. This section assesses some of the technologies adopted in fresh fruit 
and selected processed food industries in South Africa and the drivers behind them.  
5.1 Technologies in fresh fruit value chains  
Digitaliz ation of value chains  
Several indu stry and government systems and procedures in the agricultural sector in South Africa 
are still largely paper -based. The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) (now 
the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development —DALRRD),  has been 
slow in adopting and implementing electronic systems of capturing data. Although there are 
developments as we discuss below,12 most processes remain paper -based, and on email and 
spreadsheet systems. The delays in digital migration are exacerbated by the department’s 
 
11 See https://startup.info/ujuzikilimo .  
12 Unless otherwise referenced, th is discussion is drawn from Chisoro-Dube and das Nair  (2018).   
15 constraints around capacity in terms of human resources, skills , and lack of implementation of 
policies (Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019).  
In the case of fresh fruit, reliance on paperwork and manual processes of capturing data on the 
registration of orchards, phytosanitary records of growers , and  shipping information results in 
considerable time  wasted and human errors. The paper -based process of exporting fruit and 
acquiring phytosanitary certification requires that growers physically frequent government offices 
to sign paperwork (Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019).  
In re sponse to the challenges of manual intervention and paper -based systems, the industry 
association in the fruit sector, Fruit South Africa (FSA), and specifically the Citrus Growers’ 
Association (CGA), in conjunction with DAFF developed a platform for e lectronic data 
interchange (EDI) called Phytclean in 2016. Phytclean is an electronic digital platform used to 
capture, store , and  report data for export phytosanitary certification  (Hardman 2016) . The 
platform captures information on the registration of orchards, enables instant updates and 
verification of orchards  and phytosanitary records of growers , and  ultimately issues electronic 
certificates. As such, Phytclean provides electronic evidence as an alternative to the paper -based 
system for all the requisite steps in the certification process. All relevant parties in the value chain , 
including importing -country authorities , can access th ese data. With the new digi tal platform, after 
a product is cleared and the  sanitary and phytosanitary  (SPS) requirements are met, the product is 
signed off electronically without the growers having to visit government offices and sign 
paperwork. The electronic certification (e -cert) of phytosanitary standards was successfully piloted 
in the citrus industry in September 2018 from South Africa to the Netherlands (Chisoro- Dube  et 
al. 2019).  
Estimates are that the Phytclean platform will save the fruit industry ZAR 250 million over five 
years. The s uccess of the platform was evidenced when EU legislation required compliance in 
relation  to the false codling moth in 2018. This necessitated specific and special management 
processes through the value  chain to ensure market access in the EU. Through Phytclean, this was 
possible and South Africa was able to continue exporting to the EU. The platform is owned by 
FSA. As of 2018, there were 3,000 registered users in the citrus, apple, pear, peach, nectarine, table 
grape , and pomegranate markets. Other players in the value chain, such as growers, packhouses, 
exporters , and other service providers, are also connected to it.  
There are questions , however , about who is able to access this system and at what costs. The 
availability and affordability of access ing the platform f or non-FSA industry association members, 
who are likely to be smaller and black farmers, may be limited. From a governance p erspective, 
the power wielded by the industry association in  controlling such platforms determine s the 
conditions for inclusion and exclusion in value chains. There is a role for government support in 
such circumstances , to enable outsiders to access the se platforms on fair terms —or to access 
similar platforms , as we discuss in Section 6.  
The a doption of digital systems like EDI improve s process efficiency along the value chain. To 
complement and reali ze the benefits of industry -wide initiatives towards  electronic certification 
and data -sharing systems, individual firms in South Africa, particularly large producers, are 
implement ing EDI systems within their own supply chains. Such systems integrate information in 
the packhouse and cold chain facilities rather than using paper -based systems. This technology 
allows for the seamless monitoring of supply chain processes as the system synchronizes the 
information from the pack house and cold storage facility and then produces comprehensive 
reports and documentation. Tablet devices installed with apps that use cloud storage are used to 
conduct at the source ( i.e. at the farms) the audits and inspections necessary to acquire 
accreditation in export markets (Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019).  
16 Blockchain  
Similar ly to the above, the fruit industry is also adopting blockchain- powered data systems to create 
new value exchanges. Currently, blockchain technology is being used in limited cases to process 
payments in fruit trading, which has drastically reduced the speed with which payments are 
processed. For example, some producers use a company called Traderly, which utili zes blockchain 
to fast -track trade payments by converting US dollars into cryptocurrency in South Africa. In 
comparison with the traditional ‘ SWIFT’ payment method, this technology has sped up the 
payment process from 3 –5 days  to 15 minutes (Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019).  
As highlighted in Section 3, there are numerous opportunities to use blockchain more widely in 
agriculture and agro -processing value chains. As also noted, CCRED engaged Provenance UK on 
what opportunities there are for blockchain in the South African horticulture sector. In early 2019, 
a preliminary workshop was held with stakeholders in the avocad o industry to explore the potential 
applications of blockchain. This involved exploring the opportunities for digitally enabled avocado 
supply chains focusing on value -add and efficiency. Several opportunities were identified ,13 
including allowing for the  sharing of richer data points in the chain to support sales —for instance, 
providing data on carbon footprint and living wage proof; tracking the impact of retailer -funded 
community programmes; sharing the authentic origin stories of avocados across the  value chain , 
which is something that is important for small growers; and creating operational efficiencies by 
improving existing processes and decision- making.  
Despite these benefits, several challenges were also highlighted that limit the adoption of di gitally 
enabled supply chains in South Africa. These include long technology investment cycles in 
established value chains which mean that returns are only likely to occur several years after the 
investment is made. To overcome this, especially for SME gro wers, there needs to be some 
financial support to encourage adoption. Switching costs from incumbent systems also remain 
high partly because of a lack of trust in  new platforms like blockchain. Training and workshops 
on the features and benefits of such platforms are needed to increase awareness. External 
regulation and audits are part of the costs to operate such systems to maintain their  integrity. These 
challenges can be extended to products other than avocados.  In the case of avocados, there was 
low appetite to disrupt the status quo among  growers without significant change in pull from the 
market, including through supermarket outlets. Given the nature of traded fresh produce , which 
has relatively low customer loyalty, there may not be sufficient motivation for supermarket chains 
to co -invest over a longer term.  
There have also been local applications of blockchain in the citrus industry in South Africa. For 
example, a grower and producer of citrus fruits, Katlego Sitrus, is exporting fruits with stickers 
which have a quick -response barcode. Consumers can scan the barcode with their smartphones, 
then access video clips about Katlego’s production and packaging processes. Such platforms 
address the historic challenges related to limited data, often of poor quality, difficult to verify , and 
recorded in different formats at different stages of the value chain , resulting in high levels of 
manual intervention and paperwork.  
Overall, although decentrali zed blockchain technology is expected to bring about a number of 
digital efficiencies in the value chain, it is important to note that this is a relatively nascent 
technology and as such the benefits are not yet well  established.  There are still a number of 
challenges associated with the use of blockchain technology. As a decentrali zed data system, it is 
slower to process large transactions , especially if it is a public platform and there are various 
 
13 Provenance post -workshop report for CCRED, U niversity of J ohannesburg , April 2019.   
17 efficient systems currently available. Another challenge regarding blockchain technology relates to 
issues of scalability.  
Automated sens ing, grading, and  sorting technologies  
The use of automated grading technology and high- resolution cameras taking pictures of fruit and 
identifying defects has dramatically improved the quality and speed of sorting in packhouses  (Tru-
News, no date  [a]). This has resulted  in efficiency improvements in exporting and higher prices. 
For example, Tru -Cape Fruit Marketing, one of South Africa’s largest marketing companies of 
apples and pears installed a new 10 -lane sorting equipment that can process eight fr uits per second 
per lane. This technology is combined with the new iFA light technology to determine any internal 
irregularities and is installed with camera- scanning equipment  (Tru -News, no date  [b]). 
There have been public –private collaborative efforts,  other than Phytclean, in the fruit sector in 
South Africa. Through the Post -Harvest Innovation Programme, a public –private partnership 
between the Department of Science and Technology (DST) and the Fresh Produce Exporters 
Forum, a range of technological solutions related to logistics, transport , and  packaging, is being 
developed. These include validation of time and temperature tolerances, cooling efficiency , and 
the maintenance of product quality, modified atmosphere packaging, air freight cold c hain 
management and traceability systems.14 
Biotechnology  
The impacts of climate change and weather variability in the Southern Africa region are driving 
investments in advanced breeding technologies to grow varieties that are adaptable to climate 
change , with improved resistance to diseases and pests (insects, weeds , and  pathogens). For 
example, the citrus industry in South Africa has been successful in developing new local varieties 
of soft citrus such as mandarins. These include  a branded mandarin variety called ClemenGold, 
successfully launched into the world markets, and the Tango mandarin variety. The ClemenGold 
mandarin brand is being rolled out to include other branded citrus products such as the 
LemonGold, HoneyGold, and NavelGold. Tango’s  plant breeders ’ rights were granted in So uth 
Africa in March 2016, confirming that it is now registered as an individual variety in its own right  
(Mein tjes 2017) . 
Although the South African fruit industry has access to locally bred varieties (through the 
Agricultural Research Council) and open (typically older) varieties, the industry relies largely on 
imported varieties. The stone fruit industry has imported more t han 4,000 stone fruit varieties 
since 1994. In 2017, of the planted plum trees, 870,000 were ‘open’ varieties that are freely 
accessible without conditions  while 915,000 were ‘protected’ varieties with producer limitations 
and marketing condit ions. Importing new varieties into South Africa involves  an extended period 
of time in quarantine (currently two years) before the  varieties  can be used for commercial 
production, causing major delays for growers in  plant ing new varieties. The qu arantine process 
involves laboratory testing to ensure that the imported varieties are free of pests and diseases. The 
length of time it takes for imported varieties to pass through quarantine could be greatly reduced 
to improve the local growing of new  varieties. In response to the lengthy processes involved in 
importing new varieties, Citrus Research International (CRI) , under the Citrus Growers ’ 
Association of Southern Africa (CGA) , conducts evaluations of new citrus cultivars focusing on 
the cul tivar’s characteristics, its climatic suitability , and its  commercial potential in the market.  
 
14 See https://postharvestinnovation.org.za.   
18 The ownership of cultivars and plant genetics is also an important aspect for participation in fruit 
value chains. In the berries industry, for instance, imported varieties in South Africa are owned by 
three leading producers globally (BerryWorld, United Exports , and Haygrove). These producers 
have the breeding licenc es to produce new plant s/seedlings from the parent plant and have 
contracts with universities and Costco to disseminate the tree seedlings. As such, any new farmer 
planning to produce blueberries would have to buy plants from the incumbents who own the 
licences to the plant genetics. New farmers are also required to  sell their produce through the 
incumbent in exchange for payment of royalties and commission for marketing services. This 
means that intellectual property ( IP) holders possess considerable market power and are able to 
extract rents at each level of th e value chain from growing to the  marketing of the product in 
export markets. The development of quality varieties or genetic material is critical in the berries 
industry (Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019).  
Crop pest and disease technologies  
While biotechnology contributes to producing more pest - and disease -resistant varieties, 
technological advances in software can link fruit growers’ weather data to actual pest risk. This 
involves using  weather technology through solar -powered wir eless weather stations to gather real -
time temperature, humidity, rain, and leaf wetness data which is used to generate stepped risk levels 
to warn the farmer about when conditions are most susceptible to pest development.  For example, 
Katlego Sitrus has developed a scouting smartphone app designed to speed up and improve pest 
and disease identification and treatment. Using the app, a scout can take a photograph of the pest 
or disease on the tree or plant, then upload the image to a database in real ti me for immediate 
identification and treatment  (den Hartigh 2016) . 
At an industry level, C RI and River BioScience, a commercial subsidiary of the C GA, conduct 
extensive research on pre - and post -harvest diseases of citrus, crop protection products , and pest 
monitoring products. The association has an integrated pest and disease management division 
focusing on both indigenous and introduced pests.  
Irrigation technologies  
Increased weather variability and water scarcity are driving key disruptions at the growing level 
through the application of irrigation technologies and precision farming methods. Satellite imagery 
and high- resolution crop sensors are used to inform the application of the right amounts of 
irrigation or fertili zer, while optical sensors or drones are used to identify crop health across the 
field. For example, avocado growing companies such as Westfalia are adopting the use of low -flow 
drip irrigation technologies in their farming methods, controlled by mobile phones. The recent 
droughts in South Africa are increasingly forcing growers to adopt irrigation and precision farming 
technologies to maintain and improve production. In response to water challenges, t he Western 
Cape Department of Agriculture developed an online application called FruitLook in May 2016 to 
provide farmers with accurate and reliable information on the water needs of crops.15 At an 
industry level, C RI conducts long -term research on how to improve water use efficacy in citrus 
orchards. A key part of the research focuses on understanding the basic principles involved in 
different fruit physiology and irrigation scheduling, which are critical to increas ing production and 
fruit quality.  
The above discussion highlights how the fruit sector has been at the forefront of innovation and 
adopting technologies in agriculture in South Africa. Many of these initiatives are driven by the 
 
15 See www.fruitlook.co.za .  
19 private  sector . Powerful industry associations backed by large  lead firms  have been at the forefront 
of developing and adopting these technologies. These associations have, in certain cases, joined 
forced with government to roll out certain  technologies. Especially  in citrus, this has served to 
propel and maintain South Africa’s strong global position in citrus exports ( as the second- largest 
exporter globally). Creating greater access and lowering the cost of access to these or similar 
technologies is important to ensur ing that more players in these value chains, and not just those 
that are part of industry associations, are able to benefit from them.  
5.2 Technologies in selected processed food product value chains  
While the previous section evaluates the role that innovation and technology play in fresh produce 
value chains, an ongoing project funded by the UK’s Global Challenges Research Fund on 
‘Innovation and Inclusive Industrialization in Agro -Processing’ provides insights on the role of 
innovation and technolog y in selected processed food value chains. This project, which will be 
completed by mid- 2021, is undertaken by CCRED at the University of Johannesburg, the Centre 
for African Studies at the University of Edinburgh,  and the Economic and Social Research 
Foundation of Tanzania. Below we discuss some preliminary findings on technologies from over 
50 field interviews with small and medium -sized maize millers and dairy processors in South Africa 
as part of this project. These findings have implications for the inclusion of SMEs in these value 
chains.  
Maize milling  
Although the maize milling or mealie  meal production process has fundamentally remained the 
same for many generations, and the industry is relatively mature, some SME milling companies in 
South Af rica have upgraded their products and production processes through the adoption of 
technologies. Various technologies have been employed at different levels of the value chain in 
response to changing market conditions.  
Milling companies typically make use of ICT technologies as part of their procurement of maize 
from the upstream level of the value chain. Industry association Grain SA  makes market 
information on pricing and usage of grain commodities  available to its members through ICT 
(Sihlobo et  al. 2014) . Millers typically use the internet to keep track of prices , and the industry 
trades maize and hedges trades using prices and differentials published daily and annually by Grain 
SA. In addition, millers also use the internet to keep track of mar ket trends and conditions 
associated with the supply of maize. This allows millers to speculate  on whether or not to buy 
maize in advance in anticipation of an increase in prices . Given the impacts of climate change on 
crop production since the 2014 /15 drought in the region, this is particularly important.  
Prior to processing, grading and testing technologies are necessary to meet food safety 
requirements and product specifications. For instance, in South Africa, white mealie meal made 
from white gra de 1 maize is generally preferred by consumers, while  other products such as grits 
and animal feed allow for the use of yellow maize at different grades. Grading technologies allow 
the maize to be  sorted into these different grades. There is limited public sector support for testing 
facilities, making it difficult for SMEs , which  then have to rely on more expensive private testing 
labs. 
In terms of processing technologies, some SME millers use cleanin g and conditioning machinery 
to improve the quality of the maize products they make. The cleaning machinery washes the maize 
prior to milling in an attempt to get rid of as much foreign material as possible , while  the 
conditioning ma chinery adds moisture to the maize to ensure that the bran peels off easily during 
milling. This technology results in better -quality maize products. Larger milling companies have  
20 invested in optical technologies to get rid of black specks in mealie meal,  producing higher -quality 
maize meal that can be sold at higher prices. However, this machinery was found to be too 
expensive for small and medium -sized millers. This has implications f or the quality of the products 
that smaller millers are able produce relative to larger players, and negatively affects their 
competitiveness.  
Processors also employ technologies to make value -added products fortified with minerals and 
vitamins, such as flavoured maize meal and porridges. Such product upgrading requires new  
processes and equipment , which relatively small and medium -sized players appear to be investing 
in. 
At the packaging level, medium -sized firms are starting to use technologies to automate packaging, 
while , as would be expected, this is commonplace with large firms . Automating packaging results 
in less waste and more consistent product , as it eliminates the variability in how much product is 
in each package. In addition, automated packaging allows for a cleaner and safer product , as the 
product is not subjected to contamination while it is packaged. Food safety standards are more 
likely to be met through automated packaging, allowing access to RVCs and GVCs , especially 
through supermarkets.  
Cloud computing and int egrated reporting systems further allow for the generation of better and 
more accurate records for meeting food safety requirements. Some millers make use of cloud 
computing and integration software to sync maize grading records with information collected at 
the processing plant , such as moisture and protein content. This information can often be accessed 
at different locations , as it is typically stored using cloud computing. Furthermore, millers use ICT 
and computer systems to conduct e -business.  This includes marketing and communicating with 
customers. Some millers use social media platforms such as Facebook and LinkedIn to market 
their products and interact with their customers ; other millers take orders from customer using 
platforms such as  WhatsApp. In addition, some millers are aiming to completely do away with 
cash transactions for safety purposes, using electronic or digital payment methods instead.  
Overall, the technologies in milling are fairly basic and aside from automated packaging and optical 
sorting, it appears that SME millers are able to adapt to other technologies relatively easily —
although a lack of skilled workers and access to finance were still highlighted in interviews as major 
constraints. However, the cost of the da ta, which continues to be a problem in South Africa 
(although there have been recent interventions), hampers access to even the most basic technology. 
We discuss this in Section 6.  
Milk production and dairy processing  
At the upstream raw milk production le vel, feed technologies have been used to ensure that cattle 
yield enough good- quality milk to supply the dairy processing industry. These technologies are 
particularly relevant given climate change implications f or the quantity and quality of grass 
available, along with the availability of water for cattle. At the primary level, farmers also optimize 
the breed of dairy cows that they  use. For instance, J ersey cows produce milk with a high fat 
content and consume less water than Holstein- Friesland cows. Biotechnology and genetic 
manipulation are important to ensure that the desired characteristics are achieved. Cloud 
computing and integrated software systems are also used to monitor the milking of the  cows , along 
with keeping records of the milk quality. Good record- keeping regarding  milk quality can greatly 
assist milk producers and ensure better quality of milk.  
Critically , at the dairy processing level  technology is needed to ensure that dairy products such as  
milk, cheese, yoghurt, cream , and others are safe for human consumption. Dairy products are  
21 prone to contamination that result s in severe adverse health effects. Most dairy products are 
temperature -sensitive and need to remain refrigerated to stay safe to consume. Throughout the 
value chain, products need to be stored and transported in temperature -controlled equipment and 
refrig erated trucks. At the processing level, there are basic processes that milk must undergo in 
order to be ready for consumption. The basic pasteurization of milk is a mandatory health and 
safety requirement for milk used in products for human consumption, al though there are emerging 
market trends of consumers now seeking to consume raw milk for wellness -related purposes. This 
requires good testing facilities, which again is difficult and expensive for SMEs, with a lack of 
public ly available and reliable labs, especially in rural areas. There have  been efforts to create 
mobile labs and testing facilities to reach farmers in rural areas,  but these initiatives are still in early 
phases of development  (interview with Council for Scientific and Industr ial Research , CSIR ). 
In South Africa, consumers prefer homogeni zed dairy products. The process of homogeni zing 
involves breaking down the fat molecules in milk such that they remain integrated and do not 
separate as cream when the milk is resting. M any small dairy producers utilize homogeni zing 
machinery and processes to enhance their fresh milk to suit consumer tastes. Some medium -sized 
processors further invest in separating machinery , which allows cream and fat to be extracted  from 
milk. The growing demand for ultra -high-temperature (UHT) milk has also led to investments in 
technologies to produce this, although because this equipment is expensive, SME processors often 
do not invest in it. To produce other value -added products like cheese, butter, yoghurt , and amasi 
(sour milk), biotechnology is needed to produce cultures, and incubators with temperature sensors 
are crucial.  
At the packaging level, processors use automated machinery to perform specific functions. For  
instance, cheese -making companies use slicing and grating machinery to package cheese in 
different sizes, and milk processors use automated bottling machinery.  
Given the challenges with maintaining constant and affordable electricity supply, many small 
processors are using or looking to use renewable energy technology like solar power to perform 
functions such as warming water for cleaning machinery and powering cold storage infrastructure.  
The use of technology and innovation is more significant in dairy  than in milling, largely because 
of the nature and perishability of dairy products, and the degree of value addition possible. Greater 
use of even basic technology can grow production, lower costs , and increase domestic and export 
opportunities in bot h of these value chains. Unlike some of the examples in fruit in the previous 
section, most technologies in dairy and milling are fairly standard,  and with support  they can be 
made easily accessible to SME processors. These technologies are important for SME processors 
to access formal supermarket shelf space. Given  food safety requirements and the escalating 
private standards of supermarket chains, technology can assist SMEs in product and process 
upgrading to access supermarket networks in the S outhern Africa  region. While some technologies 
such as  automated packaging may have implications f or employment in these sectors, the potential 
to grow volumes and access new markets can result in overall employment gain. A lack of skills 
and the high cost  of finance for SMEs need to be addressed across these and many other processed 
food product mark ets in South Africa.  
6 Conclusions: challenges and constraints to adopting technology and policy 
recommendations  
In this paper we have discussed a wide, albeit non -exhaustive, range of innovations and 
technologies in agriculture and agro- processing in Afr ica. The i nnovation and adoption of  
22 technologies can play a powerful role in the upgrading of players in these value chains in Southern 
Africa. This has the potential to facilitate the inclusion of SMEs into local, regio nal, or global value 
chains in a number of ways , including through improving productivity, lowering costs, improving 
quality, enabling access  to finance, providing transparency and traceability, allowing adapt ation  to 
climate change , and  meeting retail and export standards. The impact on other forms of inclusion, 
such as inclusion of women, has not been evaluated in this paper.  
Innovation and technology , however , also have the potential to exclude players who cannot access 
them on favourable terms, either for financial reasons or because the technology is controlled by 
lead firms or groupings of lead firms. This can perpetuate the existing high levels of concentration 
in agricultural and agro- processing value chains in the region. The governance and power dynamics 
in such situations determine who can access the technology. As highlighted, this may be the case 
when lead firms or industry associations develop, own , and control the technology. This may lead 
to the exclusion of non- industry members, or small and often black farmers in the case of South 
Africa. Creating greater access and lowering the cost of access to these or similar technologies is 
important to ensure t hat more players in these value chains are able to benefit from them. There 
is a role for government support in this regard. While adopting new technologies has been driven 
primarily by the private sector, where large firms have substantial existing capabi lities in research 
and technology development, partnerships  and the alignment of priorities between government 
and the private sector are necessary to ensure greater inclusivity and participation.  
Similarly, advances in biotechnology , for instance , can increase the  market power of firms wh ich 
own the licenses for plant or animal genetics. These  firms then  control who participate s and the 
terms of participation , including through the payment of royalties and commissions for marketing 
services. Th is control can extend to how much is produced and marketed by licensees. Such IP 
holders possess considerable market power and are able to extract rents at each level , from the 
growing to the marketing of the product. This is essentially a form of captive governance of the 
value chain. While the incorporation of other players may occur through licencing, this may be on 
adverse terms. Appropriate regulation, including competition regulation, is important to identify 
and address concerns about the  potential  abuse of power in such circumstances.  
The wide spread  use of mobile and internet -related technology to incorporate smallholder farmers 
in the agricultural sector in East Africa has been illustrated in this and other studies. Krishnan et 
al. (2020) , for instance , find that in the East African Community ( EAC ) the most prevalent use of 
technology in agricultur e—with between 66 and 86  per cent  of sampled firms using it —was in the 
data-connected devices category. Within this category, marketplaces (platforms) were the most 
important. In South Africa , however, the high cost of data has been a long -standing concern, 
severely limiting the affordability of using such (and other internet -related) technologies in 
agriculture. The costs of data of the major mobile operators in South Africa were found to be 
about three times higher than in countries such as Kenya. Contributing to these high costs is the 
South African government’s delay in releasing available spectrum , which would allow for greater 
competition and lower costs  (Roberts and Zalk  2019). There has , however , very recently 
(10 March  2020) been a landmark settlement agreement between the Competition Commission of 
South Africa and the largest mobile network operator, Vodacom, to reduce data prices by over 30  
per cent . This followed a market inquiry on high data costs in the country. The other main mobile 
network operators are likely to soon announce similar reductions in data costs. This will have far -
reaching, positive implications f or the use of several data- connected technologies in the country. 
However, the matter of releasing additional spectr um to encourage competition, improve 
connectivity to rural farming areas, and reduce costs  still needs urgent regulatory and political will 
to materiali ze.  
23 The power of mobile money platforms to support smallholder farmers is also clearly evident in 
East Africa, particularly in Kenya. In South Africa, the barriers to entry for providing mobile 
money products are high. This includes the regulatory barriers which require banking licences for 
mobile offerings or partnering with existing banks. This has made it difficult for mobile network 
operators to innovate and react quickly to market needs (Finmark Trust  2017). The regulatory 
framework needs to change to facilitate more easy entry and the growth of mobile money 
platforms.  
Taking advantage of digital disr uptions introduced by blockchain and the IoT  requires that 
government departments and relevant stakeholders shift from paper -based systems to electronic 
processes of capturing data in the industry. This requires building widely accessible systems or 
platforms to enable the linking and sharing of ele ctronic data between producers, relevant 
government departments, ports, logistics , and  other industry stakeholders. Currently, there are no 
systems for linking producers’ in- house systems to ports, logistics companies , and shipping lines —
causing co ngestion at the ports (Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019). 
There is a critical lack of skills in many markets, and this is exacerbated by the demand for the new 
skills required to operate new technologies. Skills development is urgently needed in partnership 
with the private sector to meet the demand for different and more advanced skills and to 
ameliorate losses of low -skill jobs in some processes (Chisoro- Dube  et al.  2019). 
Government should also play a key role in supporting the development of testing and research 
facilities , along with the broad- based adoption of new technologies for the overall growth of 
agricultural and agro -processing markets. This includes investment in laboratory equipment and 
skills to promot e the local breeding of varieties for greater control over production. This can be 
extended to the Southern Africa  region, investing in regional testing facilities and labs, or regional 
centres of excellence in agriculture and agro -processing.  
Development finance for investment in capabilities and learning is also necessary  in the adopt ion 
of new technologies. There is a need for ‘ patient capital’ , given that time and scale may be required 
to benefit from some of the technological disruptions (Bell  et al. 2018).  
Scale and network economies are resulting in the growing dominance of large platforms. Platforms 
are also increasingly vertically integrating into supply and logistics networks, creating concerns 
about  foreclosure and leverage abuses. There is a need for competition authorities in the Southern 
Africa  region to be alert to possible abuses of market power and to act on these abuses to curb 
anti-competitive outcomes. The collect ion and us e of big data by these and other platforms further 
requires a national data regulatory policy to be formulated and adopted to govern and protect the  
ownership and use  of this data . 
Lastly, there is an urgent need for better co -ordination between government departments and 
institutions such as the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development ; the 
Department of Trade and Industry ; the Department of Science and Technology ; the Agriculture 
Research Council ; and the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, to create an enabling 
environment for the development and adoption of technolog y. Partnerships with the private sector 
are essential to b uilding dynamic capabilities, and policy decisions in this space need close public –
private collaboration. The role of technology and innovation in making agricultural value chains 
more inclusive needs to be taken into account in key policy interventions i n the sector, such as in 
the current development of the South African Agriculture and Agro- processing Masterplan . 
   
24 References  
Annan, K., G. Conway, and S. Dryden  (2015) . ‘African Farmers in the D igital Age: How D igital 
Solutions Can Enable Rural Development ’. Foreign Affairs , November/December ( special 
issue). 
ATA (Agricultural Transformation Agency) (2016).  ‘Soil Fertility Information Is Transforming 
Agriculture in Ethiopia’. Food & Business Knowledge Platform, 17 June. Available at: 
https://news.trust.org/item/20160617071005- vwa8o/?source=hpMostPopularBlogs  
(accessed 27 March 2020).  
Autorite de la Concurrence and Bundeskartellamt (2016). Competition Law and Data. Bonn: 
Bundeskartellamt. Available a t: www.bundeskartellamt.de/SharedDocs/Publikation/DE/  
Berichte/Big%20Data%20Papier.pdf;jsessionid=D49470E80279FCA4A61DB9FF5651694
2.2_cid378?__blob=publicationFileandv=2  (accessed 5  March  2020) . 
Baregheh, A., J. Rowley, S. Sambrook , and D. Davies  (2012). ‘Innovation in F ood Sector 
SMEs ’. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development , 19(2 ): 300–21. 
Bell, J., S. Goga, P. Mondliwa, and S. Roberts  (2018). ‘Structural Transformation in South Africa: 
Moving Towards a S mart Open Economy for A ll’. Working Paper 9/2018. J ohannesburg:  
CCRED . 
Best Food Facts (2015). ‘How Technology Helps Crops Grow’. Best Food Facts, 15 October. 
Available at: www.bestfoodfacts.org/how -technology -helps -crops -grow  (accessed 27 March 
2020).  
Bett, B. (no date) . ‘Illuminum Greenhouses, Kenya: Smart Mobile Farming’. Changemakers. 
Available at: www.changemakers.com/globalgoals2015/entries/illuminum -greenhouses -
kenya (accessed 27 March 2020).  
Bonakele, T. (2020). ‘Announcement of the Competition Commission South Africa –Vodacom 
Agreement ’. Speech by the Commissioner , Tembinkosi Bonakele , in a press conference , 
Pretoria, South Africa , 10 March 2020. Available at: www.compcom.co.za/wp -
content/uploads/2020/03/Vodacom -consent -agreement -press -conf-Speaking -notes -for-
Commissioner -.pdf (accessed  27 March  2020).  
Boohene, R., D. Ofori, B.D. Boateng, and K.A. Boohene  (2015). ‘Information and 
Communication Technology U sage and Small and M edium -Sized E nterprises G rowth in the 
Accra Metropolis ’. Journal of Business and Enterprise Development , 5(1): 101–10. 
Bucci, G., D. Bentivoglio, and A. Finco  (2018). ‘Precision a Griculture as a D river for S ustainable 
Farming S ystems: S tate of A rt in L iterature and R esearch ’. Calitatea , 19(S1) : 114–21. 
Caraça, J., B. Å. Lundvall, and S. Mendonça  (2009). ‘The Changing Role of Science in the 
Innovation Process: From Queen to Cinderella? ’ Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change , 76(6): 861–67. 
Cell Press (2018). ‘How Plant Breeding T echnologies Could Make Fruits and Vegetables More 
Exciting to Eat’. Science News , 19 July. Available at: www.sciencedaily.com/releases/  
2018/07/180719142113.htm  (accessed 27 March 2020) . 
CGA (Citrus Growers Association) and DAFF (Department of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries) (2018). ‘Government and Agri Partner for Innovation: New Paperless System Saves 
South Africa’s  Fruit Export Sector R250m ’. FarmingPortal, 23 November. Available at: 
www.farmingportal.co.za/index.php/all -agri-news/press -release/985- government -and-agri- 
25 partner -for-innovation- new-paperless -system -saves -south- africa -s-fruit-export -sector -r250m  
(accessed 27 March 2020).  
Chisor o-Dube, S. , and R. das Na ir (2018).  ‘Technological Developments and the “Industrialisation 
of Freshness” in Fresh Fruit Supply’. Digital Industrial Policy Brief 3.  Rosebank: Industrial 
Development Think Tank.  Available at: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/  
52246331e4b0a46e5f1b8ce5/t/5be44f18562fa793d93d48e5/1541689115693/DIP+Brief+3
.pdf (accesse d 27 March  2020).  
Chisoro- Dube, S., R. das Nair, and N. Landani  (2019). ‘Technological Developments in South 
Africa’s Fruit Industry and I mplications for M arket Access and P articipation ’. Working Paper 
2019/5. Johannesburg: CCRED.  
Clark, B.H., and S. Chatterjee  (1999). ‘The Evolution of D ominant Market Shares: The Role of 
Network E ffects ’. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice , 7(2): 83–96. 
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (2012). ‘ Developing New Fruit Varieties’. New York: 
Cornell University. Available at: www.hort.cornell.edu/brown/pdfs/newfruitimpact.pdf  
(accessed 27 March 2020).  
CropLife International (2016). ‘Plant Biotechnology Can Delay Ripening in Fruits’. CropLife 
International, 6 June. Available at:  https://croplife.org/news/plant -biotechnology -can-delay -
ripening -in-fruits  (accessed 27  March  2020).  
Dallas, M.P., S. Ponte, and T.J. Sturgeon (2019). ‘Power in G lobal Value Chains ’. Review of 
International Political Economy , 26(4) : 666–94. 
Das Nair, R. , and S. Chisor o-Dube  (2015). ‘The Expansion of R egional Supermarket Chains: 
Changing Models of R etailing and the I mplications for L ocal Supplier Capabilities in South 
Africa, Botswana, Zambia, and Zimbabwe ’. WIDER Working Paper 1 14/2015 . Helskinki:  
UNU -WIDER . 
Das Nair, R. , and S. Chisoro- Dube  (2017). ‘The Expansion of R egional Supermarket Chains: 
Implications for Suppliers in Botswana and South Africa ’. WIDER Working Paper 169/2016. 
Helskinki: UNU -WIDER.  
Das Nair, R., S. Chisoro -Dube,  and F. Ziba  (2018) . ‘Supermarkets’ Procurement Strategies and 
Implications for L ocal Suppliers in South Africa, Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe ’. 
Development Southern Africa , 35(3): 334–50.  
Davis -Reddy , C.L., and K. Vincent  (2017). Climate Risk and V ulnerability: A Handbook for Southern 
Africa . Pretoria: Council for Scientific and Industrial Research.  
Deichmann, U., A. Goyal,  and D. Mishra  (2016). Will Digital Technologies Transform Agriculture in 
Developing C ountries?  Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Den Hartigh, W. ( 2016). ‘Raising the Bar with Technology and Innovation’. Farmers Weekly , 14 
October. Available at: http://3b5dca501ee1e6d8cd7b905f4e1bf723.cdn.ilink247.com/  
ClientFiles/cga/CitrusGowersAssociation/Company/Documents/Farmers%20Weekly%20
14%20October%20- %20Katlego%20Citrus%2C%20Marble%20Hall.pdf  (accessed 27 
March 2020).  
Department of Trade and Industry  (2017) . Industrial Policy Action Plan  2017/18–2019/20.  Pretoria: 
the dti.  
Department of Trade and Industry  (2018) . Industrial Policy Action Plan and 2018/19–2020/21 . 
Pretoria: the dti.  
Dewar, R.D., and J.E. Dutton  (1986). ‘The Adoption of R adical and I ncremental Innovations: An 
Empirical A nalysis ’. Management Science , 32(11) : 1,422–33.  
26 Dlodlo, N., and J. Kalezhi  (2015). ‘The Internet of T hings in Agriculture for S ustainable Rural 
Development ’. In 2015 International Conference on Emerging Trends in N etworks and Computer 
Communications (ETNCC). New York: I nstitute of Electrical  and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE) . 
Ettlie, J.E., W.P. Bridges, and R.D. O’Keefe  (1984). ‘Organization Strategy and Structural 
Differences for R adical v ersus I ncremental I nnovation’ . Management Science , 30(6): 682–95. 
European Commission (2017). ‘Antitrust: Commission F ines Google €2.42 Billion for A busing 
Dominance as Search Engine by G iving Illegal Advantage to O wn Comparison Shopping 
Service –Factsheet ’. Memo, 27 June. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/  
presscorner/detail/en/MEMO_17_1785  (accessed 27 March 2020).  
European Commission (2019). ‘Antitrust: Commission Opens Investigation into Possible Anti -
Competitve Conduct of Amazon’. Press release, 17 July. Available at: https://ec.europa. eu/ 
commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_4291  (accessed 27 March 2020).  
Farole, T. (2015). ‘Factory Southern Africa? SACU in Global Value Chains ’. Working Paper  
102850.  Washington, DC: World Bank Group.  
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) (2018). ‘ Credit to Agriculture ’. Rome: FAO. Available  
at: www.fao.org/economic/ess/investment/credit/en ( accessed 14  September  2019) . 
Finmark Trust (2017). Research Report on Mobile Money in South Africa . Joannesburg: Finmark Trust.  
Gereffi, G. , and K. Fernandez -Stark  (2011). ‘Global Value Chain Analysis: A P rimer’ . Durham, 
NC: Center on Globalization, Governance and Competitiveness (CGGC), Duke Univer sity. 
Gereffi, G. , and J. Lee ( 2014) . ‘Economic and Social Upgrading in G lobal Value Chains and 
Industrial C lusters: Why Governance M atters ’. Journal of Business Ethics , 133: 25–38. 
Gereffi, G. , and J. Lee (2016). ‘Economic and Social Upgrading in G lobal Value Chains and 
Industrial C lusters: Why Governance M atters ’. Journal of Business Ethics , 133(1 ): 25–38. 
Gereffi, G., J. Humphrey, and T. Sturgeon (2005). ‘The Governance of G lobal Value Chains ’. 
Review of International Political Economy , 12(1): 7 8–104. 
Goga, S.,  and A. Paelo (2019a). ‘ Issues in the Regulation and Policy Surrounding E -Commerce in 
South Africa ’. Working Paper 2019/6. Johannesburg: CCRED.  
Goga, S.,  and A. Paelo (2019b). ‘ Strategies for Adapting to Online Entry: The Case of Retailers in 
South Africa ’. Working Paper 2019/ 3. Johannesburg: CCRED.  
GSMA ( Global System for Mobile Communications  Association)  (2018a) . ‘Start-Ups and Mobile 
in Emerging Markets: Insights from the GSMA Ecosystem Accelerator ’. Issue 2 , Spring 2018. 
Available at: www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp- content/uploads/2018/08/Start -
ups-and-Mobile -in-Emerging -Markets -Issue -2-WEB.pdf  (accessed 19 September  2019) . 
GSM A (2018b) . ‘Start-Ups and Mobile in Emerging Markets: Insights from the GSMA Ecosystem 
Accelerator ’. Issue 3 , Summer 2018. Available at: 
www.gsma.com/mobilefo rdevelopment/wp- content/uploads/2018/08/Start -ups-and-
Mobile -in-Emerging -Markets -Issue -3.pdf  (accessed  19 September  2019) . 
GSMA (2019). ‘ The Mobile Economy : Sub-Saharan Africa ’. Available at: 
www.gsmaintelligence.com/research/?file=36b5ca079193fa82332d09063d3595b5&downlo
ad (accessed 10  March  2020) . 
Giuliani, E., C. Pietrobelli, and R. Rabellotti (2005). ‘ Upgra ding in Global Value Chains: Lessons 
from Latin American C lusters ’. World Development , 33(4) : 549–73.   
27 Hagedoorn, J. (1996). ‘ Innovation and E ntrepreneurship: Schumpeter R evisited ’. Industrial and 
Corporate Change , 5(3): 883–96. 
Hardman, P. (2016). ‘PhytClean Update’. South African Fruit Journal , Aug/Sept. Available at: 
www.citrusresourcewarehouse.org.za/home/document -home/news -articles/south- african -
fruit-journal -safj/sa -fruit-journal -2016/3748- sa-fruit-journal -aug-sept-2016- cga-phytclean -
update/file  (accessed 27 March 2020).   
Hickey, S., and A. du Toit  (2007). ‘Adverse Incorporation, Social Exclusion and Chronic Poverty ’. 
CPRC (Chronic Poverty Research Centre) Working Paper 81. Manchester : Institute for 
Development Policy and Management, University of Manchester , and Bellville: Programme 
for Land and Agrarian Studies , University of the Western Cape . 
Horner, R. , and K. Nadvi  (2018). ‘Global Value Chains and the R ise of the Global South: 
Unpacking Twenty‐First C entury P olycentric T rade’. Global  Networks , 18(2): 207–37.  
Humphrey, J. , and H. Schimtz  (2002). ‘Developing Country Firms in the W orld Economy: 
Governance and Upgrading in G lobal Value Chains ’. INEF Report 61. Duisburg : INEF 
(Institute for Development and Peace).   
Hussein, K., and D. Suttie  (2016). ‘Rural –Urban Linkages and Food Systems in S ub-Saharan 
Africa ’. IFAD Research Series 05 . Rome: IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural 
Development ). 
International Finance Corporation (2017). ‘MSME Finance Gap: Assessment of the S hortfalls and 
Opportunities in F inancing Micro, Small and M edium Enterprises in E merging Markets ’. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Kamilaris, A., A. Fonts,  and F.X. Prenafeta- Boldú (2018). ‘ The R ise of B lockchain T echnology in 
Agriculture ’. Trends in Food Science & Technology , 91: 640–52.  
Kay, N.M. , S. Leih, and D.J. Teece  (2018). ‘The Role of E mergence in D ynamic Capabilities: A 
Restatement of the F ramework and S ome Possibilities for F uture Research ’. Industrial and 
Corporate Change , 27(4): 623–38. 
Kim, L. (2001). ‘The Dynamics of T echnological Learning in I ndustrialisation ’. International Social 
Science Journal , 53(168) : 297–308. 
Krishnan,  A., K. Banga , and M. Mendez -Parra (2020). ‘ Disruptive Technologies in A gricultural 
Value Chains : Insights from East Africa ’. Working Paper 576.  London: ODI (Overseas 
Development Institute ). Available at : www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource -
documents/disrupt ive_agritech_ -_5_mar_2020_ -_final_draft.pdf  (accessed 27 March  2020).  
Lall, S. (1990). Building Industrial Competitiveness: New T echnologies and C apabilities in Developing C ountries . 
Paris: OECD Development Centre . 
Lall, S. (1992). ‘ Technological Capabilities and I ndustrialization’ . World Development , 20(2) : 165–86 . 
Lall, S. (2001). Competitiveness, T echnology and Skills . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar  Publishing . 
Lema, R., R. Rabellotti,  and P.G. Sampath  (2018). ‘Innovation Trajectories in Developing 
Countries: Co- evolution of Global Value Chains and Innovation Systems ’. The European 
Journal of Development Research , 30(3): 1 –19. 
Lefebvre, V.M. , H. De Steur, and X. Gellynck (2015). ‘External Sources for I nnovation in F ood 
SMEs ’. British Food Journal , 117(1) : 412–30. 
McCarthy, J.F. (2010) ‘Processes of I nclusion and Adverse Incorporation: Oil Palm and A grarian 
Change in Sumatra, Indonesia ’. The Journal of Peasant Studies , 37(4): 821–50.  
28 Meintjes, F. ( 2017). ‘Gold Standard for Mandarins’. Eurofruit Magazine , July/August. Available at: 
http://c1e39d912d21c91dce811d6da9929ae8.cdn.ilink247.com/ClientF iles/cga/CitrusGow
ersAssociation/Company/Documents/Eurofruit%20 -%20Gold%20standard%20for%20  
Mandarins%20 -%20JulyAug%202017.pdf  (accessed 27 March  2020).  
Ministry of Industry and Commerce , Zimbabwe  (2019) . Zimbabwe National Industrial Development 
Policy 2019–2023.  Harare: Ministry of Industry and Commerce.  
Ministry of Trade and Industry , Namibia  (2015). Growth at Home:  Namibia’s Execution Strategy for 
Industrialisation . Windhoek: Ministry of Trade and Industry. Available at: www.mti.gov.na/  
downloads/GrowthinNamibia.pdf  (accessed  9 September  2019) . 
Morrison, A., C. Pietrobelli, and R. Rabelloti  (2008) . ‘Global Value Chains and Technological 
Capabilities: A F ramework to S tudy Industrial Innovation in D eveloping Countries ’. Oxford 
Development Studies , 36(1) : 39–58.  
Mtombeni , S., D. Bove , T. Thibane , and B. Makgabo (2019). ‘ An Analysis of Infrastructure and 
Inputs as a Barrier to Entry and Expansion for E merging Farmers ’. Working Paper 
CC2019/02.  Pretoria: Competition Commission of South Africa .  
Mwangi, M., and S. Kariuki  (2015). ‘Factors Determining Adoption of N ew Agricultural 
Technology by S mallholder Farmers in D eveloping Countries ’. Journal of Economics and 
Sustainable D evelopment , 6(5): 208–16.  
Narsalay, R., R.T. Coffey, and A. Sen (2012). ‘Hindustan Unilever: Scaling a C ostefficient 
Distribution and S ales Network in R emote Markets ’. Accenture Institute for High 
Performance . Available at: www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/accenture/conversion -assets/  
dotcom/documents/global/pdf/dualpub_22/accenture -high- growth -markets -scaling -
business -innovations.pdf  (accessed 27 March  2020).  
NEPAD ( New Partnership for Africa’s Development ) (2013). ‘Agriculture in Africa : 
Transformation and Outlook ’. Midrand: NEPAD. Available  at: https://www.nepad.org/ 
caadp/publication/agriculture -africa -transformation -and-outlook  (accessed 
9 September  2019) . 
Newfarmer, R., J. Page, and F. Tarp (2018) . Industries without Smokestacks: Industrialization in Africa 
Reconsidered . Oxford:  Oxford University Press . 
Nhundu, N. , and F. Chin’anga (2017). ‘Data Must Fall: Evidence from MTN SA, Nigeria and 
Ghana’ . Quarterly Competition Review 2017/01. Johannes burg: CCRED.  
Nkhonjera, M. , and R. das Nair  (2018). ‘Developing Capabilities in Mozambique’s F ood 
Processing Sector : The Role of South African F ood Processing Firms and Supermarket 
Chains ’. Working Paper 2018/10. Johannesburg: CCRED.  
Nyasimi M ., D. Amwata,  L. Hove , J. Kinyangi , and G. Wamukoya  (2014) . ‘Evidence of Impact: 
Climate -Smart Agriculture in Africa ’. CCAFS Working Paper 86. Copenhagen:  CCAFS 
(CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security ). 
Osterwalder, A.  (2002). ‘ ICT in D eveloping Countries ’. Lausanne : University of Lausanne . 
Paremoer, T. (2018). ‘ Regional V alue Chains: Exploring L inkages and Opportunities in the A gro-
Processing Sector across Five SADC C ountries ’. Working Paper 2018/4. Johannesburg: 
CCRED.  
Pietro, C. (2008). ‘ Leveraging of M arket Power in Emerging Markets: A Review of C ases, 
Literature, and a S uggested Framew ork’. Journal of Competition Law and Economics , 4(2): 449–
534.  
29 Pignatti, E., G. Carli, and M. Canavari  (2015). ‘What Really Matters? A Q ualitative Analysis on the 
Adoption of I nnovations in A griculture ’. Agrárinformatika/Journal of Agricultural 
Informatics , 6(4): 73–84. 
Ponte, S. (2008). ‘ Developing a V ertical Dimension to C hronic Poverty Research: Some L essons 
from Global Value Chain Analysis ’.  CPRC Working Paper 111. Chronic Poverty Research 
Centre.  
Ponte, S. , and J. Ewert  (2009) . ‘Which Way Is “Up” in Upgrading? Trajectories of C hange in the 
Value Chain for South African W ine’. World Development , 37(10): 1, 637–50. 
Provenance (2019). ‘From Sh ore to Plate: Tracking T una on the Blockchain’ . Provenance. 
Available at: www.provenance.org/tracking -tuna-on-the-blockchain#introduction (accessed 
27 March  2020).  
Reardon, T., C.P. Timmer, C.B. Barrett, and J. Berdegue  (2003). ‘The Rise of Supermarkets in 
Africa, Asia, and Latin America’ . American J ournal of Agricultural E conomics , 85(5) : 1,140–46. 
Republic of Zambia (2018) . National Industry Policy 2018. Lusaka: Ministry of Commerce, Trade and 
Industry. Available at:  www.zda.org.zm/sites/default/files/National%20Industrial%20 
Policy%202018.pdf  (accessed 9  September  2019) . 
Robb, G., and T. Vilakazi  (2015). ‘Mobile Payments Markets in Kenya, Tanzania and Zimbabwe: 
A Comparative Study of Contestability and Outcomes ’. Working Paper 8/2015. 
Johannesburg: CCRED.  
Roberts, S. , and N. Zalk (2019). ‘Talk of a F ourth Revolution Is Almost Meaningless without 
Cheaper Data’. Industrial Development Think Tank: Policy Brief  141. Johannesburg: 
CCRED. Available at: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/52246331e4b0a46e5f1b8ce5/  
t/5d11e2e3f539180001b608fb/1561453285653/IDTT+2+Policy+Brief+14.pdf  (accessed 
27 March  2020).  
Rusnak, P. (2013). ‘New Technologies for Fruit Growers’. Growing Produce, 7 March. Available 
at: www.growingproduce.com/fruits/new -technologies -for-fruit-growers  (accessed 
27 March  2020).  
SADC (2017). Action Plan for SADC Industriali zation Strategy and Roadmap. Available at : 
www.sadc.int/files/4514/9580/8179/ Action_Plan_for_SADC_Industrialization_Strategy_a
nd_Roadmap.pdf  (accessed 9  September  2019) . 
Salavou, H., and G. Avloniti s (2008). ‘Product Innovativeness and Performance: A Focus on 
SMEs ’. Management Decision , 46(7) : 969–85. 
Samboko, P.C., J. Sambo , and J. Luhana  (2018). ‘Agricultural Finance in Zambia: How Can 
Smallholder Inclusion Be Deepened? ’ Working Paper 142. Lusaka : IAPRI (Indaba Agricultral 
Policy Research Unit).  
Santovito, S., R. Silvestri, E. Lamonaca , and F. Contò (2016). ‘Producers Organization and D igital 
Technologies for F arms’ Competitiveness. In E. Horsk á, Z. Kapsdofferová, and M. Hallová 
(eds),  International Scientific Day s 2016.  The Agri -Food Value Chain: Challenges for Nat ural Resources 
Management and Society . Nitra -Chrenová : Slovak University of Agriculture in Nitra. 
Schumpeter, J.A. (1934 [1912]) . The Theory of E conomic Development : An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, 
Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle . Harvard Economic Studies, Vol. 46. Cambirdge, MA: 
Harvard College . 
Sihlobo, W., F. Sundani, and P. Fourie (2014). ‘Market Overview of the Grain Markets’. Grain SA,  
15 January . Available at  www.grainsa.co.za/market -overview -of-the-grain -markets  ds 
(accessed  27 March  2020).   
30 Singh, V., S. Sankhwar,  and D. Pandey  (2015). ‘The Role of Information Communication 
Technology (ICT) in Agriculture ’. Global Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies , 3(4). 
Sishuba, S. (2017). ‘Mastercard Launches Mobile Marketplace for East Africa’. Farmer’s Weekly , 
23 January. Available at: www.farmersweekly.co.za/agri -news/africa/mastercard -launches -
mobile -marketplace -for-east-africa  (accessed 27 March  2020).  
Tinsley, E., and N. Agapitova  (2018). ‘Private Sector Solutions to Helping Smallholders Succeed: 
Social Enterprise Business Models in the Agriculture Sector ’. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Tru-News ( no date  [a]). ‘New Grabouw Sort ing Line and Packhouse Uses the Latest Global Tech 
Available ’. Tru -Cape South Africa. Available at: www.tru -cape.com/tru -news/new -grabouw -
sorting -line-and-packhouse -uses-the-latest -global -tech-available  (accessed 27  March  2020).  
Tru-News (no date [b]). ‘New Technologies Keep Tru -Cape and Its Packhouses in the Lead’. Tru -
Cape South Africa. Available at : www.tru -cape.com/tru -news/new -technologies -keep-tru-
cape-and-its-packhouses -in-the-lead (accessed 27  March  2020).  
Van Schalkwyk, F., A. Young , and S. Verhulst  (2017). ‘Esoko: Leveling the Information Playing 
Field for Smallholder Farmers in Ghana ’. ODI (Open Data’s Impact).  Available at: 
https://odimpact.org/files/case -esoko.pdf  (accessed 27 March  2020).  
Wines Vines Analytics (2011). ‘Davis Instruments Announces Powerful New tool for Avoiding 
Grap Crop Pest Damage’. Wines V ines Analytics , 2 February. Available at: 
https://winesvinesanalytic s.com/suppliernews/article/83612/Davis -Instruments -
Announces -Powerful -New-Tool-for-Avoiding -Grape -Crop -Pest- Damage  (accessed 
27 March  2020).  
Wyman, O. (2018). ‘Disruption in F ruit and V egetable Distribution’ . Berlin: Messe Berlin GmbH . 
Available at: www.oliverwyman.de/content/dam/oliver -wyman/v2 -de/publications/2018/  
Mai/Fruit_Logistica_Trend_Report_2018_Part1_2_3.pdf  (accessed 27 March 2020).  
Zappa, M. (2014). ‘ 15 Emerging Agriculture Technologies That Will Change the World’. Business 
Insider , 5 May . Available at: www.businessinsider.com/15- emerging -agriculture -technologies -
2014 -4?IR=T (accessed 27 March  2020).  
Ziba, F , and M . Phiri, 2017. ‘ The Expansion of Regional Supermarket Chains: Implications for 
Local S uppliers in Zambia ’. WIDER  Working Paper 2017/58. Helsinki: UNU -WIDER.  
 
 