 
 Digital Development  
 
Working Paper Series  
 
The Digital Development (formerly Development Informatics) working paper series 
discusses the broad issues surrounding digital data, information, knowledge, 
information systems, and information and communication t echnologies in the 
process of socio -economic development  
 
 
 
 
 Paper  No. 8 7 
 
Measuring the Global 
Broadband Divide Using 
Aggregated Crowdsourced Big 
Data  
 
ALFONSO RIVERA -ILLINGWORTH, RICHARD 
HEEKS  & JACO RENKEN  
 
 
2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publishe r: Centre for Digita l Development  
Global Development Institute , SEED  
University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK  
Email: cdd@manchester.ac.uk         Web: https://www.cdd.manchester.ac.uk/  
 
View/Download from:  
http://www.gdi.manchester.ac.uk/research/publications/di/    
 Table of Contents  
 
ABSTRACT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  1 
 
A. Introduction  ................................ ................................ .............................  2 
B. Measuring Broadband and the Broadband Divide  ................................ ..... 3 
C. Researc h Dataset and Methods  ................................ ................................  5 
D. Results  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 7 
D.1.  DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS  ................................ ................................ ............................  7 
D.2.  BROADBAND SPEED DIVIDE  ................................ ................................ ........................  9 
D.3.  FIXED–MOBILE SPEED DIVIDE  ................................ ................................ ..................  10 
D.4.  DOWNLOAD –UPLOAD SPEED ASYMMETRIES  ................................ ...............................  11 
D.5.  BROADBAND INDICES  ................................ ................................ ..............................  12 
E. Discussion  ................................ ................................ ...............................  17 
E.1.  INSIGHTS INTO BROADBAND SPEED DIVIDES ................................ ................................ . 17 
E.2.  AGGREGATED BIG DATA BENEFITS AND LIMITATIONS  ................................ ....................  19 
F. Conclusions  ................................ ................................ .............................  21 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 23 
REFERENCES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  23 
APPENDIX A. CISCO-OOKLA DATA ................................ ................................ ....................  26 
APPENDIX B. BROADBAND INDICES SCORES  ................................ ................................ ........  31 
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
1 
 Measuring the Global Broadband Divide 
Using Aggregated Crowdsourced Big Data  
 
 
Alfonso Rivera -Illingworth,  Richard Heeks  & Jaco Renken  
Centre for Digital Deve lopment, University of Manchester, UK  
 
2020  
 
 
Abstract  
 
Growing broadband connectivity is central to development strategies of all countries.  Thus 
measurement of that connectivity and associated broadband divides is an essential 
foundation for telecommuni cations  and digital  policy.  Yet traditional broadband measures 
face challenges of data completeness, accuracy, relevance, timeliness and accessibility.  
 
This paper therefore investigates the potential for measuring broadband connectivity and 
broadband div ides between countries using aggregated crowdsourced big data, based on 
online survey of connectivity speeds from many millions of users.  This data source exposes 
broadband divides between high -, middle - and low -income countries.  While such divides 
are w ell known, we demonstrate that  this form of  big data provides a more complete and 
accurate picture, alongside other benefits compared to traditional data sources . 
 
We show how this aggregated form of big data offers new insights: into divides between 
fixed  and mobile networks, and download and upload speeds; and we show how it can be 
used to calculate new broadband indices and to measure readiness for broadband.  
Acknowledging the limitations of this type of big data to guide broadband divide 
measurement an d related policy decisions, we argue it should be at least a complement to 
traditional measures  given, unlike many big datasets, that it is free to access.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
2 
 A. Introduction  
 
Access to a broadband Internet connection is no longer a luxury but more of a nece ssity, 
part of the basic infrastructure of life that some even argue to be a human right (Weiss et 
al., 2015).  Broadband is seen as fundamental in a modern society to fulfilment of economic, 
social and political goals (Kelly and Rossotto, 2012; OECD, 2014 ; GSMA, 2016; Broadband 
Commission, 2018) .  As a result, an important foundation for telecommunications – and 
other – policy will be good quality data on broadband connectivity including the “broadband 
divide”: geographical and other divisions between thos e who are able to use high -speed 
broadband and those who are not (Jordán, 2011; Broadband Commission, 2018; ITU, 
2018b) . 
 
Globally, bodies such as the International Telecommunication Union  (ITU)  started gathering 
national -level data on broadband connectivi ty and divides from the turn of the century, as it 
became available for individual countries (ITU, 2019).  Such data derives largely from 
administrative records and self -reporting of  the telecommunications operators that provide 
Internet services, often fu nnelled through national telecommunications regulatory 
authorities  (ITU, 2016; Broadband Commission, 2018) .  Although widely used, this data has 
acknowledged shortcomings around issues including completeness, accuracy, accessibility , 
etc. (Bauer et al., 20 10; Helderop et al., 2019).  
 
Given these shortcomings, this paper investigates an alternative approach: use of big data.  
It specifically asks, “What difference is made by measurement of  broadband connectivity 
and divides based on  crowdsourced big data rat her than traditional data sources?”.  Past 
work ( Riddlesden and Singleton, 2014; Hilbert, 2016b ) has demonstrated big data’s 
potential in this regard but has not systematically analysed the differential implications of 
big data; an issue of increasing inte rest given the growing presence of big data and 
perception of its value, for example among international agencies (Gabay and Ilcan, 2017).  
 
The next section reviews knowledge about the role and measurement of broadband.  The 
third section presents the meth ods and dataset adopted in this study, which uses  
aggregated  Internet speed data crowdsourced from millions of users.  Results of the analysis 
using descriptive statistics and aggregated indices are then presented, differentiating results 
by income level o f country: high, middle and low ; and in terms of network type (fixed vs. 
mobile), speed (download vs. upload) and readiness threshold (low vs. high).  Finally, the 
paper discusses the findings in terms of what they tell us about the broadband divide, about  
the use of this type of big data to measure that divide, and about policy implications of that 
use. 
 
  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
3 
 B. Measuring Broadband and the  Broadband Di vide  
 
To understand the relevance of measuring broadband using big data, this section reviews 
existing knowledg e to understand the importance of broadband, its traditional 
measurement, and the potential for crowdsourced  data.  
 
At the macro -level, the evidence base on broadband’s impact is relatively limited but there 
is some that shows broadband enabling positive e conomic growth both at national level 
(Katz, 2012; Minges, 2016) and also in terms of regional or local development (Prieger, 
2013; WWC, 2015; Grubesic and Mack, 2016).  This is mirrored at micro -level with evidence 
of productivity gains for companies that  adopt broadband (Katz, 2012; OECD, 2018)  and 
employment / income gains for individuals able to access broadband ( Whitacre et al., 2014; 
Akerman et al., 2015).  Though much less studied there is also evidence of access to 
broadband being positively associa ted with facets of political and social development 
(Fuentes -Bautista, 2014; Campante et al., 2017; Broadband Commission, 2018).  
 
While the overall evidence base is mixed – including examples of broadband correlated with 
null or even negative development i mpacts (LaRose et al., 2011; Belo et al., 2013; Ford, 
2018) – the balance leans towards positive impacts, and that is certainly the perception 
driving both policy and investment.  As noted in the Introduction, a central concern has 
therefore been the “broa dband divide”: a lack of access to development benefits for those 
unable to make effective use of broadband.  This has multiple dimensions including within -
country gaps between ethnic groups (Prieger and Hu, 2008), between urban and rural areas 
(Prieger, 2 013), and between men and women (Fowlie and Biggs, 2015).  There has also 
been an issue of between -country gaps, especially a broadband divide between the higher -
income countries of the global North and the lower -income countries of the global South 
(Weiss  et al., 2016; A4AI, 2018; Broadband Commission, 2019).  It is this latter – the 
between -country broadband divide – which will be our focus here, though our findings will 
have relevance for other divides.  
 
Over time, conceptualisation of the broadband divi de has updated and expanded in various 
ways.  Four aspects will be discussed here: infrastructure, value chain, speed, and quality of 
service.  
 
Broadband was initially delivered via fixed -line services; hence measures of the broadband 
divide focused on fix ed broadband.  More recently, broadband has increasingly been 
delivered via mobile networks; especially in the global South where there have been hopes 
that countries might “leapfrog” over their limited fixed -line infrastructure (Weiss et al., 
2015; A4AI, 2018; UNCTAD, 2018).  Any understanding of broadband thus needs to cover 
both types of network.  
 
In relation to the value chain, the original concern was about availability: did users have 
access to broadband and, if so, how many could access it.  The divi de was thus thought of in 
terms of measures such as existence of broadband services within a country, geographical 
coverage, number of subscribers (Vicente and Gil -de-Bernabe, 2010).  More recently, 
concern has expanded from availability to adoption and us e (Heeks, 2018).  There has thus 
been interest in the cost of broadband, given the link between affordability and adoption; Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
4 
 and in the skills available to make effective use of broadband connectivity.  The focus on use 
also means interest in broadband spee d and other aspects of service quality (Hilbert, 
2016b).  
 
Growth in videoconferencing and video sharing, cloud applications, machine -to-machine 
communications and other data -intensive applications – and increasingly concurrent use of 
such applications – all require bandwidths well beyond the original definition of broadband 
(Kelly and Rossotto, 2012; OECD, 2014; Broadband Commission, 2018; Ericsson, 2018).  That 
original definition labelled download speeds above 256 kbps as “broadband” but more 
recent updat es have seen, for example, the Broadband Commission (2019) define 
broadba nd download speed as  3Mbps and “good quality” broadband download speed as 
10Mbps.  
 
Finally, the original usage focus looked solely at download speeds.  More recently, there has 
been a n expansion in focus to also include upload speeds in measurements of quality of 
service, reflecting a broad shift in user models; from users simply being consumers of 
downloaded data to also being producers of high data volumes that must be uploaded  
(Cisc o, 2017a; Cisco, 2017b; Ofcom, 2019b; Broadband Commission, 2019b) .  Alongside has 
been a growing concern that long latency times for transmission to servers can undermine 
quality of service for some consumers; particularly in the global South (A4AI, 2018;  Liu et al., 
2018).  
 
Traditional openly -accessible worldwide measures of broadband have been fixed and 
mobile broadband subscriptions, and population covered by mobile broadband services 
(ITU, 2016; Broadband Commission, 2018; ITU, 2019).  Non -openly -acces sible measures in 
the paid -for ITU database include broadband technology type, service activation time, cost, 
traffic and subscriptions categorised by fixed -network speed type (ITU, 2019).  Even when 
reported by other sources (e.g. World Bank, 2020), these  data invariably derive from the 
International Telecommunication Union.  The ITU in turn has derived this data from two 
sources (ITU, 2011; ITU, 2014; Ofcom, 2019a).  First, from national telecommunications 
regulators who compile data from the telecommunic ations operators that provide 
broadband services and report about these.  Second, from some national  statistical offices  
who sometimes use surveys to  capture data on broadband speed and cost from individual 
households . 
 
There are a number of recognised sho rtcomings of this approach to measurement of 
broadband (UN, 2005; Bauer et al., 2010; Hilbert, 2016b; Helderop et al., 2019), which we 
will summarise using the CARTA set of data qualities: completene ss, accuracy, relevance, 
timeli ness and accessibility (ad apted from Heeks, 2018).  Traditional broadband data is 
incomplete.  Only one of the quality of service indicators described above is even partly 
covered: category of download speed on the fixed network.  The data is not available for all 
countries as some  regulators and even operators have problems compiling or reporting; 
some operators also refuse to release data on grounds of commercial confidentiality.  
Because the data relies largely on self -reports from telecom operators without 
triangulation, then it s accuracy is uncertain.  There has also been uncertainty and potential 
for inaccuracy due to differential interpretation of indicators by those reporting.  Relevance 
is questionable; in terms of speed, for example, data relates to advertised or theoretica l Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
5 
 speeds which may well not correspond to the real speeds experienced by users.  But it is 
those latter speeds that determine development impact.  Timeliness of data is lacking 
because of the time it takes for operators to gather data, then typically pass it on to national 
regulators , then to the ITU.  There may then be some iterations of checking data so that 
confirmed (i.e. non -estimated) data is always about one year old and sometimes more .  
Finally, there are accessibility challenges  given  the c.US$300 cost of the database.  
 
Across a growing number of domains, big data is increasingly seen as advantageous 
compared to traditional data sources (Mayer -Schonberger and Cukier, 2013; Hilbert, 2016a)  
and there is interest among agencies such as the ITU to inves tigate its value for Internet -
related measurement (Vall, 2017) .  Big data has been used already for measurement of 
broadband divides, in the form of crowdsourced broadband speed check data, as used in 
this paper.  Such use appears limited , perhaps because of the high cost or inaccessibility of 
broadband big data for most researchers, but it  has been seen to measure broadband 
connectivity within countries (Riddlesden and Singleton, 2014) or within subsets of 
countries (Rojas and Poveda, 2017; FCC, 2018).  It  has also been used in conjuction with 
traditional ITU data for global between -country measurement, though focusing on 
bandwidth rather than speed and complemented by other data sources (Hilbert, 2016b; see 
also Abeliansky and Hilbert, 2017).  All of these  examples demonstrate the potential value of 
big data in measuring broadband.  But the object of their research has been tracking 
broadband progress and divides rather than, as here, the implications of replacing 
traditional with big data.  
 
C. Research Dataset and  Meth ods 
 
To conduct this study we identified five potential sources of big data (see Table 1), each with 
different data points and characteristics, which could be used to measure broadband.  For 
comparison, the traditional ITU dataset is also incl uded.  
 
Table 1 Big data sources available to measure broadband services  
 Fixed  Mobile  Frequency  Source  Open 
raw 
data  Source  Download  Upload  Latency  Download  Upload  Latency    
Akamai  ✓      Quarterly*  Sensor  No 
M-Lab ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Daily  Crowd+ Yes 
Netflix  ✓      Monthly  Crowd+ No 
Ookla  ✓ ✓  ✓ ✓  Monthly  Crowd+ No 
Ookla -
Cisco  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yearly*  Crowd+ No 
ITU ✓   ✓#   Yearly  Admin  No 
* Frequency of public release of these data is not guaranteed.  
+ Crowdsourced data are generated by a request initiated b y a user but the measurement is produced by a 
machine.  
# Only in paid -for database and for a more limited sub -set of countries . 
Source: Akamai (2017), Cisco (2017b), M -Lab (2020), Netflix (2020), Ookla (2020)  
 
Table 1 shows that only M -Lab and Ookla -Cisco have download, upload, and latency data for 
both fixed and mobile networks.  While M -Lab’s raw data is frequent and accessible, there is  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
6 
 at present  little data for the majority of countries, thus making it unsuitable for our 
purposes.  This left the crowds ourced Ookla -Cisco dataset as the best available option, with 
Ookla’s data recognised by other researchers as a reliable source ( Bauer et al., 2010; EIU, 
2018).  
 
The most -recent complete  dataset at the time of writing was that generated using 360 
million r ecords  created  during 2017 by Internet users whilst verifying the speed of their 
Internet connections through a web service or a mobile application.1  Then these data were 
acquired by Cisco, processed and released as an aggregated dataset at the country le vel on 
the Cisco Global Cloud Index webpage (Cisco, 2017a; Cisco, 2017b).  We then extracted the 
data from the Cisco webpage collecting, in total, data for both fixed and mobile networks of 
112 countries covering both mean and median values for download an d upload speed and 
latency.2  These countries were then categorised based on the World Bank (2019) and OECD 
(2017) country classifications for 2017 to consist of 45 high -income countries, 59 middle -
income countries, and 8 low -income countries3. 
 
This datas et thus has two important limitations.  First, Ookla does not provide direct, open 
access to the source big data.  We therefore have to work only on the aggregation provided 
by Cisco which constrains the nature of statistical analysis that can be undertake n.  Second, 
the low-income  country part of the dataset is small and likely – given the more limited 
number of users in those countries – to be itself based on a relatively limited number of 
speed tests.  In particular, and as noted below, the eight data po ints for fixed upload speed 
are unexpectedly high and can thus lead to only uncertain conclusions.  
 
The research strategy is based on a quantitative approach with two main stages: descriptive 
analyses and measurement through indices with the latter being e xplained below.  The first 
stage comprised four sub -stages: i) exploratory analyses including investigation of mean vs. 
median speeds; ii) descriptive analyses using medians by country income group; iii) 
measurement of the divide between mobile vs. fixed n etworks; and iv) measurement of 
asymmetries between download vs. upload speeds.  In addition to the exploratory and 
descriptive analyses, Wilcoxon signed -rank tests and Kruskal -Wallis tests were also used, as 
explained further below.4 
 
 
  
                                                      
1 Ookl a provides free speed tests to I nternet users  available in 17 languages , and stores and aggregates the 
results of these tests in order to produce a monthly index : the “Speedtest Global Index” with information o n 
the average speed of broadband connections at the country leve l for fixed and mobile networks (Ookla, 2020 ). 
2 Data for a further 23 countries was excluded because it covered only the fixed network.  
3 Using the OECD (2017) ODA DA C list, “least -developed countries” and “other low -income countries” were 
categorised as “low -income”; “lower middle -income countries and territories” and “upper -middle income 
countries and territories” were categorised as “middle -income”.  Countries not o n the DAC list were 
categorised as either “high -income” or “middle -income” based on World Bank’s (2019) categorisation of  GNI 
per capita in 2017 . 
4 We also undertook regression analysis on one of the indices developed but, for reasons of brevity, that is n ot 
reported here.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
7 
 D. Results  
 
D.1. Descriptive Statistics  
To explore the download and upload speeds for fixed and mobile networks, the values of 
country means and medians are presented using boxplots (see Figure 1 ; data presented in 
Appendix A ); a technique to present the dispersion of data  in a simple fashion (Cramer and 
Howitt, 2004; Stockemer, 2019) . 
 
Fig. 1.  Boxplot speed distributions, fixed and mobile networks  
 
Note: Fixed networks are identified with the prefix “fix” and mobile networks with “mob”; download speeds are contracted 
as “down” and upload speeds as “up”; means are given the suffix “avg”, and medians “med”.  
The box contains 50 percent of all cases, with the upper and lower sides of the box (quartile 1 [Q1] and quartile 3 [Q3]) 
showing the boundary of the remaining 25% of the  cases, respectively; the middle line inside the box represents the 
median value (quartile 2 [Q2]).  The whiskers show the minimum and maximum value excluding outliers, and they are 
derived from the interquartile range ( IQR=Q3 -Q1): lower whisker = Q1 - 1.5 * IQR; upper whisker = Q3 + 1.5 * IQR.  The 
data plotted as a circle above or below the whiskers represents the outliers.  
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
The data suggest two things that could not be derived from traditional data sources.   First, 
that the higher speeds are found on the fixed networks (e.g. comparing the position of the 
higher whisker for comparable measures between fixed and mobile networks) but that 
other comparisons between fixed and mobile networks are harder to make.  For instance, 
there does not appear to be any great difference between the median  values for fixed and 
mobile networks, perhaps reflecting the speed gains seen on mobile networks over the 
course of the century.  It will therefore be useful to investigate f ixed–mobile differences 
further below.  
 
Second, and despite the growing requirements for upload parity, upload speeds appear to 
be on average well below download speeds.  It will therefore also be useful to investigate 
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
8 
 download –upload differences further b elow.  Download speeds themselves are not that 
exemplary , with the majority of countries’ highest speed, on the fixed network, below 
15Mbps using means and below 10Mbps – the Broadband Commission’s definition of good 
quality broadband – using medians.  
 
This differential of means and medians5 exposes a third finding that traditional data sources 
could not derive: that median speeds are always well below mean speeds.  This was 
statistically validated through comparison of mean and median download and upload 
speeds for both fixed and mobile networks using a Wilcoxon signed -rank test.6  In all cases, 
H0 (mean = median) was rejected in favour H a (mean ≠ median).  We can therefore say that 
mean speeds are faster and statistically different to median speeds, indicating a positive 
skew of data.  
 
As a measure of central tendency the median is more resistant than the mean to extreme 
values and skews ( Stockemer, 2019) .  As an illustration, Figure 2 shows the mean, median 
and distribution of fixed network download speeds for Mexico.  The distribution is 
significantly positively skewed i.e. towards lower recorded speeds.  Only a little over one 
third of t he population experiences speeds above the mean which is raised to 150% of the 
value of the median due to a small proportion of high -speed outliers.  As in theory, so in 
practice, the median is a better measure of average than the mean.  
 
Fig. 2.  Distributi on of download speeds for fixed network, Mexico  
 
Source: Cisco (2017b)  
                                                      
5 The mean is the arithmetic average while the median is the midpoint of a range of values (leaving 50 per cent 
of values above and 50 per cent below).  
6 The Wilcoxon signed -rank test is a non -parametric test that can be used when the dif ference between two 
measurements is not normally distributed, assuming an ordinal difference in the variables.  It was used here to 
identify the differences between two sets of observations (speeds at the country level) that are not 
independent, to find if  there is a statistically significant difference or not; this test defines a null hypothesis 
(Ho) and an alternative hypothesis (H a) (Suchmacher and Geller, 2012; Scheff, 2016; UCLA, n.d.).  In our case H o 
assumes that the mean is equal to the median; H a assumes the mean is different from the median.  
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
9 
 Research including broadband speeds quite often uses mean values (Kongaut and Bohlin, 
2014; Nardotto et al., 2015; Gijon and Whalley, 2018).  But the widespread presence of 
skew in dis tribution of broadband speeds leads us to conclude that it is median values which 
should be used instead as they are more representative  of the real speeds observed by the 
majority of users in a country . 
 
D.2. Broadband Speed Di vide  
A key use of global bro adband data has been to identify inter -country differences, and we 
now move to this using – for the reasons just given – median speeds  as most -representative 
of real speeds .  This country data itself is also positively skewed so we summarise in terms 
of me dians, with figures for the three country types presented in Figure 3, broken down into 
fixed and mobile (upper and lower panels respectively) and download and upload speed 
(left and right panels).  
 
Fig. 3.  Median speeds on fixed and mobile networks by inc ome -level group  
 
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
The data shows a clear hierarchy and divide: broadband service is much better in high -
income  countries than others, and in general better in middle -income  than low-income  
countries.  The divide is sharpest in relation to download speeds on the fixed network: high -
income  country median speeds are more than four times faster than those in middle -
income  countries, and more than eight times faster than those of low-income countries .  
Different ials are not quite so large but still sizeable for download speeds on mobile 
networks.  For upload speeds, there is a similar differential between high -income  and less -
wealthy countries but less difference between the middle - and low -income countries.  
Differences were statistically validated through application of Kruskal -Wallis tests.7  In all 
cases except that of middle - vs. low-income countries  for fixed upload, H o (aggregated 
speed is equal across all income level groups) was rejected in favour of H a (aggregated 
                                                      
7 The Kruskal -Wallis test can be used to identify disparities within a dependent variable given some different 
levels defined by an independent variable.  This test allowed us to identify the statistical signif icance of 
disparities within a dependent variable (speed), given some levels defined by an independent variable (country 
income -level group) (Scheff, 2016) .  In this case H o assumes that the aggregated speed is equal across all 
country income levels; H a assumes the aggregated speed is not equal across all country income levels.  
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
10 
 speed is not equal across all income level groups).  The difference in broadband speed 
between income levels of countries is therefore statistically significant.  
 
The broadband divide between countries exposed by this  aggregated  big dataset is n ot 
particularly surprising.  Similar hierarchies and divides emerge through analysis of traditional 
data sources on broadband speed categories, broadband coverage and subscription levels 
(ITU, 2018b).  All that the crowdsourced  data adds here is a somewhat  fuller picture given 
the addition of mobile network and upload data.  
 
There is a further potential value, at least for some countries.  The speed data compiled by 
ITU counts subscriptions within three fixed network download speed segments: 256Kbps –
2Mbps; 2Mbps –10Mbps; and 10Mbps or more (ITU, 2018b)8.  Yet average high -income  
country speeds on the fixed network, as shown in Figure 3, are well above 10Mbps.  This 
reflects the fact that roughly 90 percent of high -income  countries fall into the ITU’s 
10Mbps+ category (ITU, 2018a), so it is no longer a good within -category d ifferentiator.  By 
contrast, this  big data  source  can readily be used to differentiate: say if one wished to split 
countries into <10MBps, 10 –50 Mbps and >50Mbps categories9. 
 
D.3. Fixed–Mob ile Speed Di vide  
Particularly given the aspirations for mobile networks in lower -income countries noted 
earlier, it is important to measure the speed experienced on  these networks relative to fixed 
networks to see if there is any fixed –mobile divide.  Such  investigation is only possible with 
the crowdsourced big data not with traditional data.  Some sense of this was present in 
Figures 1 and 3 but here we use a more direct comparison.  Figure 4 shows the result of 
calculating the ratio of median speeds betw een fixed and mobile networks for each 
individual country and then taking the median of these for different country types; 
distinguishing download and upload10.  Ratios are above one where fixed network speed is  
faster on the aggregate ; below one where mobi le network speed is faster.  
 
Fig. 4. Ratio fixed / mobile , download and upload speeds by income -level group  
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
                                                      
8 These are advertised not actual speeds.  
9 Additional segments for higher speeds have been alr eady defined by the ITU (10 –100Mbps; 100Mb ps–1Gbps; 
>1Gbps) (ITU, 2011); however, when the 2018 indicators were released , data were only available for the first 
three segments (ITU, 2018a).  
10 Median values  are again used to calculate group aggregates rather than means because the country dataset 
is positively skewed, and so use of the mean w ould give a less -representative picture.  
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
11 
 Overall figures across all countries show no great fixed –mobile network divide: download 
speeds e xperienced on fixed networks are just 2% faster  than  the mobile networks; upload 
speeds experienced on mobile networks are 23% faster than those on fixed networks.  As 
might be predicted given the different roles of fixed and mobile networks in the global 
North and South, there are differences by income level.  Speeds experienced on f ixed 
networks are faster in high -income countries (only just for upload speeds).  Speeds 
experienced on m obile networks are greater  overall in lower -income countries (excepting  
the anomaly of low-income country  fixed upload speeds noted above).  
 
To provide a further perspective on the disparities between fixed and mobile networks, 
Figure 5 identifies the proportion of countries in each category that record faster speeds on 
mobil e networks; noting again that this information is only available via big data.  Consistent 
with the data shown in Figure 4, the majority of middle -income  countries are experiencing 
faster download and upload speeds on the mobile network (59% and 68% respec tively).  
This all represents valuable information e.g. for policy makers considering the relative speed 
contributions and value  of fixed and mobile infrastructure.  
 
Fig. 5.  Faster experienced speeds on mobile compared to fixed  networks , download and 
uploa d by income -level group  
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
D.4. Download –Upload Speed Asym metries  
As noted above, the shift from users as digital consumers to also being digital producers 
means that an ideal network would provide upload spe eds similar to download speeds.  
With traditional datasets it has not been possible to investigate this but the Ookla -Cisco  
data set allows us to calculate the (a)symmetry of telecommunication networks.  Figure 6 
shows the result of calculating the ratio of  median download:median upload speeds for 
each individual country and then taking the median of these for different country types; 
distinguishing fixed and mobile networks.  
 
Fig. 6.  Ratio download / upload  speed, fixed and mobile network by income -level gr oup 
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
12 
 Again setting a question mark over the low-income country  fixed upload figures, we can see 
that asymmetries across income levels and across networks are fairly consistent.  Despite 
the much greater inv estments in broadband infrastructure in high -income countries, and 
despite the much greater role of mobile networks in lower -income countries, neither effect 
can really be seen in the data: download speeds are around three times faster than upload 
speeds i n all cases.  Comparing the two network types, then overall ratios / asymmetries are 
only around one -sixth higher on fixed compared to mobile networks, suggesting relatively 
limited benefits on this particular measure for those focused on mobile network 
investment.   Finally, the figures suggest relatively limited impact at the time of sampling of 
superfast fibre fixed networks and of 5G mobile networks, both of which allow symmetric 
download/upload, unlike earlier generations of the technologies11.  With gro wth in digital 
producer roles including data -intensive production such as video upload as part of digital 
economy strategies, policy makers will be increasingly needing these types of insights in 
order to determine investment and regulatory priorities.  
 
D.5. Broadband  Indices 
Notwithstanding its aggregation, this  crowdsourced big dataset has allowed us to separately 
explore multiple dimensions of the broadband speed divide; something not possible with 
traditional broadband data.  But we can also use this da taset  to do the opposite: create a 
broadband index figure for each country.  Indices have been popular in measuring the digital 
divide as they aggregate multiple dimensions into a single figure and readily allow 
comparisons between countries and across tim e (OECD, 2008; Bruno et al., 2010; 
Hanafizadeh et al., 2013) .  In this case, we calculate the broadband index giving equal (i.e. 
one-third) weight to median download speed, median upload speed, and latency12.  
Standardisation is required in order to enable the three elements to be combined (OECD, 
2008); normalising the distributions, moderating the effect of outliers and adjusting values 
to a 0 –1 scale based on the following rescaling formula:  
 
𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑐=𝑥−𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑚𝑖𝑛 
 
Each of the three elements is rescaled to a maximum value of 1/3.   Within the upload and 
download segments a value of 1/3 is given when the country has the highest speed, and a 
fraction of the value if this is lower; lat encies work in the opposite direction as the ideal is to 
have lower values closer to zero.  Given the differential roles of, and policies towards, fixed 
and mobile networks in different countries, we decided to create separate indices for each 
type: ifix for the fixed network, imob  for the mobile network according to the following 
formulae:  
 
 ifix = ((1/3 * download speed fixresc )  + (1/3 * upload speed fixresc ) + (1/3 (1 -latency fixresc ))) 
                                                      
11 At an individual country level, impacts can be seen.  For example, the best -performing country on the mobile 
network – Singapore – had a mobile download/upload ratio of 2.3 (three -quarters the high -income country 
average), and the best -performing country on the fixed network – South Korea – had a fixed download/upload 
ratio of 1.1 (one -third the high -income country average).  
12 Equal weight has usually  been given to each of these three elements by researchers using these types of 
data and for instance in the estimation of the EIU (2018) index; however Vicente and Gil -de-Bernab é (2010) 
suggest the use of different weights which could be valuable to lower the importance of latencies.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
13 
  
 imob  = ((1/3 * download speed mobresc )  + (1/3 * upload speed mobresc ) + (1/3 (1 -
latency mobresc ))) 
As a result the ifix and imob  indices  for each country  can take values between 0 and 1: 
values closer to 1 reflect relatively fast download and upload speeds, and relatively low 
latencies compared to the country with the best per formance in each dimension  (see 
Appendix B for data) .  Thus the indices can be useful policy tools, helping any individual 
country understand where it stands in relation to others; for example, creating a “league 
table” of broadband performance either sepa rately for fixed and mobile, or combining the 
two into a single measure.  These can be important for digital development given the role 
that indices and league tables play in shaping and even stimulating policy action (Kauffman 
and Kumar, 2005; Gerpott and  Ahmadi, 2015) . 
 
We can also gain insights through visualisation of the indices: Figure 7 is a country -level 
scatterplot of the ifix index (x -axis) and imob  index (y -axis).  The size of each point 
represents the country GDP per capita in US$ purchasing pow er parity; the shape indicates 
the country income -level group; and the colour shows the region.  
 
Fig. 7.  Fixed and mobile network indices  
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
The first thing to note is the reasonable degree of clustering arou nd the line of best fit: 
there is a fair degree of correlation between performance on the two indices.  Some 
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
14 
 countries are offset below and to the right of the line: in these the performance of the fixed 
network relative to other countries is greater than the relative performance of the mobile 
network.  For those countries towards the right side of the graph, this likely occurs due to 
their significant investments in high -speed fibre -optic broadband; something easier for the 
city-states/territories represen ted13.  Most countries, though, lie above and to the left of the 
x=y diagonal, reflecting the differing general distribution of the two indices: the ifix indicator 
is more positively -skewed with countries concentrated more towards the lower part of the 
distribution than is the case for the imob  indicator14.  This may again reflect the influence on 
the indicator of the outlier countries with some very high -performing fixed broadband 
infrastructures.  
 
Looking at the upper -right of the graph, we find countries w ith the best -performing 
broadband overall.  Singapore stands out, leading in the performance of both its fixed and 
mobile networks.  With a few exceptions – e.g. Thailand and China – almost all countries in 
this high -performing part of the graph are high -income countries, as one would expect from 
earlier findings.  Looking at the lower -left of the graph, we find countries with the worst -
performing broadband infrastructure.  Venezuela stands out, with the lowest scores for 
both indices.  Virtually all countr ies in the low -performing part of the graph are lower -
income  countries, thus illustrating the global broadband divide relating to income15. 
 
D.5.1. Fixed network broadband index  
To confirm these disparities we present the results of the calculation of the ifix indicator 
aggregated for all countries by income -level group in Figure 8.  The ifix indicator clearly 
shows the divide between high -income  countries and the other two groups.  The scores for 
the two lower -income groups  are around one -third lower when c ompared to those 
obtained by high -income  countries.  There is no difference between the scores given to 
middle - and low -income  countries on this network: the low-income  sample has fixed 
network performance similar to that o f the average middle -income count ry and may thus 
not be representative of low-income countries  overall.  A Kruskal -Wallis test confirms the 
divide between high -income  countries and the rest of the world.  The ifix index confirms 
that a global broadband speed divide exists and that high -income  countr y users  benefit 
from better service on fixed networks.  
 
  
                                                      
13 For more on why Romania is in thi s group, see Rogers (2015).  
14 Note, the independent calculation of the two indices means the graph is not showing the performance of 
mobile and fixed networks relative to one another in a country.  The upward offset therefore does not mean 
mobile networks in most countries are performing better than fixed networks in those countries.  
15 The lowest -scoring countries are middle - not low -income countries, likely reflecting the issues with low -
income country data noted earlier.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
15 
 Fig. 8.  Fixed network broadband index  by income -level group  
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
D.5.2. Mobile network broadband index  
Similar calculations are performed on the mobile network; Figure 9 presents the results for 
imob16.  It shows a clear divide across country income levels.  Once more, high -income  
countries get the highest scores, followed by middle - and then low -income countries .  The 
aggregated scores of middl e-income  countries are around one -third lower than those of 
high -income  countries; low-income countries  have scores that are less than half of the high -
income  countries and around one -third lower than middle -income  countries.  These 
differences  are statist ically significant between high -income countries and others when 
performing the Kruskal -Wallis test, and confirm an income -related  divide.  
 
Fig. 9.  Mobile network broadband index  
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
Overall, via the ifix and imob  indices we are able to explore multiple dimensions of the 
speed divide as a joint score for countries in our dataset.  The results confirm presence of a 
global broadband speed divide.  Fixed and mobile networks in high -income  countries have 
better per formance when compared to those in middle - and low -income  countries, which 
                                                      
16 As noted above, while we can com pare the values of both indices, a score of – for example – 0.5 on imob  
does not mean performance on the mobile network equal to a 0.5 on the ifix score due to the independent 
calculation and re -scaling of each index.  
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
16 
 are least able to benefit from the use of data -intensive services and applications.  None of 
the measurements in this section could be performed with traditional data.  
 
D.5.3. Broad band readiness calculations  
We can also use indices to understand the broadband readiness of nations using two 
thresholds estimated by Cisco (2017b) (see Table 2).  The low threshold is based on 
performance requirements for a country to be on the “cusp” of  using data -intensive 
services; the high threshold reflects requirements for full use of data -intensive services: 
concurrent use of multiple services including basic (e.g. text/instant messaging), 
intermediate (augmented reality) and advanced (virtual real ity streaming).  
 
Table 2 Low and high thresholds, data -intensive services and applications  
Threshold  Download (Mbps)  Upload (Mbps)  Latency (ms)  
Low More than 9.1  More than 2.1  Less than 56  
High  More than 85  More than 85  Less than 20  
Source: (Cisco, 2017 a; 2017b)  
 
Indices were created for the low and the high thresholds, for both fixed and mobile 
networks: lowfix , lowmob , hifix  and himob .  As above, each of the three components is 
equally weighted with upload/download getting a value of 1/3 when median sp eed is equal 
to or greater than the threshold value and a fraction of this value if lower; and latency 
getting a value of 1/3 when median latency was equal to or lower than the threshold value 
and a fraction of this if higher.  In sum indices can take valu es between 0 and 1, with a value 
of 1 meaning the country is ready based on the threshold criteria.  
 
For both fixed (Figure 10) and mobile (Figure 11) networks, patterns are the same.  The 
great majority of high -income countries are ready at the low thresh old but this was true of 
only a small minority of middle -income  countries, and only one of  the low -income countries , 
for its mobile network alone .  This readiness measure therefore reiterates the global pattern 
of broadband divide by income.  No countries are yet deemed ready for full use of data -
intensive services as per the high threshold.  We believe these threshold measures will be of 
value to policy makers in understanding readiness of their countries e.g. for particular types 
of participation in the d igital economy and society.  Again, these measures are not available 
with traditional broadband data sources.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
17 
 Fig. 10.  Countries ready on the fixed network, low and high thresholds (%)  
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
Fig. 11.  Countrie s ready on the mobile network, low and high thresholds (%)  
 
Source: Authors using Ookla -Cisco dataset, 2017  
 
 
E. Discussion  
 
The discussion in this se ction focuses around two topics that address our main question: 
“What difference is made by measurement o f broadband connectivity and divides based on  
crowdsourced big data rather than traditional data sources?” .  First, the insights into 
dimensions of the broadband speed divide that this aggregated big dataset has provided, 
and then a summary of the comparat ive opportunities and limitations of using  this form of  
crowdsourced data.  
 
E.1. Insights into Broadband Speed Divides  
What  new insights has this  big data -based analysis provide d? 
 
The first insight was methodological; identifying a differential between me an and median 
broadband speeds within individual countries.  Analysis was limited by lack of access to the 
Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
18 
 raw big data and presentation of distribution profiles for only six countries.  However, from 
the available data and statistical testing, it was poss ible to demonstrate that medians are a 
better reflection than means of observed broadband speeds in a country, due to positive 
skews / outliers in speeds.  As noted above, to date, most studies use mean speeds 
(theoretical or observed) for research analysi s and policy recommendations.  Results here 
support the argument that medians will be a better way to understand broadband and 
broadband divides in a country, and a better basis for making policy decisions.  
 
Using median speeds aggregated into country type s by income, we were able to identify a 
global broadband speed divide.  There was a fairly consistent correlation of speed and 
income; particularly reflected in much faster speeds experienced by high -income countries 
compared to others.  On average, middle - and low -income countries have not yet achieved 
“good quality” broadband; thus restricting their ability to build and participate in digital 
economies and societies.  While such a finding is not new, we argue that the basis for our 
big data -based analysis  – bar the concerns about low-income  country fixed upload data – 
may be an improvement on more traditional approaches.  This derives from the greater 
accuracy and relevance of the data including use of medians, use of individual speeds rather 
than speed ca tegories, and use of real not theoretical speeds.  
 
Use of the crowdsourced dataset permitted deeper investigation of specific dimensions of 
the broadband divide; something not possible with traditional broadband data sources.  The 
first of these is a fixed –mobile divide which, while not great, was differentiated by country 
income group.  In aggregate, speeds experienced on fixed networks were faster than those 
on mobile networks in high -income  countries; but the reverse was true in middle -income  
countries.  At the individual country level, these patterns applied to a small majority of high -
income  countries and around two -thirds of middle -income  countries.  More pronounced 
was a download –upload divide with download speeds across both fixed and mobile network 
around three times faster on average than upload speeds; something likely to hamper 
digital economy development.  
 
Finally, the ability of crowdsourced tests to provide download, upload and latency data 
allows  – despite access being limited to data aggregat es – the creation of new broadband 
service quality indices; valuable given the clear policy signals that such scoring provides.  
There are many possible ways in which these could have been approached but here we 
weighted the three elements equally and calc ulated separate indices for fixed and mobile 
service quality.  The indices are of individual value but plotting them together allowed 
identification of patterns and outliers that provide some level of policy insight.  The indices 
provide an overview measur e and confirmation of the global broadband divide; particularly 
between high -income and lower -income countries.  The same was seen by measuring which 
countries were ready for particular types of broadband use: none met the high -level 
threshold but there wa s a very strong divide between the proportion of high -income vs. 
lower -income countries meeting the basic threshold.  All of this confirms the digital 
economy / society infrastructure advantage of the former group.  
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
19 
 E.2. Aggregated Big Data Ben efits and  Limitations  
On the basis of the analysis undertaken, we can now review this form of aggregated big data 
in terms of the ‘CARTA’ data quality issues identified in traditional data by prior literature, 
looking at both the benefits but also limitations of the d ataset exposed here.  
 
Both  underlying and aggregated big data  is not really more complete than traditional 
broadband data.  Instead, it provides different measures to traditional data: speed and 
latency rather than speed categories, subscriptions and mobil e coverage.  Completeness 
would be improved by combining the two types of data.  The big dataset  is less complete in 
terms of country coverage: we derived full data for 112 countries compared to the 192 
covered by the ITU.  Coverage was particularly incomp lete for the lower -income countries: 
the ITU provides data for all middle -income  countries while the Ookla -Cisco dataset covers 
only 63% of these countries.  And ITU provides data for 50 of the 52 low-income  countries; 
full crowdsourced data was only avail able for eight (15%) of those countries.   While 
coverage may grow over time, t his is indicative of a “big data divide” between countries; 
excluding significant numbers, particularly of the poorest nations from the analysis and also, 
hence, from the policy and other benefits that big data -based measurement can bring.  
 
Accuracy of underlying big data can only be hypothesised.  It may be  higher than for 
traditional broadband data17.  There is relatively little self -interest in the automatic creation 
of crowdsou rced data; certainly not the issues of commercial confidentiality or desire to 
inflate speeds that may impact operator reporting.  And country -level data is based on 
multiple – typically many thousands or even millions – of data points, not the reports of a 
tiny handful of operators.  The dataset is methodologically homogeneous: generated by a 
single company via a single method rather than being gathered from multiple operators, all 
potentially using their own measurement approaches.  
 
The results above show  relevance of this big data set to be  greater than for traditional 
broadband data.  First, in terms of the range of indicators provided.  As argued from the 
literature review, traditional data provides relatively little of relevance to service quality.  By 
allowing access to key service indicators of upload/download speed and latency, 
crowdsourced data is a significant improvement and, as summarised in the previous sub -
section , has allowed analysis of multiple, policy -relevant dimensions of broadband 
connect ivity and the broadband divide.  Second, in terms of the nature of the indicators, this 
data set provides access to real rather than merely advertised or theoretical speeds; much 
more relevant for – say – policy makers seeking to guide regulatory or other d ecisions.  
Third, and related, in terms of the measures that can be calculated, this big data offers both 
mean and median measures of average, with the findings above demonstrating that 
medians are a better measure of typical real experience of broadband.  
 
Raw crowdsourced data is a contemporaneous reflection of the state of broadband in a 
country.  However, that is not the case with the processed dataset – there is a lag in 
                                                      
17 There is a suggestion (Bauer et al., 2010) that speed test data may be subject to skews due to greater 
likelihood of testing by those who perceive a problem with their connection.  But the existence of such a skew, 
and its bias e.g. to those with faster - or slower -than -average connections is un -evidenced.  We can speculate 
that awareness and hence usage of speed tests might be greater among more educated, urban populations.  
However, all of this remains to be researched.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
20 
 production, it is only available on a yearly basis after production by Cisco, and t here is no 
regular release date despite Ookla releasing its measurement data on a monthly basis18. 
 
Accessibility of this aggregated data set is equivalent to that of a sub -set of traditional data 
in that both are open -access and cost -free.  Pre -processing a nd aggregation of the data by 
Cisco means users do not require intensive computational power and data science 
capabilities in order to analyse these data; and thus users can access some of the 
advantages of big data without encountering some of the barrier s typically associated with 
its application.  Analyses such as our own can therefore be readily replicated without direct 
financial cost and by a broad range of telecommunications /digital  policy or other 
researchers.  Although the costs of producing it are  lower than traditional data sourced from 
operators, raw crowdsourced data must be purchased for a fee, just like the data on the 
paid -for ITU database, except that the costs are well above the US$300 charged by ITU: 
access to the Ookla dataset costs  order s of magnitude more than this, without the right to 
publish the data .  With raw data inaccessible for all but a very few institutions with large 
budgets and technical capabilities, it is not possible to obtain complete information about 
the distributions o f data measurements within each country (number of observations, 
maximum and minimum values, etc.).  Similarly, basic documentation is available about how 
the big data were compiled and processed but it is not possible to identify full details of the 
data preparation and transformation undertaken by Cisco.  All of this rather limits the 
analyses that can  be undertaken with the dataset, and accessibilty presents a foundational 
constraint that analyses of the potential and challenges of big data rarely highli ght (Jin et al., 
2015; Connelly et al., 2016).  
 
Table 3 summarises the benefits and limitations of using this type of aggregated big data to 
measure broadband, as found from this analysis.  
 
  
                                                      
18 At the time of writing, Cisco had  just released data for 2018 though it was unclear if this was fully updated 
from the 2017 dataset.  The Economist Intelligence Unit releases a dataset based on Ookla data as part of their 
Inclusive Internet Index but only for 100 countries.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
21 
 Table 3 Relative benefits and limitations of the Ookla -Cisco datas et in relation to traditional 
broadband data  
Characteristics  Benefits  Limitations  
Completeness  -Provides additional measures for 
112 countries  
 -Covers fewer countries and 
absent for several middle -income 
and most low -income countries  
-No ready access to  raw data  
Accuracy  -Greater accuracy  
-Methodological homogeneity  -Potential skew  
 
Relevance  -Greater relevance given measures 
of service quality  
-Real not theoretical/advertised 
speeds  
-Multiple data points via mean and 
median values   
Timeliness  -Shorte r lag time in production  -Made available only on yearly 
basis  
-No regular release of dataset  
Accessibility  -Aggregated dataset is cost -free, 
open -access  
-Use does not require high -level 
computing or data science 
capabilities  
-Ready replicability of analys is -High cost of raw data  
-No access to detailed 
documentation  
-Methodological limitations of 
working with aggregated data  
 
 
 
F. Conclusions  
 
The fundamental and increasing importance of broadband to national and regional 
development plans – hence also the growing dangers of broadband divides between those 
with and those without high -quality services – serves to amplify the need for good 
broadband d ata and indicators.   Traditional measures, such as those provided through the 
International Telecommunication Union, have been a valuable basis for understanding 
broadband.  However, there are some limitations of traditional data and so, here, we sought 
to investigate the implications of using a different data source: hundreds of millions of 
crowdsourced speed tests.  Prior work has shown the potential value of such data, 
prompting us to undertake a more systematic review.  
 
We found, overall, that – compared  to traditional broadband datasets – crowdsourced big 
data provides additional measures, is more accurate, relevant, timely and accessible.  In 
particular it provides a much better picture of the actual broadband service experienced by 
users.  However, it is also less complete especially for lower -income countries.  Because of Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
22 
 its high cost, we did not make direct use of the big data that Ookla speed tests produce; 
instead utilising a freely -available Cisco dataset that pre -processes and aggregates Ookla’s 
big data.  While this brought benefits of zero cost and low analytical capacity requirements, 
it also reduced understanding, control over access, and range of data manipulation.   Our 
work can thus provide only a partial insight into the wider potential of big data but 
realisation of that potential is currently constrained by access/cost barriers.  
 
This aggregated big dataset confirmed the presence of a global broadband divide between 
countries at different income levels but it offered an improved method of m easuring this 
divide, based on median rather than mean speeds.  The comparative benefits of this form of 
big data also allowed a deeper insight into the global broadband divide than traditional 
sources offer, providing an understanding of the asymmetries b etween fixed and mobile 
network service , and download vs. upload speeds.   It also allowed development of single -
score indices to measure broadband service quality  and readiness for different levels of 
data -intensive services ; offering a better reflection o f actual user needs and experience.  
 
Implications for policy and practice can be considered.  At global level, the current 
limitations of big data suggest that it should be seen as a complement to, rather than 
substitute for traditional broadband measures.  But the additional value it has been shown 
here to provide , create s a strong argument for its adoption.  Likewise at national level, we 
have shown ways in which crowdsourced data – even in aggregate form – offers policy 
makers greater understanding of bro adband use in their countries; thus providing a basis for 
better policy decisions  than traditional data alone .  This includes more realistic measures of 
speed; better measures of speed that encompass both mean and median values; measures 
of asymme tries bet ween different network  types and between download and upload 
speeds; and the ability to create single -score indices of broadband service that offer a 
simple and powerful way to assess broadband readiness and to track improvements over 
time.  This data set has also highlighted  specific issues warranting policy attention: the 
performance value of relative investments in fixed vs. mobile broadband, and the need for 
more attention to the relative slowness of upload speeds.  
 
Finally, we recognise some of the lim itations of our work which point to directions for future 
research.  We have used only one of the big data sources identified in Table 1, and it will be 
useful to undertake a comparative analysis of the value offered by each the five shown 
there.  This ext ension may, for those with funds available, extend to analysis of the raw data 
where sold by vendors.  We focused on particular measures and issues but future research 
can also broaden this; for example, studying within individual countries patterns over t ime 
exposed by big data; using alternative measures and tests of the divides; and trying out 
different ways to calculate broadband indices.  
 
  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
23 
 Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to thank Gindo Tampubolon and Susan Teltscher for comments on 
an earlier ver sion of the paper.   The research reported here was partially funded by Conacyt 
(Mexico) . 
 
References  
A4AI (2018). Improving Mobile Broadband Quality of Service in Low - and Middle -Income Countries . 
Washington, DC: Alliance for Affordable Internet.  
Abeliansky , A. L., & Hilbert, M. (2017). Digital technology and international trade: is it the quantity of 
subscriptions or the quality of data speed that matters?. Telecommunications Policy , 41(1), 35 -
48. 
Akamai (2017). State of the Internet: Q1 2017 Report . Cambri dge, MA: Akamai.  
Akerman, A., Gaarder, I., & Mogstad, M. (2015). The skill complementarity of broadband internet. 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics,  130(4) , 1781 -1824.  
Bauer, S., Clark, D. D. & Lehr, W. (2010). Understanding broadband speed measurements. Paper 
presented at TPRC 2010 , Arlington, VA, 1 -3 Oct.  
Belo, R., Ferreira, P., & Telang, R. (2013). Broadband in school: impact on student performance. 
Management Science , 60(2), 265 -282.  
Broadband Commission (2018). The State of Broadband 2018 . Geneva: Broadband Commission for 
Sustainable Development, International Telecommunication Union.  
Broadband Commission (2019). Connecting Africa Through Broadband . Geneva: Broadband 
Commission for Sustainable Development, International Telecommunication Union.  
Brun o, G., Esposito, E., Genovese, A., & Gwebu, K. L. (2010). A critical analysis of current indexes for 
digital divide measurement. The Information Society,  27(1) , 16-28. 
Campante, F., Durante, R., & Sobbrio, F. (2017). Politics 2.0: the multifaceted effect o f broadband 
internet on political participation. Journal of the European Economic Association , 16(4), 1094 -
1136.  
Cisco (2017a). Cisco Cloud Readiness Tool . San Jose, CA: Cisco.  
Cisco (2017b). Cisco Global Cloud Index Supplement: Cloud Readiness Regional De tails . San Jose, CA: 
Cisco.  
Connelly, R., Playford, C. J., Gayle, V., & Dibben, C. (2016). The role of administrative data in the big 
data revolut ion in social science research. Social Science Research , 59, 1 -12. 
Cramer, D. & Howitt, D. (2004). The Sage Dictionary of Statistics . London: Sage Publications.  
EIU (2018). The Inclusive Internet Index: Bridging Digital Divides . London: Economist Intelligence 
Unit.  
Ericsson (2018). Ericsson Mobility Report. Stockholm: Ericsson.  
FCC (2018). International Broadban d Data Report . Washington, DC: Federal Communications 
Commission.  
Ford, G. S. (2018). Is faster better? Quantifying the relationship between broadband speed and 
economic growth. Telecommunications Policy , 42(9), 766 -777.  
Fowlie, G., &  Biggs, P. (2015). The digital broadband and gender divides. In Digital Divides , K. 
Andreasson (ed) . New York, NY: Routledge, 56 -75. 
Fuentes -Bautista, M. (2014). Rethinking localism in the broadband era: a participatory community 
development approach. Gove rnment Information Quarterly , 31(1), 65 -77. 
Gabay, C., & Ilcan, S. (2017). The affective politics of the Sustainable Development Goals: 
partnership, capacity -building, and big data. Globalizations , 14(3), 468 -485.  
Gerpott, T. J., & Ahmadi, N. (2015). Compo site indices for the evaluation of a country's information 
technology development level. Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 98, 174 -185.  
Gijon, C., & Whalley, J. (2018). Broadband access speeds across the Northern Powerhouse. Paper 
presented at 29th European Regional Conference of the International Telecommunications 
Society , Trento, Italy, 1 -4 Aug.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
24 
 Grubesic, T. H., & Mack, E. A. (2015). Broadband Telecommunications and Regional Development . 
Routledge: London.  
GSMA (2016). Connected Society Digita l Inclusion in Latin America and the Caribbean . London: 
GSMA.  
Hanafizadeh, M. R., Hanafizadeh, P., & Bohlin, E. (2013). Digital divide and e -readiness: trends and 
gaps. International Journal of E -Adoption,  5(3), 30-75. 
Heeks, R. (2018). Information and Com munication Technology for Development (ICT4D) . Abingdon, 
UK: Routledge.  
Helderop, E., Grubesic, T. H. & Alizadeh, T. (2019). Data deluge or data trickle? Difficulties in 
acquiring public data for telecommunications policy analysis. The Information Society,  35(2) , 69-
80. 
Hilbert, M. (2016a). Big data for development: a review of promises and challenges. Development 
Policy Review,  34(1) , 135-174.  
Hilbert, M. (2016b). The bad news is that the digital access divide is here to stay: domestically 
installed bandwi dths among 172 countries for 1986 –2014. Telecommunications Policy , 40(6), 
567-581.  
ITU (2011). ITU Handbook for the Collection of Administrative Data on Telecommunications/ICT . 
Geneva: International Telecommunication Union.  
ITU (2014). Manual for Measuring  ICT Access and Use by Households and Individuals . Geneva: 
International Telecommunication Union.  
ITU (2016). Measuring the Information Society Report 2016 . Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union.  
ITU (2018a). ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicat ors Database 2018 . Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union.  
ITU (2018b). Measuring the Information Society Report 2018 . Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union.  
ITU (2019). ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2019 . Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union.  
Jin, X., Wah, B. W., Cheng, X., & Wang, Y. (2015). Significance and c hallenges of big data research. Big 
Data Research , 2(2), 59 -64. 
Jordán, V. (2011). Broadband: the new digital divide. In: Fast -Tracking The Digital Revolution: 
Broadband For Latin America and the Caribbean . Santiago: ECLAC, 81 -118.  
Katz, R. (2012). The Impact of Broadband on the Economy . Geneva: International Telecommunication 
Union.  
Kauffman, R. J., & Kumar, A. (2005). A Critical Assessment of the Ca pabilities of Five Measures For ICT 
Development , Management Information Systems Research Center Working Paper. Minneapolis, 
MN: University of Minnesota.  
Kelly, T. & Rossotto, C. M. (2012). Broadband Strategies Handbook . Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Kongaut, C., & Bohlin, E. (2014). Impact of broadband speed on economic outputs: an empirical 
study of OECD countries. Paper presented at 25th European Regional Conference of the 
International Telecommunications Society , Brussels, 22 -25 Jun.  
LaRose, R., St rover, S., Gregg, J. L., & Straubhaar, J. (2011). The impact of rural broadband 
development: lessons from a natural field experiment. Government Information Quarterly , 28(1), 
91-100.  
Liu, Y. H., Prince, J., & Wallsten, S. (2018). Distinguishing bandwidth a nd latency in households’ 
willingness -to-pay for broadband internet speed. Information Economics and Policy , 45, 1 -15. 
M-Lab (2020). Internet Measurement Tests . M-Lab. https://www.measurementlab.net/tests/  
Mayer -Schonberger, V., & Cukier, K. (2013). Big Da ta: A Revolution that will Transform how we Live, 
Work, and Think . New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin.  
Minges, M. (2016) Exploring the Relationship between Broadband and Economic Growth . 
Washington, DC: World Bank.  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
25 
 Nardotto, M., Valletti, T., & Verboven, F. (2 015). Unbundling the incumbent: evidence from UK 
broadband. Journal of the European Economic Association , 13(2), 330 -362.  
Netflix (2020). Netflix ISP Speed Index . Los Gatos, CA: Netflix. https://ispspeedindex.netflix.com/  
OECD (2008). Handbook on Constructing Composite Indicators: Methodology and User Guide . Paris: 
OECD.  
OECD (2014). Data -Driven Innovation For Growth And Well -Being . Paris: OECD.  
OECD (2017). DAC List of ODA Recipients . Paris: OECD.  
OECD (2018). Fostering Greater SME Participation i n a Globally Integrated Economy . Mexico: OECD.  
Ofcom (2019a). Connected Nations Update: Spring 2019 . London: The Office of Communications.  
Ofcom (2019b). UK Home Broadband Performance . London: The Office of Communications.  
Ookla (2020). Speedtest Global In dex. Seattle, WA: Ookla. http://www.speedtest.net/global -
index/about  
Prieger, J. E. (2013). The broadband digital divide and the economic benefits of mobile broadband 
for rural areas. Telecommunic ations Policy , 37(6 -7), 483 -502.  
Prieger, J. E., & Hu, W. M. (2008). The broadband digital divide and the nexus of race, competition, 
and quality. Information Economics and Policy , 20(2), 150 -167.  
Riddlesden, D. & Singleton, A. D. (2014). Broadband speed e quity: a new digital divide? Applied 
Geography,  52, 25-33. 
Rogers, K. (2015). Why Romania’s internet is so much faster than America’s. Vice, 2 Feb.  
Rojas, E.F. & Poveda, L. (2017). State of Broadband in Latin America and the Caribbean . Santiago: 
ECLAC.  
Scheff, S. W. (2016). Fundamental Statistical Principles for the Neurobiologist.  London: Academic 
Press.  
Stockemer, D. (2019). Quantitative Methods for the Social Sciences . Cham, Switzerland: Springer.  
Suchmacher, M., & Geller, M. (2012). Practical Biostat istics.  San Diego, CA: Academic Press.  
UCLA (n.d.). What Statistical Analysis Should I Use? Statistical Analyses Using Stata . Los Angeles, CA: 
UCLA.  
UN (2005). Measuring ICT: The Global Status of ICT Indicators . New York, NY: United Nations ICT Task 
Force.  
UNCTAD (2018). Leapfrogging: Look Before You Leap , Policy Brief . Geneva: United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development.  
Vall, I.V. (2017). Measuring real broadband speeds using crowdsourcing data from the Internet 
Foundation. Paper presented at WTIS -17, Hammamet, Tunisia, 14 -16 Nov.  
Vicente, M. R., & Gil -de-Bernabé, F. (2010). Assessing the broadband gap: from the penetration 
divide to the quality divide. Technological Forecasting and Social Change,  77(5) , 816-822.  
Weiss, J. W., Gulati, G. J., Yates, D. J., & Yates, L. E. (2015). Mobile broadband affordability and the 
global digital divide --an information ethics perspective. In 2015 48th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences . New York, NY: IEEE, 2177 -2186. 
Whitacre, B., Gallardo, R., & Strover, S. (2014). Does rural broadband impact jobs and income? 
Evidence from spatial and first -differenced regressions. The Annals of Regional Science,  53(3) , 
649-670.  
World Bank (2019) World Bank Country and Lending Grou ps. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
World Bank (2020) Data . Washington, DC: World Bank.  
WWC (2015). Broadband: Evidence Review.  London: What Works Centre for Local Economic Growth.  
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
26 
 Appendix A . Cisco -Ookla Data  
Table shows speeds for fixed and mobile networks (Mbps); and latencies (ms).  Fixed ne tworks are identified with the prefix “fix” and mobile networks with 
“mob”; download speeds are contracted as “down” and upload speeds as “up”; means are given the suffix “avg”, and medians “med ”; latencies are show as 
“lat”.  
ITU Country Name  ISO Income  fixdownavg  fixdownmed  fixupavg  fixupmed  fixavglat  fixmedlat  mobdownavg  mobdownmed  mobupavg  mobupmed  mobavglat  mobmedlat  
Afghanistan  AFG Low 4 2.5 3.4 2 59 17 3.3 2.1 1.1 0.8 96 55 
Albania  ALB Mid 10.1  7 6.6 1.8 42 26 11.1  8.4 5.7 2.6 40 27 
United Arab Emi rates  ARE High  23.7  17 9.7 5.4 23 7 25.2  22.6  12.4  5.3 45 29 
Argentina  ARG  Mid 7 5 1.8 0.9 53 30 9 6.9 5.4 2.6 58 43 
Armenia  ARM  Mid 13 6.1 9.8 3.1 31 19 9.6 5.5 5.4 1.4 34 27 
Australia  AUS High  19.2  11 7.5 1 41 21 28 21 11.7  7.4 36 27 
Austria  AUT  High  28.9  19.1  8.2 5.9 26 15 27.3  22.4  12.1  7.7 31 26 
Azerbaijan  AZE Mid 7.9 3.8 7.7 0.9 44 32 10.3  6.9 4.4 2 50 36 
Belgium  BEL High  45.1  33.8  10 7 25 14 30 22.9  13 9.7 30 25 
Bangladesh  BGD  Low 10.8  3.8 9.2 3 39 9 4.3 3.2 1.5 1.2 70 43 
Bulgaria  BGR  Mid 37.7 31.8  27.5  19.2  17 9 25 20.3  12.6  6.5 33 28 
Bahrain  BHR  High  14.7  9.8 5.5 2.1 29 18 9.3 5.9 8.2 4.4 39 24 
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  BIH Mid 16.5  9.5 3.8 1.4 34 20 9.1 7.6 2.2 1.9 45 37 
Belarus  BLR Mid 17.9  9.7 15 5.3 27 15 13.1  9.9 10.3  4.4 34 28 
Bolivia  (Plurinational 
State of)  BOL Mid 3.9 2.9 1.3 0.8 46 18 5.9 4.6 5.1 1.6 59 39 
Brazil  BRA Mid 13.2  8.1 5.1 1.6 42 20 10.5  6.8 5.4 2 79 59 
Canada  CAN  High  36.6  26.6  15.5  9.8 32 15 39.2  28.2  12.4  8.5 40 31 
Switzerland  CHE High  71.8  41.6  37.1  13.5  21 13 31.6 20.6  12.8  9.1 32 27 
Chile  CHL Mid 26.4  18 9.1 6 35 18 15.7  9.3 9 4.5 46 32 
China  CHN  Mid 47.5  40.7  17 6.3 17 9 37.9  32.2  18.3  11.9  44 32 
Colombia  COL Mid 7.4 5.2 3.2 1.1 50 32 8.2 5.8 5.7 2 80 54 
Costa Rica  CRI Mid 6.8 5.6 3.3 1.7 41 13 3.4 2.9 1.9 1.2 73 41 
Cyprus  CYP High  14.2  8.9 3.4 1 35 24 10.8  8.5 4.9 2.3 52 34 
Czech Republic  CZE High  28.1  18.9  17.3  8.5 22 15 23.2  19.1  12.7  11.3  32 26 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
27 
 ITU Country Name  ISO Income  fixdownavg  fixdownmed  fixupavg  fixupmed  fixavglat  fixmedlat  mobdownavg  mobdownmed  mobupavg  mobupmed  mobavglat  mobmedlat  
Germany  DEU  High  40.7  29.9  9.6 5.9 31 21 22.9  15.4  8.9 4.7 56 43 
Denmark  DNK  High  63 46.6  49.5  27.3  17 10 37.9 27.7  16.4  12.9  28 22 
Dominican Rep.  DOM  Mid 16.1  9.2 3.9 2 45 16 10.1  6.4 4.5 1.9 55 38 
Algeria  DZA Mid 2.7 1.9 0.8 0.5 72 45 4.1 2.5 1.8 1 70 50 
Ecuador  ECU Mid 6.7 4.1 5 1.4 41 20 8.4 5.2 7.9 1.9 54 43 
Egypt  EGY Mid 4 2.3 1.1 0.6 58 33 5.9 5.2 3 2.1 52 36 
Spain  ESP High  50.3  30.2  43 10 36 22 31.6  22.3  14 6.8 53 43 
Estonia  EST High  28.6  18.8  20 9.4 23 13 23.3  14.9  9.7 5.1 29 21 
Finland  FIN High  37.4  23.8  17.9  9.9 28 20 27.2  21.6  12.3  8.2 31 26 
France  FRA High  33.5  10.9  18.8  1 37 24 27.5  18.9  9.1 5.3 47 36 
United Kingdom  GBR  High  33.7  25.6  9.7 6.2 31 18 25.2  18.2  10.6  7.2 43 38 
Georgia  GEO  Mid 13 8.7 12.5  7.7 40 14 12.4  8.9 8.3 4.9 49 30 
Ghana  GHA  Mid 7.5 4.2 6.6 2.5 62 24 8.2 5.6 4.4 1.8 68 38 
Greece  GRC  High  11.3  9.2 1.5 0.8 43 26 15.9  13.7  6.4 3.5 41 29 
Guatemala  GTM  Mid 5 4.1 1.9 1 58 22 7.6 6.4 5.2 3 47 35 
Hong Kong, China  HKG  High  117.3  66.8  117.1  49.4  20 5 25 16.3  12.1  6.4 36 27 
Honduras  HND  Mid 4.3 3 3.1 1 54 20 5.7 5 3.1 1.3 77 59 
Croatia  HRV  High  16.6  10.8  5.5 2 31 20 19.7  18.2  9 4.7 37 28 
Hungary  HUN  High  49.2  30.5  20.2  9.3 23 14 39.1  32.1  15.7  11 34 22 
Indonesia  IDN Mid 9.4 7.4 6.3 1.7 33 15 8 5.4 6 3.8 52 41 
India  IND Mid 9.5 5.9 8.9 3.4 39 19 7.1 4.4 3.2 2.2 71 50 
Ireland  IRL High  32.3  21.9  12.1  8.7 36 19 19.2  11.5  8.5 4 39 33 
Iran (Islamic Republic 
of) IRN Mid 6.3 4.8 3.2 0.8 42 31 10.3  7.9 5.5 3.2 56 36 
Iraq IRQ Mid 6.9 4.6 6.1 3.1 50 18 4.9 2 3.1 1.2 92 47 
Israel  ISR High  33.8  28.7  4.3 2.8 24 15 19.6  13 9.7 4 35 27 
Italy  ITA High  16.4  10.7  6.6 1 43 29 20.3  14.3  8.6 4.5 49 43 
Jamaica  JAM  Mid 10.6  6.8 3.3 1 56 27 10.5  6.2 4.1 2.1 52 34 
Jordan  JOR Mid 12.4  8.2 8.2 2 43 20 11.1  8.2 9.8 4.7 43 23 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
28 
 ITU Country Name  ISO Income  fixdownavg  fixdownmed  fixupavg  fixupmed  fixavglat  fixmedlat  mobdownavg  mobdownmed  mobupavg  mobupmed  mobavglat  mobmedlat  
Japan  JPN High  77.9  41.6  73.1  40.7  32 21 30 16.2  12.6  8.5 59 50 
Kazakhstan  KAZ Mid 19.3  8.2 18.4  3.9 40 28 12.7  8.1 9.1 4 49 38 
Kenya  KEN Low 9 5.4 6 2.6 43 15 13.5  9.6 7.4 3.8 49 33 
Kyrgyzstan  KGZ Mid 12.2  6 11.5  3.5 36 21 10 6.4 5.2 2.1 47 35 
Cambodia  KHM  Low 9.2 6.1 8.9 5 19 7 6.1 3.8 6 3.2 42 29 
Korea (Rep. of)  KOR  High  88.9  72 85.2  67.2  14 7 38.7  26.1  14.4  11.4  53 31 
Kuwait  KWT  High  10.4  6.5 9.2 3 26 8 12.4  8 12 6.3 43 25 
Lebanon  LBN Mid 2.7 1.8 1.8 0.7 64 42 4.2 3.8 3.2 1.7 56 39 
Sri Lanka  LKA Mid 15.9  10.2  6 1.4 45 25 7.1 5.4 3.3 1.9 53 36 
Lithuania  LTU High  55.1  35.6  52.7  27.3  19 10 32.6  23.8  14.3  9.3 31 24 
Luxem bourg  LUX High  50.7  30.2  27.7  13.6  24 16 33.4  27 13.6  10.1  34 28 
Latvia  LVA High  45.7  29.7  45.6  24.8  17 8 26 20.1  12.2  7.7 28 18 
Macao, China  MAC  High  65 47.5  64.1  46.8  10 4 25.4  13.8  12.3  5.3 32 21 
Morocco  MAR  Mid 10.3  4.1 1.9 0.4 79 46 11.7  8.9 6.3 3.4 47 33 
Moldova  MDA  Mid 39 25.8  34.3  17.7  24 9 16.5  9.6 7.4 2 35 28 
Maldives  MDV  Mid 10.5  4.8 8.3 2.9 46 8 13.7  11 9.8 4.4 48 29 
Mexico  MEX  Mid 14.6  9.8 6.9 2 46 26 13.4  10.4  9.3 4.7 64 49 
The Former Yugoslav 
Rep. of Macedonia  MKD  Mid 13.8  9.2 9.2 1 34 21 16.3  11 9.2 2.5 40 30 
Malta  MLT  High  36.9  29.7  5.2 3.1 22 11 38.1  32.2  10.3  4.6 22 15 
Montenegro  MNE  Mid 14.9  12.6  2.3 1.7 31 22 15.7  11.9  7.5 3 36 28 
Mongolia  MNG  Mid 14.2  3.9 14.1  3.1 38 11 12.1  7.4 8.7 3.4 44 32 
Mozambique  MOZ  Low 3.4 2.6 2.9 1.7 72 29 8.4 6.7 2.3 2.2 60 36 
Malaysia  MYS  Mid 15 8.5 9.1 6 44 20 11 7.1 6 2.9 51 37 
Nigeria  NGA  Mid 5.7 3.7 5.5 3 84 37 6.7 4 3.1 1.8 118 67 
Nicaragua  NIC Mid 4.7 3.3 2.7 1.1 53 19 6 4.6 4.5 1.3 51 38 
Netherlands  NLD High  56.4  40.6  26.5  15.4  22 12 46.5 36.5  16.7  12.3  32 27 
Norway  NOR  High  45 30.3  34.3  17 26 10 54.8  42.5  17.6  13.2  37 32 
New Zealand  NZL High  39.9  26.4  24.5  9.9 27 16 32 21 13.3  7.6 43 36 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
29 
 ITU Country Name  ISO Income  fixdownavg  fixdownmed  fixupavg  fixupmed  fixavglat  fixmedlat  mobdownavg  mobdownmed  mobupavg  mobupmed  mobavglat  mobmedlat  
Oman  OMN  High  9.8 5.4 5.8 0.9 69 23 15.2  12.1  9.8 3.8 50 37 
Pakistan  PAK Mid 4.9 3.2 3.8 1 59 35 7 5.6 4.2 2.4 78 48 
Panama  PAN  Mid 13.3  8.2 4.5 3.4 42 16 13.4  10.3  7.7 4.5 67 39 
Peru  PER Mid 8.5 5.9 2.3 0.7 64 35 11.5  9 9 5.2 62 38 
Philippines  PHL Mid 9 4.6 7.7 0.8 58 30 7.7 5 5 2.4 56 37 
Poland  POL High  30.2  18.7  11.8  5.9 28 19 17.9  12.3  8.6 4.9 39 34 
Portugal  PRT High  42.2  28 20.3  8.5 23 13 22.4  12.1  10.2  4.7 36 29 
Paraguay  PRY Mid 5.2 3.9 3.7 2 40 15 7.6 5.9 4.8 3 82 43 
Qatar  QAT  High  18.7  11 13.1  5.5 23 5 26.1  17.3  12.8  8.8 42 21 
Romania  ROU  Mid 94.7  54.8  70.2  42 19 9 35.9  16 14.2  5.5 38 28 
Russian Federation  RUS Mid 33.8  21.9  30.9  21.9  23 8 12 7.4 6 3 57 45 
Saudi Arabia  SAU High  12.2  7.5 6.4 1.1 47 31 8.5 4.7 6.8 3.4 58 39 
Singapore  SGP High  142.6  66.4  139.8  55.4  14 4 63.6  46.2  33.5  20.5  30 21 
El Salvador  SLV Mid 4 3.3 1.5 0.7 66 27 4.8 4.4 2 1.4 64 49 
Serbia  SRB Mid 19.4  11.3  2.8 1.9 25 14 19.3  15.5  7.4 3.9 30 25 
Slovakia  SVK High  28.7  15.7  12 3.9 27 18 24.7  20.3  9.9 7.7 34 30 
Slovenia  SVN High  25.2  13.6  9.9 3.3 27 13 20.9  17.5  8.1 5.1 28 21 
Sweden  SWE  High  60.3  44.4  42.9  11.6  24 10 33.8  22.3  11.8  6.5 50 32 
Thailand  THA Mid 34.7  30.3  13.9  10.8  22 13 30.3  30.2  15 14.1  29 23 
Trinidad and Tobago  TTO High  21.7  18.4  6.5 3 27 12 14 9 5.2 3.1 37 22 
Tunisia  TUN  Mid 5.2 3.5 2.1 0.8 51 31 8.4 6.5 3.9 2.2 37 28 
Turkey  TUR Mid 11.9  7 3.4 1.1 34 19 15.7  12.1  7.6 3.9 41 33 
Tanzania  TZA Low 5.4 3.4 5.3 3 49 22 5.2 3.4 3.4 1.9 57 40 
Uganda  UGA  Low 3.3 2.1 3 2 48 22 5.2 3.8 1.9 1.6 74 46 
Ukraine  UKR  Mid 28.1  15.9  28.1  14.4  28 16 9.1 6.4 5 2.5 52 45 
Uruguay  URY Mid 20.1  16 5 4.2 30 12 13.7  8.7 7.1 3 49 38 
United States  USA High  46.2  33.3  16.7  6.2 34 19 33.9  17.2  15.8  6.3 69 29 
Uzbekistan  UZB Mid 3.6 2.2 3.2 1 50 27 6.6 5.4 3 1.8 58 39 
Venezuela  VEN Mid 2.7 1.8 0.9 0.6 93 62 3.5 2.8 1.4 1 100 75 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
30 
 ITU Country Name  ISO Income  fixdownavg  fixdownmed  fixupavg  fixupmed  fixavglat  fixmedlat  mobdownavg  mobdownmed  mobupavg  mobupmed  mobavglat  mobmedlat  
Viet Nam  VNM  Mid 21.6  17.3  20.6  17.2  13 4 9.5 6.7 4.6 2.2 42 35 
South Africa  ZAF Mid 7.7 4.6 4.6 0.9 44 25 23.2  17.8  9.6 5.5 37 26 
Zimbabwe  ZWE  Low 4.9 2.5 4.1 1.5 42 23 6.7 5.4 2.7 1.1 68 46 
 Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
31 
 Appendix B . Broadband Indices Scores  
ITU Country Name  ISO Region WB  Income Level  ifix imob  
Afghanistan  AFG South Asia  Low 0.269928558  0.111865259  
Albania  ALB Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.238573938  0.345388979  
United Arab 
Emirates  ARE Middle East & North 
Africa  High  0.413216793  0.487052137  
Argentina  ARG  Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.201597738  0.24518 7873  
Armenia  ARM  Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.281017344  0.303214124  
Australia  AUS East Asia & Pacific  High  0.282310906  0.521629878  
Austria  AUT  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.379706301  0.542819645  
Azerbaijan  AZE Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.184405479  0.273924478  
Belgium  BEL Europe & Central Asia  High  0.460743019  0.585986887  
Bangladesh  BGD  South Asia  Low 0.327068429  0.193595741  
Bulgaria  BGR  Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.540860219  0.495566861  
Bahrain  BHR  Middle East & North 
Africa  High  0.299343302  0.373658804  
Bosnia and 
Herzegovina  BIH Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.282931534  0.27195591  
Belarus  BLR Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.332077911  0.381602494  
Bolivia (Plurinational 
State of)  BOL Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.260092743  0.233144222  
Brazil BRA Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.277281864  0.145392552  
Canada  CAN  North America  High  0.434779915  0.572318819  
Switzerland  CHE Europe & Central Asia  High  0.535962313  0.547378092  
Chile  CHL Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.357740752  0.356547432  
China  CHN  East Asia & Pacific  Middle  0.51874917  0.654458787  
Colombia  COL Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.192051157  0.165628852  
Costa Rica  CRI Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.306139906  0.202444409  
Cyprus  CYP Europe & Central Asia  High  0.255098017  0.302178096  
Czech Republic  CZE Europe & Central Asia  High  0.391730685  0.578846473  
Germany  DEU  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.396505594  0.344823432  
Denmark  DNK  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.645807658  0.692998165  
Dominican Rep.  DO
M Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.30748955  0.25735058  
Algeria  DZA Middle East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.098674985  0.146043723  
Ecuador  ECU Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.257290508  0.220523029  
Egypt  EGY Middle East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.17003884  0.262796013  
Spain  ESP Europe  & Central Asia  High  0.412642051  0.432392626  
Estonia  EST Europe & Central Asia  High  0.407241122  0.470043105  
Finland  FIN Europe & Central Asia  High  0.393247938  0.545246699  
France  FRA Europe & Central Asia  High  0.264594693  0.420259779  
United Kingdom  GBR  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.394826125  0.436018533  
Georgia  GEO  Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.345052747  0.371410142  
Ghana  GHA  Sub-Saharan Africa  Middle  0.240265858  0.249625351  
Greece  GRC  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.244030262  0.389476129  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
32 
 ITU Country Name  ISO Region WB  Income Level  ifix imob  
Guatemala  GTM  Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.243800247  0.292629768  
Hong Kong, China  HKG  East Asia & Pacific  High  0.88073916  0.469264457  
Honduras  HND  Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.250071328  0.11997356  
Croatia  HRV  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.292098385  0.44927 2905  
Hungary  HUN  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.45655055  0.694031769  
Indonesia  IDN East Asia & Pacific  Middle  0.303192662  0.265291336  
India  IND South Asia  Middle  0.281564683  0.1806771  
Ireland  IRL Europe & Central Asia  High  0.383985198  0.359122892  
Iran ( Islamic 
Republic of)  IRN Middle East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.194401942  0.301770525  
Iraq IRQ Middle East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.279641964  0.162323745  
Israel  ISR Middle East & North 
Africa  High  0.409821285  0.403768442  
Italy  ITA Europe & Central Asia  High  0.234909393  0.333143712  
Jamaica  JAM  Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.227885128  0.281448602  
Jordan  JOR Middle East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.279752706  0.401635901  
Japan  JPN East Asia & Pacific  High  0.625713844  0.376265526  
Kazakhstan  KAZ Europe & Centra l Asia  Middle  0.243256732  0.305704088  
Kenya  KEN Sub-Saharan Africa  Low 0.298187004  0.341409988  
Kyrgyzstan  KGZ Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.271044266  0.277401342  
Cambodia  KHM  East Asia & Pacific  Low 0.3594639  0.309739353  
Korea (Rep. of)  KOR  East Asia & Pacific  High  0.982758621  0.605551089  
Kuwait  KWT  Middle East & North 
Africa  High  0.345636068  0.416089252  
Lebanon  LBN Middle East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.116439535  0.228803087  
Sri Lanka  LKA South Asia  Middle  0.257519738  0.260920213  
Lithuania  LTU Europe  & Central Asia  High  0.593575939  0.591561584  
Luxembourg  LUX Europe & Central Asia  High  0.465088881  0.60700847  
Latvia  LVA Europe & Central Asia  High  0.564579947  0.56991869  
Macao, China  MAC  East Asia & Pacific  High  0.78186931  0.465131574  
Morocco  MAR  Midd le East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.102875201  0.329362764  
Moldova  MD
A Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.50488516  0.338730913  
Maldives  MD
V South Asia  Middle  0.337064892  0.384342564  
Mexico  MEX  Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.252867288  0.273782708  
The Former Yugoslav 
Rep. of Macedonia  MKD  Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.273763898  0.346638109  
Malta  MLT  Middle East & North 
Africa  High  0.439055135  0.625383773  
Montenegro  MNE  Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.287654135  0.372996787  
Mongolia  MN
G East Asia & Pacific  Middle  0.316548012  0.323606103  
Mozambique  MOZ  Sub-Saharan Africa  Low 0.199940869  0.275800277  
Malaysia  MYS  East Asia & Pacific  Middle  0.301137287  0.285105644  
Nigeria  NGA  Sub-Saharan Africa  Middle  0.165674055  0.076447874  Manchester Centre for Digital Development Working Paper 87  
33 
 ITU Country Name  ISO Region WB  Income Level  ifix imob  
Nicaragua  NIC Latin America & 
Carib bean  Middle  0.257741958  0.233623636  
Netherlands  NLD Europe & Central Asia  High  0.546442139  0.721433111  
Norway  NOR  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.517012541  0.754132628  
New Zealand  NZL East Asia & Pacific  High  0.428582123  0.475013973  
Oman  OM
N Middle East &  North 
Africa  High  0.243726958  0.338041462  
Pakistan  PAK South Asia  Middle  0.164814099  0.204222079  
Panama  PAN  Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.30972724  0.325200021  
Peru  PER Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.176137606  0.332795987  
Philippines  PHL East Asia & Pacific  Middle  0.199199401  0.260808304  
Poland  POL Europe & Central Asia  High  0.35481846  0.374828945  
Portugal  PRT Europe & Central Asia  High  0.446434815  0.397714332  
Paraguay  PRY Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.288070484  0.244414585  
Qatar  QAT  Middle East & North 
Africa  High  0.396720019  0.550748406  
Romania  ROU  Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.76384445  0.446218032  
Russian Federation  RUS Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.513071852  0.244615691  
Saudi Arabia  SAU Middle East & North 
Africa  High  0.2087194 61 0.264355223  
Singapore  SGP East Asia & Pacific  High  0.914527071  0.966666667  
El Salvador  SLV Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.209768938  0.172696276  
Serbia  SRB Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.328456311  0.432041201  
Slovakia  SVK Europe & Central Asia  High 0.336340532  0.504760319  
Slovenia  SVN Europe & Central Asia  High  0.352110643  0.489650948  
Sweden  SWE  Europe & Central Asia  High  0.557018001  0.488427595  
Thailand  THA East Asia & Pacific  Middle  0.468833038  0.726600873  
Trinidad and Tobago  TTO Latin Ameri ca & 
Caribbean  High  0.379152786  0.386151881  
Tunisia  TUN  Middle East & North 
Africa  Middle  0.188229102  0.318736426  
Turkey  TUR Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.275310809  0.361955731  
Tanzania  TZA Sub-Saharan Africa  Low 0.25045645  0.223615035  
Uganda  UGA  Sub-Saharan Africa  Low 0.239293591  0.188222151  
Ukraine  UKR  Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.401179662  0.228613976  
Uruguay  URY Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.373744798  0.293308501  
United States  USA North America  High  0.425641202  0.463248629  
Uzbekistan  UZB Europe & Central Asia  Middle  0.206042772  0.242561499  
Venezuela  VEN  Latin America & 
Caribbean  Middle  0.000998004  0.009417277  
Viet Nam  VN
M East Asia & Pacific  Middle  0.490764909  0.281355833  
South Africa  ZAF Sub-Saharan Africa  Middle  0.228434035  0.4709038 03 
Zimbabwe  ZWE  Sub-Saharan Africa  Low 0.23295079  0.191828279  
 