 
  
1 
Emerging Issues  Report   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Mobile technology and 
inclusion of persons  with 
disabilities  
Stephen Thompson  
Institute of Development Studies  
May 2018 
 2 About this report  
The K4D Emerging Issues report series highlights research and emerging evidence to policy -makers to help 
inform policies that are more resilient to the future. K4D staff researchers work with thematic experts and DFID to 
identify where new or emerging rese arch can inform and influence policy.  
This report is based on twelve days  of desk -based research.  
K4D services are provided by a consortium of leading organisations  working in international development, led by 
the Institute of Development Studies (IDS), with Education Development Trust, Itad, University of Leeds Nuffield 
Centre for International Health and Development, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), Un iversity of 
Birmingham International Development Department (IDD) and the University of Manchester Humanitarian and 
Conflict Response Institute (HCRI).  
For any enquiries, please contact helpdesk@k4d.info.  
Acknowledgements  
Thank s to Tony Roberts  who provide d advice and guidance on the development of this report and served as an 
external expert reviewer.  
Thank s also to  the following experts who voluntarily provided suggestions for relevant literature or other advice to 
the author to support the preparation of  this report.  The content of the report does not necessarily reflect the 
opinions of any of the experts consulted.   
 Philippe Bellordre , GSMA  
 Jenny Casswell , GSMA  
 Sarah Hall, Ashland University  
 Hannah Kuper LSHTM  
 Islay Mactaggart, LSHTM  
 Brigitte Rohwerder , IDS  
 Tim Unwin, Royal Holloway  
 Mary Wickenden, UCL/IDS  
Suggested citation  
Thompson S. 2018 . Mobile technology and inclusion of persons with disabilities . K4D Emerging Issues Report.  
Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies.  
Copyright  
This report was prepared for the UK Government’s Department for International Development (DFID) and its 
partners in support of pro -poor programmes. It is licensed for non -commercial purposes only. K4D cannot be held 
responsible for errors or any consequen ces arising from the use of information contained in this report. Any views 
and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect those of DFID, K4D or any other contributing organisation. 
© DFID - Crown copyright 2017.  
  
3 Contents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  4 
2. Disability and inclusion ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  4 
3. Technology introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  5 
Information and communications technology  ................................ ................................ ...........  5 
Mobile economy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  9 
Mobile enabled technology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 11 
Barriers to access to technology  ................................ ................................ ............................  12 
4. Evidence and examples  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 14 
Being accepted  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  14 
Having relatio nships  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  15 
Being involved in activities  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 16 
Living accommodations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  18 
Employment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  19 
Support systems  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  21 
5. The Future  ................................ ................................ ..................  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
6. References  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  24 
Annex 1 - Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  28 
Annex 2 - Strength of the evidence base  ................................ ................................ ..................  29 
 
 
 
 
 
  4 1. Introduction  
This K4D Emerging Issues report highlights research and emerging evidence that show how 
mobile -enabled  services can help increase inclusion of persons with disabilities. The aim is t o 
provide DFID policy -makers with the information required to inform policies that are more resilient 
to the future. This r eport provides a synthesis of  the current evidence on  how mobile technology 
and mobile -enabled services can help increase inclusion of persons with disabilities.  It was 
originally planned that this report would also explore how mobile enabled technology  might 
exacerbate existing inequalities. Some evidence w as found to focus on the barriers to ICT that 
marginalised groups encounter, however, no evidence was found to focus on how mobile 
technology might exacerbate  inequalities . As such, the report focuses on the positive impact that 
mobile technology has been shown to have in increasing the inclusion of persons with 
disabilities.  Research outcomes detailing the potential for mobile enabled technology to 
exacerbate existing inequalities  is recognised  from the outset as a major evidence gap requiring 
further investigation. This report  focuses specifically on evidence produced by academic 
research from low and middle income countries. It also includes information  from theoretical or 
conceptual research,  policy papers, institutional literature and where necessary press releases 
and blogs.  Further details of the methodology used for this report can be found in Annex 1.  The 
quality of the body of evidence was high but the size of the body of evidence was low. The 
geographical and contextual focus of the evidence was found to be varied. The consistency of 
the body of evidence was not be established, as the papers assessed were based on a variety of 
different designs or methods and applied in a range of contex ts. Further discussion of the 
strength of the evidence base can be found in Annex 2.  
2. Disability and inclusion  
It is estimated that over a billion people (or 15% of the global population) have a disability ( WHO  
& World Bank 2011). No single description is a dequate to  define  disability. F actors including the 
definition of disability, the quality and methods of data collection, rigour of sources and varying 
disclosure rates influence the prevalence of disability  (Thompson 2017) . The UN Convention on 
the Rights  of Persons with Disabil ities (UNCRPD) was adopted in 2006  and r ecognises that 
disability is an evolving concept, and includes t hose who have long -term physical, mental, 
intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with various barriers may hin der their full 
and effective participation in societ y on an equal basis with others. Under the UNCRPD’s general 
principals, it is recognised that persons with disability should have f ull and effective partici pation 
and inclusion in society.1 The Sustainabl e Development Goals were adopted in 2015 aim to end 
poverty, protect the planet and ensure prosperity for all as part of a new sustainable development 
agenda. People with disabilities are referenced under five of the seventeen goals, in relation to 
educati on, growth and employment, reducing inequality, safe and inclusive human settlements, 
                                                   
1 https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention -on-the-rights -of-persons -with-disabilities.html   5 and data collection and monitoring.2 Broad reoccurring themes of the post -2015 agenda include 
disability inclusi on and pledges to leave no one behind.3 
Disability inclusi on leads to realising various benefits including increased earnings and labour 
productivity, increased tax revenues, improved individual and family well -being, as well as wider 
societal benefits through a more inclusive and accessible society for all ( Rohw erder 2015) . In 
2015, The UK’s Department for International Development’s (DFID)  Disability Framework  set out 
their vision of a wo rld where no one is left behind, ensuring their work  contributes towards  a 
world where everyone, throughout all stages of thei r lives, ha ve equal opportunities to realise 
their rights, achieve their potential and live in dignity, free from extreme poverty, exclusion, 
stigma, discrimination and violence. The framework highlights DFID’s commitment to a  world 
where people with disab ilities have a voice, choice and control over t he decisions that affect 
them and where persons with disability can  participate in and benefit equitably from everyday life, 
everywhere.4 
A meta -analysis of the use of social inclusion in qualitative disabilit y studies reported six common 
themes to frame inclusion  of persons with disabilities : being accepted, having relationships, 
being involved in activities, living accommodations, employment, and support systems  (Hall 
2009) . Social inclusion should aim to facilitate, enrich and enhance capacity at the group and 
individual level for opportunity, reciprocity and participation  (Peace 2001). Social inclusion, social 
cohesion, social integration and social participation are often used interchangeably (Rimmerman 
2013).  
3. Technology introduction  
This introductory chapter provides an overview of the i nformation and communications 
technology  landscape and its potential for impact on international development. It introduces 
mobile enabled technology  and describes its po tential in reducing inequality for persons with 
disabilities. It provides some key evidence on the global m obile economy , as well as some 
regional data. A brief introduction to mHealth is provided. The final section of this chapter 
considers the b arriers that marginalised people (including those with disabilities) may face while 
trying to access to technology . 
Information and communications technology  
Information and communications technology  (ICT) is a term that refers to mainstream 
technologies such as mo bile and fixed -wire telephones, computers, tablets, radio, television and 
the Internet  (Barlott, Adams & Cook 2016). ICTs represent the fastest, broadest and deepest 
technical change experienc ed in international development, a ffecting every sector. T he pac e of 
change is continuously accelerating  (Heeks 2018) . ICT and d igital technologies have the 
potential to  help marginalised groups, such as persons with disabilities overcome barriers to 
communication, interaction, and access to information.  Utilising tech nology to empower persons 
                                                   
2 http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable -deve lopment -goals/   
3 http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E   
4 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/dfid -disability -framework -2015   6 with disabilities is not a new concept. Assistive and adaptive technologies have been used in the 
past to promote independence and participation . However, i ncreasingly, as ICT (including mobile 
devices)  develops, new  functionaliti es that facilitate communication and information access for 
persons with disabilities  are emerging . In the past technology for persons with disabilities was 
expensive and required either specialised standalone software or hardware. Technological 
advances have reduced the cost and the availability of ICT for persons with disability. For 
example, feature s such as text -to-speech and voice recognition, ability to change contrast and 
colour schemes, touch and gesture input, and screen magnification  are now readily available. 
ICT has the potential to enable persons with disabilities to realise independent liv ing, 
employment, education, and access to government services. The internet and ICT can facilitate 
the social, economic, and civic participation of persons with disabilities. Multiple ICT formats, 
channels and services allow persons with different disabili ties to access information and 
communication in the manner in which they can comprehend and prefer. Technological 
advances have increased the ability to use everyday consumer ICT devices as assistive devices. 
This, along with the growing role in the delive ry of services, is making ICT a key driver of 
inclusive development. Accessible functionality in mainstream ICT is driving down costs and 
encouraging innovative uses of ICT for inclusion. For ICT to enable inclusion for persons with 
disability, efforts mus t focus on raising the awareness of various stakeholders and building 
capacity for service provision and bar rier free digital environments (Samant Raja 2016).  
To assist the wider involvement and fulfilment of people with disabilities in low income societi es 
through the use of ICTs, companies developing new ICTs are encouraged to place accessibility 
at the heart of their work. Identifying appropriate funding for such initiatives will be essential 
(Bonnah Nkansah and Unwin 2010).  Accessibility in the product ion, transmission, and rendering 
ICT technology can be achieved via a mixture of top -down (impose direct obligations on supply 
side) as well as bottom -up (rights for users/consumers) approaches to promote accessibility in of 
ICT products and services . Gove rnments can foster ICT innovation and local manufacturing via 
public -private partnerships. This type of approach would ensure the creation and delivery of ICT 
accessibility tools and content are both locally and culturally relevant (Samant Raja 2016) . Table 
1 below, adapted from Samant Raja (2016) , details the barriers to inclusion and how ICT has the 
potential to help:  
Table 1: Major b arriers to inclusion  and how ICT can help 7 Major barrier to inclusion  How ICT can help  
When traditional written or verbal 
communications are the only forms of 
communication available, they can be 
completely inaccessible to persons depending 
on type of disability.  Individuals can use the form of 
communication that works for them - voice, 
text, vid eo - to understand and contribute 
information in face to face or remote 
interactions.  
Specialized, standalone, assistive technology 
used to increase, maintain, or improve the 
functional capabilities of individuals with 
disabilities can be cost prohibitive  for persons 
with disabilities without external financial 
supports or subsidies.  How ICT can help: Accessible functionalities 
in mainstream, off -the-shelf, ICT are rapidly 
reducing the cost barriers to technology 
solutions for persons with disabilities, wh ile 
becoming attractive features for all users 
irrespective of disability.  
Many persons with disabilities will need more 
than one type of assistive technology solution 
to enhance their independent living and 
socioeconomic participation.  The growing number  of apps and web -
enabled services make it possible to bundle 
and access multiple assistive features within 
a single or limited number of devices thus 
increasing affordability, efficiency, and 
portability.  
 
For ICT to make a serious contribution to improving the lives of the most marginalised people 
(including people with disabilities), they must be involved in the conceptualisation, design and 
implementation of ICT programmes from the start ( Unwin  2017). Technological solutions to 
global health chal lenges require innovative and participatory approaches to ensure people living 
in low -income and middle income countries are included in shaping the global health agenda. At 
present, major donors set the priorities, with little input from stakeholders from  low and middle 
income countries. These hierarchies can be further entrenched if technology is used 
indiscriminately without considering context. The development of new technologies must be 
informed by an understanding local context. Effectiveness of techn ological innovations can 
increase if local needs and resources are considered during the design phase. An example of 
this concept in operation is Peek Vision, which uses smartphone technology and incentive -based 
financing to increase access to eye care in Botswana, India, and Kenya. Peek Vision are 
facilitating teachers to use locally adapted smartphone apps to screen and identify school 
children with visual impairment  (Mannell et al 2018).  8  
Credit: Peek Vision - @peekteam  
As technology has developed, so has the potential for it to benefit health and health systems. 
Technological advances combined with medical expertise has led to mobile devices to 
increasingly be used in all healthcare areas including diagnostics, telemedicine, research, 
reference librari es and interventions. This sector is often called ‘mHealth’. A literature review 
written by Bastawrous and Armstrong (2013) reported that while smartphones are the main 
mHealth tool used in high -income countries, basic text -messaging systems of standard mo bile 
phones are useful in low- and middle -income countries. While the availability of mobile phone 
based applications for healthcare workers and healthcare consumers is well established, the 
evidence base in terms of what works is weak and requires further  research.   
The explosive global growth in the availability of mobile phones is increasing opportunities for 
large scale data collection . In the mobile enabled era, costs of data collection have come down 
and data exchange have improved.5 A lack of data on  persons with  disabilit ies and their 
experiences contributes to the invisibility of persons with disabilities  within  in official statistics, 
reducing their inclusion in  planning and policy.6 There is a  need to improve the collection, 
analysis and use of  accurate data on disability to inform all development efforts  (UN 2014) . 
Mobile technology may present opportunities to achieve this . For example, Aptivate developed a 
tool which allows visually impaired field workers to collect data using mobile phones. The field 
workers record how many people there are with disabilities in a particular area and the support 
they currently have. This data is presented on a web -based reporting dashboard that allows local 
and overseas program managers to analyse the data, an d thus better serve the needs of the 
                                                   
5 http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/using -mobile -phone s-data-collection -opportunities -issues -and-challenges   
6 https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/resources/monitorin g-and-evaluation -of-inclusive -
development.html   
9 community and empower community members.7 Another example is the Global Trachoma 
Mapping Project (GTMP),  which was the largest infectious disease survey ever undertaken. It 
was led by  Sightsavers and involved the  collec t and transmit data on 2.6 million people in 29 
countries using smartphones.8 In 2014 a UN  Expert Group on  Disability Data and Statistics 
called for further exploration of the  potential of collecting data using new technologies, such as 
data on the Web or  using mobile phones. New technologies may  facilitate disability -
disaggregation within routine data collection  (UN 2014) .  
As mHealth technology  develops, so does the potential to improve data collection, education and 
lead to behaviour change . This may ind irectly lead to increased inclusion of persons with 
disabilities. As such, mHealth is not the main focus of this report but relevant evidence from the 
mHealth literature is included where relevant.  
Mobile economy  
A major and important component of the ICT  industry is mobile technology. By 2017 over 5 billion 
people globally were connected to mobile services. It is expected that the number of unique 
mobile subscribers will reach 5.9 billion by 2025, equivalent to 71% of the world’s population. 
Growth is bei ng driven by developing countries, particularly India, China, Pakistan, Indonesia and 
Bangladesh. The regions of Sub -Saharan Africa and Latin America are also experiencing high 
growth. However, globally, the speed of growth is slowing as high income countr ies reach 
saturation. Mobile internet offers a significant growth opportunity and could add 1.75 billion new 
users over the next eight years, with 5 billion mobile internet users predicted by 2025. It is 
predicted that mobile internet adoption will become the key metric by which to measure the reach 
and value created by the mobile industry, including its contribution to the UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). It also contributes to developments in the wider digital ecosystem, 
as mobile internet users  are the addressable market for e -commerce, fintech and a range of 
digitally delivered services and content ( GSMA 2018) . 
 
Credit: GSMA  
Some of the key features of the global mobile phone market are illustrated in this infographic:9 
                                                   
7 http://aptivate.org/en/work/projects/cbm -mobility -india -mobile -data-collection/   
8 https://www.sightsavers.org/programmes/mhealth/   
9 https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/   
10  
Credit: GSMA  
Sub-Saharan Africa is a region that has seen high growth in mobile usage. At the end of 2016, 
there were 420 million unique mobile subscribers in Sub -Saharan Africa, equivalent to a 
penetration rate of 43%. The compound annual growth rate  (CAGR) for mobile  technology in 
Africa is 6.1% over 5 years – which is 50% higher than the global average and indicating  faster 
growth than any other region. Growing at this rate, Africa  will have more than half a billion unique 
mobile subscribers by 2020, with half the po pulation subscribing  to a mobile service. The total 
number of SIM connections in the region reached 731 million at the end of 2016, and will rise to 
nearly 1 billion by 2020 .10 
 
Credit: GSMA  
                                                   
10 https://www.gsma.com/mea/mobile -economy -2017 -sub-saharan -africa -2017   
11 Mobile enabled technology  
In recent years, mobile connected devic es (mainly smartphones and tablets) have become the 
primary characteristic of the post personal computer era. In 2011, globally, smartphone sales 
surpassed the personal computer sales. Mobile devices are increasingly being used as assistive 
technology as t hey are more affordable than specialised systems or devices. Many software 
applications across different operating systems have been developed to increase the inclusion of 
people with disabilities. As the post personal computer era is currently evolving, t he research into 
the accessibility and impact of mobile devices is relatively limited. Many tablets and other 
mainstream technologies have built -in functions that are useful to people with disabilities 
including Internet access, phone (voice and texting) a nd other applications such as navigation 
based on built -in capability (e.g. accelerometers, GPS tracking and cameras). As well as being 
smaller and cheaper, many mobile technologies with apps and sensors now have the 
functionality equivalent to special -purpose assistive technology – for example with regards to fall 
detection, wayfinding and sound amplificati on. While not specific to disability initiatives,  mobile 
enabled technology is increasingly regarded as the preferred technology for ICT projects due to  
their widespread use and availability in lower -income countries. Mobile devices can improve 
access to information, promote local knowledge, as well as facilitate sharing and improving social 
interaction for marginalised populations, such as persons with d isabilities  countries (Barlott, 
Adams & Cook 2016).  
While some applications designed to improve the inclusion of persons with disability will be 
developed in low and middle income contexts , others will be developed in high income contexts 
but may still inc rease the inclusion of persons with disability in low income settings. For example, 
in 2015 IBM announced that they had created a new tool for iOS and Android mobile applications 
expected to potentially benefit as many as one billion people with disabiliti es worldwide, including 
those who are vision and hearing impaired, as well as the elderly. The new Mobile Accessibility 
Checker is an automated test to help strengthen the accessibility features of mobile applications. 
Speaking at the Mobile World Congress  in Barcelona in 2015, Frances West, IBM Chief 
Accessibility Officer, said: “Mobile technology has sparked a new era of opportunity for people of 
all ages and abilities, yet many mobile apps have design flaws that prevent people with 
disabilities and the e lderly from using them effectively. Our researchers saw an opportunity to 
address this by inventing technology that identifies and corrects usability issues early in the 
software development process. This makes mobile apps easier to use for people with dis abilities, 
helps developers save on costs and satisfy compliance requirements, and drives greater 
inclusivity in our communities through mobile technology ”. 11  
For innovative mobile enabled technology to be successful, the cost of intelligent mobile 
termin als (smartphones) and rates for data use must be affordable (Abascal et al 2016). As well 
as being affordable, accessibility and usability must also be assured for persons with disabilities 
(Eid 2016). Innovation in this sector will require funding. Mobile  technology may have the 
potential to result in increased inclusion,  but it is important to note that  there is limited research 
on the use of mobile phones to address the needs of people with disabilities in lower income 
countries (Barlott, Adams & Cook 20 16). 
                                                   
11 https://www -03.ibm.com/pres s/us/en/pressrelease/46232.wss   12 Barriers to access to technology  
Members of marginalised groups, including those with disabilities, are reported to have unequal 
access to computers and internet technologies (Guo, Bricout & Huang 2005, Dunn 2009, Hasan 
et al 2017). People with disabi lities often experience economic and linguistic restrictions in 
addition to accessibility barrie rs. This inequality of access is sometimes called the ‘digital divide’ 
– a term used in the 1990s to describe inequalities among countries, but more recently ap plied to 
inequalities within countries (Abascal et al. 2016).  People with more disabilities have far more to 
gain from the use of ICTs than those who have fewer disabilities  (Unwin 2017). The most 
marginalised groups are the least likely to gain access to ICTs but that when they do it can make 
the biggest difference to their lives (in terms of enhanced capabilities and functionings). This is 
true in many  different settings and sectors (Heeks 2018).   
Despite the great potential ICT and mobile technology has to improve the inclusion of persons 
with disabilities, advances in technology alone are insufficient to address all forms of inclusion of 
persons with disabilities. The success of the internet and ICT for the inclusion of persons with 
disabilities is heavi ly impacted by stakeholders’ knowledge and awareness of the technology 
available, as well as knowledge of laws and policies (Samant Raja 2016). In several countries 
laws exist that cover ICTs, although the relevance of the laws to accessibility , and levels  of 
compliance, are  not well documented. The ICT landscape is developing rapidly, leaving existing 
regulation outdated. Compared to accessibility standards for other sectors (such as 
transport/accommodation) standards for the development of ICT are lagging  behind (WHO  & 
World Bank  2011).  
Poor  persons with disabilities face significant challenges in acquiring digital technology, due to 
cost and availability (Samant Raja 2016). A number of initiatives have been developed to 
promote accessible web content and inclusive ICT. For example, the Web Accessibility Initiative 
(WAI) develops guidelines widely regarded as the international standard for web accessibility, 
develops support materials to help understand and implement web accessibility.12 Also, the 
World Wide  Web Consortium (W3C) is an international community where Member organisations, 
a full -time staff, and the public work together to develop web standards, to ensure the web is 
accessible for all.13 G3ict is the Global Initiative for Inclusive Information and  Communication 
Technologies. It was launched in 2006 by the United Nations Global Alliance for ICT and 
Development, in cooperation with the Secretariat for the Convention on the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities at UN DESA. Its mission is to facilitate a nd support the implementation of the 
dispositions of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities on the accessibility of 
Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) and assistive technologies.14 These initiatives 
are important in promoting a ccessible web content. Accessibility may be underwritten by law in 
countries that pass inclusive legislation, although the laws must be adhered to if they are to be 
effective. For the web to be universally accessible, a coordinated international effort is required 
(Abascal et al 2016). In addition, stakeholder capacity to support accessible ICT services will be 
important. The internet and ICT could potentially increase the exclusion of persons with 
                                                   
12 https://www.w3.org/WAI/   
13 https://www.w3.org/  
14 http://g3ict.org/  13 disabilities if they are not designed to be accessible and inclusive. Although not focused 
specifically on mobile enabled technology, there is a risk that if ICT enabled development 
programs are inaccessible, the internet and ICT may result in marginalisation and exclusion for 
persons with disabilities (Samant Raj a 2016). Action is needed by both government and non -
government organisations to accelerate the development of ICT -enabled tools, including those 
with mobile connectivity, to enhance the ability of persons with disability (Hasan et al 2017).  
Assessing who has access to technology can be complex. It may not be as simple as either 
being fully connected or not at all connected. The situation may be complicated, for example, by 
some people having two mobile phones, but still not having reliable access to either  calls or 
Internet for a number of reasons. Assessing connectivity using the five ‘A’s of technology access 
(Roberts 2016): Assessing the availability, affordability, awareness, ability and accessibility of 
technology will develop an understanding of who h as access and who does not ( Roberts and 
Hernandez  2017).  
 
Credit: Roberts and Hernandez  2017, p. 7.  
ICTs  have been shown to be personally transformational for persons with disabilities when they 
do have access, yet underlying factors resulting in unequal access to technologies for 
marginalised groups continue to undermine the potential for significant change.  
To ensure access to ICT is inclusive, collaboration of stakeholders in every sector  will be 
required , as well as concrete actions by each group of s takeholders while relevant indicators to 
monitor progress need to be developed.  A report by the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), UNESCO , and partners (2013) concluded that  the following action is required:  
 Governments must ensure  ICT-enabled so lutions are adapted to the needs of 
persons with disabilities, increasing the availability of accessible ICTs and promoting 
the affordability of assistive technologies in social and educational programmes, 
business, and other areas.  
 The UN and internationa l organisations should continue implementing operational 
activities to meet disability -inclusive development goals, complemented by the 
monitoring and evaluation of development efforts at the global, regional and national 
levels.  
14  Private sector organisatio ns must increase research and development efforts, 
incorporating universal design principles at the earliest stage possible and recruit 
persons with disabilities in product development departments to develop accessible 
ICT. Attitudinal barriers can be chal lenged by hiring persons with disabilities and 
promoting accessible workplaces.  
 Civil society organi sations can raise policymakers’ awareness of accessibility 
barriers, and should become more active in the work conducted by international 
standards organi sations. They can also raise awareness of s ocial progress and 
economic growth with regards to  capacity -building among persons with disabilities 
and their relatives regarding the use ICT to facilitate their own economic and social 
inclusion. They can advocat e for the  mainstreaming of the use of the universal design 
principle in all development efforts is crucial to ensure that the international 
development framework is disability -inclusive.  
 International standards organi sations can enabl e a disability -inclusive development 
agenda by providing a neutral platform from which to develop and harmoni se 
international standards and provide recommendations related to accessible ICT and 
their applications.  
4. Evidence and examples  
The main body of this  emerging issues report is structured loosely around the six themes of 
social inclusion, which are i) being accepted; ii) having relationships; iii) being involved in 
activities; iv) living accommodations; v) employment; and vi) support systems  (Hall 2009) . It is 
recognised that there is some overlap between themes.  For each of the six themes of inclusion, 
a brief overview of the academic literature is provided, followed by some examples of how mobile 
enabled services can help increase inclusion of those wi th disabilities.  
Being accepted  
Although not specific to mobile technology, research from China has indicated that internet 
connection significantly reduced social barriers in the physical and social environment for 
disabled people (Guo, Bricout & Huang ( 2005). Pal et al (2013) undertook research in Peru, 
Jordan and India to better understand marginality, aspiration and accessibility in ICTD. Although 
the research is not specifically focused on mobile connectivity, the findings are relevant, as 
participant s with vision impairments reported changes in their economic and social aspirations 
following technology usage. However, multiple forms of exclusion from the public sphere were 
reported due to negative social attitudes towards disability. Therefore, it is argued that the nature 
of marginalisation caused by disability has yet to be adequately addressed.  
Bonnah Nkansah and Unwin (2010, P. 206) found that ICTs are very important tools in 
addressing some of the social barriers that have typically limited the pa rticipation of persons with 
disabilities in many social spheres. The Director of the Ghana Association of the Blind reported: 
“When I exchange mails with my colleagues from other NGOs, and I read their mail and they 
read mine, there is no blind written any where on anyone’s mail and so at that point we are equal 
... so it helps to break that social barrier” . Mobile telephony enhanced the communicative abilities 
of persons with hearing impairment through text messaging. Video phones and devices with 
webcams a lso enable people to communicate via both sign language and text messaging.  15 A campaign called WeCare is run by GSMA. It was launched in Latin America and involves 
operators joining forces to make a series of commitments in every country in the region where  
mobile phones and networks can provide solutions to social problems. The WeCare campaign 
has already been launched in Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, 
Honduras, Mexico and Nicaragua, and will continue to expand throughout th e region. Under the 
campaign in Costa Rica, in 2016 three mobile operators (Claro, ICE and Telefónica) committed 
to working together to facilitate greater accessibility for consumers with disabilities with the 
support of Costa Rica’s telecoms regulator, Su perintendencia de Telecomunicaciones (Sutel), 
and the Deputy Ministry of Telecommunications. The mobile operators signed an agreement with 
the Mobile Manufacturers Forum to improve access from their websites to the data system of the 
Global Accessibility R eporting Initiative (GARI). The system enables users to identify mobile 
handsets in their area that offer services designed to assist users with disabilities.  
Emilio Arias Rodriguez, Deputy Minister of Telecommunications of Costa Rica  commented : 
“Mobile penetration has reached 151 per cent in Costa Rica, and this trend is set to continue. In 
this context, and as we work to build an integrated, inclusive and caring society, it is essential to 
keep taking action to enable every citizen, without exception, t o have access to affordable, 
quality telecommunications services through the development of infrastructure that supports 
sustainable, efficient, secure and robust mobile networks. These networks will also be key to 
enabling people to develop their skills a nd knowledge, in particular those people who are the 
most vulnerable, through productive, safe an d meaningful use of these tools ".  
Jaime Palermo, Telecommunications Manager, ICE: “These initiatives reaffirm our commitment 
with actions to help support the efforts of the Costa Rican government to [increase ] accessibility 
of services for the entire population. In ICE we believe that technology is key to economic and 
social development  and should contribute to the protection of the rights of Costa Ricans.”  
Jose Pablo Rivera, Regulatory Manager, Telefónica Movistar Costa Rica: "This agreement 
allows us to support Costa Rica through Telefónica Group’s various initiatives in the area of 
disability and which aim to promote social inclusion."15 
A similar commitment has been made in Mexico where t he GSMA, Mexican mobile operators 
and ANATEL have signed an agreement with the Mobile Manufacturers Forum to improve the 
access from their websites to  the GARI  system, which enables users to check and identify mobile 
devices in their region that offer features to aid users with disabilities.16 
Having relationships  
Research based on interviews conducted with blind masseurs in Indonesia reports that mobile 
phones play significant roles in micro -entrepreneurs’ perceived well -being. As well as facilitating 
inclusion in work, mobiles are facilitating communication with f amily and friends, as well as 
improved physical mobility and independence. Having a mobile phones was shown to facilitate 
beneficial ‘functionings’, which were reported as valuable by participants (Anwar & Johanson 
2015). A study that gathered survey data from 122 persons with disabilities in China found 
                                                   
15 https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press -release/gsma -and-costa -rican -operators -commit -to-a-safer -mobile -
environment/   
16 https://www.gsma.com/latinamerica/we -care-mexico   16 internet use can lead to significantly improved frequency and quality of social interaction. 
Evidence from Jamaica reports that for persons with disabilities, mobile phones help them to stay 
informed, meeti ng their emotional needs to interact with their peers ( Dunne 2008). To realise 
increased inclusion, high speed connection at an affordable price is essential. For example for 
persons with hearing impairment may require high quality video conferencing servi ces for 
communication, for which connection needs to be reliable and high quality (Eid 2016).  
Mobiles phone (and in particular texting features) are now being used extensively by people who 
are deaf or have hearing impairment to communicate with each other . As an example, parents of 
children with hearing impairment can now communicate with them throughout the day, satisfying 
themselves that their children are safe. Before mobile phones existed, the lack of communication 
resulted in a state of perpetual worr y and fear. The connectivity that mobile phones bring are 
particularly valued by poor parents, because compared to their wealthier counterparts, they 
cannot afford to arrange escort services for their disabled children ( Dunne 2008).  
A study by Hasan et al (2017) investigated the impact of ICT on the change in the quality of the 
daily lives of persons with disabilities in Bangladesh. The findings show that the acceptance of 
ICT by PWDs was at moderate level, and there is a positive correlation between accept ance of 
ICT and quality improvement in the lives of PWDs. ICTs can support persons with disabilities by 
offering alternative means of communication, access to education and enhancing learning 
motivation.  
Being involved in activities  
Although not specific t o mobile connection, the internet has been shown to improve the 
frequency and quality of social interaction among persons with disabilities, as well as having the 
potential to help persons with disabilities to overcome physical and social barriers (Guo, Br icout 
& Huang 2005, Chigona et al 2009).  
Mobile enabled technologies including internet -ready phones, voice services, texting, and other 
features present opportunities for inclusion those with physical, visual, hearing, or other forms of 
disability. These  opportunities can be further realised when coupled with specialised training and 
special technology designs that facilitate accessibility (Dunn 2009).Mobile connected technology 
presents a real opportunity for marginalised groups to be included in the mai nstream of digital 
society. Software can be used by individuals to engage in outsourcing opportunities such as data 
processing and administrative work (Dunn, 2008). An example of such software is Job Access 
With Speech (JAWS) - a screen reader, developed f or people whose vision impairment prevents 
them from seeing screen content or navigating with a mouse. JAWS provides speech and Braille 
output for the most apps.17 
Bonnah Nkansah and Unwin (2010) argue that there is strong evidence from higher income 
countr ies that ICTs can provide very significant learning support for those with special 
educational needs. Although not entirely specific to mobile enabled technology, it was found that 
those involved in delivering special educational recognise that ICT has the  potential to 
significantly contribute to the learning processes of people with disabilities. ICTs and assistive 
technologies can substitute for the impairments that people have, enabling them to lead more 
                                                   
17 http://www.freedomscientific.com/Products/Blindness/JAWS  17 fulfilled lives. Bonnah Nkansah and Unwin (2010) g ive the following examples of how ICT can 
increase inclusion of persons with disabilities:  
 Text to speech software enables people with visual impairment to hear what others read  
 Calls converted to text on mobile phones can assist those with hearing impairm ent 
 Students with severe physical disabilities can participate actively in university lecture and 
fieldwork classes through assistive technologies.  
 
In fragile or conflict affected contexts, ICT can increase the participation of refugees with 
disabilities,  as long as appropriate inclusive pedagogical support for ICT use is provided. A low 
tech ICT approach is recommended using local knowledge constructions in refugee camp 
environments (Eid 2016).  
BarrierBreak is an Indian for -profit social enterprise that h as designed an app called Newz Hook 
that provides news access for persons with various disabilities. Since its start in 2016 it has been 
downloaded 8,000 times. Newz Hook provides access to news for persons with hearing and 
visual impairments as well as in tellectual disabilities. It also provides disability -focused updates 
for parents and special educators. The app supports the use of screen readers that read aloud 
the text displayed on a mobile phone. It also allows for a high contrast view and to increase  the 
size of the text, supporting partial visual impairment. To address the needs of persons with a 
hearing impairment, simple understandable language is used, e.g., a complex word like 
“infrastructure” is simplified as “roads and bridges.” It includes sig n language news videos. The 
app is supported and developed by a team of accessibility experts and persons with disabilities 
(who make up 70% of the staff). The Newz Hook project is fully funded by BarrierBreak but in the 
future it may be funded by advertis ing. . Going forward, Newz Hook aims to generate advertising -
based revenues (Charles et al 2018).  
A community -based research (CBR) project in Colombia used FrontlineSMS, an open -source 
text message delivery program created specifically for international de velopment. The computer 
running FrontlineSMS and a mobile phone acted as a two -way SMSmessaging hub for sending 
to, and receiving messages from the participant’s personal mobile phone. The keyword INFO 
was used to send information messages to caregivers. T he keyword PREGUNTA (“question”) 
was used by caregivers to ask health -related questions. Messages including the keyword 
PREGUNTA were automatically forwarded to the community clinician. During the three months 
that the project was undertaken, 56 informatio n messages were sent to participants by the 
community clinician and community leader. More than half of the participants confirmed that they 
participated in a community event after receiving one of the project text messages. One of the 
major outcomes of th e project was that the participants were shown the possibility of community 
participation. The technology opened a window to a new possibility of being a participatory 
member of their community. The project aimed to investigate whether mobile phones and SM S 
could be used by people with disabilities and their caregivers to access information. Although the 
community in focus was resourced -limited, mobile phones were readily available. This case 
study found mobile phones were a useful tool for addressing the i nformation exclusion of people 
with disabilities and caregivers (Barlott, Adams & Cook 2016).  
AlManarah (“lighthouse”) is a non -profit association for persons with disabilities in Israel’s Arab -
speaking population. It has developed the International Access ible Library – the first free Arabic 
digital audio library in the world, which contains over 4,500 audio books. It receives over 200,000 
visits per month and has 60,000 users. The audiobooks can be accessed via a mobile app or 18 from website. Over 4,500 book s have been professionally recorded to date, providing access to 
over 50,000 hours of audio for persons with visual impairments or print disabilities. It is currently 
funded through donations from non -profit organizations working in Israel, along with gran ts from 
the government, corporate sponsorship and advertising. Israeli National Insurance Institute and 
the Ministry of Culture and Sports, as well as from advertising on the website through Google 
AdWords. There is a plan to transform the library from a n on-profit project into a social business 
by moving to a small subscription -fee service to ensure long -term sustainability. The Israeli 
Ministry of Education has shown interest in including the app as part of the educational 
curriculum for persons with prin t disabilities in schools (Charles et al 2018).  
The Ministry of Information and Communications Technology of Colombia (MINTIC) launched an 
initiative called Plan Vive Digital para la Gente (“Live Digital for the People”) to promote access, 
effective use, a nd massive appropriation of ICT. Through this initiative a project called Cine para 
Todos (“Cinema for Everyone”) supported a Smart Films festival. The festival encouraged 
Colombians with any type of disability to make short films with their cell phones, a nd compete for 
a €7,000 prize (Charles et al 2018).  
Living accommodations  
According to the WHO (2011), the standards of ICT development are lagging behind the 
standards for public accommodations and public transport in terms of accessibility. However, 
there are some examples of where Qureshi (2016) argues that among other uses, location -based 
mHealth applications have the potential to assist the independent living of persons with 
disabilities. Although not focusing specifically on low income contexts, Boulos et al (2011) report 
that GPS (Global Positioning System) and location -enabled smartphones and applications offer 
opportunities to assist the independent living of persons with disabilities.  
In some low income countries, persons with disabilities are not allowed to independently open 
and operate bank accounts or use banking fa cilities and services due to policy barriers. Such 
barriers are primarily based on assumptions the capacity of persons with disabilities. Inclusive 
financial services offering access to all are vital to poverty reduction and participation in 
economic prosp erity and growth and development (Eid 2016).  Advances in mobile enabled 
technology have improved the inclusion of persons with disability in accessing financial services. 
In the past financial services were predominantly paper based, Technology -enabled ban king - 
including internet banking, phone banking, mobile banking - has made it easier for persons with 
disabilities to access these financial services increasing independent living. In particular mobile 
banking allows persons with disabilities to manage th eir own accounts and finances without 
having to depend on someone else (Samant Raja 2016).   
Helm (“Dream”) is a non -profit organization based  Egypt that aims to promote the full inclusion of 
persons with disabilities. In 2015, they developed a mobile app and website called Entaleq to 
provide details on the accessibility of venues across Egypt through crowdsourced reviews. A 
consulting service p rovided by a social enterprise is also offered to companies that wish to 
improve their accessibility. Over 1,000 people with disabilities are using Entaleq regularly. 
Although Egypt does have accessibility standards and building codes relating to accessibi lity, 
they are not always implemented or enforced. The app was co -funded by Vodafone Egypt 
Foundation and co -developed with Microsoft as a technology partner. It is available on Android 
and IOS smartphones. Persons with physical, hearing and visual impairm ents can search for 
venues such as shops, restaurants, and public offices that provide the accessibility features that 
they require. Venues can be added and reviewed. Since 2015 700 venues (mostly in Cairo) have 19 been reviewed. As a result of the app and th e consultancy services, more than 140 venues have 
implemented accessibility modifications. The app is currently financed through grants and 
sponsorships. As traffic increases it is planned that the app will become sustainable through 
commercial advertising  (Charles et al 2018).  
In Colombia, under the Plan Vive Digital para la Gente initiative, the Cine para Todos project 
aimed to enable people with disabilities, in particular with visual and hearing impairments, to be 
able to access cinema. MINTIC reduced r egulatory and tax barriers to facilitate the development 
of accessible infrastructure and the availability of telecommunications services. It prioritising state 
capital investments into digital accessibility. These actions aimed to encourage the private se ctor 
to expand their accessible infrastructure. Under the initiative MINTIC has partnered with the 
Saldarriaga Concha Foundation (an inclusion not for profit) and Cine Colombia (a film distribution 
company) to make their venues accessible through various i nterventions. MINTIC developed an 
app and a free download that allows people with disabilities to access audio descriptions, sign 
language, and subtitles. In 2017 over 3,500 people had downloaded the app. Currently, the 
initiative is financed solely by the  government (Charles et al 2018).  
Wayfindr is a project and standard to make audio navigation systems accessible for persons with 
visual impairments. Although it was developed in the UK, it is relevant to this report as in March 
2017 it was approved as the  first Open Standard for indoor audio navigation by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU). It is the world’s first internationally recognised standard for 
accessible audio navigation, giving governments, companies, and non government organisation s 
around the world an accepted benchmark along with a host of resources to implement the 
navigation technology in their own organisations. Wayfindr is an Open Standard for indoor 
navigation technologies that provides audio instructions to users’ smartphone s to help them find 
their way through built environments. A toolkit of information is provided to help implement an 
accessible audio navigation system or to develop products and services that work with the 
technology, such as mobile phone applications. The  toolkit provides details on disabilities, 
recommendations for best practices, guidelines on development, suggestions for further 
investigation; and considerations for app development (Charles et al 2018).  
Employment  
ICT enables and empowers persons with d isability to do almost all types of work and contribute 
to society (Hasan et al 2017). In particular, advances in technology, including mobile 
connectivity, have increased opportunities for persons with disabilities to be included in 
employment (Ansong & B oateng 2018, Dunn 2009). People with physical disabilities who are 
employed to work remotely, an affordable and reliable connection is a pre -requisite (Eid 2016).  
Although not specifically referring to mobile enabled technology, Samant Raja (2016) argues t hat 
ICT is increasing the inclusion of persons with disabilities in the world of work. For example, 
persons with disabilities can be included in communications and interactions with clients and 
colleagues through mobile instant chat platforms and real -time text displays facilitate 
communication for persons with hearing and speech impairments. Text and video telephony can 
also be used to facilitate internal and external phone calls through an interpreter. As mobile 
devices facilitate remote working, persons with disabilities can use the technology to work more 
flexibility, allowing for needed breaks, medical provider visits and other appointments. Remote 
work platforms and policies allow employees schedule flexibility. They also allows employees to 
work from physically accessible and convenient locations (Samant Raja 2016).  20 Telecommuting - where employees work remotely - offers opportunities to people (including 
persons with disabilities) who were previously excluded from work. Based on their research into 
telecommuting in Ghana, Ansong & Boateng (2018, P.7) present an interview with the Service 
Delivery Manager Ericsson, who stated “It has become more accessible if you go back to a 
decade or a decade and half ago, having internet at home was a thing that peopl e didn't have. 
Now internet has become vastly cheap and more accessible and so it's now easy to access 
information from a remote location so you do not need to be in the office to plug in your LAN 
cable to access the internet. With the introduction of wire less, MiFi devices, Dongles or even the 
mobile phone, tethering of your mobile phone allows you to access the internet. Once you can 
access the internet you have access to all the information you need to be able to perform your 
functions. Also, the advance ment of mobile phone, Skyping, face ‐to‐face calling and video call. 
You are able to cluster people in groups and disseminate information faster on Apps like 
telegram, WhatsApp etc. So, these kinds of technologies have helped.”  
Poor people and marginalsed g roups often engage in micro enterprise as a form of 
entrepreneurship. Mobile phones are rapidly becoming an essential tool for people’s work. Dunn 
(2009) reports that people with disabilities, along with other marginalised groups, have a special 
need for t hese technologies. Mobile technology allows for connection and participation in the 
global economy. Evidence from research undertaken in the Caribbean suggests that workers 
who are visually impaired, but have access to email with software programs that enl arge the text 
or generate speech from the text, have no different level of productivity compared to other 
workers. Mobile technology is now being used extensively among persons with hearing and/or 
visual disabilities. In particular, the texting feature has  been shown to assist with communication 
for social networking and for conducting business (Dunn 2009). Evidence from Indonesia also 
shows that mobile technology is increasingly important for the work prospects of micro -
entrepreneurs who have disabilities (Anwar & Johanson 2015).  
Dunne (2008) presents a case study of Inez, a 40-year old Jamaican fruit and tuber vendor in 
Kingston. She lives in an adjoining area of the city and commutes daily to and from the market. 
Inez has a physical disability and requires a wheel chair to assist with mobility. A basic mobile 
phone allows  her to make personal contact with her suppliers and customers on a daily basis. 
The phone has helped her to gain additional income and to procure and deliver her goods more 
efficiently.  
 “Yes man, I can get me business going by calling suppliers who deliv er my goods right to my 
stall or at a location where somebody can pick it up for me. I don’t know about anybody else but 
the cell phone is important to me. Since cell phone came about, it has been more comfortable for 
me. For example, if my phone is not wo rking now, I cannot eat because I am worried about it, 
because my business is going to go bad, because some people who are supposed to contact me 
cannot do so. Therefore, I must have a phone”  (Dunne 2008, P.46).  
Bonnah Nkansah and Unwin (2010, P.206) repor t that c omputers and the Internet were generally 
considered as equalizers of opportunities, familiarity with which improved the employability of 
persons with disabilities. ICT (including mobile enabled technology) provides people with 
disabilities the inde pendence to work and generate outputs of similar quality to that by those 
without disabilities. As the Director of the Ghana Association of the Blind observed:  “I see ICT as 
an equaliser ... now when we sit behind the computer and we are working, at that p oint we are 
equal with our sighted colleagues, because we can bring out the same quality of work ... and that 
can open up employment opportunities for us”.  21 Enable India is an Indian non -profit organisation that has developed a mobile phone -based 
informati on sharing service called Namma Vaani (“our voice”). It allows users to listen and 
respond to recorded voice messages from the disability community regarding education and 
employment opportunities, workplace solutions and enhanced life skills. It aims to p rovide better 
information to persons with disabilities living in rural areas. Namma Vaani is a voice -based social 
network. Information is shared via regular mobile phones, so no smartphone or web -access are 
needed. A variety of stakeholders, including non -government organisations, private companies, 
persons with disabilities and parents record and upload voice messages, which are then 
accessed by the system users. An Enable India team manage, moderate and publish the 
information. Much of the information upl oaded relates to employment opportunities, but 
education, training, life skills and other themes are also included. The service allows for 
information to be spread easily, quickly, and at a low cost. By 2017, Namma Vaani had received 
over 200k calls from 1 5k unique callers. It was first launched in Kannada language and a Hindi 
version (Hamari Vaani) was introduced in mid -2017. The service is privately funded and costs 
approximately $50,000 per system (Charles et al 2018).  
DFID  and Humanity and Inclusion a re collaborating to prototype an app that will help employers 
in developing countries share in formation on how to adapt tools - including prosthetics - and 
working environments, to make sure that workplaces are accessible for employees and 
entrepreneurs with  disabilities.  For example, in Cambodia, farmers are using low -cost prosthetic 
legs made for unstable terrain, such as swampy fields. The app will share this adaptation with 
other farmers with similar disabilities in developing countries so they can adapt their own 
prosthetics and continue to work.18 
Support systems  
In countries were access to civil rights, such as voting, is increasingly provided through digital 
channels, services must be accessible to all to avoid any discrimination. Services must be 
acces sible to all users regardless of their physical, sensory or cognitive abilities, language or 
equipment used. While initiatives, such as WAI and W3C, are working to promote accessible 
Web content, the guarantee of accessibility must be reinforced through in clusive legislation 
(Abascal et al 2016). E -government websites are government websites that have been 
developed for use in public administration and service/information delivery to citizens. Although 
not specifically related to mobile connectivity, it is important to note that e -government websites 
are increasingly becoming the fundamental platform for interaction between governments and 
citizens, presenting new opportunities for political inclusion for persons (Verkijika & De Wet 
2018). Increased accessib ility is a recognised public value of e ‐government websites, which 
should aim to be transparent, providing citizens with engagement mechanisms that allow their 
voices to be heard, and providing equal access by ensuring accessibility for disabled people 
(Karkin & Janssen 2014). E -governance is increasingly regarded as important to ensure inclusion 
of persons with disabilities. E -governance can promote independent and autonomous interface 
with government services and offices. Various mobile enabled technology  and services, including 
Government websites, social media, and crowdsourcing platforms, are increasingly recognised 
as being important sources of information for persons with disabilities. As such, it is essential that 
                                                   
18 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk -aid-supports -worlds -first-mobile -app-to-help-the-poorest -people -with-
disabilities -into-work   22 such support systems are designed to  be accessible. Digital technologies such as SMS, mobile 
apps, accessible web -based forms, and web portals can meet demand while enabling improved 
interaction between the government and citizens with disabilities (Samant Raja 2016).  
In Sri Lanka, growth i n mobile connectivity suggests potential for further development of e -
government services accessible via mobile phones (Karunasena, Deng & Singh 2011). Verkijika 
& De Wet (2018) evaluated 279 e ‐government websites from 31 countries in Sub ‐Saharan Africa 
from a public values perspective. They found that currently, the performance of Sub ‐Saharan 
Africa e‐government websites was highly unsatisfactory when it comes to the delivery of public 
values. The majority of websites were found to display poor implementat ion of accessibility 
guidelines, lack feedback forms, are plagued with numerous privacy and security issues, 
numerous broken links, are not mobile responsive, and have limited dialogue features. 
Governments responsible for these websites in sub Saharan Afr ica must update, or develop their 
policy frameworks for e ‐government website development to include public values within their 
design (Verkijika &  De Wet 2018). The potential of e -government websites to be more inclusive 
of persons with disability is clear. However, the current reality suggests that this potential is not 
being optimised.  
Support systems are not limited to e -governance. Mobile enable d technology is increasingly 
being used for rehabilitation purposes or to provide support to people with disabilities who require 
assistance with management of a disability. The World Report on Disability states that the use of 
mobile technologies for reha bilitation is an emerging resource that can enhance rehabilitation 
measures by providing interventions remotely ( WHO  & World Bank  2011). Such interventions 
have become known as ‘telerehabilitation’ and can include video and teleconferencing 
technologies in  accessible formats, data -collection and telemonitoring. Such technology may be 
used by a range of stakeholders including people with disabilities, rehabilitation workers, peers, 
trainers, supervisors, and community workers and families. The WHO (2011) sta tes that 
evidence on the efficacy and effectiveness of telerehabilitation is growing and shows that it can 
lead to similar or better clinical outcomes when compared to conventional interventions. 
Examples of where mobile enabled technology may benefit reha bilitation include the following:  
 Telepsychiatry services.  
 Cardiac rehabilitation.  
 Speech and language therapy.  
 Cognitive rehabilitation for people with traumatic brain injury.  
 Remote assessments to provide home modification services to underserved elderly  
people  
 Training and support of health -care personnel.  
 Computerized guidelines to help clinicians use appropriate interventions.  
 Consultation between tertiary hospital and community hospitals for problems related to 
prosthetics, orthotics, and wheelchair p rescription.  
 Sharing professional expertise between countries, as well as at critical times such as in 
the aftermath of a disaster.  
At present, the evidence focused on the effectiveness of these interventions is focused on high 
income contexts.  
Some evidence does exist from low and middle income contexts. For example, in India, a mobile 
application called ‘Care for Stroke’ has been developed as an educational intervention for the 
management of physical disabilities following a stroke. It aims to address the unmet needs and 
growing magnitude of disability experienced by the stroke survivors in LMICs. In particular, the 23 intervention was developed for use by stroke survivors who have any kind of rehabilitation needs 
to independently participate in hi s/her family and social roles. With limited resources for - or 
complete absence of - organised stroke care rehabilitation services, a Smartphone -enabled 
educational intervention for management of disabilities has potential to meet the substantial 
rehabilit ation needs of stroke survivors in low income contexts (Sureshkumar et al 2015).  
In 2015, the Special Talent Exchange Program (STEP) in Pakistan developed an Android mobile 
application to connect persons with disabilities with information on disability rig hts. The Disability 
Inclusive Voter Education (DIVE) app offers potential for persons with disabilities for greater 
inclusion in political processes by providing information to enable on rights and opportunities. 19 
One feature of the app enables persons wi th disabilities, disabled persons organisations and 
other stakeholders to learn about how to take part in elections. Another provides information 
about relevant services available. It also provides information on registering as a voter or running 
for offic e. The development of the app was supported by the International Foundation for 
Electoral Systems (IFES). As of May 2017, STEP had circulated a link for the app through 8,000 
SMS messages to persons with disabilities and over 900 persons with disabilities have 
downloaded the application. The following are feedback from Pakistani disabled persons 
organisations about the DIVE app:  
“It is one of the biggest achievements of the disability movement in Pakistan. Through this 
application all persons with disabilit ies and their families can easily be informed about their civic 
rights.”  –Society for Special Persons  
“Through this application we can have the latest information in real time and persons with 
disabilities can have better information about their civic righ ts.” –Disability Welfare Association  
“It is an informational revolution in the disability movement of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) and we 
should extend the information platforms to the northern parts of KPK.”  –Special Life Foundation  
FENASCOL (National Associa tion of the Deaf in Colo mbia) started a project called Centro de 
Relevo  (“Relay Service ”) in 2001, which enables telephone communication between deaf and 
hearing people through sign language interpreters. The service allows people with a hearing 
impairment  to find an interpreter via their phone who will provide them with free translation for 15 
minutes. The communication service can be used for medical appointments, work -related 
consultations, legal formalities, and similar situations for a maximum of 30 mi nutes. No 
specialised equipment is needed – only access to the Internet or a mobile app. The project is a 
public -private initiative but the government provides 95 per cent of the funds. The annual cost of 
the service is approximately $800k. The project is led by persons with hearing impairment. The 
technology allows the project’s team of 50 interpreters to operate from home in all areas of the 
country, every day including weekends. 2 million free calls have been made and 15,000 online 
interpreting services have been provided since 2009. There is a strategy in place to make the 
service available to other countries in the region (Charles et al 2018).  
The non -government organisation Sightsavers is incorporating mobile technology into its 
programmes in two ways.  The first is to utilise the technology to improve the quality, speed and 
access of data collection. For example in Cameroon, Nigeria and Zambia, data for mass drug 
                                                   
19 http://www.ifes.org/news/technology -inclusion -persons -disabilities  24 administration for neglected tropical diseases which can cause blindness are being collecte d by 
mobile phones. Also the Global Trachoma Mapping Project saw Sightsavers partner with 53 
organisations to collect and transmit data on 2.6 million people in 29 countries using 
smartphones. 20 In Zambia they are working with Akros, an organisation that u tilise mobile 
devices to collect data about water and sanitation.21 The second is through behaviour change, 
with mobile devices being used communicate and interact. For example, in Kenya Sightsavers 
are working with Amref Africa using its Leap platform to h elp community health volunteers with 
remote learning via a mobile learning package. 300 volunteers are currently signed up to the 
trachoma module, where they can use a basic mobile phone to complete quizzes, have group 
chats via SMS and listen to audio rec ordings of training material.22 While using mobile 
technology in this way does not directly increase inclusion of persons with disabilities, it is  
relevant to this report as it does strengthen local health systems and contribute to the reducing 
the burden o f blindness and vision impairment.23  
People with disabilities frequently remain marginalised  in the process of disaster planning and 
preparedness. Communication of information before, during and following a disaster can be life -
saving. For those communication channels to be successful they have to be accessible to all, 
requiring forward planning.  The Emergency 2.0 Wiki Accessibility Toolkit was developed to 
empower people with disabilities to use social media for disaster preparedness, response and 
recovery. The toolkit includes information on how to access certain types of media, such as the 
Easy  Chirp; an alternative twitter portal which enables tweets to be read with assistive 
technologies. An important consideration as social media plays an increasingly prominent role in 
information sharing and communication during disasters. The toolkit includ es accessible 
YouTube videos specifically aimed at preparedness for different types of disasters, and tailored 
advice for people living with disability.24 
Limitations  
This K4D Emerging Issues report highlights research and emerging evidence that show how 
mobile-enabled services can help increase inclusion of persons with disabilities. It provides a n 
introduction to the current evidence on how mobile technology and mobile -enabled services can 
help increase inclusion of persons with disabilities.  It is non -systematic in nature and was based 
on 12 days desk based work. As such, it has limitations.  
There are several other relevant areas that have potential for further research. For example, as 
well as directly impacting on the inclusion of persons with disabilit ies, it is recognised that mobile 
                                                   
20 https://www.sightsavers.org/programmes/mh ealth/   
21 http://akros.com/   
22 http://www.leaphealthmobile.com/   
23 For further information on the effectiveness of mobiles for improved health in low -income contexts, see 
DeRenzi et al. 2011. Mobile Phone Tools for Field -Based Health care Workers in Low -Income Countries. Mount 
Sinai Journal o f Medicine ; 78 
24 https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/programme/disaster -response/living -with-disability -and-
disasters -towards -accessible -communication -for-all  25 technology has the potential to benefit health systems through data collection  and education  
services. However, further investigation into these themes was not possible within the scope of 
this report.  Also, while t he grow th in the mobile industry is made clear  in this paper, further 
investigation is needed to assess whether persons with disability are proportionately represented 
in those benefiting from accessing mobile services. Future  research could seek to establish 
levels of access to technology for persons with disabilities, as well as exploring the barriers to 
access that may exist.  
While this paper does make reference to the growth in the smartphone industry, it does not 
consider the potential of non -smart phone tech nology. Further research could focus on the 
potential of non -smart phone technology to increase the inclusion of persons with disabilities.  A 
noted limitation is the lack of focus on funding for mobile technology that is designed to address 
inclusion of pe rsons with disability. Future research could investigate funding modalities that exist 
and measure their impact. Another area for future work is the potential for mobile technology to 
influence citizenship and the impact this would have on the inclusion of  persons with disability.  
References  
Ansong E, Boateng R. 2018. Organisational adoption of telecommuting: Evidence from a 
developing country. The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries ; 84 
Anwar M, Johanson  G. 2015. Mobile Phones and the Well -Being of Blind Micro -Entrepreneurs in 
Indonesia. The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries;  67 (1)  
Barlott T, Adams K, Cook A. 2016. Increasing participation in the information society by peo ple 
with disabilities and their families in lower -income countries using mainstream technologies. 
Universal Access in the Information Society ; 15 (2)  
Bastawrous A, Armstrong M. 2013. Mobile health use in low - and high -income countries: an 
overview of the p eer-reviewed literature. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine ; 106.  
Bonnah Nkansah G, Unwin T. 2010. The contribution of ICTs to the delivery of special 
educational needs i n Ghana: practices and potential.  Information Technology for Development ; 
16 (3)  
Boulos M, Wheeler S, Tavares C, Jones R. 2011. How smartphones are changing the face of 
mobile and participatory healthcare: an overview, with example from eCAALYX. BioMedical 
Engineering OnLine : 10 
Charles P, Fembek M, Kainz W, Mundackal S, Saupe A, Vaug han-Spitzy M, Kahane A, Wagner 
C. 2018. Zero Project Report  – Accessibility  - Essl Foundation, Austria.  
Chigona W, Beukes D, Vally J, Tanner M. 2009. Can Mobile Internet Help Alleviate Social 
Exclusion in Developing Countries? The Electronic Journal on In formation Systems in 
Developing Countries ; 36 (7)   
Dunn H. 2008. “Wha’ a Gwaan?” Research Report on a Qualitative Study of Mobile Telephony 
and Poverty in Jamaica. TPM -MSB , UWI.  26 Dunn H. 2009. Teleworking the Mobile Caribbean: Enabling Remote Work Among the  
Marginalized in Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago. Information Technologies and International 
Development ; 5 (2)  
Eid N. 2016. Disability and Bridging the Digital Divide - ICT Accessibility and Assistive 
Technology For People of All Abilities. Telecentre Fou ndation, Philippines .  
GSMA. 2018. The Mobile Economy 2018 . GSMA, London.  
Guo B, Bricout J, Huang, J. 2005. A Common Space or a Digital Divide? A Social Model 
Perspective on the Online Disability Community in China. Disability and Society ; 20 (1)  
Hall S. 2009. The social inclusion of people with disabilities: A qualitative meta -analysis. Journal 
of Ethnographic and Qualitative Research ; 3 (3)  
Hasan N, Ashraf M, Ahmed E, Hasan M, Bhattacharjee V. 2017. The impact of information and 
communication te chnology (ICT) on the lives of disabilities: a case in Bangladesh. International 
Journal on Disability and Human Development ; 16 (3)  
Heeks  R. 2018 . Information and Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D)  
Routledge , UK 
International Telecommunicati on Union (ITU)  and UNESCO. 2013. The ICT Opportunity for a 
Disability -Inclusive Development Framework . International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and 
UNESCO . 
 
Karkin  N, Janssen M. 2014. Evaluating websites from a public value perspective: A review of 
Turkish local government websites . International Journal of Information Management ; 34 (3)  
Karunasena K, Deng H, Singh M. 2011. Measuring the public value of e ‐government : a case 
study from Sri Lanka. Transforming Government People Process and Policy ; 5(1)  
Mannell J, Abubakar I, Bastawrous A, Osrin D, Patel P, Piot P, Prince M, Smith J, Wilkinson R, 
Horton R. 2018. UK’s role in global health research innovation. The Lancet ; 391 (10122)  
Pal J, Ammari T, Mahalingam R, Alfaro A, Lakshmanan, M. 2013. Marginality, aspiration and 
accessibility in ICTD . Paper presented at the proceedings of the sixth international conference on 
information and communication technologies and develo pment ; 1 
Peace R. 2001. Social exclusion: A concept in need of definition?’ Social Policy Journal of New 
Zealand ; 16 
Qureshi S. 2016. Creating a Better World with Information and Communication Technologies: 
Health Equity. Information Technology for Develop ment ; 22 (1)  
Rimmerman, A. 2013. Social inclusion of people with disabilities: National and international 
perspectives. CUP, UK .  
Roberts T, Hernandez  K. 2017 . The techno -centric gaze: incorporating citizen participation 
technologies into participatory gov ernance processes in the Philippines . Institute of Development 
Studies, UK.  27 Rohwerder, B. 2015 . Disability inclusion: Topic guide. Birmingham, UK: GSDRC , University of  
Birmingham.  
Samant Raja D. 2016. Bridging the disability divide through digital techno logies. Background 
Paper for the 2016 World Development Report: Digital Dividends. World Bank, Washington DC .  
Sureshkumar K, Murthy G, Munuswamy S, Goenka S, Kuper  H. 2015. Care for Stroke - a web -
based, smartphone -enabled educational intervention for management of physical disabilities 
following stroke: feasibility in the Indian context. BMJ Innovations ; 1 
Thompson S. 2017. Disability prevalence and trends. K4D Hel pdesk Report . Brighton, UK: 
Institute of Development Studies.  
UN. 2014. Disability Data and Statistics, Monitoring and Evaluation: The Way  Forward - a 
Disability Inclusive Agenda Towards 2015 and Beyond. New York, USA: UN  
Unwin T. 2017. Reclaiming Informati on and Communication Technologies for Development . 
Oxford University Press, UK.  
Verkijika S, De Wet L. 2018. Quality assessment of e ‐government websites in Sub ‐Saharan 
Africa: A public values perspective. Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Devel oping 
Countries  
WHO  & World Bank . 2011. World report on disability . WHO, Geneva.    28 Annex 1 - Methodology  
The evidence in this report was identified through a rapid desk -based search. The following six 
journals were identified as the most relevant to Inform ation and Communication Technology for 
Development and searched for relevant literature.25 
Journals  1. The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries  
2. Information Technology for Development  
3. Information Technologies & International Development  
4. African Journal of Information and Communication  
5. International Journal of Education and Development using Information 
and Communication Technology  
6. Asian Journal of Communication  
The following search terms were used:  
Search ter ms disab* and mob ile 
disab* and app  
inclus* and app  
disab* and inclus*  
The search of these ICT focused journals was accompanied by internet search and appropriate 
key words and search terms. A number of experts in the field (listed in the Acknowledgements 
section) were also identified and approached for recommendations and contributions. Many of 
the examples included are taken from blogs, product launches, news articles or webpages  
 
  
                                                   
25 https://ict4dblog.wordpress.com/2010/04/14/ict4d -journal -ranking -table/  29 Annex 2 - Strength of the evidence base  
Using the DFID How to Note on Assessing the Qua lity of Evidence for guidance, 15 papers 
included in this report could be considered ‘evidence’.26 18 papers were not considered as 
evidence. Ten out of the 15 individual studies  included as evidence  were judged to be of high 
quality, three were judged to b e of moderate quality and two were judged to be of low quality. 
The quality of the body of evidence was  found to be  high, as the majority of single studies 
reviewed were assessed as being of a high quality, demonstrating adherence to the  principles of 
research quality. As only 15 studies were included in the assessment, the size of the body of 
evidence is considered to be low. In terms of context, from the papers classed as evidence, four 
of the papers focused on multiple countries. Two studies focused on G hana, while one study was 
included for each of Indonesia, Colombia, South Africa, China, Bangladesh, Turkey and Sri 
Lanka. The geographical focus of two papers was not clear. The consistency of the body of 
evidence could not be established, as the papers a ssessed were based on a variety of different 
designs or methods  and applied in a range of contexts.  
It was noted that some investigations focus on mobile technology and social inclusion (for 
example Chigona et al 2009), but do not focus specifically on dis ability. Other research focuses 
on internet connection and its impact on persons with disability (for example Guo, Bricout & 
Huang 2005) but do not focus specifically on mobile enabled connection. There is a wealth of 
literature on relevant topics includin g the digital divide, mHealth, inclusive innovation, ICT for 
development and other relevant themes. Where possible, this report has included relevant 
literature while acknowledging where it does not specifically relate to the question in hand. In 
general, the literature that directly addresses mobile technology/mobile -enabled services and 
inclusion of persons with disabilities in low and middle income contexts was found to be limited 
(Barlott, Adams & Cook 2016).  
 
                                                   
26 
https://assets.publishing.s ervice.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/291982/HTN -
strength -evidence -march2014.pdf   
