1 
  
 
           
Performance Evaluation   
 
 
   
 
Performance Evaluation of the Enterprise 
Development for Global Competitiveness 
(Compete) Project 
  
Final Evaluation  Report
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
   
8
 JUNE  2018  
This publication was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development. It was 
prepared by QED, LLC Group.  
  
Performance Evaluation Report of the USAID WB/G Enterprise Development for Global 
Competitiveness Project (COMPETE). Prepared for the United States Agency for International 
Development, USAID Contract Number AID -294-C- 17-00005.  
 
  
Performance Evaluation of the Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness (Compete) Project  
 FINAL EVALUATION REPORT  
     Prepared for the United States Agency for International Development, USAID Contract Number AID- 294-C-17-00005 
 Implemented by The QED Group, LLC.  
1820 N. Ft. Myer Drive Suite 700  
Arlington, VA 22209  
+1 703.678.4700 
 
   
Performance Evaluation Report of the USAID WB/G Enterprise Development for Global 
Competitiveness Project (COMPETE). Prepared for the United States Agency for International 
Development, USAID Contract Number AID -294-C- 17-00005.  
 
 Contents 
Acknowledgements  ................................................................................................................... 1 
Acronyms  .................................................................................................................................... 2 
Compete Project - Summary Information  ........................................................................... 3 
1. Evaluation Introduction, Purpose and Questions  .................................................... 9 
2. Project Background ....................................................................................................... 11 
3. Evaluation Methodology and Limitations  ................................................................. 14 
4. Evaluation Findings  ........................................................................................................ 16  
4.1 Evaluation Question 1: To what extent have project activities been effective in 
achieving intended objectives and key results (as per the project results 
framework) ........................................................................................................................................... 24 
4.2       Evaluation Question 2:  Where key achievements are identified in targeted sectors, 
to what extent are these  achievements sustainable?  ......................................................... 39 
4.3      Evaluation Question 3:  Lessons Learned; how can successful interventions be 
replicated by future USAID programs?  .................................................................................... 43 
4.4 Evaluation Question 4: Were there any unintended project outcomes (positive or 
negative)?  ............................................................................................................................................... 44 
4.5 Evaluation Question 5:  How did the project’s implementation approach and 
management, (including selection criteria and pro cesses), influence the 
achievement of results?  ................................................................................................................... 45 
5. Conclusions .................................................................................................................... 47 
6.  Recommendations ....................................................................................................... 52 
Annexes…………………………..………………………………………………....57 
Annex (A) -  Evaluation Scope of Work and Design ....................................................... 58 
Annex (B) -  Evaluation Data Collection Tools  ................................................................. 83 
Annex (C) - Final Sample of Firms/ Farmers Interviewed  ............................................... 96 
Annex (D) - Summary Analysis of Compete Data and Sample Selection 
Considerations ......................................................................................................... 97 
Annex (E) - Mapping of key ongoing donor programs and projects  ........................... 102 
Annex (F) - Field Work Schedule ....................................................................................... 105 
Annex (G) - Compete Component A and Component B Results Framework 
performance measurement, PMP Indicators and Measurement  ................. 112 
Annex (H) -  Quantitative Data Tables  ............................................................................. 118 
Annex (I) -  Statements of Differences  ............................................................................ 123 
A
nnex (J) -  Signed Disclosure of conflict of interest  ..................................................... 126 
Annex (K) - Evaluation Team Curriculum Vi etas ............................................................ 130  
1 
  
Acknowledgements  
 
The Evaluation Team  would like to acknowledge the many people who made this evaluation 
possible , while also seeking people’s understanding that not all can be named.  In particular , 
special thanks is given to Said Abu Hijleh, Compete Chief of Party and Rozana Saleem, 
Compete’s Monitoring, Evaluation and Communications Manager who were ever helpful in responding promptly to our many questions and requests for all manner of data.  More 
generally, the whole team at Compete were consistently responsive and generous with their time, thoughts and clarifications on the seven -year implementation period of the project.  
 At USAID , the team would like to thank Tayseer Edeas, S enior Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist  and Amal Tannous, the Compete COR who supported a series of very worthwhile 
engagements for the Evaluation Team  with different aspects of the USAID  West Bank and 
Gaza Mi ssion team .  
 Most of all, we extend our heartfelt appreciation to the hundre ds of Palestinians who found 
time t o meet with us, answer countless questions and help shed light on the complexity of 
their lives, livelihoods and the contribution of the project to their context and more generally to private sector development across West Bank and Gaza.
 
 
 
    
2 
 Acronym s 
 
ADS                Automated Directive System  
BRC                 British Retail Consortium  
Compete  Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project  
DAI  Development Alternatives, Inc.  
DFID   (UK) Department for International Development  
DQA   Data Quality Assessment  
EDIP   Enterprise Development and Investment Project  
ETI                  Ethical Trade Initiative  
FAO   (UN) Food and Agriculture Organization  
FGD  Focus Group Discussion  
FLAP   Firm Level Assistance Program  
GlobalGAP     Global Good Agriculture Practices  
HLITOA  Holy Land Incoming Tour Operators Association   
ICT  Information and Communications Technology  
ICI  Investment Climate Improvement Project   
IR  Intermediate Results  
KII  Key Informant Interview  
KRA   Key Result Areas  
M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  
NI                    National Instrument   
PA  Palestinian Authority  
PIRS   Performance Indicators Reference Sheets  
PMIS   (Compete) Project Management Information System  
PMDP             Palestinian Market Development Program   
PMP  Performance Management Plan  
PPU   Palestine Polytechnic University  
RF  Results Framework  
SDC   Swiss Development Corporation  
SME  Small and Medium Enterprises  
SoW   Scope of Work  
SWG   Sector Working Groups   
USAID  United States Agency for International Development  
USG   United States Government  
WB                 West Bank  
WBG               West Bank & Gaza 
WTO   World Trade Organization  
 
   
3 
 Compete Project - Summary  Information  
 
 
   Activity/Project 
Name  Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project 
(Compete)  
 
Implementer  Development Alternatives International (DAI)  
 
Cooperative 
Agreement/Contract 
# 
 AID-294-C-12-00001 
Total Estimated 
Ceiling (TEC) of the Evaluated 
Project/Activity  
 $62,868,718  
Life of 
Project/Activity  
 Jan 2012 – October 2018 
Active Geographic 
Regions  
 West Bank and Gaza Strip  
 
Development Objective(s) (DOs)  DO 2: Reduced Constraints to Private Sector -Led Economic 
Growth  
IR 2.1: Reduced barriers to trade and improved movement and access for people and goods  
IR 2.2: Increased competitiveness of targeted sectors  
IR 2.3: Improved business and investment enabling  environment 
IR 2.4: Improved availability and lower cost of energy, water, and transport resources  
 
USAID Office  USAID West Bank and Gaza office  
  
4 
 Executive Summary  
 
The Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness (Compete) project  has achieved 
scale and breadth within its programming across the West Bank and Gaza. Having partnered 
with 1,550 different beneficiary farmers, firms and support organizations  working across 
seven sectors and 41 sub -sectors or value chains, the project has engaged the Palestinian 
private sector with depth and breadth, and interviewees for this evaluation  recognize 
Compete  as a project willing to invest in evidence based initiatives to promote 
competitiveness, especially of those with export orientation or aspirations.  
 Across the headline key result  areas of sales, employment and investment, Compete reports 
$287,448,427 in sales, 5,684 new full or part time jobs, and  more than $60 million of private 
investment (in co -contributions) by beneficiary firms to project performance. At the same 
time, the evaluation found  project performance is (predictably) uneven both across sectors, 
and even within sectors.  
 Evaluation purpose  
The purpose of thi s external performance evaluation of is to assist USAID/West Bank Gaza 
(USAID/WBG) in assessing project approach and performance of against its main objectives 
in terms of results and sustainability. The evaluation will provide lessons learned and 
recommen dations for future activities in relation to private sector development under 
consideration by the USAID Economic Growth and Infrastructure team . 
 Project background  
Compete was conceived in 2011 at a time of genuine optimism  in the Middle East, with USAID 
assessing that ‘ the Palestinian economy stood on the threshold of an enormous opportunity for 
integration into world markets’. This led to conceptualisation of a competitiveness project, aimed 
at accelerating the process of linking Palestinian small and medium enterprises ( SMEs ) to 
international markets in order to take advantage of emerging global market opportunities.  Within 
the award, four sectors were identified for inclusion - agribusiness, tourism, information and 
commu nications technology ( ICT) and stone and marble. It was further stipulated that the project 
be built around two interrelated components:  
• Component A: Assistance to Palestinian enterprises to become competitive in global markets  
• Component B: Assistance in the development of Palestinian business support 
organizations  
 
Evaluation methodology and limitations  
A central challenge of the evaluation was the sheer scope of Compete, in terms of the 
number of beneficiaries and different sectors in West Bank and Gaza, over a seven- year 
period. Informed by an  initial review of project documentation, the Evaluation T eam (ET) 
undertook purposive sampling to ensure representation of different project sectors and sub-
sectors, project  strategies, project periods and geographical distribution. While interviewees 
comprised 4 percent of the total number of firms assisted by the project, these accounted 
for 30 percent of the investments made by the project in firm- level- assistance over the  same 
period. The ET used a mixed methods approach, including qualitative and quantitative data 
collection and analysis. Qualitative data were collected through 83 key informant meetings, of which 6 7 were with project beneficiaries, 3 with government repre sentatives, 7 with 
other donors and their implementing partners, and 3 with USAID. Additionally, both formal 
and informal meetings were held with Compete leadership and staff, and briefings 
undertaken with USAID at entry, mid -point and exit.  
 
The main limitation of the evaluation, given direction from USAID to measure effectiveness 
against the project’s key result areas (KRAs), related to a disconnect between the data being  
5 
 gathered by the project and measurement of several of the KRAs described in the project 
results framework. A related limitation was the absence of a dynamic baseline and shifts in 
approach performance measurement over the life of the project. In response, the ET 
worked to investigate through the evaluation sample the largely qualitati ve result areas  for 
which Compete was not collecting any specific, relevant data. In relation to quantitative data, 
the results outlined are assessed by the ET as representing the best available data.  
 
Major findings and conclusions   
Evaluation Question 1: To what extent have project activities been effective in achieving intended 
objectives and key results (as per the project results framework) ? 
 As evidenced by the number and breadth of partnerships entered into, the project cost -
sharing model has proven popular in both West Bank and Gaza. Firms speak of the 
opportunity of Compete contribution incentiviz ing them to invest in growing their business 
and tapping emerging market opportunities, since it reduced the risk associated with pil oting 
innovation or chasing new markets. Compete support to firms to better understand and 
engage export markets was also cited by many as a project strength.  
 
While project actions  often demonstrate astute value chain understanding, it is equally the 
case that sector analysis, strategy and intended results are rarely documented in any robust 
form. Compete management are clear that they did not feel the need to reinvent the wheel, given how many market assessments had previously been undertaken of targeted value 
chains. However, limitations in documented analysis underpinning Compete interventions 
and the lack of clearly articulated vision statements and theories of change for sub -
sector/value chain development appears in some cases to have affected strategi c decision -
making and the degree to which sub- sectors have been holistically supported.  
 A common theme cutting across successful activities is that the project’s best results are 
achieved when either a market is already secured, where a clearly identified market 
opportunity exists, or where opportunity exists to activate a niche within a market.  A 
related approach, especially in the agriculture sector, has been to support aggregation of 
small producer product, helping aggregators chase larger contracts wh ich in turn connects 
them and allows engagement of more established value chain actors. Within this approach, 
the project has also worked to invest in promoting quality and quality assurance as a strategy for strengthening relationships with buyers, strengthening the relationship between 
producer and aggregator, as well as the ability of a sector to give confidence to buyers.  
 
In some instances, targeted support to address s trategic sub-sector bottlenecks – especially 
those that were high cost – was effecti ve in benefitting the wider value chain. Sorting 
machines, cool rooms and washing facilities have all contributed within agriculture to quality 
improvements allowing value adding and greater responsiveness to buyer demands, while 
also facilitating new oppo rtunities for producers. Baby cucumber and potatoes stand out 
within agriculture as notable successes, based in the confidence of different value chain 
actors that a secure market existed for their product.  
 Within the ICT sector, Compete provided staffing support (internships) in the earlier phase of the project to assist firms to target specific, known opportunities such as the 
development of health information management systems or positioning of Palestinian ICT 
businesses as an efficient back office to larger operations in Europe or North America.  
 Another common theme of success stories relates to firms that enjoy freedom of movement 
and confidence that targeted markets can be accessed as required. This is most notable in Gaza where those firms who have capacity to reliably move produce through Karem Shalom  
6 
 are almost universally growing at a significant rate.  Conversely, project beneficiaries in Gaza 
speak of ‘lost opportunities’ based on their lack of mobility and inability to meet clients. 
 
The common theme with firms that appear to have not benefited so greatly from Compete 
support is that assistance occurred in a context where clarity around market need and 
approach to achieving market traction was less apparent. Common to such contexts is th e 
project not being active at multiple points on the value chain, or there being limited shared 
understanding across the value chain of how different project interventions relate to each other. For example, while the project invested broadly across differe nt sub- sectors of the 
tourism sector, these interventions seem to have occurred in relative isolation of each other, with few respondents met during the evaluation being aware of Compete programming in other areas of tourism.  
 Component B of C ompete was to  support business associations and support organizations. 
The ET observes that the priority placed on component B diminished over the course of the 
project, in favor of more direct project -firm relationships consistent with the Firm Level 
Assistance Progra m (FLAP) introduced at the project mid -point. While the FLAP brought a 
more structured and better documented approach to decision -making and facilitated a sharp 
rise in the number of smaller firms participating, it also reduced opportunities within the project for support organizations and especially business associations to strengthen their 
enabling capacity to the sector.  
 
An important impact of the FLAP has been to stimulate employment opportunities, with 
3,198 of the total number of 5,684 jobs generate d by Compete coming in Year 6 through 
FLAP supported firms. Women and youth have benefited from the project inspired 
employment occupying 1,231 and 2,801 of the 5,694 jobs respectively.  
 
While a gender strategy was developed by the project, its proposed ap proach was not fully 
implemented with no documented analysis of the gender dynamics within the targeted value -
chains/sub- sectors, making it difficult for gender considerations to be incorporated within 
planning given the complex and varied challenges to mainstreaming gender and addressing 
systemic constraints to women’s inclusion that exist within the se value chains. 
 Evaluation  Question 2: Where key achievements are identified in targeted sectors, to what extent 
are these achievements sustainable?  
 
Across all sectors, the potential of sustainability of project investment is intimately linked to the degree that market traction has been achieved by participating firms within that sector. 
Within the agriculture sector, the degree to which the required linkages within a value chain 
are in place and functioning is also an important aspect of sustainability. Central to such linkages is strategic identification of bottlenecks that constrain multiple value chain actors, through key interventions.  
 
Support that reduces reliance on importation of inputs is reported by participants as 
another important sustainability measure, since it contributes to enhanced confidence levels 
within production systems. Within agriculture, those firms supported by Compete to 
produce inputs previously needing to be purchased externally (seeds, seedlings, fish 
fingerlings) believe they are able to produce at a lower cost per unit than imported inputs, 
and see this as paving the road to a sustainable future for their enterprise and  sector.  
 
Evaluation Question 3: How can successful interventions be replicated by future USAID programs?  
 
There are a range of key factors common to Compete success stories which offer insight as 
to how the best aspects of Compete can be replicated. Strong sector understanding appears  
7 
 to be critical in terms of the project being able to identify highly strategic and 
complementary entry and intervention points that build confidence and resilience within a 
sector. This analysis contributes to  sophisticated understanding of market potenti al and 
opportunities, which also is key to guiding project decision -making.  This foundational work 
is important since Compete demonstrates that when clear and accessible market 
opportunity exists, the private sector appears to be generally capable of managing itself forward in that market . 
 Replication is therefore best served by a foundation that ensures sophisticated and nuanced 
understanding of the potential of sectors under consideration, since this contributes to the 
project being well positioned to identify bottlenecks and strategic interventions to overcome 
them. It also assists identification of synergies and mutual benefit where the ‘investment 
whole’ can be greater than the sum of its parts. Such an approach also pro vides an efficiency 
dividend, since it can avoid unnecessary interventions.  
 Evaluation Question 4: Were there any unintended project outcomes?  
 
Unintended outcomes of the project mostly relate to limitations in market system understanding, and the subsequent impact of project interventions on the overall market 
system.  For example, within the potato sub -sector in West Bank, the project concentrated 
project resources within relatively few hands, which has led to concerns being expressed more broadly  in the sector in relation to distribution of water resources and marketing 
approaches that disadvantage smaller producers. It is likely that a more robust market system analysis would have alerted the project to potential negative impacts of different project interventions . 
 Evaluation Question 5: How did the project’s implementation approach and management, (including selection criteria and processes), influence the achievement  of results ? 
 
Compete’s approach and management across its different sectors is  understandably diverse 
and varied, as the project works to find the best fit for the unique challenges and 
opportunities inherent to different levels within each sub-sector. Not surprisingly, feedback 
on Compete management is mixed and often contradictory . While many interviewed spoke 
of smooth processes and responsiveness, others spoke of delays and a lack of communication. Generally speaking, more positive feedback came from those in the 
agriculture sector who appreciated the project willingness to addre ss bottlenecks, co -finance 
procurement of assets and valued the availability of Compete staff to support them as 
required in value chain strengthening.  More negative feedback was apparent within the ICT 
and Tourism sectors, with the most common complaint being a lack of clarity around the 
project strategy and poor communication related to the project’s shift in direction in these sectors.  
 
While Compete management of sub -sectors such as baby cucumber, (Gaza) potatoes and 
fisheries reflect intimate underst anding of these value chains, the ET believes that better 
documentation of sector understanding, strategy and objectives would have assisted project management in terms of all stakeholders having clarity around what it was that Compete 
would do in their se ctor. 
 
The ET also believes that an opportunity was missed with the way M&E was conducted over 
the life of the project, by not being sufficiently focused on ‘monitoring for learning’, as opposed to monitoring to aid reporting.   
   
8 
 Recommendations  
 
The headline  recommendation  of the evaluation  is that USAID commit  to further support 
and progress competitiveness  of the Palestinian  economy  through interventions in both 
West  Bank and Gaza.  Results  achieved  through Compete demonstrate  that strategic and 
considered  support to sectors  and businesses can be catalytic in strengthening export  
readiness,  building investor  confidence and addressing bottlenecks, resulting in a 
strengthened  Palestinian  economy  and growth  in employment opportunities.  
 While  a total of 17 recommendations  are laid out in the following  report,  these  can be 
summarized  as follows: 
• Any future competitiveness program should endeavor to unlock growth potential of sub -
sectors by addressing systemic constraints to competitiveness using a  systems approach to 
the extent possible.   A key focus of such approach should be selecting sub -sectors and 
value chains within them that have a clear growth and value -adding potential, and that can 
deliver improved returns and incomes for small and micro  enterprises.  Interventions in 
these sub-sectors and value chains should then be designed to build capacities, change 
behaviors of actors in the market systems to deliver results at scale.  
• Any future project should maintain capacity to support strengtheni ng of support 
organizations. While this recommendation carries relevance across all sectors, particular focus should be placed on those capable of facilitating trade, identifying market opportunities and addressing information asymmetries related to them, and supporting 
aggregation and value adding within the agriculture sector as a means of supporting the 
many small Palestinian farmers who historically have been ‘price-takers’.  
• M&E systems should  be appropriately  resourced  and strengthened  placing greater  focus on 
tracking assessing  life-of-program  results,  knowledge management  and lessons  learned, 
recognizing the opportunities  and efficiencies  inherent  in clearly  understanding  what has 
and hasn’t  worked,  and why.  
• Improve  project  communications  in general, and with government  in particular.  Project  
participation in coordination  mechanisms  should  also be more actively  undertaken  as a 
means  of progressing learning in relation  to competitiveness,  while also facilitating 
opportunities  to identify  potential programming synergies. 
• A gender advisor should be appointed to specifically manage women -led programming, 
including research and provision of support to sector leads to assist them in ensuring gendered approaches and gender sensitivity in their own value chain  approaches. The 
Gender Advisor would also provide support to ensuring M&E approaches adequately address gender issues and learning. 
• S
tructural  considerations  remain  paramount  making it vital that the project  work hand in 
glove with USAID  to pursue strateg ic advocacy  aimed at overcoming structural  constraints  
to the competitiveness  of the Palestinian  economy. 
 
 
   
9 
 1. Evaluation Introduction, Purpose and Q uestions   
 
1.1 Introduction  and purpose  
 
The USAID -funded Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness project (from here  on referred to 
as Compete) commenced implementation in 2012. Originally conceived as a five-year project, it has twice 
received one-year extensions and will now conclude Octo ber 31 , 2018. Central to decision s to extend the 
project was its deferred commencement in Gaza, wh ere it only came online in 2015 (related to political 
tensions emerging from hostilities in both 2012 and 2014).  
 
Building off earlier work of USAID West Bank and Gaza’s Private Enterprise Office, the P roject Award 
document articulated the importance of a prosperous and competitive private sector, economically 
integrated within the global economy, to the establishment  of a sovereign, independent, viable and 
democratic Palestinian state.1 
 The purpose of the project, as described in the Award document , was to strengthen the competitiveness 
and ex port potential of four sectors - Agriculture and Agribusiness, Stone and Marble, Tourism and 
Information and Communications Technology  (ICT) - to the future prosperity of the Palestinian economy. 
This was to occur through provision of technical assistance and grants within these sectors and to business service organizations tha t support these sectors with the aim of improving sales, income, and employment , in 
order to strengthen the overall Palestinian economy.  
 The purpose of this performance evaluation is to assist USAID/West Bank Gaza (USAID/WBG) in assessing 
the approach an d performance of Compete against its main objectives in terms of results and sustainability. 
The evaluation will provide lessons learned and recommendations for future activities that the USAID 
Economic Growth and Infrastructure team is considering in relation to private sector development  in the 
West Bank and Gaza.   The primary audience for th e evaluation will be the USAID/WBG office , specifically the Economic Growth 
and Infrastructure office as they evaluate potential follow -on proposals and  future activities in this sector. 
Secondary audiences would be other stakeholders interested in private sector development  across West 
Bank and Gaza, as well as those with interest in the specific sectors focused upon by Compete.  
 
Detail of t he evaluation structure and approach was outlin ed in a Scope of Work (SoW)  prepared by the 
evaluation team (ET) in the startup evaluation phase, based on extensive reading of project documentation. 
The SoW detailed a series of evaluation questions and sub-questions that aimed to ensure a rich blend of 
qualitative and quantitative evidence from which conclusions could be reached with regards to the degree to 
which project interventions and processes have been effective in achieving the results they set out to 
achieve.  The agreed  methodology was to put in place  a logical sequence of evaluative approaches capable of 
establishing whether or not a clear and plausible line of sight exists between  the various types of support 
provided by the project to firms, support organizations and targeted  sector s, towards achievement of the 
project’s lead  outcomes - increased exports and investment, enhanced innovation and services, and an 
expanding job market  in the West Bank and Gaza. 
 1.2 Evaluation questions  
 
The SoW was presented to USAID/WBG on 28
th March  2018. It is attached as Annex A. The evaluation 
questions and sub -questions were agreed as follows:  
 
 
 
                                                
1 Award Document Contract No. AID -294-C- 12-00001, Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project; p. 2   
10 
  
1) EFFECTIVENESS: To what extent have project activities been effective in achieving 
intended objectives and key results (as per the project results framework)?  
 
Sub-questions 
1.1 To what extent (and why) have levels of investment and revenues of participating SMEs increased? 
Are trends apparent in different sectors and sub -sectors supported by the project?  
1.2 Has the number of international markets accessed by Palestinian firms expanded? Has the quality and reliability of relationships with external buyers improved?  
1.3 To what degree do firms feel supported by Business Associations and service providers? 
1.4 Do supported firms enjoy increased market share for their products and services in West Bank and 
Gaza?  
1.5 Has the project achieved demonstrable improvement in the quality of products and services produced by supported SMEs? Has this resulted in firms achieving greater value from their 
production? 
1.6 Has the p roject generated increased employment opportunities for Palestinians? Do SMEs supported 
by the project employ additional people?  
1.7 How has the project approached skills transfer and development? Are staff within participating firms 
applying enhanced skills?  
1.8 Has the contribution made by other agencies/ mechanisms to participating firms been sufficiently factored into results reporting?  
1.9 To what extent has the approach been proactive in promoting an enhanced role for women and youth?  
 
2) SUSTAINABILITY: Where key  achievements are identified in targeted sectors, to what 
extent are these achievements sustainable?  
 
Sub-questions 
2.1 Are there common characteristics to successful project interventions?  Do these differ across 
sectors or by type/size of grant??  
2.2 Which of these characteristics are sustainable without ongoing project support? What characteristics 
of success (if any) are reliant on external support?  
 
3) REPLICABILITY: How can successful interventions (identified as part of Question 1) be 
replicated  by future USAID programs?  
 
Sub-questions 
3.1 Which have been the most successful intervention types, and why? Do these vary by sector? Do 
these vary when considered by level of financial assistance?  
 
3.2. Are there local mechanisms or is there local capacity capable of replicating better business support 
approaches?  
 
4) UNINTENDED OUTCOMES: Were there any unintended project outcomes (positive or 
negative)?  
 
5) MANAGEMENT APPROACH: How did the project’s implementation approach and 
management, (including selection criteria and processes), influence the achievement of results?
   
11 
 2. Project Background  
 
2.1 Project conception  
 
Compete was conceived in 2011 at a time of genuine optimis m in the Middle East, with USAID (and most 
other observe rs) assessing that ‘ the Palestinian economy stood on the threshold of an enormous 
opportunity for integration into world markets’. This assessment was based on cessation of the second 
Palestinian Intifada, the spur to the Palestinian economy provided by the advent of the Fayyad government, 
positive momentum in terms of Israel lifting some b arriers to movement and access,  and important efforts 
being made at the time by the Palestinian Authori ty (PA)  to undertake the reforms necessary to achieve 
observer status in the World Trad e Organization (WTO) which offered the potential of an improved 
business environment where equity and debt financing was more available.  2 
 
While this pointed to a range of opportunities to support the Palestinian economy, USAID w as specif ically 
interested  to identify ways of supporting the many small and medium enterprises  (SME)  that employed the 
overwhelming majority of Palestinians. This focus was seen as urgently needed given SMEs  had historically 
focused primarily on the domestic market, and were therefore poorly placed to engage international 
markets and benefit from the various opportunit ies emerging from  the improved economic landscape 
described above. The new project would follow on from and be informed by the USAID Enterprise 
Development and Investment Promotion project  (EDIP) , which was  implemented between 2008- 11. 
 
Based on an  overall assessment  of past programming and the current political and economic context , a 
competitiveness project was conceptualized and released to market, aimed at accelerating the process of 
linking Palestinian SMEs to international markets in order to take advantage of emerging global market 
opportunities. This was to occur through the project providing ‘a combination of market information, innovative 
solutions to unique constraints on Palestinian businesses, technical assistance, and training to Palestinian SMEs and 
business associations. The primary objective was to address sectorial gaps that will enable Palestinian enterprises to 
identify and exploit significant economic opportunities, primarily in the international market, through identification of Palestinian firms with good potential for growth that can expand the country’s export revenues and increase employment, particularly of young people. ’ 
3 
 
The opportunity  was proposed as a three -year project with an option to extend for two additional years , 
and proposed that the f our specific sectors engaged through EDIP (agribusiness, stone and marble, tourism, 
and ICT) continue to be focused upon, since USAID assessed these as still being the most promising sectors 
for Palestinian engagement of the global economy. At this point, it was also expected that the project would 
be immediately operational in both West Bank and Gaza, while also  recognizing the need for differ ent 
approaches in each given the expectation that Gaza would remain significantly isolated from world markets 
for the foreseeable future . 
 
2.2 Technical proposal and start -up 
 
The Award document asked applicants to build their concept  around two interrelated components:  
• Component A: Assistance to Palestinian enter prises to become competitive  in global markets  
• Component B: Assistance in the development of Palestinian business support organizations  
 
In mid -2011, the successful applicant  – Development Alternatives, Inc. (DAI) – outlined a  technical proposal 
that detailed  anticipated results detailed under each component.  
 The technical proposal outlined Component A results specific to each of the four identified sectors, with 
these results emerg ing from a project facilitated sector planning process built around the establi shment of 
‘Sector Working Groups’ (SWGs) . As described, DAI would ‘draw on principal counterparts in each sector to 
                                                
2 Contract No. AID -294-C- 12-00001, Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project, Part One; p.8  
3 Contract No. AID -294-C- 12-00001, Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project, Part One; p.9   
12 
 organize SWGs that would not only manage sector planning workshops, but also champion results  and assure 
corrective action as warranted.  As SWGs help sectors become skilled at collaborating on the design and 
implementation of needed activities, DAI would help the SWGs to involve overlooked or hard to reach sector 
participants (such as cooperatives, youth and women) in commissioned research, deliberations and decisions.’  4 
 
Component B results focused on enhancing the organi zational development and role of business 
associations, with a focus on ensuring their capacity to respond to demand driven services and financial self -
sufficiency. The project would support business association development through building the capacity of 
business service providers to respond to local industry needs and end market d emand.  
 Underpinning the overall approach was a commitment to rigorous performance, monitoring and evaluation 
processe s capable of captur ing performance data, track ing progress in relation to outputs, outcomes and 
results, and continuous learning  able to inform decision making of both project management and USAID in 
relation to future dir ections.  
 
2.3 Project structure  
 
The goal of Compete is to strengthen the competitiveness and export potential of key sectors essential to 
the future prosperity of the Palestinian economy. This is achieved through efforts aimed at facilitating rapid 
expans ion in sectors of the Palestinian economy that show the most potential for employment and export 
growth. In West Bank, the project was specifically instructed by USAID to focus on the agribusiness, 
tourism, ICT, and the stone and marble sector s. In Gaza, the project undertook its own rapid assessment 
of needs and opportunities, identifying agri culture, ICT, fisheries, textile garments, tourism  and furniture as 
target sectors  (though furniture was soon withdrawn from due to a tightening of dual use restrictions on 
products entering Gaza, restricting producer access of producers to the wood required for furniture 
production).  
 
Project a pproaches include : 
• provision of grants and technical assistance to companies ; 
• efforts to maximize the value of products with a view to partnering with firms towards new 
products and approaches that better respond to market opportunities ;  
• connect smaller businesses with larger producers and exporters that have direct and more efficient 
access to markets ; 
• empower SMEs to better perceive and respond to opportunities as they arise t hrough training and 
increasing the flow of information, products, and technology throughout target sectors . 
 Across work plans, the project highlights the formation of partnerships and lev eraging of governmental, 
donor and private sector commitment and cooperation as critical to enhancing competitiveness among targeted WBG sectors . While the USAID/Compete model does not include a steering committee 
mechanism  upon which government representa tives would sit, the project identified contact points within 
each ministry of relevance, including the Ministry of Economy. These contact points are used as liaison points, and as required, facilitate access to meetings with more senior government representatives.   
 
To provide structure and support performance monitoring, the project developed  a results f ramework  
that conveys the development hypothesis implicit in the program’s goal and objectives, as well as the cause -
effect relationships among key results areas, program intermediate results, and program objectives . The 
results framework is used to guide planning and communications, and as a foundation for work planning 
and performance monitoring.  (see section 5.1 for a description of the Results Fr ameworks for both West 
Bank and Gaza).  
 In total, Compete works across 6 sectors and 41 sub- sectors, providing support to a total of 1,550 
beneficiary farmers, firms and support organizations. This support ranges in scale from $405 to $2.24 
                                                
4 DAI Technical Proposal; WBG: Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness project; May 16, 2011; p. 10  
13 
 million, with n early 90% of the value of support provided concentrated in the agriculture (43%), Tourism 
(33%) and ICT (13%) sub- sectors.   
 
In 2013, Compete began to more deliberately incorporate youth and gender components into the projec t. 
With regard to gender, the p roject formalized its approach through development of a gender strategy in late 
2013, which was incorporated in the 2014 work plan and included the addition of gender specific indicators.   
 In 2015, an external mid- term review was undertaken.  Among the recommendations was that the project 
‘develop more activities that do not focus on the same, often larger and more established firms’, since this 
restricted opportunities for the smaller firms that  were described in the Award as needing support t o 
become export ready.
5 Coinciding with this observation , Compete introduced the Firm Level Assistance 
Program (FLAP) which brought a more structured approach to decision -making around grants, while also 
facilitating a significant increase in the number of  smaller firms becoming involved in the project.  
 
2.4 Other USAID programming at conception 
 It is important  to note another project under implementation by USAID at the time  of conception of the  
competitiveness project  in 2011. The Investment Climate Improvement Project (ICI) worked with the 
Ministry of National Economy,  Ministry of Finance  and line ministries, as well as with governorate and 
municipal officials and private- sector associations to analyze reforms, identify obstacles to reform, and 
develop a multi -year strategy to improve the enabling environment for business, investment, and trade.  
Within the Competitiveness Award document was clear direction that the ICI project was responsible for  
efforts aimed at improving the enabling environment for  Palestinian business, and that any work done by the 
proposed competitiveness project on the enabling environment vis -à vis Palestinian enterprises should be 
coordinated with that project.   
 The significance of this context lies in the fact that much of the optimism felt in 2011 in relation to continued positive momentum towards an easing of tensions between the Israeli and Palestinian governments proved to be premature, meaning that significant ‘enabling work’ is still urgently needing to be done if the Pa lestinian 
economy is to come even close to working on a level playing field.
6 With ICI finishing in 2014, and Compete 
not structured in such a way that it can work to facilitate a more enabling environment for competitiveness  
in a structured and deliberate way, many profoundly significant structural obstacles remain in terms of efforts 
to progress competitiveness of the Palestinian economy. How the unrealized political settlement manifests 
itself in the form of competitiveness  constraints that permeate throughout the Palestinian economy is 
described in USAID WBG’s Inclusive Growth Diagnostic, publishe d in May 2017.  
 
In finance, Palestinian banks are constrained by limitations on cash transfers from WBG to 
correspondent banks in Israel, and large amount of vault cash affect interest rates and lending 
practices. Social returns are low because Palestinians do not have full control of territory in the West 
Bank and cannot access many of the natural resources, namely water and offshore Gaza Marine gas 
fields, which they would otherwise use. Workers must pass through onerous checkpoints to reach 
better -paying jobs, and a skilled worker in Gaza who would like to work for a firm in the West Bank 
cannot do so without an Israeli permit. Palestinian firms must import and export goods through 
Israeli customs and security procedures. Shipments must undergo back- to-back transfer from 
Palestinian trucks to Israeli trucks to move across borders and crossing points.7 
  These constraints pose a sig nificant implementation challenge for Compete, demanding the need to adapt 
and respond to the many threats and opportunities that arose during implementation.
 
                                                
5 Mid Term Evaluation of the Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness (Compete) project; Optimal Solutions Group; March, 
2015; p.7  
6 See West Bank and Gaza Inclusive Growth Diagnostic published by USAID in May 2017.  
7 USAID West Bank and Gaza Inclusive Growth Diagnostic; May 2017; p.6   
14 
 3. Evaluation Methodology and L imitations  
3.1 Overview  
A central challenge of the evaluation was the sheer scope of Compete, in terms of it having worked with 
1,550 beneficiaries across  seven different sectors  over a seven -year period. Informed by  an extensive 
literature review, t he ET worked to identify an ap proach and sample suitable to ensur ing sufficient breadth 
and flexibility to effectively gather  data from multiple sources within a relatively short field work period. It 
was understood from the first instance that both quantitative and qualitative analysis were needed. Qualitative data m ethods included document review and key informant interviews (KIIs) with stakeholders  
from different stakeholder groups acr oss the pr oject landscape. Standardized interview guides were used for 
firm and all other stakeholder interviews, which yielded both quantitative and qualitative results. The interview guides are included in  Annex B. Quantitative data were  obtained through a review an d synthesis of 
existing program reports and M&E data  contained within the project’s extensive data base  and U SAID/West 
Bank and Gaza's primary system for capturing and managing project related information (GeoMIS) retrieved 
on Feb ruary 25, 2018. Data table s of all graphics included in this report are found in Annex H.  
 
A mixed met hods approach allowed flexibility for the ET to identify and understand different points of view 
within the stakeholder landscape in relation to  Compete  performance and achievements. The different 
stakeholders also helped assess and determine the degree to which targeted sectors had been positively 
progressed by Compete, and also how the project had worked at firm level to build capacity, achieve impact, 
and support susta inable outcomes for participating firms .  
Throughout the evaluation, the  ET followed the principle of triangulation  for both qualitative and quantitative 
analysis, seeking to confirm conclusions through supporting evidence from multiple sources. The se sources 
include the quantitative data held by the project at both macro and firm level s. Project  Performance 
Management Plan  (PMP) data was analyzed and efforts made to selectively verif y such data with firms. 
Additional data was requested from and prov ided by firms on key questions considered in this Evaluation.  
 
3.2 Sampling  
The process of selecting firms for interviews, while not quantitatively rigorous, followed the ideas of 
stratified random sampling. Fi rms were chosen to be representative of different  project sectors and sub -
sectors, project strategies, and geographical distribution across the country, with some firms chosen that have had extensive interaction with the p roject and some chosen more on the periphery of project activities. 
Interviewed  firms and farmers comprised 4 percent of the total number of firms assisted by the Project over 
its seven -year lifetime, but accounted for 30 percent of the investments made by the Project in firm -level-
assistance over the same period.  The final sample of firms is attached at Annex C, and is based is based on 
the analysis summarized in Annex D, which details s ummary analysis undertaken by the ET of Compete data.  
The final evaluation sample allowed insight to all sectors  and included participation of women and youth as 
selection criteria to ensure understanding of the levels of ‘genuine’ participation  and challenges inherent 
within these important cohorts.  Given the Mid -Term Review that examined performance during the first 
three years of project implementation, the sampling w as weighted (60%) towards the firms that received 
support from the fourth year of implementation onwards.
  
 
3.3 Data sources and methods  
The evaluation was  conducted by an independent team of three consultants, with quality assurance support 
provided by The QED Group in both Ramallah and Washington, DC. Following a briefing mission to USAID 
in Tel Aviv and DAI in Ramallah, fieldwork in the West Bank and Gaza took place 1 –26 April 2017.  
During the course of five weeks in country, the ET undertook 86 interviews  and briefings  involving project 
beneficiar ies, private sector associations, service providers, Compete  staff, a s well as representatives of 
USAID, the Palestinian Authority, donors, and international organizations working in the areas of  
15 
 competitiveness promotion, agribusiness development, an d trade facilitation.  Annex F features the ET ’s field 
schedule and lists all entities consulted during  the evaluation.  
Logical sequencing was employed with t he ET first me eting with  USAID to understand the Mission’s 
perspective on the p roject  and evaluation , followed by meetings with Compete  staff to better understand 
and clarify understanding of the detai ls of p roject activities and staff insights  regarding the proposed sample. 
The ET  then worked to a geographically logical sequence of beneficiary interviews, meeting with various 
Palestinian firms and farmers . Meetings were also schedule with other key donors and agencies, other 
projects of relevance and government agencies.   
The ET asked the Compete Team to generate different data analys es for review. Structured interviewing of 
Compete’s different parts also occurred, including the CoP, sector leads, Grant s Manager, and M&E Officer 
(in both the West Bank and Gaza offices). In these meetings, the Team sought to understand the details of 
project activities, the perspectives of project staff, the decision- making processes at various levels, 
monitoring and repo rting processes, and the allocation of staff resources to tasks.  
The purpose of meeting with non- participating stakeholders, such as private sector interested donor 
organizations,  other projects of relevance, central government author ities, and trade organizations was to 
understand how the project cooperates, coordinates, and builds synergies across the broader private sector promotion landscape.  Such i nterviews also allowed the ET to hear external perspectives on what Compete 
does well and where improvements could be made.    
In interviews with beneficiary firms and farmers, the ET sought to confirm what project assistance had been 
received, what the impact of that assisatnce had been (including verifi cation of data reported in the PMP), 
firm perspect ives on p roject  implementation , and more general  information about the firms  context and 
direction.  
Table 1: Summary of interviews conducted in West Bank and Gaza  
Sector/ Entity  # of Interviews Completed  
Total  # of P eople Interviewed  
Total  
WB Gaza  WB Gaza  
Agriculture  26 8 34 31 14 45 
ICT 6 3 9 9 3 12 
Marble and Stone  3 None  3 4 None  4 
Tourism  14 1 15 23 4 27 
Fishing  None  2 2 None  2 2 
Garment  None  2 2 None  4 4 
Other Support 
Organizations  1 1 2 2 1 3 
Government 
Counterparts  3 (MoTA, 
MoA, MoNE)  None  3 6 None  6 
Other Donors & their 
IPs 6 1 7 10 2 13 
Compete Team  2 1 3 5 4 9 
USAID  2 1 (El Wafa)  3 11 3 14 
USAID Briefings  3 None  3 27 None  27 
Total  66 20 86 128 37 166 
 
3.4 Limitations  
The primary limitation of the evaluation was the limited time available to it. Given Compete has 1,550 
different beneficiaries working across seven sectors in West Bank and Gaza, it was not possible for  every 
aspect of the p roject to be investigated in exh austive detail. This was overcome best as possible by the 
purposive sa mpling described above.   
16 
 Limited human resources also compromised the degree that the project’s gender and youth focused 
programming could be assessed in detail. While efforts were made to consider each, it became apparent 
during the field work that assessment of the project’s gender performance would have benefitted from more 
detailed investigation and the availability of specific gender expertise.    
Another challenge for the evaluation was that it overlapped release by USAID of the call for proposals for 
the proposed ‘competitiveness’ successor phase . This  led to a directive from USAID that the ET ‘ not share 
verbally or in writing any portion of the C ompete  evaluation work product, including observations, 
conclusions, and collected data, with anyone outside USAID/WBG.’ This denied the ET the standard opportunity of a full debrief and validation workshop with Compete, which would have provided an 
opportunity for valuable initial feedback on draft findings, fact -checking and exploring feasibility of 
recommendations.  
 
Another challenge has been significant variability identified across the quantitative data reviewed by the 
evaluation team. Th is has made it less possible than anticipated to use the project baseline and monitoring 
data to confidently assemble different results and measurements of project effectiveness  While every effort 
has been made to resolve such discrepancies, this has not always been possible. When data variability has 
been identified, the ET has worked to identify what it regards to be the ‘better’ data source through cross -
referencing and triang ulation of different sources. All Tables detailed in the report were generated by the 
ET, drawing on what they assessed to be the best available data.  
 
4. Evaluation Findings  
 
Predictably, given 1,550 distinct different partners, project performance is m ixed, with it not uncommon for 
different programming examples to vary considerably in approach, management and outcomes. The report 
that follows does its best to contextualize and explain the reasons underpinning different results.  
 
Overarching Findings on  Project  Approach 
The purpose of this section is to provide an overview of Compete’s structure and approach , while also 
describing shifts in approach across its seven -year implementation period . The need for this section relates 
primarily to the project not having a clearly documented theory of change to guide implementation, and concern within the ET that this has been a contributing factor to better practice being inconsistently applied.  
While flexibility and adaptability were both critically important given the overall context, it is felt that clear 
description within a ToC of fundamental principles and core approaches would have helped address areas of 
weakness described within this evaluation .  
 The two areas described in this section focus on:  
• processes for sub -sector selection and strategy development and , 
• monitoring and evaluation approaches, given their importance to results measurement in general, 
and the first evaluation question in particular, which asks for effectiveness to be measured against 
the described project key result areas. 
 
Approach to identifying and a ddressing competitiveness constraints   
DAI’s original technical proposal submitted to USAID outlined a heavily sector driv en approach, including 
establishment of SWGs.  While the proposed approach was not delivered as originally described in the 
technical proposal, the project has  initiated different approaches to identifying sector constraints, needs and 
opportunities.  
 
During the first three years of operation, Compete utilized a model of sector analysis referred to as the 
Competitiveness Impacts of Business Environment Reforms (CIBER) methodology. According to the CIBER documents, the CIBER combines intensive stakeholder -driven advocacy with rigorous economic analysis to 
identify opportunities for advancing key reforms in the business environment for a particular value chain,  
17 
 including analysis of laws and regulations, and administrative practices from a sector development and 
growth perspective. T he CIBER methodology placed strong focus on identifying sector -wide interventions 
necessary to upgrade the individual and collective performance of enterprises in targeted sub -sectors by 
maximizing local value addition and helping to calibrate needed changes throughout key value chains to 
accelerate sectorial growth.     
 While the outputs of the CIBER approach were of a high standard, only three subsectors/value chains were CIBER assessed:  fresh herbs and Madjool dates; tourism sector, with a focus on site development and 
alternative tourism; and stone and marble sector, with a focus on slurry management and value addition. 
None of these were ever updated, as is generally proposed within CIBER methodology. The existence and 
depth  of CIBERs in just a few select sub -sectors highlights the significantly less robust documentation 
underpinning other sector and sub- sector interventions. The decision to abandon the CIBER approach 
related to their very high cost and also a perspective wit hin Compete that there is no point reinventing the 
wheel in terms of sub -sector analysis given the breadth of data already in circulation. While this is an 
understandable perspective, there is only limited documentation and articulation of how those other studies 
informed Compete decision -making regarding sub -sector engagement.  
 
Based on review of Annual Reports from Compete’s first three years of implementation, Compete focused on facilitating connections between SMEs and larger producers and exporters tha t have direct and more 
efficient access to markets. Working beyond anchor firms, the Project followed an industry -wide approach, 
leveraging off past USAID investments and helping smaller businesses link into, actively participate in, and benefit from secto r-wide economic growth and development activities. It did so by supporting firms to build 
their managerial, marketing, and production capacities and skills to meet quantity and quality standards and become active participants in the global market place. Much of this occurred within the framework of the project’s Component B activities, and in line with the CIBER assessment findings. Component B activities 
also supported strengthening the enabling business environment and working with sector associations and  
business service organizations (BSOs) to enhance their current direct market opening activities in the 
targeted sectors.  Compete also supported the diffusion of ICT through relevant business associations to support the competitiveness of the project‘s ta rget sector as well as other related economic sectors; and to 
support the greater efficiency of government services to enhance competitiveness. These ranged from e -
government and modernization programs for administration of taxes and construction permits a nd 
import/export transactions to the private provision of ICT enabling services, such as payment and booking 
gateways in the tourism and hospitality industries.  
 
Come Year Four of the project, some notable shifts occurred in implementation and approach. In Year Four 
Compete described in its annual work plan a shift towards a Market Systems  approach to correcting 
identified market failures that hinder the competitiveness of its four target sectors.  
 
USAID describes market systems as being complex systems that comprise multiple value chains and which 
include actors and dynamics at both household and community levels.  
“Achieving sustainable impact at scale is the objective of … [many] projects. Inclusive market system development is increasingly recognized as a potential means for achieving this objective. … an inclusive 
market system development approach focuses on building the capacity and resilience of local systems, 
leveraging the incentives and resources of the private sector, ensuring [an all-inclusive process], and stimulating change and innovation that continues to grow beyond the life of the project. Specifically, the 
objective of inclusive market system development is to catalyze a process that  results in a market system 
that is (i) competitive— system actors are able to effectively innovate, upgrade and add value to their 
products and services to match market demand and maintain or grow market share; (ii) inclusive —delivering 
a sustainable flow of benefits to a range of actors, including the poor and otherwise marginalized, as well as 
to society as a whole; and (iii) resilient—system actors are able to address, absorb and overcome shocks in the market, policy environment, resource base or other a spect of the system.”  
8 
                                                
8 USAID, Leveraging Economic Opportunities (LEO): Brief – A Fra mework for Inclusive Market System Development.  Found at: 
https://www.enterprise- development.org/wp- content/uploads/Market_Systems_Framework.pdf  
  
18 
  
The rationale described in the Year Four Annual Plan9 for this shift was to enable the project to promote 
competitiveness more holistically within the targeted sectors through a market systems lens that better identified and addres sed complex constraints and inter -relations among market actors, market and 
household systems, environmental considerations, policy environment, and sociocultural factors, including 
poverty and gender. Through this shift, Compete aspired to reorient its ro le from an active participant in 
value chains it targeted to an outside agent that supports systemic change, as USAID’s best practice in 
economic development theory recommends. Central to this approach was the logic of defraying the risks and the costs of market development interventions for the private sector so that enterprises are able to 
bring new, innovative ideas, develop value -added products, and deliver them to new markets.  
 
While this proposed shift made sense, it is the perspective of the ET that  Market Systems are complex and 
require nuanced understanding of root causes and constraints, which can be difficult and time -consuming to 
identify. Conversely, insufficient diagnostic processes can result in programs exerting their intervention 
efforts in  the wrong places: dealing with symptoms and not underlying causes.  Despite their stated intention 
to advance competitiveness through a market systems approach, this did not fully come to fruition with Compete focus from Year 4 on primarily focused at fir m level.   Interventions during the latter years of the 
project were based on details outlined in Evaluation Committee reports and Action Memos – prepared by 
Compete and approved by the Mission. These commonly lacked analytical depth, and did not provided 
detailed justification for the proposed interventions, or how the different activities within them will consolidate to achieve system wide changes. 
10  
 
What was starkly different in the ‘second phase’ of Compete implementation was the introduction in Spring 
2015 of the Firm Level Assistance Program (FLAP) , which sought to improve opportunities for not 
yet and near export -ready Palestinian firms (especially small and medium size) to receive technical assistance 
and raise their managerial capacity through Compete support.  The core of the FLAP is a demand -driven, 
technical assistance process, with interventions including: building of management and financial  capacity; 
development of sales and marketing plans; adoption of quality systems to improve operations; support to 
train and employ key staff; tailored apprenticeship projects to build capacity of the sector and address 
workforce development needs, and pro vision of equipment and production inputs.11  
 Approach to  program monitoring and data collection  
 
The section below describes the project approach to data collection and monitoring and evaluation. The level of detail that it goes into aims to contextualize  weaknesses identified by the ET in the Compete M&E 
system. These include a lack of alignment between data gathered and the KRAs agreed for the project, the 
absence of a life of project dynamic baseline for performance measurement, and discrepancies in ter ms of 
quantitative data presented across different information management and reporting systems.  
 These weaknesses are a significant constraint on the evaluation given that the primary question of the 
evaluation is to ‘assess the extent to which project activities  have been effective in achieving intended 
objectives and key results (as per the project results framework) .” 
 
Compete collects a  significant  amount of data related to project performance, commencing with sector 
analysis and initial engagement o f interested firms and farmers and followed up through its monitoring 
system. The project has also developed a sophisticated internal database that has specific application to 
Compete and its needs, and from which data can be reproduced as required for the  PMP, Geo -MIS, annual 
reports and annual workplans. Data also feeds into activity selection processes . Demonstration by Compete 
                                                
 
10 Refer to potato, baby cucumber, herb value chains as examples of significant investment occurring with only limited documentation of 
rationale and justification, and West Bank Grapes for an example of a value chain with comparatively detailed documentation..   
11 Drawn from project provided documentation related to the purpose and application of FLAP, including ‘Compete project overview 2018’ 
powerpoint presented to USAID March 2018 
 
  
19 
 of the capacity of the internal database highlighted its ability to quickly generate refined reports, as per user 
requirements. 
 
At inception, Compete prepared a Results Framework (RF) to guide project implementation and performance measurement for the life of the project. A modified RF was prepared for Gaza on entry in  
2015.
12  See f or a full diagrammatic presentation of both West Bank and Gaza RFs.  
    Figure 1: Compete Results Framework - West Bank  
 
Figure 2: Compete Results Framework – Gaza Strip  
 
                                                
12 Compete Year Five Annual Plan, Annex A  
 
20 
  
The RF identifies three  intermediate results (IRs) and 13 corresponding k ey result areas (KRAs ), with two of 
the latter repeated under IR1 and IR2.  All three IRs and their corresponding KRAs are linked to Component A. While indicators were developed for measurement of some KRAs, there are no separate 
indicators for the IRs.  While KRAs  were identified for Component B in the Award document
13, the project’s 
results framework d oes not reflect these.  Neither the contract nor the project operational documents 
developed thereafter specif y an IR for Component B.  14 
 While those indicators u sed for measurement of some KRAs are valid to measu ring progress towards the 
project goal of strengthening the competitiveness and export potential of key sectors essential to the future prosperity of the Palestinian economy , it is noted that there are als o KRAs for which no specific data are  
collected, or where the KRA can be only partially measured. This weakness is particularly true of more 
qualitative results such as ‘reliability and dependability’ of relationships; increase in ‘improved’ products,’ or 
the ‘improved image’ of Palestinian goods  where no specific measurement approach has occurred . 
 
As part of their contractual obligations, Compete has developed and maintained a Performance Management 
Plan (PMP), which primarily describes the project RF, processes for monitoring implementation, data 
collection, verification, analysis and reporting, in addition to detailing roles and responsibilities pertaining to monitoring and reporting. Compete review s and update s their PMP on an annual basis including r eview of 
the Performance Indicator Reference Sheets  (PIRS)  and PMP Matrix, which are also approved by the project 
COR.  This matrix includes 57 indicators, of which 11 are operational indicators.   
While indicators have been developed and tracked to measur e performance against IRs, there are fewer 
indicators capable of tracking performance against the specific KRAs, with  the KRAs in the textbox below  
having either no or incomplete measurement indicators . For example, on e key result is described as 
“increase d number, reliability and dependability of relationships between Palestinian firms and Israeli and 
international buyers”. While the  project has the capacity to measure number of relationships , no strategy 
exists for measuring their reliability and dependab ility cannot . 
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
KRAs identified in the contract for both project components w ere tracked through a set of operational and 
management indicators, but linkages between these indicators  and the respective KRAs were not  explicitly 
made, particularly for Component B.  In Year 3, some attempts were made to establish such  linkages for 
Component A, but their collection proved irregular in  following years.  Linkages bet ween Component B 
KRAs and performance indicators were never made in any of the monitoring documents.  However, there 
are some component B relevant indicators in the PMP. As a result, project monitoring and reporting d oes 
not holistically reflect project achievements at the level of KRAs or IRs.  Narrative reporting pays some 
attention to KRAs, but generally speaking it is difficult to  reach firm conclusions around performance against 
several of the KRAs.  
 
This leaves a situation whereby performance measurement is primari ly seen through the lens of the big-
ticket  indicators of sales, exports and growth. For both sales and export indicators across all sectors, 
                                                
13 Contract No. AID -294-C- 12-00001, Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project, Part One; p.19  
14 Contract No. AID -294-C- 12-00001, Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project, Part One KRAs with n o measurement indicators:  
o Increase in quality of Palestinian goods  
o Improved image of Palestinian products and services in local and global markets  
o Demonstration effects being replicated at equal of higher levels without project support   
KRAs with incomplete measurement indicators:  
o Increased number, reliability and dependability of relationships between Palestinian firms 
and Israeli and international buyers  
o Increased market share of Palestinian products and services in West Bank and Gaza  
o Increased added value by Palestinian firms for products exported to Israel and beyond   
21 
 Compete and USAID have agreed that the following methodology and assumptions could be used for dat a 
collection , which are detailed in PIRS (and directly quoted) as follows : 
A.  If assisted firms are able to split value of exports as a result of USG assistance, M&E will 
report this value.  
B.  If assisted firms are unable to split value of exports as a r esult of USG assistance, M&E will 
report the increase by comparing against baseline (before Compete intervention).  
C.  When Compete interventions lead t o a significant influence on a  firm with regards to value 
of exports, M&E will report the total export value of the assisted firms. Examples of ‘significant influence’ were cited as adoption of international standards certification, direct 
firm level technical assistance, participation in trade shows and exhibitions etc .
 
D.  The value of exports is also affected by Compete's interventions indirectly, as companies and 
firms are carrying out interventions and strategies that they observe in the sector that have 
been developed with support from Compete (Attribution) - such as forward Contracting.  
E.  Sales from assisted firms in Gaza to West Bank or from West Bank to Gaza will be 
considered as exports . 15 
 Performa nce measurement is further complicated by irregularities in the project baseline. While all 
performance indicators should have a baseline and targets set prior to reporting data, the Compete PMP matrix has gaps in reporting life of project baseline and tar gets for a number of indicators. (For more 
detailed analysis of baseline and data gathering shifts , refer to Annex G. ) From Year 5 onwards, Compete has 
been using a dynamic baseline for indicators related to exports, sales and employment. However, their internal database has annual baselines that are not aggregated into life of project baselines or reflected in the 
PMP matrix. Despite the fact that Compete met and exceeded their annual targets for the above indicators, 
the absence of life of project dynam ic baselines and inconsistency in reporting life of project targets and 
achievements is a limitation for holistic quantitative review of the project ’s results . 
 It is also noted that the project was directed to  disaggregate indicators by sex when measuring person -level 
data. Despite the fact that Compete collects and is able to provide sex  disaggregate d employment data 
internally, replacing the ‘ sector disaggregated % increase in employment ’ indicator by a non -sex or sector 
disaggregated indicator of ‘ # of new jobs created ’ from  Year 5 onwards prevents gender trend analysis of 
employment across sectors . It also restricts the PMP from provid ing a holistic overview o f employment 
trends over the life of the project given that units of measurement d iffer.   
 The summary RF at Table 1 below  highlights in red those indicators for which no monitoring data are  
collected (and orange where not all facets of the KRA can measured).  ‘Best available measure’ indicates the 
ET’s assessment of the best data source availab le for measurement of the result.  
  
Table  1: Compete Component A Results Framework performance measurement, data 
gathering and years collected  as per Project PMP 
 
Project Intermediate Result One: Exports 
and investments increased Best available measure Years measure 
collected  Sectors  
                                                
15 Compete M&E Plan Year 7, p.25   
22 
 • Increased revenues for Palestinian firms  
 
• Increased added value by Palestinian firms for 
products exported to Israel and beyond  
 
 
• Improved image of Palestinian products and 
services in local market place  
 
• Increased number, reliability and dependability 
of relationships between Palestinian firms and Israeli and international buyers  
 
• Increased number of international markets for Palestinian products and services  
 
• Increased market share of Palestinian products and services in West Bank and Gaza  
 • % increase in sales  
 
• Value of exports  
   
• No measurement  
  
• # of new contracts executed with international buyers/ firms 
• # of new markets accessed  
 
• Sales- Exports (not 
captured in the PMP)  • LOP, for 
tourism ,, Y5 
only 
• LOP 
      
• Y1-Y4 
   
• LOP 
  
• LOP 
 • All, except tourism  
 
• All (no indicator for Fishing in PMP) 
 
• ICT & Agriculture  
   
• ICT, Agriculture & Stone and Marble  
• All 
 
Project Intermediate Result Two: 
Innovation of products and services 
increased  Best available measure Years measure 
collected  Sectors  
• Increase in both new and/or improved Palestinian products and services  
   
• Increase in quality of Palestinian goods  
• Increased added value by Palestinian firms for products exported to Israel and beyond  
• Improved image of Palestinian products and services in local and global markets  
• Demonstration effects being replicated at equal 
of higher levels without project support  • Various, tailored to sectors 
   
• No measurement  
• Value of exports  
 
• No measurement  
 
• No measurement  
 • LOP, stone & marble Y2 only  
   
• LOP • All, except Garment and Fishing , stone & 
marble Y2 only  
 
• All (no indicator for Fishing in PMP) 
 
Project Intermediate Result Three: 
Employment increased, skills expanded  Best available measure Years measure 
collected  Sectors  
• Increased employment of youth (under 30 years old)  
• Increased employment in firms targeted by Compete  
 • # of youth gaining employment or better  
employment  
 
• # of new jobs  
 
• increase in employment  • Y3-Y6 
  
• Y5-Y6 
 
• Y1-Y4 • Aggregated for all sectors 
 
• Aggregated for  all 
sectors 
• All sectors in WB  
While not a stated result, data 
are collected in relation  to 
skills expansion and inclusion of women  • # of individuals receiving short -term 
agricultural sector productivity or food security training  
• # of training courses developed and delivered through the hospitality school  
• 
# of women in training and capacity building courses that improve skills in the ICT and 
Tourism sectors  • Y2-Y6 
  
• Y2-Y4 
  
• Y3-Y4 • Agriculture 
  
• Tourism  
  
• ICT & Tourism  
 
It is also noted that no results are included within the RF that directly consider performance in relation to 
Component B – to assist in development of Palestinian Business Support Organization s and Service 
Providers – despite there being four expected res ults defined in the project contract. Furthermore , two 
Component B relevant measures were dropped  from the PMP at the  end of Year 4. See below.  
  
 
   
23 
 Table  2: Component B results as per project contrac t 
Results described in contract  Measures of relevance and years 
collected  as per project PMP  
Increased use of BSOs by Palestinian firms to resolve constraints to 
global competitiveness of specific products and services targeted by the project. • # of new services provided by BSOs and BSPs (Y2 -Y6) 
• % increase in # of firms receiving services 
from BSOs and BSPs (Y2 -Y4) 
• % increase in revenues of BSOs and BSPs (Y2-Y4) 
• # of BSOs and BSPs receiving assistance (Y2-Y6) Increased use of BSPs by Palestinian firms in acquiring needed services to 
improve such things as pac kaging, branding, and marketing of products 
and services.  
Increased use of business -to-business services in the areas of accounting, 
transport, ICT, and other services.  
Increased financial viability of BSOs providing needed services for 
Palestinian firms competing in the global marketplace.  
 
Even within the more quantitative result areas, data gathering has been inconsistently co llated and often 
gathered in a form that is incompatible with the baseline data that had been assembled.  Table 3 below 
highlights data gathering and reporting discrepancies. It is noted that even at sector level there is no one 
place where all key performance data are  available, and that there is inconsistency in data being reported 
through different reporting mechanisms.  
 Table 3: Quantita tive data comparison across PMP
16, the Year Six  Annual Report  (Oct 2017)  
and Compete managed internal database17 
 
 
Compete operational indicators were subject to Data Quality Assessment s (DQAs) by the Mission in Year 2 
and Year 6. DQA reports indicate that the data meet USAID data quality standards including reliability, 
validity, timeliness, precision and integrity.  
 
                                                
16  Compete PMP matrix was generated from GeoMIS on February 25, 2018.  
 For sales, PMP data is reported as % increase, however due to missing life of project targets and achievements across all sectors, it is difficult to 
obtain the total increase in value of sales per sector. Also, there is no life of project baseline for ICT.  
For exports, PMP data is not available for fishing and Compe te dropped the exports indicator for tourism sector as the project has no significant 
influence on the flow of international tourists/visitors.  
For employment, Compete replaced the sector disaggregated % increase in employment indicator in Year 5 by a non -sector disaggregated indicator 
of # of new jobs created preventing trend analysis of employment across sectors.  
For investment, data for furniture, fishing and garment is aggregated on GeoMIS under one category  
17 Provided as per ET data request. For invest ment, Compete did not provide beneficiary’s investment and USAID investment in garment and 
furniture is aggregated under one category, in addition, it is not clear whether fishing included under garment and furniture  or with agriculture.  
 
24 
 4.1  Evaluation Question 1:  To what extent have project activities been effective in 
achieving intended objectives and key results (as per the project results framework)   
 
Effectiveness overview  
It is firstly important to acknowledge Compete for the scale and breadth of its programming in the West 
Bank and Gaza. With 1,550 different beneficiary farmers, firms and support organizations  working across 
seven sectors and 41 sub -sectors  or value chains , the project has engaged the Palestinian private sector with 
depth and breadth, and is now recogniz ed by firms across the SME landscape as a project able to support 
evidence based initiatives to promote growth, especially those with export orientation or aspirations.  
 
Intermediate and key result areas of the project are diagrammatically described below for both West B ank 
and Gaza.  
 As can be seen in the table below, agriculture is the overwhelm ingly dominant sector accounting for 79% of 
supported beneficiaries and 43% of total project expenditure. While tourism accounts for 33% of 
expenditure and an $81,347 average expenditure per beneficiary, this figure is somewhat distorted given that 
it includes substantial investment in historic site renovations, which related to a pre-project commitment 
made by USAID that was built into Compete.  
 
Table  4: Compete Overview Years 1 -7 
18 
Sector  Total No. 
of firms  
supported  % of total 
firms  
supported  No. of 
sub-
sectors  Total USAID 
Contribution  % of total 
Contri -
bution  WB/Gaza 
split  Ave.  spend 
per 
beneficiary  
Agri- 
culture  1,220  79%  23 $13,291,686  43%  74.2%/  
25.8%   
$10,841.50  
Fishing   
5 0% 2 $      473,077  2% 0%/ 
100%   
$94,615.40  
Garment   
33 2% 1 $       624,467 2% 0%/ 
100%   
$18,923.24  
ICT 120 8% 4 $   3,863,132  13%  81.5%/  
18.5%  $32,192.77  
Tourism   
126 8% 6 $ 10,249,726  33%  96.1%/  
3.9%   
$81,347.00  
Stone & 
Marble  46 3% 5 $    2,177,060  7%  
100%/0%   
$47,327.40  
Total  1,550  100%  41 $ 30,619,148  100%  100%  $19,716.68  
  
As descr ibed in Section Four  above , there are difficulties associated with conclusively determining results 
against the full spread of results described in the RF given that several of the key result areas  were not 
measured in a systematic form. Despite this, the ET worked to understand pr oject performance in relation 
to those more qualitatively oriented results where clear indicators we re not available.  
 
Across the key result  areas that were measured , Compete reports considerable success, attributing 
$287,448,427 in sales, 5,684 new full or part time jobs, and  more than $60 million of private investment (in 
co-contributions) by beneficiary firms to project performance.  
 
When trying to identify common themes to project success, it is noted that Compete support to beneficiaries ranges in scale from $405 (baby cucumber) to $ 547,238 (carrots)
19, and that average support 
across sectors ranges from $10,886 in agriculture  to $94,615 in (Gazan) fisheries. Across this spread,  the 
project has calibrate d its approach to the d ifferent needs that come with different investment levels , 
                                                
18 Compiled from sampling data provided to the ET by Compete  
19 The largest grant of $2.224 million was made to the Centre for Cultural Heritage Preservation in relation to site renovation within the tourism 
sector, and actually involved multiple sub -grants.   
25 
 including capacity to work with larger numbers of smaller scale producers on similar interventions 
simultaneously, as can be seen in the  netting and T -bar support to  grape value chain . Of the 1,550 different 
partners, close to half of these are concentrated in the two agriculture sub -sectors of grapes (440) and baby 
cucumber (243). Totaling 44% of all beneficiaries, these two sectors received just 5.4% ($1,655,192) of total investment. Summary whole -of-project analysis of numbers of beneficiaries and spread of levels of 
investment can be found at Annex E - Overview of Compete engagement by sector and sub -sector .  
 While th ese levels of investment are  not surprising given the nature and ne eds of these sub -sectors, it is 
noted that these larger su b-sector scale interventions commenced with only limited  documentation detailing 
preliminary  analysis , the proposed overall strategy and objectives underpinning intervention  with a sizeable 
number of actors within a value chain.   
 
As described above, it is the perspective of the ET that structured sector analysis is limited within the 
project and significantly removed from the approach proposed in DAI’s t echnical proposal  whereby the 
project would have facilitated the emergence of SWGs , which would be key to informing sector approaches.  
While there is only limited documentation of the project’s sector and sub- sector analysis and strategic 
approach , there are sub -sectors w here the actual actions  taken  reflects sophisticated market systems  
understanding. For example, while Compete’s role in the baby cucumber sub- sector is poorly documented, 
it was apparent through meetings with project supported value chain participants that in implementation 
Compete touches virtually every point of the value chain, and includes astute, targeted investments that 
address bottlenecks  while also being active in facilitating consolidation of relationships between producers, 
aggregators and buyers.   
In three of the ten agricultural sub- sectors sampled by the evaluation, the ET observed that  strong 
complementarity and synergies between activities within a sub -secto r has contributed to an appreciation of  
the mutual  benefit of each activity. For example, producers and aggregators told the ET that the provision of 
cold storage  facilities in Gaza aligned with irrigation support to producers has encourage d potato producers 
to expand their production capacity, recognizing that cold storage offers the opportunity of e nhanc ing quality 
allowing  flexibility that contributes to more profitable market engagement.   Aggregators report that t his has 
in turn enhanced  the viability of the cold store as an enterprise, since it has contributed to increased use and 
turn over . However, even within this example, a remaining vulnerability exists in the form of the cost and 
reliability of electricity  in Gaza . More generally, the ET identified universal demand across all sectors in Gaza 
for support to firm based solar power development.  
 Conversely, t here are also sectors where analysis, strategy and approach is better documented, but where 
actual implementation doesn’t seem to have yet followed through on that analysis  and strategy. Within the 
grape sub -sector, Compete has developed a project supporting a market systems approach that addresses 
production, quality, processing and ma rketing issues. By distributing inputs to farmers , delivering training and 
directly supporting the introduction of farm management and irrigation systems, Compete took on the role of a market actor. 
20During the evaluation field work, the ET met with five p roducers who had received T -
bars (to support hanging of grapes), netting and/or irrigation a ssistance, but none were aware of other 
aspects of Compete  support to the sub -sector, and all but one was  unaware of opportunities in the value 
chain beyond the mos t basic description of production and selling within their local market without any 
thought of value adding. Having said that, i n Hebron, Compete is assisting Dawalina Company for 
Agricultural Manufacturing in installing a new line of grape byproducts prod uction including grapes molasses, 
jam, vinegar, raisins and malban .  
 A notable exception amongst grape producing beneficiaries was a dynamic agricultural entrepreneur who 
had 150 dunum of grapes, and had received two separate grants of netting for a total of 13 dunums of 
grapes. While he was able to describe his own approach within the grape market, he was not aware of the broader grape sub -sector approach of Compete that he had received assistance through.  This felt like a lost 
opportunity given th e knowledge he had and his sophisticated understanding of advanced technical 
approaches such related to immediate post -harvest management of stock to avoid weather related damage, 
                                                
20 Refer grape sector strategy attached to Action Memos of all grape sector participants   
26 
 and also current market forces whereby he closely monitored pr ice data by re gion and had identified buyers 
in Israel and Russia.   
 
Another sector where the ET observes a lack of clear direction and strategy is tourism. Compete work in the tourism sector has been broad- based to the point that it seems to lack coherence across its s ix sub -
sectors, with no sense amongst beneficiaries interviewed during the evaluation of the big picture objective  of 
Compete assistance  to the sector . Tourism beneficiaries noted that Compete’s lack of detailed engagement 
of any one sub- sector is compounded by tourism being a sector populated by a cross -section of donors too 
often working in isolation and/or not being sufficiently invested to achieve traction around  the profound 
changes that firms within the sector feel are needed. Compete itself appears to be spread thin across the sector  working in six sub -sectors , with the ET told by beneficiaries that no one sub-sector intervention had 
achieved sufficient traction  to be considered sustainable  given lack of progress in other sub -sectors. 
 A common theme cutting across the most successful activities observed by the evaluation is that the  
project’s  best results are achieved when either a market is already secured, where a clearly identified market 
opportunity exists, or where opportunity exists t o activate an already capable actor to take advantage of a 
niche within a market. Baby cucumber , fresh herbs, and strawberries in the West Bank, fisheries in Gaza, and 
potatoes in both regions stand out within agriculture as notable successes, with that success based in the 
confidence of different value chain actors that a secure market existed for their product, and that 
opportunity existed for enhanced prices through value adding  and investmen t in product diversification .  
 
Within the ICT sector, Compete provided staffing support (internships) in the earlier phase of the project to 
assist firms to target specific, known opportunities such as the development of health information management syst ems or positioning of Palestinian ICT  busine sses as an efficient back office to larger 
operations in Europe or North America.  
 The Palestinian Territories also offer certain niche opportunities, which Compete has supported firms to tap.  Compete support i s reported by companies as key in them addressing the problem of slurry by -product 
within the stone and marble sector . For example,  Compete facilitated technical support and exposure to 
leading producers in Italy allowed for new, innovative products to be developed, which bring the benefit of  
also helping resolve the critical environmental problem of slurry damaging river systems  in West Bank and 
Israel . However, even though both ‘niche’ and the ‘product’ have been identified, discussions with beneficiary 
firms in the sector suggest that further support is needed to ensure sustainability of firms  by supporting 
regulatory reforms around light weight building products, awareness raising and support to market 
expansion, as well as a general scaling up of production to assist West Bank in being recognized  as a serious 
market actor.  The volume of slurry available to production is significant and affordable, and currently needing to be disposed of through a costly process  of removal to waste sites. This under -utilized ‘slurry 
problem’ and the innovative nature of the product is in the opinion of the ET  a compelling argument for 
sustained support to this sub -sector.    
 Another common theme observed amongst many of Compete’s success stories relates to firms that enjoy at least some freedom of movement and confidence that targeted markets can be accessed as required. This is 
most notable in Gaza where those firms in the agriculture, garments, and ICT sectors who have the capacity 
to reliably move produce through Karem Shalom are almost universally significant sales grow th, based on 
Compete reporting . Conversely, project beneficiaries in these sectors in Gaza speak of ‘lost opportunities’ 
based on their lack of mobility and inability to meet with potential clients.  An alternative niche actioned within the project approach is support to firms capable of ‘input substitution’ , 
thus reducing reliance on  procurement of inputs from abro ad through supply chains that are fragile and  
vulnerable to disruption. Reliable access to inputs – not to mention the potential of reduced costs – was 
reported by interviewees across the respective value chains as key to building inve stor confidence.  The 
emergence and availability through Compete s upport of b oth seedling production in the West Bank and fish 
fingerling production in Gaza has been very well  received within relevant sub -sectors, as evidenced by their 
inability to meet demand.   
27 
  
4.1.1 Levels of investment and revenues  of participating SMEs  
 Compete  works to a basic principle of at least 50% cost sharing in West Bank, though demonstrates some 
flexibility when working with poorer farmers where in -kind investments have been incorporated in to the 
approach. Due to the econ omic malaise of Gaza, cost sharing expectations have been reduced to a minimum 
of 30% to encourage participation levels.  Compete’s cost -sharing based implementation modality has proven 
very popular in both West Bank and Gaza. This is evidenced by the 2476
21 FLAP  application s Compete 
received from firms in the West Bank and Gaza  by the end of Year 6 of implementation, the breadth of 
partnerships actually entered into by Compete with private businesses, and the satisfaction of nearly all businesses met by the ET with the support they received from Compete.  
When consider ing Compete’s role in encouraging firm level investment, the following  perspectives were 
advanced by interviewees : 
• In nearly all interviews conducted by the ET with project beneficiaries, Compete’s contribution was said to have  incentivized compan ies to invest in growing their business and tapping emerging 
market opportunities , since it reduced the risk associated with piloting innovation, developing the 
quality of production for higher- return markets,  or chasing new markets .   
• In several cases these investments were coupled with incentives to firms to integrate small -scale 
producers into export and high- value market channels (most prominent examples are potatoes in 
Gaza, and cucumbers, grapes, and guava in the West Bank) . 
• Targeted s upport to address s trategic sector bottlenecks, particularly those that come at high cost 
overcame significant obstacles to growth within sub -sectors (such as vegetable sorting/washing 
machines; heating units for hanging strawberry production in West Bank; high- end engraving 
machinery within stone and marble sector; etc.; staffing and workforce development support 
directed at a specific contract opportunity within ICT; etc. ). 
• Recognition of the spin off e ffect of strategic sector investments , such as project support to a cool 
room  motivating farmers to increase production, which in turn leads  to business generation  and 
consolidation  for the investor/ aggregator . 
• Political and market access concerns are stil l a major inhibitor to investment , both from within a 
company and also external investment . 
• The concept of cost -sharing doesn’t fit neatly with all sectors, especially when it comes to youth 
inclusion. For example, needs of the ICT sector, especially ‘start -ups’ which by definition are 
commonly starting from next to nothing.   
• Compete support in helping understand and access market opportunities helped encourage and 
justify willingness to invest  (highlighting importance  of Compete focus on market unders tanding, 
identification and engagement).  
  
Understandably given the complexity of attribution of private investment choices and motivations, project data related to firm investment beyond the required contributions (to secure grants) is one of the weaker  
aspect s of the monitoring approach. This is highlighted by the extraordinary variance between project 
reporting and data reported in Geo -MIS, as outlined below. 
 
Table  5: Compete partner investment data  by sector  
 
 
                                                
21 Compete Y ear 6 Annual Report, page 8.  
 
28 
 Based on data drawn from GeoMIS, the following table describes investment by both Compete and 
beneficiaries, disaggregated by components A and B, highlighting capacity in agriculture and tourism for firms 
to cost share in r elation to component A but less  so in relation to component B .  
 
Fig 3:  Compete  investment by Component A and B  
 
 
  
Project reporting in relation to sales is far more consistently reported, with firms reporting both total sales 
and export sales from which ‘local sales’ can be calculated.  
 
Table  6: Compete partner sales data by sector  
 
 
While it is assumed that total sales align with the agreed PIRS definitions, there are weaknesses observed in 
actual reporting related to ‘exports’, with sales in Gaza  that are known to be destined for  West Bank not 
being reported as ‘exports’ due to them being sold through an aggregator within Gaza who then sells on to 
West Bank . This distortion  can be seen in the fisheries sector where the overwhelming end destination for 
product is West Bank, yet the  majority of sales are reported as being in Gaza.  While this is not an error per 
se, it does distort  understanding of sub -sector  performance . 
 
The figures below detail annual sales  and exports growth by sector. (Note that sales are used by Compete as 
a proxy for revenues.)  
  
  
 
   
 9.3 
3.0 
1.9 3.7 
0.9 6.5 
3.7 3.3 
0.1 1.2 2.8 
1.2 
0.2 2.5 
-0.7 0.9 0.1 0.4 -
 - 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0
Agriculture
ICT
Stone & Marble
Tourism
Fishing, Garment&Furniture
Agriculture
ICT
Stone & Marble
Tourism
Fishing, Garment&Furniture
USAID BeneficiaryInvestment ($M)Component A Component B
 
29 
  
Fig 4:  Compete  attributed annual increase in sales  by sector22  
 
 
Fig 5:   Compete attributed annual increase in exports by sector23 
 
 
While they suggest agriculture as the standout sector, continued growth of agriculture reflects the fact that it is the only sector that has remained a full programming priority over the duration of the project. Beyond agriculture, sales have been relatively static over the course of the project. Within the overall evaluation 
sample, 68.5% of interviewees reported increase in revenues  that they attribute to Compete , with that 
number rising to 82.8% for agriculture beneficiaries.  In terms of increase in exports, 59.5% of the overall 
sample reported a Compete attributed increase, and 75% in agriculture.  
 
4.1.2 New markets accessed/quality and reliability of relationships with external buyers  
 
Over its life  to date , Compete  reports having facilitated linkages with 102 new markets , as described below . 
Note that no ‘new market’ data is collected for tourism. 
                                                
22 Source:  Compete managed internal database, May 1, 2018  
23 Source:  Compete managed internal database, May 1, 2018  
  $- $10.0 $20.0 $30.0 $40.0 $50.0 $60.0 $70.0 $80.0
Year1 Year2 Year3 Year4 Year5 Year6Sales ($M)
Agriculture ICT Tourism Stone & Marble Garment Fishing
 $- $5.0 $10.0 $15.0 $20.0 $25.0 $30.0 $35.0 $40.0 $45.0
Year1 Year2 Year3 Year4 Year5 Year6Ecports ($M)
Ag ICT Tourism Stone &Marble Fishing Garment 
30 
  
 
 
Fig 6:  Number of n ew markets  accessed  by sector24 
 
 
A notable project approach, especially in the agriculture sector, has been to support aggregation  of 
production, helping aggregators chase larger contracts which in turn connects them with larger and more 
professional and reliable  value chain actors. A tandem approach reported by the Compete CoP has been to 
invest in promoti ng quality and quality assurance as a strategy for  strengthening relationships with buyers. In 
select value chains such as baby cucumbers and potatoes t his has strengthened the relationship between 
producer and aggregator, as well as the ability of a sector to give confidence to buyers. For example, based 
on collective interviews undertaken by the ET across the potato and baby cucumber value chains , it is 
apparent that post -harvest support  has contributed to improvements in production quality, given this 
facilitate s quality control measures and  enhanced prices available to those who meet quality standards.  This 
is reported by value chain participants to have led to investment and expansion of production, which in turn 
has given buyer’s confidence that the y will receive a reliable supply of quality product.  Unfortunately, sub -
sector disaggregated data is not available to validate expansion of areas under cultivation or added value.  
 Compete has also played an important role in supporting different firms to  get their ‘l eg in the door ’ through 
support to participation in trade shows and other buyer focused approaches. This is appreciated by firms, 
and is seen as particularly significant in a context such as the Palestinian Territories given external 
perceptio ns are often based on the difficulties associated with doing business, and thus have potential to 
derail potential relationships. Throughout the evaluation, stakeholders  including stone and marble and 
agriculture products companies in addition to  tour oper ators and support organizations spoke of the 
importance of being able to meet with buyers face to face in order to reassure potential buyers and move 
beyond negative  stereotypes.  
 
This need is voiced even more strongly in Gaza where it is common for opport unities to be missed due to 
restrictions on mobility that prevent meetings with potential buyers , as well as face -to-face customer care 
and after sale support as is the case with one of the ICT businesses interviewed . A universal perspective 
across all interviews in Gaza is that movement restrictions are a serious impediment to Gazan businesses 
and that more active support from Compete  (and USAID ) to help resolve such issues would be appreciated . 
 
                                                
24 Data source: Project PMP matrix, February 25, 2018. LOP refers to Life of Project achievement and it reflects the aggregate up to Y6, however, 
and as per the indicator PIRS in Y6 PMP  “if Company A and Company B accessed Market X, M&E will count them as two new markets accessed by 
beneficiaries, but one unique market for aggregate tracking.”  
 
0102030405060
LOP Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y653
1513
6 71223
35 53726
486 53Agri ICT Stone & Marble 
31 
 4.1.3 Degree to which firms feel supported by Business Associations and S ervice Providers  
Predictably, the degree that different project participants feel supported by business a ssociations and Service 
Providers varies considerably. Within the evaluation sample,  just 24.5% of the total felt that their business 
interests were adequately supported by a business association or support provider, with that number rising 
to 30% amongst agriculture beneficiaries. The ET observed higher levels of satisfaction with Compet e within 
those sectors and sub -sectors where it is clear that Compete has a deep and intimate understanding of the 
dynamics that drive the value chain and multiple touch points within it. Within  some agriculture sub-sector s, 
Component B type actors such as  cooperatives , post -harvest entities and aggregators have been supported 
to good effect and in a manner integrated within that specific sub- sector . When such support is strategically 
considered, a context of mutual benefit is achieved as can be seen in the  oft mentioned potato and baby 
cucumber value chains.  
 
A conundrum observed by the ET and faced by Compete is that firms often have only limited confidence in 
the capacity of their relevant business association, and question the worth of the project engagi ng them , yet 
at the same time bemoan the absence of support and enabling services available to them . However, at the 
same time, Compete also offers a unique opportunity through which business associations and support 
organizations can be supported and strengthened in their work , contributing to downstream  sustainability 
and capacity for targeted sectors . This said, business associations interviewed also report disappointment 
with Compete’s disengagement from  them, and highlight a need for further support to  strengthen their 
member services and outreach.  In the earlier phase of the project, Compete seems to have been more invested in supporting ‘component B’ type entities with this diminishing over later years as the project moved towards more direct firm le vel assistance.  
 Agriculture is the one sector where strong support has been maintained to component B type initiatives, where it is clear the  project has played a key role in terms of skills transfer and capacity building 
(cooperatives) and aggregat ion and market engagement (post -harvest actors). As described already, this 
breadth of touch points within a sub -sector appears to be a key indicator of success and satisfaction with 
Compete performance.  
In each of the three other lead sectors  (ICT, tourism and stone & marble) , the ET encountered frustration 
amongst Business Associations and Support Organizations that Compete’s shift away from component B 
type entities had been poorly communicated and/or had occurred just at a point when momentum was being 
achieved. Support to hotel classification, shift away from incubator support to start ups, and a scaling down 
of the project’s relationship with Paltrade were all cited as evidence of Compete commitment to component 
B having diminished  over the course of the project .  
 Compared to business associations, Compete’s  support to service providers  seems to have  been more 
sustained, with the value they are held in by their sector closely connected to the degree that their services 
respond to and benefit other value chain actors. Across all interviews, positive impression of support 
organizations is strongest with in agriculture based on the health of relationships fostered between 
producers, aggregators and buyers.  
 
4.1.4  Domestic market share  
 
While the language of Compete talks very much to an export oriented approach, the project appear s to be 
effective in supporting companies to attain a greater share of their domestic market  through support geared 
to enhancing their competitiveness . 36.2% of the evaluation sample reported an increase in domestic sales 
following Compete sup port, with that number reaching 54.2% amongst agriculture beneficiaries 
Understandably, the project has not been able to measure market share  in any robust form. However, 
domestic sales attributed to Compete can be calculated by subtracting export sales from overall sales. This does not however shed light on the question of overall market share given the absence of baseline data.  
 As can be see n in Figure Seven below, $85.4 million of domestic sales  are attributed to Compete, with $70.4 
million of that within agriculture.   
32 
  
Fig 7:  Compete attributed increase in domestic sales  by sector  in West Bank and Gaza25 
 
 
One crucial dynamic of ‘domestic market share’ highlighted repeatedly by beneficiary firms, associations and other stakeholders is the importance of access to West Bank for Gazan producers. While this was stated by 
some West Bank firms, it was stated in AL L Gaza interviews. Given the very weak state of the Gazan 
economy, the only real opportunity currently available for growth of the Gazan economy is access to the 
West Bank and beyond (with the exception of the garments sector whose growth has been largely driven by 
opportunities in Israel). In the eyes of Gazan producers, the West Bank is as good as an export market since it offers opportunities and prices not present in Gaza. When West Bank market access is assured to Gazan producers (as is mostly the case  for Compete supported firms producing potatoes, vegetables, strawberries, 
fish, and garments) they are highly competitive, based on their lower cost base in terms of salaries, and in the 
case of producers in the agriculture sector also have easier water access than producers in West Bank – 
although the quality and ongoing viability of this water supply is a critical issue needing to be faced (discussed below in 4.2  – Sustainability).  
 In some scenarios, Gazan produce has the capacity to threaten West B ank production, with West Bank 
strawberry producers very concerned by the threat posed by Gazan strawberries which are cheaper and 
enjoy a greater status in the market.  
 
There has also been progress in terms of import substitution and also notable innovations  and progress in 
production of various inputs previously needing to have been procured abroad. One notable example of true 
import substitution has come from support to the food processing company Al Salam, which produces frozen vegetables. With the increas ed production and quality coming from its new food processing unit 
which Compete partially supported, it reports that the import share of the Palestinian frozen vegetable 
market has reduced from 95% to 35%.  
26 
 
While enhanced domestic market share is most c ommonly seen within the agriculture sector , the ICT 
sector has also enjoyed some domestic success. H&W MENA was supported by Compete to develop health 
information management systems that they have geared towards both international and local markets . The 
company is n ow responsible for delivery and management of systems in several West Bank h ospital s. In 
Gaza, ICT firms Al Tariq and Gaza Gateway have both achieved traction in both local and international 
markets , highlighting the lesser impediment of the bl ockade to the ICT sector.  
  
                                                
25 Calculated by deducting export sales from total sales reported in Compete managed internal database  
26 Interview with CEO of Al Salam Group, Hebron 4th April 2018.  $70.4 
$1.0 
$3.3 
$3.9 
$6.0 
$85.4 $6.6 $0.8 $1.5 
$-
$3.9 $6.0 
$18.7 $63.9 
$0.3 $1.8 $0.7 
$-$-
$66.7 
 $- $10.0 $20.0 $30.0 $40.0 $50.0 $60.0 $70.0 $80.0 $90.0
Ag ICT Tourism Stone
&MarbleFishing Garment TotalDomestic sales ($M)
WBG Gaza WB 
33 
 4.1.5 Quality and value adding  
Quality and value adding are other key result areas for which data has  not been formally gathe red. While the 
project has facilitated the ‘opportunity’ for quality improvements and value adding amongst participating 
firms through awareness raising and technical interventions , it is the observation of the ET the project 
primarily leaves  the market to dictate standards for firms to work to. This can be seen in  the export 
orientation of the project, whereby buyers  demanded quality improvements that have in turn resulted in 
added value, building positive momentum within the sector that has seen other producers change their own practice as they attempt to achieve the better prices  on offer. Compete capacity to leverage this dynamic is 
best seen in the baby cucumber value chain, where  technology (netting)  has improved quality and price of 
product, and sorting machines have aided quality assur ance for buyers, contributing to forward contracts. 
Observation of this dynami c, has led to technology uptake that has diffused to non- project beneficiaries. 
 
It is worth noting that in earlier years of the pro ject, emphasis was placed on quality improvement through 
support to internationally recognized certification. These included  Integrated Pest Management (IPM), British 
Retail Consortium ( BRC), Global Good Agriculture Practices ( GlobalGAP ), ISO 22000, Social Accountability 
(SA) 8000, ISO 17025, and Ethical Trade Initiative ( ETI).   Support was also provided – through the Arab 
Hotel Association  - to upgrade the quality of service within the hotel industry through workforce 
development and curriculum development for hotel management and tourism , as well as support to service -
gap assessments in conjunction with the Hotel Certificatio n Process. 
 
Within the agriculture sector, the project has frequently identified strategic opportunities to progress quality as a strategy to achieve better prices. Producers report that cleaning and sorting machines give  greater 
surety to agricultural buyers that they will receive what they have asked for. Support to laboratories has 
increased interest and awareness of phyto -sanitary standards within several value chains. Cool rooms have 
protected produce from weather damage and allowed producers to avo id selling at peak production times.  
Each of these have the potential to add value, and to also build momentum of how producers look at and engage the market. Within the baby cucumber sub-sector, producers spoke of a quantum shift in attitude to quality assurance following the arrival of a Compete provided sorting machine which objectively highlighted who produced the required quality and who didn't.  
 Within the stone and marble sub- sector, the project has moved from a broad -brush approach towards one 
that is focused on high end product . Compete supported Creative Building Solutions report that the thermal 
qualities of products being developed with slurry are outstanding and therefore offer a niche opportunity for 
production of lightweight building materials  that dovetail with current trends in the construction industry.  
The project has also supported the introduction of high tech cutting and engraving machinery that allow for 
production of high  end engraved marble and granite. 
 Sections of the tourism sector  are working tow ards provision of higher value boutique travel opportunities, 
building off site renovation work undertaken through the project. For example, Peace by Piece travel provides individual and small group travel opportunities  that are using and b enefiting from Compete 
supported renovated sites as one aspect of their itinerary.  
 
When beneficiaries were asked whether their partnership with Compete had contributed to them adding 
value to their product, 69.3% of the total sample and 93.1% within agric ulture reported positively.  
 
4.1.6 Project generated employment  
As reported by the Compete CoP, Compete view s employment growth as being best served by a 
strengthen ed economic outlook for firms, rather than employment being pump primed by the project. 
Within this perspective is recognition that competitiveness might even contribute to a reduction in 
employment within some f irms when technolog ical advances reduce labor demands , but also an assumption 
that such developments would bring increased employment in other segments of the value chain or in supporting value chains .  
  
34 
 Despite this, the project attributes  significant employment growth to the project, with 5,684 jobs having 
been generated up until the end of Year Six.  27 A weakness within the employmen t data is that full time and 
part time employment is not disaggregated. Given that 79% of all jobs attributed to Compete have been 
within the agriculture sector, it is likely that a significant proportion of that number relates to part time , 
seasonal emplo yment. It is also important to note that 3,198 (or 56.2%) of the total number of jobs created 
life of project were generated in Year 6, and that 2,879 of these were in the agriculture sector. While there is no data available for such analysis, it is the as sumption of the ET that the majority of these agricultural jobs 
would be seasonal and unskilled, related to burgeoning production in baby cucumber, potato and grape value chains.  
 Across the evaluation sample, 48.3% of firms assessed Compete support as having contributed to them employing additional people. Of those firms that had employed additional people, 69% reported employment 
being a mix of both full time and part time employment, with only 13.8% saying generated employment was 
only part time and 1 7.2% saying employment was only full time.  
 
Fig 8 : Compete generated employment Years 1 – 6 by sector , region , gender
28  
in West Bank and Gaza 
 
  
 
Despite this, interviews with beneficiary firms in some agricultural sub -sectors such as baby cucumbers and 
fresh herbs are demonstrating that increased expectations of quality amongst buyers demands greater 
attention to detail  in production , which in turn is rewarded through higher prices being paid. This is allowing 
for better wages to be paid. It is also noted across greenhouse using sub- sectors that  greenhouse based 
production systems open opportunities for greater participation of women, with strawberry producers now 
employing more women compared to when their production was open- field.  
 
Despite strong Compete attributed employment generation, just 10.3% of sampled firms were willing to describe Compete efforts to promote women’s employment as ‘proactive’, with that number reducing 
further to 6.3% in the agriculture sector.  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
                                                
27 Compete Year six Annual Report, p.5  
28 Data source: Compete managed internal database  
 3094
403
128 1740 03772
936
20428 36 0 01204
459
21 6 0 27144657
9 18 0 0 0 0 27
01000200030004000
Agriculture ICT Tourism Stone & Marble Fishing Garment TotalWB (M) WB (F) Gaza (M) Gaza (F) 
35 
  
Fig 9: Number of new jobs created by sector (Y1 -Y6) in W est Bank and Gaza29 
 
 
Overall, the project has been effective in enabling employment opportunities for youth with a total of 2, 801 
jobs having been generated until end of year 6, compared to its life of project target of 7 85. As with 
employment statistics more generally, youth employment opportunities surged in Year 6 with 67% of the 
total number of youth jobs generated that year.   
Fig 10: Project attributed y outh employment  Y1-Y630 
 
4.1.7 Approach to skills transfer  and workforce development  
Based on data review undertaken by the ET, a n otable feature of Compete is that it has not invested heavily 
in the provision of technical assistance to firms, preferring to draw on pre -existing skills within the sector, as 
well as the technical capacity of its own team where  skilled sector leads were employed to guide 
programming. This contrasts with the DFID funded PMDP which invests heavily in technical assistance.  31 As 
mentioned above, Compete and PMD P have worked strategically together recognizing that their different 
approaches were indeed complementary in many respects. This has especially been the case in terms of 
technical assistance, with several interviewed firms drawing on PMDP provided technic al assistance to help 
                                                
29 Data source: Compete managed internal database  
30 Data source: Project PMP matrix, February 25, 2018. LOP target includes Y7, whereas LOP achievement is reported to Y6  
31 Interview with PMDP Senior management in West Bank and Gaza.  0100020003000400050006000
Ag
ICT
Tourism
Stone and Marble
Fishing
Garment
Total
Ag
ICT
Tourism
Stone and Marble
Fishing
Garment
Total
Ag
ICT
Tourism
Stone and Marble
Fishing
Garment
Total
WBG WB Gaza
Year1 Year2 Year3 Year4 Year5 Year6
785
113226 186 1802801
322 290 3091880
050010001500200025003000
LOP Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6Target Actual 
36 
 define opportunities and needs within a sector. Such synergies can be seen in the fisheries and tourism 
sectors in addition food processing sub -sector where beneficiaries report high quality technical support  
having been received from  PMDP, which helped identify and articulate needs that were subsequently sought 
from and provided by Compete.  
 
A de facto skills transfer component of Compete has been its support to firms to undertake international 
standards certification processes , which  standardly include training and skills development. In the case of 
ICT, H&W  MENA was supported by C ompete for ten of their staff to achieve the highly regarded 
‘Salesforce’ certification in 2012, with all ten remain ing employed by the company to this day.32 More 
generally within the ICT sector, retention of Compete provided interns as permanent staff has been strong, based in those interns having been key in developing new markets, and thus new employment opportunities within participating firms. This can b e seen within both H & W MENA and Infinite Tiers.  
 Another notable skills transfer strategy undertaken by Compete involved the training of a team of young agronomists, who were then supported to undertake extended assignments within agricultural firms with the 
objective of introducing new and advanced technical approaches. Interviews with firms who received this 
assistance suggest its impact was uneven, with firms that were already abreast of current agronomic practice 
best placed to benefit from the assistance.  Al Junaidy nursery is an example of a technic ally sophisticated 
company that was able to put agronomists to good use developing seedling production systems.   
 Support was also provided to the appointment of Export Managers in strategic locations, tasked with engaging specific  market s, with several s till being employed to this day e.g. Canaan Fair Trade US based 
Export Manager , Al ‘Ard Agri -products company Malaysia based Export Manager and the Gulf based Export 
Manager of Fonoon; the technological company to engrave marble and granite 
33 . 
 
Within the  ICT sector, the project initially provided support to start ups through incubators such as  Leaders 
and Ibdaa, but stepped back from utilization of incubators  to directly engage the start- ups themselves. 34 
 
More recently, the project has partnered with Palestine Polytechnic University (PPU) and National 
Instruments (an American multinational producer of automated test equipment and virtual instrumentation software ) in an innovative partnership, which is providing p rofessors at PPU exposure to National 
Instruments (NI) technology and integrated NI technologies in the course s they teach.  The output of the 
relationship will be to  build capacity for production of a sele ction of niche technology needs, such as  grading, 
dehydrator s, and stone imaging machines , which all have potential to promote competitiveness of Palestinian 
firms. 
35 
 
4.1.8 Relationships with other agencies/mechanisms of relevance  
With the exception of PMDP, other prominent actors in the relevant sectors and private sector space 
expressed a desire for Compete to be more visible and active in coordination mechanisms and information 
sharing.  
It is also noted that many of the firms that partner with Compete also receive support from other agencies . 
In some instances, partners have a long history of support from multiple donor agencies e.g. Canaan Fair Trade.  Within some sub -sectors, a host of different actors are engaged and making con tribution to the 
overall progression of that sector. For example, Oxfam and FAO are both very active in the baby cucumber sub-sector, with FAO having supported Kufr Dan Cooperative with a cold store that is an important part of 
that value chain’s success. Within the tourism sector, Bethlehem University, Visit Palestine and Holy Land 
Incoming Tour Operators Association (HLITOA) are other examples of agencies that have received support 
from a diversity of sources over a sustained period of time.  
 
                                                
32 Interview with Firas Al Zaghal, H & W MENA  
33 Drawn from interviews undertaken with these companies  
34 Drawn from interviews undertaken with these companies  
35 Drawn from interviews with staff of PPU   
37 
 However, project PIRS as they are currently defined do not factor in the contribution of other agencies and 
allow Compete to claim attribution for 100% of exports generated by a supported partner, even when 
substantial contributions have been made by other agencies . 
4.1.9 Project gender and youth performance  
Women’s inclusion  
Compete was not required by USAID to develop a gender strategy at the time of award.  However, the 
Regional Inspector General/Cairo (RIG/Cairo) Audit Report No. 6 -294-13-012- P dated May 27, 2013 
recommended that the Mission direct DAI to “implement a gender strategy for the Compete Project and, based on the results, include relevant gender -sensitive indicators in its performance monitoring and 
evaluation plan.”  In accordance with the audit recomm endation and the Mission’s direction, DAI d eveloped 
a comprehensive Gend er Strategy for the Project that outlined guiding principles, strategies and 
recommendations to progress the project’s gender performance for the remaining implementation period.  
 The strategy outlined four pillars and affirmed Compete’s commitment to gender mainstreaming and 
enhancing opportunities for women’s participation in the project’s activities. The four pillars are as follows:  
• Pillar #1: Promote the success of women in busines s in the Palestinian Territories, especially those 
operating within Compete Project sectors.  
• Pillar #2: Identify new entry points for women within the Project’s four value chains.  
• Pillar #3: Encourage private sector support for the economic participation of women through 
financial and technical cost share models and incentives.  
• Pillar #4: Expand efforts to increase the full participation of women in training and capacity building 
programs.  
 For each of these pillars, the strategy identified specific actions to be undertaken in each of the targeted sectors to enhance opportunities for women in line with the strategic principles described above.  Most of 
these actions were based on bu ilding on or continuing support to specific grants that were already in 
implementation at the time when the strategy was developed. The list of 22 specific measures included :  
• Applying a gender lens to activity identification, selection, design and deliver y.  
• Enhancing inclusion opportunities through addressing cultural barriers related to mobility and 
participation in project activities.  
• Strengthening gender elements in the granting process, including incentivizing firms to integrate 
gender considerations  in their grant applications.  
• Working with stakeholders and counterparts in the four targeted sectors/value chains to enhance participation opportunities for women, and to showcase successes.  
• Integrating gender in the project’s communications strategy, public awareness, and outreach, including showcasing women in business.  
• Mainstreaming gender in project monitoring and reporting (data gathering)  
 
Within the evaluation process , weighting is given to those a ctivities that indicate women’s inclusion . Over 
the course of the project, 24.2% of all project  generated jobs in West Bank have been taken by women. 
However, this drops to just 2.4% in Gaza, highlighting the challenge of generating employment options for 
women in Gaza , especially in the current economic context of 40% unemployment. 
36 
  
                                                
36 Data source: Compete managed internal database   
38 
 Fig 11: Number of new  female  jobs created by sector (Y1 -Y6) in W est Bank and Gaza37 
 
 
One approach  to women’s inclusion was to enhance inclusion through addressing cultural barriers related to 
mobility and participation in project activities. Work in the ICT sector exhibits strengths in  this respect, 
supporting opportunities for young women to take up jobs within the sector without needi ng to relocate to 
Ramallah. In one case, the project supported H&W MENA to establish a sub -office in Hebron, allowing the 
pool of very strong female ICT graduates in that area to take up jobs without the need to relocate.  Similar 
results have been achieved  by ICT companies establishing in other cities outside Ramallah. 
 Another approach described in the gender strategy is to showcase ‘gender successes’. While there is 
evidence of s ome women focused communications  across Compete’s reporting and website , these are not 
apparent on review of the project website.  
 As appropriate, the project identifies some activities as ‘women -led’, described in the table below.  
 Table  7:  Compete activities designated as ‘women -led’
38 
 
Sector  # of 
women 
led 
activities  # of 
women 
led 
activities 
(WB)  # of 
women led 
activities 
(G) USAID 
Investmen
t ($) Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Y7 Notes  
ICT 12 9 3               
153,209  0 2 1 0 0 7 2 10 start- ups, 1 
organization and 1 
service provider  
Tourism  8 8 0 1,503,523  0 3     4 1   4 tour operators, 2 hotels, 1 organization 
and 1 site renovation  
Agri- 
culture  47 36 11               
568,549  0 0 2 2 17 19 7 26 grapes, 4 hanging 
strawberry, 1 carrots, 
1 dried herbs, 1 herbs, 1 mushroom, 2 
potatoes, 1 olive oil, 
2 strawberry , 8 
vegetables  
Total  67 53 14 2,225,281  - 5 3 2 21 27 9  
 
                                                
37 Data source: Compete managed internal database  
Within the award document, emphasis was placed on the importance of youth employment as a project outcome, given high  levels of unemployment 
amongst youth.  
38 Data source: Compete managed internal database  0200400600800100012001400
Ag
ICT
Tourism
S&M
Fishing
Garment
Total
Ag
ICT
Tourism
S&M
Fishing
Garment
Total
Ag
ICT
Tourism
S&M
Fishing
Garment
Total
WBG WB Gaza
Year1 Year2 Year3 Year4 Year5 Year6 
39 
 The four s ampled firms that were designated as ‘women led’ coming from the ICT and Tourism sectors 
were indeed women led activities. However, of the four women led’ agriculture beneficiaries, the ET was not 
able to meet with the woman, and upon investigation, it appeared that the woman was either the owner of 
the land or used primarily to enhance the chances of the application of what was essentially a male run 
business.   
 
Youth  
 The project has also been effective in generating youth jobs with almost half of all jobs generated through 
Compete being taken by youth  (as described above) . 
 
Within the ICT sector, Compete support to firms commonly came in the form of youth focused staffing 
support through internship programs that were mobilized for engagement of specific market opportunities. 
The three interviewed firms that participated  spoke positively of this approach, highlighting that significant 
proportions of those interns remain in employment to this day.  
4.2  Evaluation Question 2: Where key achievements are identified in targeted 
sectors, to what extent are these achievements sustainable?   
Across all sectors, the potential of sustainability of project investment is intimately linked to the degree that market traction has been achieved by participating firms within that sector. This can either be pre -existing 
whereby Compete leverages off a c ompany identified opportunity in support of consolidation and expansion, 
or where Compete can support achievement of market traction through targeted initiatives.  Within the 
agriculture sector, the degree to which the required linkages within a value chai n are in place and functioning 
is also an important aspect of sustainability.  
 
4.2.1 Common characteristics of successful activities  
Agriculture  
Within the agriculture sector, market traction (awareness amongst buyers of production capacity, established r elationships with buyers, and in some cases forward contracts) is observed within sub -sectors 
where robust value chains have been established that are responsive to buyers’ requirements, such as baby 
cucumbers, potatoes and fresh herbs. Within these value chains, participants report that Compete has been 
deft in targeting bottlenecks and opportunities to strengthen the value chain in ways that address buyer 
concerns and can be sustained moving forward. Across six interviews with participants from the baby cucumber value chain, the ET clear market demand was identified, a business case for investment in 
production was developed, and actions taken to support the piloting and then scaling -up of production, all 
the while providing support to ensuring product qua ntity and quality through strategic, inter -linked 
interventions affecting production, post -harvest and marketing. This value chain strengthening contributed to 
improved prices being achieved, which in turn has helped build positive momentum within the sect or that 
has encouraged farmers to invest, resulting in the increases in quality and quantity sought by the buyer.  
 Strengthening linkages between producers and aggregators able to provide post -harvest support and secure 
markets is an effective project strategy. This can be seen within the more straightforward value chain of potatoes, where the project has been strategic in its interventions. Through the simple action of irrigation refurbishment for producers in Gaza, production quantity and quality has incr eased, assisting aggregators to 
secure markets in West Bank, Israel and Jordan. Support to cold storage capacity has further aided the sub -
sector by allowing flexibility in timing of market engagement allowing price optimization. Collectively, Compete approaches have been mutually reinforcing of the symbiotic relationship between producers and aggregators.  
  Support to access appropriate technology is also effective. Within the herb production sector, support to 
mechanization in the form of a high tech seeding machinery has reduced costs and risk of human error in the 
very delicate seeding process. This was reported by the CEO of Daraghmeh Company for Agricultural  
40 
 Production and Medical Herb  as having reduced costs related to seedling production by 40%, helping 
position an already successful business to further consolidate its position in the market. The advantage this 
has brought to this business supports global competitiveness and strengthened market engagement within 
this dynamic sector.  
 
Support that reduces reliance on importation of inputs is reported by beneficiaries as another important 
sustainability measure, since it contributes to enhanced confidence levels within production systems. Within agriculture, those firms supported by Compete to produce inputs previously needing to be purchased externally (seeds, seedlings, fish fingerlings) believe they are able to produce at a lower cost per unit than 
imported inputs, and see this as paving the road to a sustainable future for their enterprise and sector.  
 
At a more advanced level, Compete support to PPU to partner with NI in local production of specific 
machinery needs identified within the different value chains presents the opportunity of easier and more 
affordable access to sub -sector appropriate techn ology. (However, it is still unclear whether such production 
systems will be able to compete with imported alternatives in terms of both quality and price.)  
 Within both the strawberry and grape value chains, there is less surety around market traction and  concerns 
expressed by market actors regarding potential price pressure based on over -supply. In West Bank, all of the 
strawberry growers interviewed expressed anxiety at the risk of Gazan produce saturating the market, and 
the potential impact that might have on their own businesses. Compete support to the grape sector is 
focused heavily on improving production, and while there are plans to support processing of grapes into molasses, jams and other grape based products, it is unclear whether these approaches can absorb the 
growth in production being spurred by the project and hold up prices that producers already report are 
under pressure from production increases.  
 
A key obstacle to sustainability within the Palestinian agricultural sector is water access and quality. In the 
West Bank, water quality is high but access is often severely constrained  due to occupation related 
restrictions. In Gaza, water access is less constrained, but acute concerns were raised over  its quality and 
availability moving into th e future , paralleling international concerns on this issue . Over abstraction of ground 
water – both in Israel and Gaza - alongside devastated water and sewage infrastructure is contributing to 
multi- faceted environmental collapse in Gaza. With no perennial  streams and low rainfall, Gaza is almost 
totally dependent upon the coastal aquifer running from the West Bank and Israel for ground water. Current 
Israeli abstraction of water from the Coastal aquifer before it reaches Gaza is thought to be triple its 
recharge rate.
39 This is contributing to a water supply that is heavily polluted and increasingly saline – 
currently well beyond WHO safe drinking standards.40 The UN has estimated that the aquifer will be 
unusable and irreversibly damaged by 2020.41  
 A similar structural/political constraint relates to affordable and reliable access to electricity. This is 
particularly the case in Gaza where extended blackout periods are common, forcing reliance on expensive generators and fuel. These costs affect compet itiveness and undermine sustainability. In the case of fish 
fingerling production, it is reported by the Sohail Fish fingerling Company that just a 15 minute loss of power would be catastrophic to the production system, resulting in the death of all fingerlings under production.  
 ICT 
Within ICT, Compete has strengthened the market position and potential for sustainability of some firms 
through the provision of staffing support directed at specific growth opportunities. More generally, 
interviewed firms feel that a strength of the Palestinian ICT sector is that it is increasingly recognized for the 
quality of its graduates and its potential to provide back office services to global companies – as is already 
the case with the key role that Infinite Tiers performs for the US based Home Shopping Network, where it provides the full back office for the network.. For this model to achieve traction, firms feel that the positive 
                                                
39 World Bank. 2012. Stagnation or Revival? Palestinian Economic Prospects: Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, 2012 
40 World Health Organization, “Health conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory, including east Jerusalem, and in the occ upied Syrian Golan,” 
(Report by the Secretariat, May 11, 2012), http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Full_Report_3973.pdf , 2 
41 UN Country Team; Gaza in 2020 – A Liveable Place?; p.13   
41 
 loop of very capable ICT graduates finding ‘good employment’ needs to be engaged and suppo rted. Sector 
actors speak of the need of enhancing the reputation of the Palestinian ICT sector alongside ensuring jobs 
for graduates is seen as key to the ongoing viability of the sector.  
 
At midpoint, the project repositioned its work in the ICT sector to one more focused on technology 
support to its target sectors. While this makes sense in theory, the ET found it difficult to identify examples 
whereby this new ICT approach had supported the tech needs of other sectors, with the exception of support to P PU/NI to domestic development of key technologies required within each sector.  
 
Within ICT, Compete has strengthened the market position and potential for sustainability of some firms 
through the provision of staffing support directed at specific growth opportunities. More generally, interviewed firms feel that a strength of the Palestinian ICT sector is recognized for the quality of its 
graduates and its potential to provide back office services to global companies – as is already the case with 
the key role that Infinite Tiers performs for the US based Home Shopping Network, where it provides the 
full back office for the network. For this model to achieve traction, the positive loop of very capable ICT 
graduates finding ‘good employment’ with needs to be engaged. Sector actors speak of the need of enhancing 
the reputation of the Palestinian ICT sector alongside ensuring jobs for graduates is seen as key to the ongoing viability of the sector.  
 
At midpoint, the project repositioned its work in the ICT sector to one more focused on technology 
support to its target sectors. While this makes sense in theory, it is hard to determine the degree to which 
this approach has supported tech needs of other sectors, with the exception of support to PPU/NI to 
domestic deve lopment of key technologies required within each sector.  
 
Stone & Marble  
The reality of SMEs in the West Bank and Gaza is that their sustainability is affected to a significant extent by 
the degree to which Israel is willing to facilitate or disrupt their sub -sector. Within the stone and marble 
sector, the ongoing viability of the sector was being brought into question by the environmental impact of the slurry waste by product. Compete has worked to turn this around by working to identify value adding 
oppor tunities for the slurry by -product of the stone and marble sector, since such approaches will enjoy the 
advantage of being actively encouraged within both West Bank and Israel to help address the environmental 
impact of slurry entering the watershed.  
 The potential of this sub -sector is also aided by the fact that construction materials being produced from the 
slurry which the ET observed as being innovative, conceptually contemporary and well suited to current 
demands of the construction sector.  
 
 
Even t hough some innovative product s are now being develop ed, sales do not yet allow these to be brought 
to the scale needed to address the problem.   Sustainability in this sector will be facilitated by support to 
both better promote the product in internationa l markets, while also encouraging other firms into the space 
to allow the sector to achieve critical mass and market traction in this new product space. There is also an important need for advocacy focused on revision of building codes to ensure these prod ucts are certified as 
an acceptable construction material within any market that is to be targeted, if growth is to occur.  
 Tourism 
Sustainability is viewed by project beneficiaries within the tourism sector through the lens of increasing the 
number of nig hts spent by visitors in West Bank hotels, and also through facilitation of ‘non- pilgrimage’ 
related tourism opportunities. The challenge of increasing overnight stays relates in large part to the quality 
of hotel stock available. Unfortunately, project efforts aimed at addressing this challenge through a 
strengthened hotel accreditation system were not successful, with the system not being enforced and their 
being no penalties in place for hotels that did not work to the agreed system.. Hoteliers report th at this has 
reduced their incentive to achieve higher standards given they were not seeing any return in prices achieved (due to the flawed system of accreditation).   
42 
  
‘Non-pilgrimage’ related travel was supported by the project through support to different actors such as 
Visit Palestine, HLITOA and boutique tour companies such as Peace by Piece Tourism. However, the unresolved hotel accreditation situation is felt right across the sector to generally retard growth in individual travel.  
 One difficult to me asure contribution to sector sustainability is site renovation. This support has certainly 
strengthened the sector asset base and will be available to the sector for the foreseeable future, given that the renovated sites are now completed and available to the public.  
 Support to tourism within Gaza is arguably the greatest challenge taken on by the project. When questioned on sustainability, the Gaza Hotels Association responded, ‘guarantee us two busloads weekly of tourists 
from West Bank and we will have no need to ask you for any further assistance ever again!’  
 Fisheries  
Onshore fisheries represent a very rare area of economic growth in Gaza, with interviews both with participating forms and FAO clear that production is not yet be even close to meeting demand of the  West 
Bank. 
42 Sector sustainability is aided by the emerging capacity within Gaza to produce fingerlings at a price 
of one NIS per unit, compared to 1.8 NIS for imported varieties (which have an average death rate of 15% 
during transportation. This reduces  business risk on multiple fronts given uncertain access and high death 
rates of imported fingerlings, and also that fingerlings can be produced in Gaza at lower cost per unit than 
imports.  
 Garments  
While growth in the Gazan garment sector shows potential, manufacturers report that growth is still 
restricted by uncertain access to the necessary fabrics and materials which currently need to be provided to 
the producer by the contracted buyer. This undermines both growth potential and profitability.  Those garments reliant on Gaza sales are particularly precarious, given they are accumulating receivables to what 
seems an unsustainable level, with one company reporting collecting less than 10% of its monthly sales and 
having nearly a million dollars owing in receivables.  
 
Gaza  
As with each of the sectors above, beneficiaries spoke of the political context and constraints on movement of people and goods posing a huge threat to sustainability, given the potential of sudden and unexpected disruption to the value chain. Support from USAID to engage diplomatic channels with a view to reducing 
this risk, and assuring greater levels of confidence for traders is sought generally, though particularly by 
traders in Gaza.  
 
It is also important to note that all sectors in Gaza commented on the impact of the extreme weakness of 
the local economy on their business, compounded by challenges posed by electricity prices and water quality. In relation to the former, support to install solar power was a need expressed across all s ectors in 
Gaza.  
While growth in the garment sector shows potential, it is still restricted by uncertain access to the necessary fabrics and materials which currently need to be provided to the producer by the contracted buyer. This undermines both growth p otential and profitability.  Those garments reliant on Gaza sales are particularly 
precarious, given they are accumulating receivables to what seems an unsustainable level, with one company 
reporting collecting less than 10% of its monthly sales and having nearly a million dollars owing in receivables.  
As with each of the sectors above, the political context and constraints on movement of people and goods 
poses a huge threat to sustainability, given the potential of sudden and unexpected disruption to a va lue 
                                                
42   
43 
 chain. Support from USAID to engage diplomatic channels with a view to reducing this risk, and assuring 
greater levels of confidence for traders is sought generally, though particularly by traders in Gaza.  
 It is also important to note that all sectors  in Gaza commented on the impact of the extreme weakness of 
the local economy on their business, compounded by challenges posed by electricity prices and water 
quality. In relation to the former, support to install solar power was a need expressed across a ll sectors in 
Gaza.  
 
4.2.2 Characteristics are sustainable without ongoing project support  
Clear market understanding and/or market traction appears key to sustainable interventions. While 
Compete has the ability to provide very strategic support to firms,  it is inevitable that they will thrive or 
wither based on their capacity to engage markets.  
 Considered and strategic support across a value chain is another contributor to sustainability, especially 
where different value chain actors have become more appreciative of the overall sector and the different roles played within the sector by different actors.  
 In cases where beneficiaries have been effective in engaging export markets, they feel confident that they can proceed without further support from Compete – within that particular product stream. This points to 
Compete’s effectiveness in identifying and resolving bottlenecks, since once resolved, firms are generally able 
to continue to independently with their marketing and business development. 
 One anxiety that remains across all sectors is a lack of confidence in being able to reliably move produce and 
people also appears to facilitate sustainability, since it allows for more robust relationships to be developed 
with buyers. Conversely, uncertainty and a lack of reliability in terms of moving produce to market hinders sustainability due to the nervousness that it instills in buyers, as well as suppressing prices that buyers are 
willing to pay. Currently, movement across borders is generally negot iated at firm level and reliant on 
personal relationships established with Israeli actors able to help facilitate that movement. When Compete 
commenced, the ICI project was under implementation with a mandate to address ‘enabling issues’ for Palestinian bu sinesses. At the time of the award, Compete was instructed to not duplicate this effort and was 
structured accordingly. However, ICI closed in 2013.
  
 
4.3  Evaluation Question 3: Lessons Learned; how can successful interventions be 
replicated by future USAID programs?   
 
4.3.1 Most successful interventions  
There are a range of key factors common to Compete success stories, and which offer insight as to how the 
best aspects of Compete can be replicated. Strong sector understanding appears to be critical in  terms of 
the project being able to identify highly strategic entry and intervention points that build confidence and resilience within a sector. This analysis contributes to  sophisticated understanding of market potenti al and 
opportunities, which also is key to guiding project decision -making.  This foundational work is important 
since Compete demonstrates that when clear and accessible market opportunity exists, the private sector appears to be generally capable of managing itself forward in that market . 
  Examples from Compete that are consistent with the above approach:  
• Netting to support quality and production improvements alongside reliable sorting capacity, in a context where a known demand exists (baby cucumber).  
• Making cold storage available to sect ors known to suffer from a production glut, allowing for 
improved engagement of the market at times when the glut has passed (multiple agricultural sub -
sectors).   
44 
 • Support to mechanization that can reduce production costs and risk of human error (fertigation 
systems and seeding machines).  
• Supporting aggregation opportunities for small farmers through support to cooperatives or relationships with post -harvest companies (support that directly benefits small farmers also ensures 
a social return).  
• Support realistic niche opportunities for export engagement through:  
o youth focused staffing support that targets specific contract opportunities (ICT),  
o partnering innovative and market savvy ideas towards market traction (stone and marble),  
o promotion of unique brands (support Protected Geographic Identification Designation for 
Gaza strawberries),  
o support initiatives that reduce reliance on importation of inputs, enhancing investor 
confidence in related sub -sectors,  
o support participation in targeted promotional activities , such as trade shows,  
o support appointment of Export Managers to closely engage potential markets where there is evidence of significant market opportunity,  
• Strategy for addressing macro issues related to mobility and freedom of movement of producers and 
produce, both between West Bank and Gaza, and beyond. This is particularly the case in Gaza where producers who have capacity to move goods beyond Gaza are one o f the very few glimmers 
of hope in the current context of the Gazan economy .
 
• Purposeful certific ation with the objective of opening door to likely market opportunities.  
• Support to procurement, notably in Gaza, where USAID procurement and delivery can reduce costs to firms by a significant margin.
 
 4.3.2 Capacity o r local mechanisms to facilitate replicat ion  
The support structure available to private sector development in West Bank and Gaza is widely regarded across the project landscape as weak for many and complex reasons, mostly related to the compromised context  of the private sector to freely operate within West Bank and Gaza, and also the limited capacity of 
government to play a role given its own resource constraints.   Over the course of implementation, Compete has pulled back from supporting sector entities that might be 
capable of carrying lessons learned and best practice forward, in favour of working more directly at firm and sub-sector levels. This has assisted many firms to better understand their potential vis a vis the market. 
However, it remains to be  seen whether or not firms will be able to replicate project supported approaches 
without the grants that have often been key to overcoming bottlenecks.  
 On the other hand, key agencies on the Palestinian export landscape, such as Paltrade, have the manda te and 
capacity to carry trade promotion independent of project based assistance. However, Paltrade report that Compete engagement receded over the course of implementation  
4.4  Evaluation Question 4: Were there any unintended project outcomes (positive 
or negative)?   
 The following were identified during the course of the evaluation as unintended outcomes of the project:  
• (Positive) Support to agricultural diversification and entry to export markets is helping prop up prices of other commonly produced commodities such as tomatoes . 
• (Negative) Project s upport to address hotel classification weaknesses failed, with a perception a cross 
the sector  that such is the disillusionment with the accreditation process and outcome, that it will be 
difficult to re -engage many stakeholders.  
• (Negative) Concerns have been raised that project support to the root vegetable sector i s distort ing 
the market , resulting in a tight cartel of larger producers who are marginalizing smaller producers, 
including monopolization of wat er resources.  
45 
 • (Negative) The positive of US support through the Kerry Initiative to open up a 20,000 dunum 
parcel of Area C for potato production, might have negatively affected existing producers up stream 
who have seen their water access reduced.  
• Shift to FLAP contributed to perception that Compete was less interested in understanding a sector, 
and more focused on numbers and transactions.  
4.5  Evaluation Question 5: How did the project’s implementation approach and 
management, (including selection criteria and processes), influence the achievement of 
results?  
 
Compete’s approach and management across its different sectors is understandably diverse and varied, as 
the project works to find the best fit for the unique challenges and opportunities inher ent to different levels 
within each sub -sector. However, even within sub -sectors there is variance in management approach and 
depth of engagement of partner entities. Observation of the ET is that this relates to a range of factors, including: 
• the energy and dynamism that the partner brings to the relationship at start -up, including the 
information they choose to provide and the clarity of their vision for support;  
• the baseline status of the sub- sector and its firm, with some sub -sectors already well advanced in 
their thinking and others very much starting from square one;  
• the capacity of Compete staff to find time and opportunities to sufficiently understand the context of 
an applicant;  
• the capacity of aggregators, cooperatives, business associations etc. to represent and articulate 
sector context and needs;  
• the timing of the intervention given the mid -point shift in project approach from one that was more 
focused on ‘medium’ enterprises to one more open to inclusion of ‘smaller’ firms, particularly farmers.  
 
Given this diversity, it is not surprising that feedback on Compete management is mixed and often 
contradictory. While many interviewed spoke of smooth processes and responsiveness, others (even within the same sub -sector) spoke of delays and a lack of communication. Generally speaking, more positive 
feedback came from those in the agriculture sector who appreciated project willingness to address bottlenecks, co -finance procurement of assets and valued the availability of Compete staff to support th em 
as required in value chain strengthening.  
 More negative feedback was apparent within the ICT and Tourism sectors, with the most common complaint being a lack of clarity around the project strategy and poor communication related to the project’s shift in direction in these sectors. Within ICT, there was frustration at a perceived lack of dialogue 
related to Compete’s strategic shift given a widespread belief that the existing approach was achieving 
traction and would deliver good results if that same di rection had been sustained.  
 
As mentioned above, during the first three years of operation, Compete utilized the Competitiveness 
Impacts of Business Environment Reforms (CIBER) methodology for some sector analysis. While these were of a high quality,  they were only applied to a small number of sectors, and were not continued with as a 
market analysis methodology. Beyond CIBER, market assessments were rarely documented with any thoroughness beyond the inclusion of some headline information provided as part o f the grant evaluation 
process.  
 
Throughout implementation, the project operated on a first in, first served basis following release of funding 
opportunities – which the project CoP justifies based on the need for a transparent, indisputable process of 
beneficiary selection that could not be challenged. The scale of these ‘grant opportunities’ was based in 
preliminary assessment by Compete of the demand expected from the market for specific opportunities. Understandably, competitiveness for grants was greatest in agricultural sub -sectors given the number of 
Palestinians active in agriculture – either as their primary or secondary source of income. While this first in  
46 
 first served approach is reported by the project as efficient and transparent, the ET heard  some complaints 
that opportunities were monopolized by those closer to the contact points that Compete had engaged in 
their preliminary assessment. Being computer based, the application system proved challenging for the 
cohort of farmers less familiar wit h information technology. In some cases, the person within a community 
who was most computer literate was asked to submit applications on others’ behalf, which slowed down 
their application and led to some missing out, which in turn caused tension within t hat community.   
 
While the project worked to the principle of minimum 50% cost sharing, some flexibility was applied when dealing with small scale farming households who were able to claim in -kind contributions as their cost 
sharing contribution, such as previously purchased assets relevant to that value chain, thus assisting poorer farmers to participate in the project. In Gaza, the co -contribution expectation was appropriately lower at 
30%, in recognition of the current economic malaise being experienced  in Gaza.  
 Documentation related to selection processes standardly included an application that is researched by Compete and then put before an evaluation panel for assessment. Vetting is another aspect of the process. 
Based on document review, it is the a ssessment of the ET that introduction of the FLAP brought far greater 
rigour to administration processes and the paper trail  available to support decision making and compliance. 
This was an important adjustment, since based on firm folders provided to the ET, documentation 
supporting decision- making within the earlier phase of the project was limited and not particularly 
informative in terms of clearly justifying the why and what of the investment. This is especially notable since this was when many of the project’s larger grants were made.  
 
Project procurement is another aspect of the project that received mixed feedback from project 
beneficiaries. Positive feedback included appreciation for Compete support in accessing the agreed purchases, including support to clear and deliver such purchases through Israeli customs and other 
procedures. In several instances, especially in relation to getting materials into Gaza, the cost to the firm was 
significantly reduced by Compete support to procurement. Less positi ve procurement feedback related to 
inflexibility in terms of firms not being able to receive the specific specifications they sought, even when at times these would have been cheaper than what Compete delivered.  
 Compete commencement in Gaza in Year Five w as based on a rapid assessment
43 undertaken in mid 2015 
that identified potential sectors for project engagement. Agriculture (vegetables, strawberries, carnations and 
fresh herbs), ICT, fisheries, garments, tourism and furniture were agreed as target secto rs, with furniture 
soon needing to be dropped due to tightened dual use restrictions rendering the sector too difficult to 
engage effectively. The project is managed by a small Gaza based team which is further supported by the 
Ramallah based technical leads. Given that project commencement in Gaza occurred just a year after the 
devastating 2014 conflict in Gaza, the project has proven highly effective in identifying actors within its various value chains that were export ready, as defined by their capacity to move produce to market from 
Gaza. Through these partnerships, Compete has demonstrated the capacity to do good business in Gaza 
when companies have confidence and relationships that allow their product to exit Gaza as required.  
 Interestingly, there is  a widely held perspective that Compete was more analytical and sector focused in the 
earlier stages of the project. This perspective was particularly true amongst stakeholders whose area of interest reduced in priority during the later stages of the proje ct. Both incubators and larger companies 
within ICT, business associations and the tourism sector in general felt that a ‘bigger picture’ perspective was 
apparent pre -FLAP, and that the FLAP focus on firm level denied opportunities for ‘sector enablers’.  
 
Being the largest project of its kind in the Palestinian Territories, there is strong interest from the broader 
development community in its implementation and approach, including a desire to cooperate and 
complement as possible. As mentioned, this perspe ctive was stated by each and every government 
department, donor or NGO engaged by the ET.  
 
Being a US funded project, the broader sector also looks to Compete (in partnership with USAID) for 
                                                
43 Compete - Gaza Summary Visit Report; August 4 2015   
47 
 leadership in terms of addressing some of the politically inspired constraints that thwart competitiveness 
within the Palestinian economy. Given these two perspectives, there is a widely held desire that the project 
be more active in coordination mechanisms and information sharing than it seems to be. This perspe ctive 
was held by government, other donors and NGOs.  
5. Conclusions  
 Since commencing in 2012, the Compete project has made a very important contribution to the Palestinian economy, being an important catalyst for private sector engagement of export marke ts across key sectors. 
As the largest project of its kind, the project has significant profile right across the Palestinian economy, and 
is valued by the private sector for its capacity to respond to sector development needs, cost share, pilot and 
scale-up innovation, advise and help facilitate linkages with export markets and buyers.  
 
 
5.1 Effectiveness - To what extent have project activities been effective in achieving intended 
objectives and key results (as per the project results framework)  
 Determining the overall effectiveness of the project strategy is complex given Compete’s breadth and depth, as well as considerable evol utions of the project approach over the course of implementation, and most 
notably at its mid -point when a new CoP was a ppointed and a new firm level assistance approach 
introduced. W hile flexibility and adaptability were both critically important given the overall context, a clear 
description within a ToC of fundamental principles and core approaches would have helped addr ess the 
project’s  areas of weakness. 
 Across its key result areas of increased revenues, levels of investment, value adding and employment, the ET observed considerable success eman ating from Compete investme nts. 
 For many companies, the positive impact of  Compete support continues to be enjoyed as momentum from 
getting a toe hold in export markets continues to be progressed.   
Two common themes appear to cut across those interventions where Compete is seen to be most effective. 
Firstly, supported companies  that had a clear and nuanced pre- existing understanding of their particular 
export market landscape were better equipped to seek finely tuned and targeted assistance from Compete, 
and have mostly been able to achieve export traction. Secondly, for those sectors where export clarity was 
less apparent, Compete has been able to support export market traction through the provision of strategic support at multiple points  of the market system – as can be seen in the baby cucumber value chain, where 
Compete provided clever, targeted support to each of production, aggregation, marketing and even technology. Not insignificantly, this market system intervention has fostered a sense of shared benefit across the sector and recognition of the contribution needed from each market actor for success to follow.  
 This points to a key conclusion of the evaluation that strategic investments that address sub -sector 
production and marketing bottlenecks have the capacity of energizing a sector, especially when that investment is valued by multiple actors within the value chain.   In such circumstances, 
the identification of synergies and mutual benefit amongst different value chain actors can contribute to the 
‘whole’ being greater than the sum of the various parts of the project’s investment parts, through quality improvements and value adding.  
 
It is also noted that level of investment does not equate to effectiveness, with more lightly fun ded sub -
sectors such as baby- cucumber and potatoes demonstrating far greater impact and likelihood of sustainable 
market traction than other sub -sectors that received higher levels of funding. T he project is to be 
commended for its ability to  calibrate its  approach to the different needs that come with different 
investment levels , with little variance in terms of levels of satisfaction with Compete performance according 
to level of grant .  
  
48 
 The common theme to firms that appear to have not benefited so greatly from Compete support is that 
assistance occurred in a context where clarity around market need and approach to achieving market 
traction was less apparent. Common to such circumstances is the project not being active at multiple points 
on the value chain, or there being limited shared understanding across the value chain of how different project interventions relate to each other. 
 
The diagnosis Compete undertook to guide its sub- sector and value chain development support did not 
clearly: (i) identify s ystem -level constraints (root causes) related to promotion of an enabling environment 
and strengthened business support services, (ii) identify incentives and capacities of market players 
associated with these constraints, (iii) generate intelligence and insights that could be used to influence 
market actors during intervention, and (iv) generate information that could be used to strengthen indicators and  performance measurement. Limitations in the analysis underpinning Compete’s interventions in several 
of the assessed value chains and the lack of clearly articulated vision statements and theories of change for 
sub-sector/value chain development also appears to have affected strategic decision -making processes 
relating to when to exit a sector or scale -down activities.  
 
Despite Compete’s commitment to advancing competitiveness through a Market Systems  approach, 
Compete fell short of truly transforming the project to a market systems approach. This relates in large part to the project not systematically dem onstrating (and documenting) clear analysis and understanding of how 
market systems within its targeted sub -sectors work - or how systems fail to serve the least advantaged 
producers and market actors, which is the primary target group of programs followin g market systems 
approaches - prior to intervening in them.  
 Introduction of the FLAP brought more transparency to the technical assistance and beneficiary firms selection process, and led the approach to be more heavily focused on advancing competitiveness at the 
firm-level (rather than, more holistically, at the sub -sector and value chain levels as suggested by a Market 
Systems approach) than before  FLAP also provided the space for Compete to address key market failures at 
the firm level and  introduce pilot interventions, which in certain value -chains enabled the project to identify 
scalability opportunities that led to wide -scale, inclusive sub -sector development.   
 
The shift to the FLAP is also a significant aspect in the steep rise in beneficiary numbers, especially within agriculture, seen in the later years of the project, since it opens the door to large numbers of smaller grants.  
 
The FLAP approach can marry well with component B given it has better capacity to support smaller value chain actors, linking them to aggregators who in turn link to markets.  
 5.1.1  Levels of investment and revenues   
The opportunity of  Compete co-contribution incentivized compan ies to invest in growing their business and 
tapping emerging market opportunities, since it reduced the risk associated with piloting innovation or chasing new markets.  In several cases these project investments also acted as incentives to firms to integrate small- scale producers into export and high- value market channels . 
 
Compete’s provision of t argeted support to address strategic sector bottlenecks, particularly those that 
come at high cost, appears to have been catalytic in launching some firms and sub -sectors towards new 
markets.  
 
Despite Compete facilitating firms to invest, p olitical and market access concerns still act as a major inhibitor 
to investment . It therefore seems safe to assume that any support that can be provided by Compete or 
USAID to resolve constraints to movement of people and goods from Gaza would  be a positive investment 
in the Gazan economy.  
 5.1.2 New markets  accessed/quality and reliability of relationships with external buyers    
49 
 The project has been influential in supporting the number of new market engagement by partners, and has 
often facili tated improvements in the relationship through supporting quality assurance and taking on an 
intermediary role when necessary between producers and client.  
Within agriculture, the project has had some success supporting aggregation of small producer product as a way of helping aggregators chase larger contracts, which in turn connects them with larger and more 
professional and reliable value chain actors. Investment in promoting quality and quality assurance has often 
strengthened the relationship between producer and aggregator, as well as the ability of a sector to give 
confidence to buyers.  
 
5.1.3 Support to Business Associations and Support Organizations  
Within those sectors and sub -sectors where it is clear that Compe te has a deep and intimate understanding 
of the dynamics that drive the value chain and multiple touch points within it, some agriculture sector 
cooperatives, post -harvest entities and aggregators have all been supported to good effect within different 
value chains.  In the most successful examples, Compete support has helped foster recognition of mutual 
reliance and benefit across the market system.  
 
Agriculture is the one sector where strong support has been maintained to component B type initiatives, where it is clear the project has played a key role in terms of skills transfer and capacity building 
(cooperatives) and aggregation and market engagement (post harvest actors). As described already, this 
breadth of touch points within a sub -sector appears to  be a key indicator of success and satisfaction with 
Compete performance.  
 Compete is best positioned to engage market systems that are tangible and where the required 
interventions and results can be clearly defined and affected.  
 
An aspect of the projec t approach that has had both positive and negative consequences has been the shift 
away from component B type support over the course of the project. While this has sharpened project 
focus at firm level, and strengthened capacity for firm self -sufficiency, the broader enabling environment for 
the project continues to be of acute importance.   
 
While there are advantages in terms of efficiency to the more direct relationship now enjoyed between 
Compete and firms under the FLAP, there are various critical rol es to be played by business associations. 
Sector level promotion, leadership and coordination are in many respects even more important than other contexts given the need for exporters to address anxieties of would be buyers related to the additional comple xities of doing business in the Palestinian Territories.  
 However, Compete also offers a unique opportunity through which business associations and support organizations can be supported and strengthened in their work, contributing to down stream sustainability 
and capacity for targeted sectors.  
 
5.1.4 Domestic market share  
Despite the project focus on export markets, one of its achievements has been to give producers the option of engaging the best market, which in some cases is the domestic mark et.  
 Growth in capacity to produce key inputs within the West Bank and Gaza is a vital aspect of domestic market share.  
 5.1.5 Quality and value adding   
Assessing t he project approach to quality enhancement and value adding is complex, since it is often not an 
explicit approach, but more one that is a by -product of firms engaging export markets where enhanced 
quality is demanded, resulting in improved prices being received.  
  
50 
 In some se ctors, the approach to value adding has been explicit, notably stone and marble where the two 
main strands to the approach are both aimed at supporting the sector towards greater value adding. While 
this has been effective in developing the higher value ‘product’, in both cases market traction for these new 
markets is currently limited and in need of targeted support.  
 
5.1.6 Project generated employment   
The project has been effective in creating jobs, especially in agriculture, with the majority of those assumed to be seasonal workers.  
 
However, it is difficult to analyze the project’s jobs statistics with any rigour given limited capacity to analyze 
employment data through lens such as full or part time; skilled or unskilled; and remuneration rate. This data 
gap is frustrating since it denies the project an important learning opportunity in relation to its impact on 
employment, and women and youth employment in particular.  
 5.1.7 Approach to skills transfer and workforce development  
Compete’s approach to skills transfer recognizes  that it is companies themselves that are best placed to 
identify and direct required capacity development. While this has merit, it also carries some risk since it 
assumes that companies sufficiently know th eir business  and understand their needs , and that they have a 
clear understanding of best practice and current trends within a sector.  
 5.1.8 Relationships  with other agencies/mechanisms of relevance  
A key conclusion of the evaluation is that Compete has not been a particularly active member of its 
community.  
More active participation in coordination mechanisms is not only good ‘citizenship’, it also opens the door to complementary relationships. Such relationships offer particular potential for a project  such as Compete 
which is heavy on ‘hardware’ capacity (provision of materials) but limited in terms of ‘software’ (the capacity to provide people on the ground to support skills development, inclusion or troubleshoot) – which is the 
opposite situation for  many partners, especially NGOs who often can contribute staff and technical support, 
but cannot address material deficiencies.  
 5.1.9 Project gender and youth performance  
Compete’s gender performance has been limited in terms of the higher- level outcomes aspired to within the 
gender strategy pillars for inclusion, promotion and empowerment of women within the Palestinian private sector.  
The lack of detailed analysis of the gender dynamics within the targeted value chains/sub -sectors, combined 
with Compete’s lack of sub -denies the project the opportunity of utilizing a market systems analysis process 
to inform broader landscape understanding of gender dynamics.  
5.2 Sustainability - Where key achievements are identified in targeted sectors, to what extent are 
these achievements sustainable?  
Across all sectors  engaged by the project, the potential of sustainability of project investment is intimately 
linked to the degree that market traction has been achieved by participating firms within that sector .  
 
While business associations and support organizations could and should factor in to sustainability 
considerations, a conundrum faced by Compete is that firms often have only limited confidence in the capacity of their relevant business association, and question the worth of the project engaging them, yet at 
the same time bemoan the absence of support and enabling services available to them.  
 
A macro  obstacle to sustainability within the Palestinian agricultural sector is water access and quality. In t he 
West Bank, water quality is high but access is often severely constrained due to occupation related 
restrictions. In Gaza, water access is less constrained, but water quality issues are acute.   
51 
  
5.2.1 Common characteristics of successful activities  
Compete appears to be most successful when it intervenes at multiple points along a value chain in a way that targets bottlenecks and specific opportunities that help resolve buyer concerns. Typically, such interventions involve support that helps enhance production and quality (contributing to value add potential 
in the process), while also engaging and supporting aggregators to absorb production increases and better 
engage markets. This is particularly the case in agriculture where project support to post  harvest service 
provision has often been the strategic bottleneck needing to be addressed, giving producers the confidence to expand production given the incentive of better prices being available with better post harvest facilities in 
place.  
 
Also within  agriculture, s upport that reduces reliance on importation of inputs enhances confidence within 
the value chain, and is therefore another important sustainability measure . 
 Confidence within a firm or value chain that key people and/or produce can freely c ross borders is also 
common to successful activities. Currently, this outcome is generally negotiated at firm level and reliant on personal relationships established with Israeli actors able to help facilitate that movement. While this system can work well  for individual firms, there remains a need for there to be clarity of decision -making and 
criteria around such processes.  
 
5.3 Replicability - How can successful interventions (identified as part of Question 1) be 
replicated by future USAID programs?  
Replication is best served by a foundation that ensures sophisticated and nuanced understanding at entry 
point of the potential of sectors under consideration, since this contributes to the project being well positioned to identify bottlenecks and strategic i nterventions to overcome them. It also assists identification 
of synergies and mutual benefit where the ‘investment whole’ can be greater than the sum of its parts. Such 
an approach also provides an efficiency dividend, since it can avoid unnecessary inter ventions.  
 
Opportunities for replication will be further enhanced if USAID supported projects support capacity development of key agencies on the Palestinian export landscape that have the mandate and capacity to carry 
trade promotion independent of proje ct based assistance. 
 
 
5.4 Unintended project outcomes  
Unintended outcomes of the project mostly relate to limitations in market system understanding, and the 
subsequent impact of project interventions on the overall market system.  It is likely that a more robust market system analysis would have alerted the project to potential negative impacts of different project 
interventions.  
 5.5 Implementation approach and management  
Compete needs to be acknowledged for the breadth of its reach and its ability in the most part to astutely tailor support to the context  of its many different sub -sectors and sub -sector actors, each of which faces its 
own unique challenges and opportunities.  
 Project identification and start up in Gaza also deserves acknowledgment for being well conceived and swift 
in its response, allowing for a lot to be achieved within a relatively short time. More generally, the project 
has identified sub- sectors and a cohort of partners within Gaza who all have the capacity to either directly 
or indirectly get their produce out of Gaza. This is a very  important lesson learned and points to the 
importance of addressing macro issues related to movement of people and goods, since those businesses that do enjoy that privilege demonstrate that they are very capable of being competitive even within the myria d constraints that currently affect Gaza.  
  
52 
 Efforts in the agriculture sector deserve particular mention given they touch virtually every agricultural value 
chain of importance. Success in value chains such as baby cucumber highlights the potential of Compe te 
when it has sophisticated understanding, is deeply engaged and active across multiple points of a value chain. These successes provide a road map for sector engagement, and beg the question of whether the project spread itself too thin by being involved  across 23 agriculture value chains. Deeper initial analysis leading to 
deeper engagement of fewer sub -sectors might well have yielded better results. 
 It is also noted that agriculture remained a project priority throughout, whereas approaches to ICT and Tourism significantly changed course during implementation. While the rationale for these changes appears 
sound, it equally appears that these changes were not clearly communicated or justified to those who felt 
they had contributed a lot to helping Compet e establish a strategy within those sectors.  
 
While the project monitoring and evaluation approach is expansive, it is not sufficiently tailored to 
measurement of the results that the project is working towards.  This is particularly true of more qualitative 
results such as ‘reliability and dependability’ of relationships; ‘increase in ‘improved’ products; or the 
‘improved image’ of Palestinian goods. Even within the more quantitative result areas, data gathering has 
been inconsistently collated and often incompatible with the baseline data that had been assembled . 
 PIRS in related to attribution o f increase in exports, sales and employment are generous and run the risk of 
inflating results beyond what should be genuinely attributed to Compete. One aspect of this is a lack of 
recognition of the contribution being made to firms by other stakeholders and donors.  
 
Overall, the process of PIR S review/update appears to have not paid  sufficient attention to how such changes 
affect the evaluability of the project, a nd was overly focused on addressing weaknesses identified in indicator 
measurement year -on-year. Ideally, more attention would have been paid to ensuring the M&E system was 
capable of generating data that enables more holistic and revealing monitoring and evaluation of the project 
over its entire lifetime  
 Overall, it is the ET’s perspective that an opportunity was missed with the way M&E was conducted over the 
life of the project, by not being sufficiently focused on ‘monitoring for learning’, as opposed to monitoring to 
aid reporting.  In depth understanding and documentation of successes and failures would be a great asset as 
USAID moves towards funding a similarly focused program. Clear understanding of issues related to 
wastewater use; reasons underpin ning the failure of the Gaza greenhouse strawberry intervention; unpacking 
of the concept of ‘better jobs’; or drilling down in to the complexity of issues related to ‘women led’ 
businesses are examples of activities worthy of documented research.  
 
6.  Recommendations  
 
This section  outlines  recommendations  relating  to future programming  in support of competitiveness  in the 
Palestinian  Territories.  Underpinning all that follows  is the headline  recommendation  that USAID  undertake 
further programming  to suppo rt and progress  competitiveness  of the Palestinian  economy  through 
interventions in both West  Bank and Gaza.  Results  achieved  through Compete demonstrate  that strategic 
and considered  support to sectors and businesses can be catalytic in strengthening expo rt readiness,  building  
investor  confidence and addressing  bottlenecks, resulting in a strengthened Palestinian  economy  and growth  
in employment  opportunities.   
 
Recommendation One  
Any future competitiveness project should either fully adopt a market systems development approach, or at 
least include a component for market systems development approaches to be applied when specific sub -
sectors are assessed as export ready, and where it is expected that multiple actors within that value chain 
will be engaged.  
  
53 
 Recommendation Two  
Ensure that the selection of value chains is done on the basis of clear selection criteria, including the 
participation of market actors and government stakeholders in the selection process. Typical criteria for value 
chain selection within a market systems approach include:  
• Market prospects: in domestic and export markets.  
• Competitiveness: commodities with the most potential for growth.  
• Meeting development objectives: commodities with the most potential for meeting program 
objectives . 
• Feasibility: commodities the project can work with and see results (e.g., value chain actors’ buy -in, 
likelihood of achieving results within the program’s timeframe).  
 Recommendation Three  
When a sub- sector is identified as export ready and presents an op portunity for multi-faceted engagement, 
initial investment should be made to document proposed strategy through analysis underpinning the investment and articulation of vision statements and theories of change for sub -sector/value chain 
development. This analysis should include:  
• system -level constraints (root causes) affecting promotion of an enabling environment and 
strengthened business support services ; 
• incentives and capacities of market players associated with these constraints ; 
• sector specific intelligence and insights that could be used to influence market actors during intervention, and;  
• information to be used as a sub-sector baseline from which strong qualitative and quantitative 
indicators and performance measurement can be drawn.  
 
Recommendation Four 
Based on the above, results for the main targets of Project assistance should be clearly differentiated to 
reflect the different realities of micro, small, and medium enterprises, large anchor firms, and BSOs . 
 Confidence within a value chain that secure markets exist and that they can be reliably accessed is key to 
bringing focus and clarity as to how best a sub -sector can be supported. Compete has demonstrated 
important value add in terms of supporting firms in their market engagement, in terms of strategic advice, 
direct engagement of buyers, and efforts to address structural constraints (often with support of USAID).  
 
Recommendation Five  
The project should be structured in such a way that it is able to provide pro -active, context specific support  at 
sub-sector and firm levels to enhance market engagement and achieve market traction. Such support should include efforts to address, or raise with relevant bodies, structural constraints that inhibit competitiveness of a sub-sector.  
 
Central to the log ic of Compete was the principle that the business environment requires a strong enabling 
landscape to thrive, and for that to develop, there is a need to strengthen business associations and support 
organizations. The importance of this supportive environm ent was especially highlighted in the agriculture 
sector where aggregators and other post -harvest entities were key in helping secure market traction within 
some of the most successful sub -sectors.  
 
Recommendation Six  
Any future project should maintain capacity to support strengthening of support organizations. While this 
recommendation carries relevance across all sectors, particular focus should be placed on those capable of supporting aggregation and value adding within the agriculture sector as a mea ns of supporting the many 
small Palestinian farmers who historically have been ‘price-takers’.  
 An observation of the ET was that each of the 41 different sub- sectors that Compete engaged had a story to 
tell, and lessons to impart – not to mention the inte ractions between sub- sectors. However, much of the 
extraordinary amount of knowledge generated was never captured in a form that could be shared or carried  
54 
 forward. This relates to the project’s M&E approach being focused on compliance and reporting than o n 
learning and knowledge management. While compliance and reporting are and will always be critically 
important needs, there is an opportunity for such approaches to be augmented to allow for the project’s 
lessons learned to be clearly captured, analyzed and made available to the broader sector interested in private sector development.  
 
Recommendation Seven  
Place greater focus on knowledge management and lessons learned, recognizing the opportunities and efficiencies inherent in clearly understanding what h as and hasn’t worked, and why. This could include 
commissioning of key research to better understand competitiveness and/or identify strategies for addressing weaknesses that undermine competitiveness.  
 
Even within the project monitoring that was done, the re was a disconnect between the data gathered and 
the results framework agreed with USAID. There was also inconsistency in the way that data was gathered 
and how indicator measurement was managed. Furthermore, the agreed PIRS for the project lack rigour an d 
texture, and most likely over state project achievements given they allow attribution to Compete of results that were clearly affected by other factors. Collectively, this overall context has made difficult the learning focus suggested above.   
 
Recommen dation Eight  
Project M&E systems need to be strengthened to better align with intended results, and to better allow for monitoring of progress against baseline.  
 Being the largest project of its kind in the West Bank and Gaza, there is great interest acros s government 
and the broader development sector in Compete plans, results and learning. However, almost without 
exception, these stakeholders expressed frustration at the lack of information available from Compete, and 
their lack of visibility in the vario us coordination mechanisms.  
  Recommendation Nine  
There is an urgent need to improve project communications in general, and with government in particular. While government is understanding of the implementing modality, they feel they have a right to receiv e 
regular updates on the project, lessons learned, and future directions. They also seek project alignment with 
their own strategic plans.   
 
Compete has capacity and resources that the broader development sector does not, and vice versa.  These 
different permutations of resources and skills offer the potential for complementarity in programming that 
helps best address sector and firm level needs. Already, there is strong complementarity between Compete 
and the DFID funded PMDP.  
 
Recommendation Ten  
Project participation in coordination mechanisms should be more actively undertaken as a means of 
progressing learning in relation to competitiveness, while also facilitating opportunities to identify potential 
programming synergies.  
 
A related recommendation is f or USAID to facilitate periodic coordination and planning meetings with 
economic growth and market development programs, and assume a leadership role facilitating the collaboration of its programs with other programs.
 
 
Areas of interest to the broader sect or that Compete could benefit from relates to youth and women’s 
empowerment and strategies for promoting their meaningful participation and leadership in the economy. 
While Compete developed a gender strategy, there was only limited evidence of activities where women were genuinely leading an initiative.  
  Recommendation Eleven   
55 
 A gender advisor should be appointed to specifically manage women led programming, including research 
and provision of support to sector leads to assist them in ensuring gendered approaches and gender 
sensitivity in their own value chain approaches. The Gender Advisor would also provide support to ensuring 
M&E approaches adequately address gender issues and learning.  
Agriculture as a headline sector covers off multiple sub -sectors, each with different potential for growth, 
value adding and export traction. Compete demonstrates that granular understanding of a sub -sector market 
system allows for efficient and strategic investment in that sub -sector, and that strengthening relationships 
between producers and aggregators offers potential for the greatest number to benefit.  
  Recommendation Twelve  
Any follow -on project should use the approach described in recommendations one and two to clearly identify 
and understand agricultural sub-sectors with potential for growth, and to identify opportunities within the 
market place to be leveraged.  
 
While there is a general opportunity to support further development and consolidation of the West Bank 
and Gaza as providers of high quality ICT support, there is a more contained and specific opportunity to build an ICT strategy that focuses on an internship system that supports companies to take on young graduates in pursuit of specific business opportunities.  
  Recommendation Thirteen  
Consider options for promoting growth and competitiveness of the Palestinian ICT sector through an 
approach that focuses on facilitating youth into the ICT workforce through an internship support program that supports companies in pursuit of specific business oppor tunities. 
  
Compete was integral to supporting identification and consolidation of an exciting opportunity within the 
stone and marble value chain, based in application of the waste slurry by product of quarrying to production of an innovative lightweight building material with strong thermal properties. While it has been proven that production of these materials is relatively straightforward, a challenge remains in raising awareness of the 
product to achieve market traction. With traction, there is enormous growth potential for the production 
system, especially since such an industry will be welcomed and encouraged by Israel given it offers a potential solution to the environmental damage being caused by slurry in West Bank and Israel watersheds.  
  Recomme ndation Fourteen  
Look at options for supporting development and rapid expansion of slurry based construction materials, 
including efforts to penetrate key markets by both marketing and also seeking accreditation of materials 
within different building codes . 
 
The challenges faced by the Palestinian tourism sector are broad and complex. Compete efforts in this 
sector suffered from being spread too thin. Any future engagement of the tourism sector needs to be either scaled up to ensure the human and financial resources necessary to achieve impact, or focused on strengthening of a specific sub- sector to promote its growth and competitiveness.  
  Recommendation Fifteen  
Focus support to development of individual or small group, non -pilgrimage tourism, aimed at developing and 
promoting niche tourism opportunities related to historical, cultural and/or ‘political’ tourism, focusing on tourism products that encourage visitors to ‘Visit Palestine’.  
 
While it is understood that these issues are extremely complex and poli tically sensitive issues, there is a 
variety of constraints that fundamentally undermine the competitiveness of the Palestinian economy. More 
generally, there is an urgent need for greater transparency and reliability in terms of the processes that dictate  decision -making in relation to the movement of people and goods needing to enter. This need is 
particularly acute in Gaza, where uncertainty and restrictions on the movement of traders needing to access  
56 
 West Bank or beyond for business, is quite literally  preventing deals from being done that would strengthen 
the Gazan economy and employ Gazan people.  
 
 
Recommendation Sixteen 
The project, with support from USAID (and the broader development sector), needs to help facilitate 
agreement and clear processes th at allow traders with bona fide business reasons to travel outside Gaza as 
required.  
 
In the case of Gaza, all exports must enter Israel before they reach their final destination, even if that final 
destination is outside Israel. Border procedures and clearance are time consuming and expensive, and a drag on competitiveness.  
 More generally, a clear approach needs to be in place through which on the ground issues related to an enabling environment for the Palestinian economy can be systematically brought to the attention of the US 
Mission, to inform advocacy development.  
 
Recommendation Seventeen  
The project, with support from USAID, should pursue strategic advocacy aimed at opening a faster track export only channel at the Karem Shalom border crossing between Gaza and Israel for goods that have a 
final destination beyond Israel.  
 
   
57 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Annexes    
58 
 Annex (A) -  Evaluation Scope of Work and Design  
 
I.          PURPOSE OF THE EVALUATION  
 
This purpose of this performance evaluation is to assist USAID/West Bank Gaza 
(USAID/WBG) in assessing the approach and performance of the Enterprise Development for 
Global Competitiveness (Compete) project against its main objectives in terms of results (outcomes) and sustainability. The evaluation will provide lessons learned and recommendations for future activities the USAID/WBG Economic Growth and Infrastructure team is considering in this sector.
44  
 
The primary audience for this evaluation will be the USAID/WBG office and specifically the Economic Growth and Infrastructure office as they evaluate potential follow- on proposals or 
future activities in this sector.
45 Secondary audiences would be other stakeholders in this 
sector and potentially USAID on a more global level. 
 
II.          SUMMARY INFORMATION  
 
Activity/Project N ame Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness Project (Compete)  
Implementer  Development Alternatives International (DAI)  
Cooperative 
Agreement/Contract #  AID-294-C-12-00001  
Total Estimated 
Ceiling (TEC) of the 
Evaluated 
Project/Activity  $62,868,718 (taken from Compete presentation to USAID)  
Life of Project/Activity  Jan 2012 – October 2018  
Active Geographic 
Regions  West Bank and Gaza Strip  
 
Development 
Objective(s) (DOs)  DO 2: Reduced Constraints to Private Sector -Led Economic Growth  
IR 2.1: Reduced barriers to trade and improved movement and access for 
people and goods  
IR 2.2: Increased competitiveness of targeted sectors  
IR 2.3: Improved business and investment enabling environment  
IR 2.4: Improved availability and lower cost of energy , water, and transport 
resources  
USAID Office  USAID West Bank and Gaza office  
 
III. BACKGROUND  
 
A. Description of the Project  
 
The United States Agency for International Development in West Bank and Gaza  
(USAID/WBG) recognizes the importance of a prosperous private sector, economically 
integrated within the global economy, to the establishment of a sovereign, independent, viable and democratic Palestinian state. While some larger Palestinian firms have est ablished 
themselves in the global market place, small and medium enterprises (SMEs), which employ the vast majority of Palestinians and the potential to employ many more, have found it more difficult to grow their businesses and engage external markets.  
                                                
44 The evaluation will cover all activities implemented since inception of the project in 2012, but focus heavily on post 2015 implementation.  
45 The evaluation will not be completed in time to influence PAD development for the follow -on activity   
59 
  
Implemented by DAI, Compete was commenced in 2012 and will conclude October 2018. The project has the goal of strengthening competitiveness and export potential of key sectors essential to the future prosperity of the Palestinian economy. This is being ach ieved 
through efforts aimed at facilitating rapid expansion in sectors of the Palestinian economy that show the most potential for employment and export growth. Approaches include the provision of grants and technical assistance to companies and expertise on how to maximize the value of their products  with a view to partnering with firms towards new products and 
approaches that better respond to market opportunities.  
 
In order to maintain focus and ensure holistic value chain development, the project focuse s 
in on selected sectors regarded as having the best potential for market development. In West Bank, the project focuses on the agribusiness, tourism, information and communications technologies, and the stone and marble sector. In Gaza, the project places  
primary focus on agribusiness, information and communications technologies, and fishing, 
with secondary focus placed on tourism, furniture and textile/garments.  
 To facilitate sector expansion, companies are supported with technical assistance and expert ise to maximize the value of their products. The project also aims to connect smaller 
businesses with larger producers and exporters that have direct and more efficient access to markets. Through training and increasing the flow of information, products, and technology throughout target sectors, the project aims to empower SMEs to better perceive and 
respond to opportunities as they arise.  
 
B. Results Frameworks  
 The primary focus of the Compete Project is to improve market access for small- and medium- sized Palestinian enterprises, as well as to increase competitiveness and market 
participation for firms through improved product design, quality, packaging, and efficient production. The Project also aims to improve access to services through the development of local business associations and business service providers. To monitor performance, the project has developed results frameworks that outline results and priorities for work in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. These are used as a planning, communications, and management tool, providing a foundation for work planning and performance monitoring. This conveys the development hypothesis implicit in the program’s goal and objectives, as well as the cause- effect relationships among key results areas, program intermediate results, 
and program objectives.   
60 
  
Figure 3: Results Framework - West Bank  
 
 
 Figure 4: Results Framework – Gaza Strip  
 
 
61 
 C. Summary of Project to be evaluated  
 
The project approach involves two distinct components, namely;   
 
• Component A focuses on assisting Palestinian firms to better compete on 
international markets through supporting innovation, skills training, and by linking them to sustainable, high value distribution channels.  
• Component B focuses on developing Palestinian service providers and business support organizations to foster a market friendly environment and improve the likelihood of sustainable results in the Palestinian economy. 
 
Five strategic priorities guide project implementation:  
 
1. Developing workforce skills and introducing new technologies to generate 
employment. 
2. Strengthening high value -added products, services, and technologies to facilitate 
growth.  
3.  Enhancing access to markets, both locally and internationally, to maximize value and profit. 
4. Supporting enablers and service providers to address sectorial impediments.  
5. Providing access to finance and investment to build sustainable business development.  
 
Collectively, these approaches are expected to consolidate targeted sectors resulting in increases in exports and investments, with increasingly innovative practices being applied, with the result being an expansion of both skills and employment opportunities. If successful, such an approach has the potential to result in transformational and sustainable expansion of the Palestinian economy.  
 
While all sectors are supported in broad alignment with this framework, each specific sector receives tailored support responsive to its unique challenges and opportunities aimed at increasing competiti veness and market participation within that sector. This is achieved through critical inputs 
designed to support the sectors to expand in local and global markets. The Project also aims to 
improve access to services through the development of local busines s associations and business 
service providers. Furthermore, USAID through its Compete Project deliberately targets women and 
youth throughout its strategic interventions.  
 
D.  Summary of the Activity/Project M&E Plan  
 
Compete places significant priority on monitoring and evaluation recognizing it to be a tool of critical importance both to day to day management and to the project’s capacity to provide robust evidence related results. A basic principle underpinning Compete’s M&E system is that all project participants have a role to play if highest possible results are to be achieved. The 
system is therefore designed to involve all technical team members and Project counterparts 
located in West Bank and Gaza, in a reporting process aimed at achieving:  
 
• Efficiency – in terms of recognizing those with first -hand knowledge of an activity are 
best placed to efficiently collect and verify basic M&E data in their respective technical areas.   
62 
 • Ownership – in terms of allowing technical team members and counterparts a role 
and insight regarding the project approach, direction and results  
• Feedback – in terms of ensuring clear and shared understanding amongst technical 
team members and counterparts in relation to project progress and future needs  
 
A sophisticated and inte grated project database is maintained with capacity to prepare a wide variety 
of reports of relevance against the project baseline assembled soon after commencement. Its M&E 
section includes the project Performance Management Plan, which includes annual ta rgets and is 
reviewed annually to reflect progress and adapted needs by sector. Monitoring is based on tracking progress against both management and performance indicators at both output and outcome levels. Each performance indicator is classified and assi gned to the related Project Intermediate Result. For 
each performance indicator, Compete collects actual data, monitors change as related to the relevant baseline, disaggregates data to identify differentiated results, and highlights notable variance from targets.  
 
Baseline and targets are revised and set out annually within the annual M&E Plan, which details sector 
by sector M&E plans, with sector specific indicators, as well as a set of cross -cutting indicators, that 
disaggregate overall project performance in relation to gender and youth inclusion. 
63 
 IV. EVALUATION QUESTIONS  
The evaluation shall provide answers to the following five questions and related sub -questions: 
 
6) To what extent have project activitie s been effective in achieving intended objectives 
and key results (as per the project results framework)?  
Sub-questions 
1.10 To what extent (and why) have levels of investment and revenues of participating SMEs 
increased? Are trends apparent in different sector s and sub -sectors supported by the project?  
1.11 Has the number of international markets accessed by Palestinian firms expanded? Has the 
quality and reliability of relationships with external buyers improved?  
1.12 To what degree do firms feel supported by Business Associations and service providers?  
1.13 Do supported firms enjoy increased market share for their products and services in West Bank 
and Gaza?  
1.14 Has the project achieved demonstrable improvement in the quality of products and services 
produced by supported SMEs?  Has this resulted in firms achieving greater value from their 
production? 
1.15 Has the project generated increased employment opportunities for Palestinians? Do SMEs 
supported by the project employ additional people?  
1.16 How has the project approached skills transfer and development? Are staff within participating 
firms applying enhanced skills?  
1.17 Has the contribution made by other agencies/ mechanisms to participating firms been 
sufficiently factored into results reporting?  
1.18 To what extent has the approach been proactive in promoting an enhanced role for women and 
youth?  
 
The project results framework includes three intermediate results , identified as key to achievement of 
the project goal of strengthened competitiveness and export potential within target sectors:  
• Increasing exports and investments  
• Increasing innovation of products and services  
• Increasing employment and expanding job skills  
 
The ET will review all available data and provide sector disaggregated reporting in relation to these three targets, considering the following:  
 
Exports and investments 
increased  Innovation of products 
and services increased  Employment increased, 
skills expanded  
• Shifts in r evenue against 
baseline  
• Capacity to add value to  
exported products  
• Number, quality and 
reliability of relat ionships 
with external buyers 
increased?  
• Number of international 
markets accessed by Palestinian firms  
• Increased market share for Palestinian produced products in West Bank 
and Gaza  • Number of new and/or 
improved Palestinian products expanded?  
• Quality i mprovement of 
Palestinian goods  
• Improved reputation for Palestinian products and services in local markets  
• Innovations being replicated in the 
Palestinian market place 
at equal or higher value  
 • Shifts in employment over 
baseline  
• Increased youth 
employment opportunities 
• Increased women’s employment opportunities  
• Number of supported staff with/using e nhanced 
skills?  
 
  
64 
  
Face to face interviewing will occur with more than 62 program participants to best understand 
‘effectiveness’ in their particular context, and to determine the relevance and suitability of project 
indicators in reflecting their context. Prior to meeting, the ET will review the beneficiary file to understand context, baseline, reported progress and level of investment.  Effectiveness of sector 
approaches will be reflected through both quantitative and qualitative assessment.  
 The ET will also provide a SWOT analysis to highlight areas of greater success and risks to success in other areas, including analysis of level of effort needed and how much control USAID and partners may have in terms o f influencing specific issues.  
 Gender and youth differential participation and benefits will be considered as part of data collection 
and analysis.  
 
7) Where key achievements are identified in targeted sectors, to what extent are these 
achievements sustainable?  
Sub-questions 
2.1 Are there common characteristics to successful project interventions?  Do these differ across 
sectors or by type/size of grant??  
2.2 Which of these characteristics are sustainable without ongoing project support? What 
characteristics of success (if any) are reliant on external support?   
 
COMPETE provides specific inputs to firms to enhance economic growth within sectors viewed as having growth potential.  The results framework above defines success, which can be seen from 
preliminary reading to vary across sectors and sub- sectors. The purpose of this question is to assess 
from an economic perspective,  the potential  for firms to continue and sustain a positive growth 
trajectory, and also the potential of the sector to achieve traction within domestic and international markets. Implicit in this field of enquiry is the question of attribution of impact, g iven Compete is 
but one actor working to strengthen the Palestinian economy. While attribution at firm level could potentially be straight forward, attribution of progression at sector level will present a more complex challenge, especially in sectors such  as agriculture where multiple actors share similar 
objectives. To address these challenges the ET will meet with select key informants external to the Compete  Project , in addition to those active in the project to disaggregate contribution. It is also 
anticipated that other external factors will have impacted progress, notably security issues and 
changes in restrictions to products allowed to enter West Bank, and particularly Gaza.  
 
8) How can successful interventions (identified as part of Question 1) be replicated by future USAID programs?  
Sub-questions
 
3.1 Which have been the most successful intervention types, and why? Do these vary by sector? Do 
these vary when considered by level of financial assistance?  
3.2 Which have been the most successful intervent ion types, and why? Do these vary by sector? Do 
these vary when considered by level of financial assistance?  
3.3. Are there local mechanisms or is there local capacity capable of replicating better business support 
approaches?  
 
Compete holds a breadth of disaggregated data across 41 sub- sectors. Each sub -sector will be 
analyzed, and the sample of project beneficiaries will be adapted to ensure that evaluation captures 
the views of project beneficiaries across a purposively representative sample of beneficiary firms, farmers and support organizations through face -to-face meetings.  Through this proc ess of 
document review and face -to-face meetings, both qualitative and quantitative data will be gathered 
in relation to each sub -sector. Prior to meeting, specif ic approaches applied by the project within  
65 
 each sub- sector will be understood and analyzed with beneficiaries during face to face meetings to 
determine what did and didn’t work. Once key achievements are identified and connected to 
successful interventions, the evaluation team will assess to what extent the successful interventions can be replicated through future USAID programming.   
 
9) Were there any unintended project outcomes (positive or negative)?  
 
The exercise described under Question 1 will focus on intended results described in the two project results frameworks (and noted above) but methods used will be open enough to also capture possible or realize unintended outcomes (positive or negative). The evaluation team will consider the same risk analysis  factors described above to determine possible sustainability (if 
positive) or feasible mitigation plans (if negative).  
 
10) How did the project’s implementation approach and management, (including selection criteria and processes), influence the achievement of results?  
 
The evaluation team will assess the efficiency in the internal processes undertaken by the project to identify and select targeted sectors and firms.  The team will highlight to what extent the management of those processes lead to the achievement of intended and unintended results.    In addressing the above questions, the evaluation team will provide recommendations and lessons learned to inform future USAID programming.  Recommendations will specifically 
address what priority sectors (perhaps  beyond those targeted by COMPETE) USAID should 
consider as part of any future programming.  Recommendations may also weigh the merits of the sector vs. sector -agnostic approaches and which is best suited for the WBG context.   This will 
include recommendations of how future USAID programming can address remaining gaps, challenges and any unmet needs identified.  
 
V. EVALUATION DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY  
A. Summary of evaluation context and methodology  
 
The methodology proposed for this performance evaluation is based upon ensuring a rich blend of 
qualitative and quantitative evidence from which conclusions can be reached with regards to the degree to which pro ject interventions and processes have been effective in achieving the results 
they set out to achieve. As can be seen in the context described above, this requires consideration of the overall effectiveness of the various approaches initiated by Compete to achieve its goal of strengthening the competitiveness and export potential of key sectors essential to the fu ture 
prosperity of the Palestinian economy. Areas requiring detailed investigation can be summarized as:  
 
• The relevance of the overall approach in facilitating a more dynamic and supported Palestinian economy that positions Palestinian firms to better compete on international markets . 
• The capacity of the project to identify interventions capable of progressing its priority sectors in a form that is effective, replicable and sustainable. 
• Whether or not the approach is sufficiently thorough and capable of ful ly optimizing 
opportunities presented by the grants made available through the project . 
• The degree to which change at both firm and sector levels can be directly attributed to 
the project ( given a development landscape where many actors are working towards  
similar ly targeted  objectives – especially in the agriculture sector).  
• Whether synergies have been built with other programs supporting market and private  
66 
 sector development . 
• The degree to which circumstances beyond the control of the project have impacted 
progress . 
• Whether or not project interventions have positively (or negatively) impacted firms not directly active within the project?  
• The adequacy of data collection and management systems in facilitating clear sighted understanding of cause and effect of project interventions, and helping identify potential opportunities for replication . 
• The adequacy of management p rocesses and resources to provide dynamic and 
responsive leadership in a highly complex and challenging operational environment requiring frequent adaptation. 
• The degree that gender and youth have been effectively integrated within the program approach as cross -cutting issues of importance.  
 
The central challenge for the evaluation team therefore is to holistically consider these various  
elements (including their relationships with each other) to  determin e the degree that the project is 
generating innovations and solutions that are relevant to the complex and somewhat unique context 
of the Palestinian economy. Within that assessment is a need to investigate whether or not sufficient 
consideration and strategy is being applied to ensuring that these innovations are accessible and overcome the many impediments that are known to have historically inhibited adoption of new technologies by smallholder farmers. Similarly, the evaluation will need to assess the degree to which assistance to business associations, services providers and trade support networks and organizations have contributed to the overall project results.  
 
Effective knowledge management and strategic dissemination of learning generated from Compete’s implementation  is also of critical importance given the importance of scaling of interventions. It will 
therefore be important for the evaluation to consider the stakeholder landscape and the degree to which other key stakeholders have been engaged and leveraged in support of project objectives.  
 The methodology is therefore built around assembling a logical sequence of evaluative approaches capable of establish ing whether or not a clear and plausible line of sight exists from the types of 
support provided by the project to firms, support organizations and at sector level, towards sustainable outcomes related to increased exports and investment, enhanced and appr opriate 
innovati on and an expanding job market.  
 Along that continuum, Compete has approaches in place that :  
 
● Identified, understood, and responded to issues and needs of  small and medium 
enterprises  
● Articulated and prepared an approach responsive to identified needs.  
● Cultivated awareness and understanding related to potential innovations  
● Established an inclusive outreach and targeting approach  
● Monitored and mitigated possible market distortions that it may be creating  
● Established robust management systems, including appropriately transparent systems related to decision making on grants  
● Set up dynamic monitoring approaches capable of validating the potential contribution and impact of its interventions  
● Have in place c lear sighted strategy capable of commun icating results to different 
audiences in a form suitable to the needs of each of those audiences  
  
67 
 A guiding premise of the evaluation therefore is to understand the process and rationale by which 
key decisions have been taken, including disbursement of grants. The evaluation team will work with 
a sample of beneficiaries from the point of their grant application to determine the quality and efficacy of the many dimensions of support that occurred along their ‘Compete journey ’. Within this 
approach will be the need to understand other interventions being made on the economic landscape by Compete to determine their effectiveness in supporting grantees and enhancing chance s of 
‘success’. It is also anticipated that the project’s more general economic and sector  landscape 
interventions might have potentially enhanced opportunities for firms not directly participating in Compete. Conversely, it is also possible that project support to one firm comes to the detriment of others.  
 The evaluation approach will then progress logically along the implementation continuum of target sectors considering the above -mentioned issues. The proposed approach is embedded in a 
determination to remain flexible and responsive to information as it arises. This is regarded as particul arly important in the context of a program like Compete given its diverse range of activities, 
partners, and potential beneficiaries, and that its sophisticated approach engages multiple stakeholder simultaneously.  
 It is imperative that both quantitative and qualitative data be gathered throughout the evaluation. It is also important that the ET develop a full and sophisticated understanding of how the results presented in project reporting were gathered, in order to understand how completely they describe the project picture.  
 While detailed analysis and understanding of quantitative data will be essential, the ET also places great importance on the gathering of high- value, qualitative data from across the key informant 
landscape in order to understand the full context of the project’s headline results in terms of business confidence, skills development, a more collegiate and collaborative business sector and the impact that the project is having on the lives of those women and youth that it has supported.    
 Where possible, qualitative findings will be cross -checked and triangulated from multiple sources and 
against available quantitative project data, as well as other data sources when or if applicable.    
 Other factors relevant to measuring progress toward program objectives and outcomes relate to the: 
● Strengths (and weaknesses) of the program structure and program management approach; 
● Organization and implementation factors, including the efficacy of program processes 
for information sharing and dissemination of results (both internally and externally);  
● Depth of ownership and involvement in activities by partners and other important 
development actors such as government staff, local civil society, academia and the broader donor community with shar ed interests; and  
● Whether a genuine space exists within the program approach for meaningful inclusion and voice for women’s perspectives in programming. 
 
Given the diverse nature of a program providing grants that range from $405 to $2.224 million, conside rable variability in approach will be inevitable. It will therefore be important to fully 
understand how approaches differ and to consider the relative merits of these different approaches.   To assist with this, evaluation findings will be disaggregated t o achieve more granular understanding 
of project impact, by disaggregating data in terms of sector (and sub- sector, where possible); 
type/level of assistance (low/mid/high); and gender and region (WB and Gaza).   
68 
  
Due to the complexity presented by a project  that has invested in 1,550 different small or medium 
enterprises (holding significant data on each), it is proposed that the evaluation approach build logically from an extensive review of the library of program data maintained on the various Compete databases. While heavily biased towards quantitative data, this database still provides trends and 
insight as to program performance, especially when reviewed alongside narrative reporting.  
 Collectively, the evaluation team will work through a logical sequence of desk review, evaluation planning, and consideration of results reported) to determine optimum use of time in the field. Once on the ground, key informant interviews (KIIs) and focus group discussions (FGDs) will be employed to gather qualitative data  related to fully understanding program performance and direction, allowing 
for triangulation of recommendations. Key informants (described from the ground up) will include:  
  
● Farmers and r epresentatives from targeted firms (micro, small and medium enterpr ises) 
and support organizations,  
● Government partners , particularly the Ministries of Agriculture, National Economy, 
Tourism and Antiquities, and Communication and Information Technology.  
● Other development actors interested in private sector promotion (both  donor and civil 
society) . 
● Sector bodies, such as the Palestine Trade Center, Palestinian Federation of Industries, Palestinian IT Association of Companies, C hambers of C ommerce etc.  
● Academic institutions  such as the Palestine Polytechnic University, which was also a 
project grantee.  
● Compete Management  
● USAID Mission  
● Other donors (whose interest is more sector focused, e.g. Government of Australia or FAO) 
 
Final recommendations will be firmly evidenced -based and presented in a format that is accessible to 
all stakeholders. Recommendations will be divided into overall program, sector, and management sections, while also ensuring coherent discussion of the inevitable linkages that exist among them.   The evaluation will be undertaken by a small team led by an international consultant with support from three highly qualified and relevantly experienced Palestinian team, including a gender specialist to help ensure highest possible gender analysis is integrated within the evaluation approach.  
 
B. Sampling  
The proposed sample of firms is presented in Annex A – Evaluation Sample. Evaluation sampling is 
based on the analysis summarized in Annex B – Summary analysis of Compete data. In total, Compete 
works across 6 sectors and 41 sub- sectors, providing support to a total of 1,550 beneficiary farmers, 
firms and support organizations. This support ranges in scale from $405 to $2.24 million, with nearly 90% of the value of support provided concentrated in the agricultur e (43%), Tourism (33%) and ICT 
(13%) sub- sectors.  The sample aims to allow insight to all sectors, given variability in performance is 
already reported by the project. 
 
The evaluation will use a purposive sampling approach in selecting the beneficiary far mers, firms, and 
organization it will meet.  This approach is designed to ensure that sampling of firms fairly represents: 
the various sectors and subs -sectors in terms of number of firms assisted and distribution of firms and 
sub-sectoral distribution of USAID investment; the types and categories of firms and organizations 
assisted, types of assistance provided, and the bands of investments in the sampled sub- sectors, with  
69 
 each of low, midpoint and high targeted in the sampled sub- sectors where more than t en beneficiaries 
exist. Sample selection will consider participation of women and youth as a selection criteria, to ensure 
understanding of the participation and challenges inherent in these two important cohorts.   In view of the Mid- Term Review that exam ined performance during the first three years of project 
implementation, the sampling will be weighted towards the firms that received support from the fourth year of implementation onwards.  
 
C. Data Analysis Plan  
The analysis of data gathered by this evaluation will be an iterative process built around the Evaluation Questions and sub- questions. The analytic process involves drawing on evidence from the 
various data sources to articulate and corroborate findings relevant to these questions, with cross -
checks  across sources.  The type of analysis will vary by type of data.  The document review will 
stress content analysis.  The quantitative data will use basic statistical tools, aggregating across sectors and sub -sectors in some cases and drawing comparisons a mong sectors in others.  The 
qualitative data will be coded and mapped by themes to identify (and document) patterns across sectors, sub -sectors, types of assistance, and over time.   
Because it is an iterative process, the analysis is continuous throughout the data collection period as new pieces of evidence are brought to bear.  In keeping of one of QED’s best practices in evaluation, the team will have dedicated time to do this throughout the evaluation instead of just a block of time at the end - (i.e. day six of every work week). The findings relative to the Evaluation Question or sub -
question are used to establish conclusions, which in turn serve as the basis for extraction of lessons learned and recommendations.   
All members of the evaluation team will be involved in the analysis through examination of the 
findings and statement of conclusions, and in the definition of the lessons learned and recommendations.  Consensus among team members is required for the evaluation recommendations.
   
70 
 D. Evaluation Design Matrix  
 
 
Questions  Suggested Data  
Sources (*)  Suggested Data  
Collection 
Methods  Data Analysis  
Methods  
1. To what extent have 
project activities been 
effective in achieving 
intended objectives and 
key results (as per  the 
project results 
framework)?  a. Project reporting  
b. Project database  
c. Project management  
d. Project staff  
e. Business associations  
f. Relevant ministries  
g. Supported companies  
h. Service providers  
i. U.S. Mission  
j. Donors and agencies active 
in private sector development  • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus Group 
Discussion  ● Reading and analysis of existing reporting and 
other documentation  
● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
o disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results  using 
above detailed disaggregation  
 
1.1 To what extent (and why) 
have levels of investment 
and revenues of 
participating SMEs 
increased? Are trends 
apparent in different sectors 
and sub- sectors supported 
by the project?  a. Project reporting  
b. Project database  
c. Project management  
d. Project staff  
e. Busines s Associations 
f. Supported companies  
g. Relevant ministries  
 • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus Group 
Discussion  • Reading and analysis of existing reporting and 
other documentation  
• Quantitative analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including gender 
disaggregated analysis when possible  
• Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results:  
o recorded against project questions  
o disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
  
71 
 1.2 Has the number of 
international markets 
accessed by Palestinian firms 
expanded? Has the quality 
and reliability of 
relationships with external 
buyers improved?  a. Project reporting  
b. Project management  
c. Project staff  
d. Business associations  
e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. Relevant ministries  • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Reading and analysis of existing reporting and 
other documentation  
● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
o disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
1.3 To what degree do firms 
feel supported by Business 
Associations and service 
providers?  a. Project staff  
b. Supported companies  
c. Business Associations  
d. Service providers  • Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus Group 
Discussions ● Quantitative analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including gender disaggregated analysis when possible  
● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
1.4 Do supported firms enjoy 
increased market share for 
their products and services 
in West Bank and Gaza?  a. Project reporting  
b. Project staff  
c. Project database  
d. Supported companies  
e. Business Associations  
f. Relevant ministries  • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Reading and analysis of existing reporting and 
other documentation  
● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high)  
72 
 o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
1.5 Has the project achieved 
demonstrable improvement 
in the quality of products 
and services produced by 
supported SMEs? Has this 
resulted in firms achieving 
greater value from their 
production? a. Project reporting  
b. Supported companies  
c. Business Associations  
d. Relevant ministries  
e. Palestinian Standards Institute  
 • Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus Group 
Discussion  ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of  assistance 
(low, mid, high)  
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
1.6 Has the project generated 
increased employment 
opportunities for 
Palestinians? Do SMEs 
supported by the project 
employ additional people?  a. Project reporting  
b. Project database  
c. Project staff  
d. Supported companies  
e. Ministry of Labor  • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
1.7 How has the project 
approached skills transfer 
and development? Are staff 
within participating firms 
applying enhanced skills?  a. Project reporting  
b. Project staff 
c. Supported companies  
d. Service providers  
 • Desk review 
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)   
73 
 ● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
1.8 Has the contribution made 
by other agencies/  
mechanisms to participating 
firms been sufficiently 
factored into results 
reporting?  
 a. Project management  
b. Supported companies  
c. Business Associations  
d. Support agencies  
e. Relevant ministries  
f. U.S. Mission  
g. Other donors and agencies 
active in private sector 
develop ment • Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
1.9 To what extent has the 
approach been proactive in 
promoting an enhanced role 
for women and youth?  
 a. Project reporting  
b. Project database  
c. Supported companies  
d. Women working within 
supported companies  
e. Women’s organizations  
f. Youth organizations  • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus Group 
Discussion  ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance 
(low, mid, high)  
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
2. Where key 
achievements are 
identified in targeted 
sectors, to what extent 
are these achievements 
sustainable?  a. Project reporting  
b. Project management  
c. Business associations  
d. Relevant ministries  
e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  • Desk review 
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of result s: 
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)   
74 
 ● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
2.1 Are there common 
characteristics to successful 
project interventions?  Do 
these differ across sectors  
or by type/size of grant ? 
 a. Project reporting  
b. Project management  
c. Project staff  
d. Business associations  
e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  • Desk review 
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
2.2 Which of these 
characteristics are sustainable 
without ongoing 
project support? What 
characteristics of success (if 
any) are reliant on external support? 
 a. Project reporting  
b. Project management  
c. Project staff  
d. Business associations  
e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. Donors and agencies active in 
private  sector development  • Desk review 
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
 ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
3. How can successful 
interventions (identified 
as part of Question 1) be replicated by future 
USAID programs?  
 a. Project reporting  
b. Project management  
c. Project staff  
d. Business associations  
e. Relevant ministries  
f. Supported companies  
g. Service providers  
h. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  • Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus  Group 
Discussion  ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation   
75 
 3.1 Which have been the most 
successful intervention 
types, and why? Do these vary by sector? Do these 
vary when considered by 
level of financial assistance?  
 a. Project reporting  
b. Project database  
c. Project management  
d. Project staff  
e. Business associations  
f. Relevant ministries  
g. Supported companies  
h. Service providers  
i. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  • Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus Group 
Discussion  ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
3.2 How can USAID best 
replicate such approaches? 
What opportunities exist to 
evolve the approach towards gr eater self -
reliance and sustainability?  
 a. Project management  
b. Project staff  
c. Business associations  
d. Relevant ministries  
e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. U.S. Mission  
h. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  • Key Informant 
Interviews  ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
3.3 Are there local mechanisms 
or is there local capacity 
capable of replicating better 
business support approaches?  
 a. Project management  
b. Project staff  
c. Business associations  
d. Relevant ministries  
e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. U.S. Mission  
h. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  • Desk Review  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
4) Were there any 
unintended project a. Project management  
b. Project staff  
c. Business associations  
d. Relevant ministries  • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant ● Quantitative Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:   
76 
 outcomes (positive or 
negative)?  
 e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  
h. Companies within sectors 
NOT supported by project  Interviews  
 o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation  
5) How did the project’s 
implementation 
approach and 
management, (including 
selection criteria and 
processes), influence the 
achievement of results?  
 a. Project management  
b. Project staff  
c. Business associations  
d. Relevant ministries  
e. Supported companies  
f. Service providers  
g. Donors and agencies active in 
private sector development  • Desk review 
• Data analysis  
• Key Informant 
Interviews  
• Focus Group 
Discussion  ● Quantitative  Analysis of Project Management 
Information System (MIS), including disaggregated 
analysis of results:  
o recorded against project questions  
disaggregated by sector  
o disaggregated by level of assistance (low, mid, 
high) 
o disaggregated by gender  
o disaggregated by region (WB or Gaza)  
● Qualitative analysis of KII and FGD results using 
above detailed disaggregation   
77 
  
 
VI. DELIVERABLES AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS  
 
The evaluation will present the following deliverables: 
 
Deliverable 1:  Final SOW (March  23, 2018)  
At the Kickoff Meeting, the evaluation team leader will present a final SOW which includes a) a detailed work plan/timeline, b) methodology, c) data collection tools/protocols and informed consent forms, d) data analysis plan and e) any modifica tions to deliverables. Field work will not begin until the evaluation 
team receives written approval of the proposed data collection instruments. 
 
Deliverable 2: Mid-Evaluation Debrief to USAID (on/about April 17, 2018)  
The Evaluation Team Leader will cond uct a debrief to USAID to provide a progress report on field 
activities, including challenges and any unanticipated field course corrections in scheduling or in the overall implementation plan.  
 
Deliverable 3: End-of-Evaluation Oral De -brief to USAID on P reliminary Findings, 
Conclusions and Recommendations (on/about April 26, 2018)  
After completion of the fieldwork and prior to the submission of the draft evaluation report, the Team Leader will provide a formal debriefing to USAID points of contact. The de briefing will include a 
discussion of findings (accomplishments and challenges), conclusions and preliminary recommendations. The evaluation team will consider all oral comments and will incorporate feedback into the draft report as it is finalized.  
 
Deliv erable 4: Delivery of the draft evaluation report (English) and the draft stand -alone 
executive summary (English) (On/about April 16, 2018)  
 QED will submit a draft version of the 30- page evaluation report with associated annexes to the 
USAID technical tea m for review and comment. The report will describe findings (accomplishments 
and challenges) and recommendations. The 6-8- page executive summary  will be included in the body 
of the text of the draft report prior to the page count and will also be delivered as a stand -alone 
document for public dissemination.  
 
The USAID technical team will provide consolidated written comments on the draft report/executive summary within 10 working days  of receiving the draft documents.  
 
Deliverable 5: Final Evaluation report (English) and the stand- alone final executive 
summary (English) (on/about May 31, 2018)  
 Upon receipt of consolidated comments46, the team leader will address said comments in a final 
revision of the report/executive summary within 5 business days. QED will resubmit the revised versions to USAID for review and approval.  
 
Deliverable 6: Infographic  
The QED team will engage our in -house designer to produce a two -page full color infographic which 
illustrates key findings, recommendations and insights. This deliverable will be geared toward one particular audience as determined during the Kick off Meeting. The draft and final infographic will be based on the USAID approved executive summary. QED will submit to USAID an infographic in English and a translation of the infographic into Arabic, if required, in electronic format (Microsoft 
                                                
46 QED requests that USAID solicit feedback from other stakeholders on the draft report and provide all feedback in one consolidated document or other format agreed to during the Kick off Meeting.   
78 
 Word). Prior to submission, the Arabic translation will be proofread by a professional from within 
the technical field to ensure technical terms are appropriately and accurately translated.  
 Deliverable 7: Translation of the stand -alone final executive summary (Arabic)  
If requested by USAID, QED will submit to USAID a translation of the executive summary (Arabic) in electronic format (Microsoft Word) within 15 business days of USAID written approval of Deliverable 5. Prior to submission, the Arabic translations will be proofread by a professional from within the technical field to ensure technical terms are appropriately and accurately translated.  
 
Deliverable 8: Post the USA ID approved final report (English), the stand- alone final 
executive summary (English and Arabic if required) and the infographic (English) to the USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC)   
Within 30 calendar days of USAID written approval of the final report (English the stand- alone final 
executive summary (English and Arabic if required) and the infographic (English), QED will post said documents to the USAID Development Experience Clearinghouse (DEC) for public access and use.  
 
Deliverable 9: Po st USAID -approved anonymized public -release datasets and associated 
supporting technical documentation to the USAID Development Data Library (DDL)  
Within 30 calendar days of USAID written approval of the final report (English) and stand- alone 
executive sum mary (English), QED will submit anonymized “public release” quantitative and qualitative 
datasets (English) and associated supporting technical documentation (English) for written approval.  
 
Within 30 calendar days of USAID written approval of anonymized “ public release” datasets (English) 
and associated supporting technical documentation (English), QED will post said materials to the USAID DDL for public access and use. In addition, QED will submit said materials to the task order COR on a secured flash dr ive; all materials will be in an unlocked and editable format  
 
   
79 
 VII. EVALUATION SCHEDULE  
 
  
Compete Project Performance Evaluation  By whom   
Planned Key Dates 
(provisional per 
agreement with 
USAID)  
Phase 1  - Inception      
  Team preparation prior to Evaluation Mission (Desk Review)  Team  15 – 22 Mar 2018  
  Submit Draft Expanded Scope of Work and Evaluation Methodology 
(after QED’s quality check)  TL 23 Mar 
Phase 2 - Evaluation Mission -  Fieldwork in West Bank and Gaza Strip      
 Team Leader arrives in -country  TL 26 Mar  
 Evaluation Team meeting and debriefing by QED – Team develops detailed field 
work schedule.  Initial meeting with USAID.  Team  27 Mar  
 Kick-Off meeting with USAID, including presentation of Expanded Scope 
of Work.  Introductory meeting with DAI/Compete.  Team  28 Mar  
  Team revises evaluation methodology, further develops evaluation tools based on 
verbal feedback from USAID and resubmits to USAID for feedback.  Team   29-31 Mar  
  USAID reviews and approves Expanded Scope of Work.  USAID  1 Apr  
 Fieldwork in the West Bank and Gaza Strip begins & desk review 
continues. Internal team meetings for stock -taking and rolling analysis of findings 
and conclusions.  Team  
1 Apr – 24 Apr  
 Mid-point briefing to USAID  TL 
16 Apr  
 Final briefing to USAID  TL 
27 Apr  
Phase 3 - Evaluation Report (ER) – high quality report from draft 1 onwards      
Draft 1  Submit draft Evaluation Report (ER1) to USAID (after QED’s quality check)  TL&QED  16 May  
  USAID feedback sent to the team  USAID  23 May   
80 
   
Compete Project Performance Evaluation  By whom   
Planned Key Dates 
(provisional per 
agreement with 
USAID)  
Draft 2  Submit revised Evaluation Report (ER2) to USAID (after QED’s quality check)  TL&QED  31 May  
  USAID final feedback sent to the team  USAID  
5 Jun 
 Draft 3  Submit revised Evaluation Report (ER3) to USAID (after QED’s quality check)  TL&QED  10 Jun  
Final Draft  Submit Final Evaluation Report (ER3) to USAID, addressing final comments as 
appropriate (after QED’s quality check)  TL&QED  20 Jun  
 USAID approves report  USAID  7 July  
Infographic  QED begins infographic design in collaboration with USAID  QEQ  1 May  
 QED submits final infographic  QED 22 May  
All 
Deliverable  QED submits all remaining deliverables to USAID  QED 30 May  
Note: TL = Team Leader.  ER = Evaluation Report.    
81 
  
VIII. FINAL  REPORT FORMAT  
 
The evaluation final report will include an executive summary; introduction; background 
of the local context and the projects being evaluated; the main evaluation questions; the methodology or methodologies; the limitations to the evaluatio n; findings, conclusions, 
and recommendations; and lessons learned.  
 
The executive summary will be kept to a maximum of 5 pages in length and summarize the 
purpose, background of the project being evaluated, main evaluation questions, methods, 
findings, conclusions, and recommendations and lessons learned.  
The evaluation methodology will be explained in the report in detail. Limitations to the evaluation will also be disclosed in the report, with particular attention to the limitations associated with the evaluation methodology as it unfolded in practice (e.g., selection bias, recall bias, unobservable differences between comparator groups, etc.)  
 
The annexes to the report will include:  
• The Evaluation SOW;  
• Any statements of difference regarding significant unresolved differences of 
opinion by funders, implementers, and/or members of the evaluation team;  
• All tools used in conducting the evaluation, such as questionnaires, checklists, and 
discussion guides;  
• Sources of information, properly identified and listed; and 
• Disclosure of conflict of interest forms  for all evaluation team members, either 
attesting to a lack of conflicts of interest or describing existing  conflicts of. 
 
In accordance with AIDAR 752.7005 , the contractor will make the final evaluation 
reports publicly available through the Development Experience Clearingho use within 30 
calendar days of final approval of the formatted report.  
 
IX. CRITERIA TO ENSURE THE QUALITY OF THE EVALUATION REPORT  
 
Per the USAID Evaluation Policy and USAID ADS 203, draft and final evaluation reports 
will be evaluated against the following criteria to ensure the quality of the evaluation report.
2 
 
• The evaluation report should represent a thoughtful, well- researched, and well-
organized effort to objectively evaluate what worked in the project, what did 
not, and why. 
• Evaluation reports shall address all evaluation questions included in the  SOW.  
• The evaluation report should include the SOW as an annex. All modifications to 
the SOW — whether in technical requirements, evaluation questions, evaluation 
team composition, methodology, or timeline—nee d to be agreed upon in writing 
by the  AOR/COR.  
• The evaluation methodology shall be explained in detail. All tools used in conducting  
82 
 the evaluation —such as questionnaires, checklists, and discussion guides —will be 
included in an annex in the final  report.  
• Evaluation findings will assess outcomes and impact on males and  females.  
• Limitations to the evaluation shall be disclosed in the report, with particular 
attention to the limitations associated with the evaluation methodology (selection 
bias, recall bias, unobservable differences between comparator groups,  etc.). 
• Evaluation findings should be presented as analyzed facts, evidence, and data and not 
based on anecdotes, hearsay, or the compilation of people’s opinions. Findings should be specific, concise, and  supported by strong quantitative or qualitative  
evidence.  
• Sources of information need to be properly identified and listed in an annex. 
• Recommendations need to be supported by a specific set of findings. 
• Recommendations should be action- oriented, practical, and specific, with 
defined responsibility for the  action.  
 
OTHER REQUIREMENTS  
 
All quantitative data collected by the evaluation team must be provided in machine- readable, non - 
proprietary formats as required by USAID’s Open Data policy (see ADS 579). The data should 
be organized and fully documented for use by those not fully familiar with the project or the 
evaluation. USAID will retain ownership of the survey and all da sets developed. 
 
All modifications to the required elements of the SOW of the contract/agreement, 
whether in technical requirements, evaluation questions, evaluation team composition, methodology, or timeline, need to be agreed upon in writing by the COR. Any revisions should be updated in the SOW that is included as an annex to the  Evaluation Report.  
 
 
 
2 See Appendix I of the Evaluation Policy and the Evaluation Report Review Checklist from the Evaluation 
Toolkit for additional guidance.  
83 
  
Annex (B) -  Evaluation Data Collection Tools  
 
The following interview gu ides have been developed to guide key informant interviews (and focus group 
discussions, when appropriate) with key informant groups.  
 
The instruments provide a broad guide from which questions will be tailored to the specific context of 
interviewees. Inte rviews with program participants and benficiaries will draw on background information 
provided by Compete in relation to that particular context, including:  
• Initial application for assistance 
• Business case developed by Compete in support of application  
• Compete rationale for deciding in favor of the application  
• Details of the grant  
• Baseline and data collected against business case indicators  
 
While efforts will be made to tailor to each particular informant, the following tools provide a framework for 
interviewing of the following key informant types:  
• Category A: Program participants/beneficiaries  
• Category B: Support agencies  
• Category C: Relevant Government agencies  
• Category D: Donors and other Development Actors interested in Private sector development  
 
Each interview aims to achieve detailed and holistic raw data that can contribute to answering of the questions 
detailed in the Evaluation Design included in the expanded Scope of Work.  
 
Consideration of gender dimensions will be factored into each interv iew. 
 The interviewing approach will be open, and additional lines of enquiry will be followed if thought to be relevant to the overall evaluation approach – particularly questions related to unintended outcomes.  
 
An introduction to each meeting will highlight:  
• Importance of the interview to shaping future thinking around private enterprise support  
• Our interest is in directly linking Compete support to changes in your business practice  
• Total anonymity of the interview  
• No results will be reported against any  specific activity  
• The importance of honest answers  
   
84 
 Category A:  Key Informant Interviews – Program participants/ beneficiaries  
 
Name      Business    
Location     Date 
 BACKGROUND  
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Better understand process of outreach and promotion of Compete 
• Understanding of process of application  
• Details of support available to encourage application  
• Levels of satisfaction with outreach and application process  
 A1. How did you first hear about Compete?  
a. Advertisement  
b. Business association  
c. Word of Mouth  
d. Other……… 
 
A2. Was the grant application process easy to understand?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
 
A3. Was the grant application process easy to complete?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
 
A4. If no, was support available to assist with application?  
a. Yes  Details: ……………….  
b. No 
 A5. Can you describe the process of your application and how agreement was reached with Compete?:  
 
A6. What were the greatest challenges of the process?  
o Details  
 A7. What was it that you found most attractive about the Compete approach?  
• Availability of a grant  
• Availability of technical assistance 
• Workforce development  
• Other  
 
Details of assistance  
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Understand the context of support to the firm  
• Understand the context of how firms engaged Support agencies which Compete supported  
 A8. Please describe details of your agreement and the different aspects of support provided by Compete (explore the following to prompt):  
 Workforce development     Grants/Financial  
Technical assistance      Linkage to business advisors  
Strengthened capacity of Support Agencies   Workforce development  
Market access       Other  
 Document key differences  between interviewee understanding and documents provided by Compete  
  
85 
 A9. Has Compete support to other organizations assisted in your own orga nizations development? e.g 
business associations, distribution centres, cooperatives etc.?  
• Details  
 
A10. Does your business receive support from other agencies?  
• If yes, who and what?  
• Explore significance of Compete support compared to other support.  
o Details 
 
A11. Women  
Were any specific approaches put in place to support women’s participation?  
• If so, what?  
 
Impact of assistance from Compete  
 
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Achieve textured understanding of impact of support to firm  
• Identify gaps that could have further progressed the firm  
• Understand the contribution of project support to Support agencies  
 
A12. What have been the major changes for your business since receiving support from Compete? (allow them to self identify initially, then promp t with specific questions below related to different facets of support):  
o Details  
 A13. What has been the impact on your business of the relationship with Compete in terms of:  
• A13.a Innovation – what changes have you made to your business approach?  
o Details  
 • A13.b Investment – Have you further invested in your company since receiving support from Compete? Was 
Compete support a factor in your decision to invest further in the company?  
o Details  
 
• A13.c Market orientation – what has changed for you in terms of the customers/markets you now engage? 
By type? Location? By breadth?  
o Details  
• A13.d Export orientation - Have you entered or expanded export markets through the project?  
o Details  
 • A13.e Domestic orientation – Have you been able to expand in local market place ? 
o Details  
 
• A13.f Value adding – are you able to achieve a better price for your products now? Are you able to produce 
more?  
o Details  
 
• A13. g Employment – have market changes reduced or increased the number of people you employ? (from 
baseline to now?)  
o If employing more, what type of people are you employing? Age/ gender/ skill level?  
o Details  
o Women – was the project supportive of women’s participation  
 
• A13.h Revenue/profit – Have total revenues increased? Have profits increased?  
o Details  
 • A13.i Supporting opportunities for women – has the project worked with you to encourage women’s 
inclusion in your business model?   
86 
 o If yes, how?  
o If yes, what has been the impact of that support?  
 
A14. Of the different types of support provided, what were the two most valuable support components for your situation? (in order)  
1. …. 
2. …. 
 Future directions/sustainability  
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Consider issues of sustainability  
• Consider gaps in Compete model 
 A15. Thinking about the range of assistance provided through Compete, what other types of support could further strengthen your business.  
 A16. (If achieving progress) Will you be able to maintain progress of your business without further support?  
 A17. Over the next 24 months, do you expect to employ:  
a. The s ame number of people  
b. More people  
c. Less people  
 A18. Overall, how would you assess your business development and opportunity over the next two years?  
a. Worsen  
b. Stay the same as now  
c. Improve modestly  
d. Improve significantly  
 
A19. If USAID is to commence another pri vate sector promotion type project in the WB and Gaza, what 
would you suggest their major focus be?  
o Details  
 
A20 Women  
Are there different approaches you would recommend to better support inclusion of women in the project?  
 Unintended consequences  
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Have there been unintended consequences (positive or negative)?  
 A21.  Are Compete efforts benefitting non -direct project beneficiaries? (Skills transfer, improved business 
associations, technical advances, replicat ion of new technologies, etc..)  
 A22. Have their been any negative consequences  
• Unsupported actors being squeezed out of market  
• Market distortions e.g land prices  
 A23. Has the project contributed to greater consideration of women’s needs and inclusion in your business 
model?  
 
Project management Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Determine suitability of management approach to different client groups’ reality  
• Determine degree that management system was able to listen and respond to participants perspectives/concerns  
• Re-emphasize confidentiality!  
  
87 
 A24. Thinking of your overall relationship with Compete, have they been responsive and easy to work with? 
(quite possibly, the relationship might have been both good and bad at times)  
• If yes, examples?  
• If no, examples?  
 
A.25What management and/or communication approaches would have assisted the project approach?  
o Details  
 
Other notes  
   
88 
 Category B: Key Informant Interviews – Support agencies  
 
BACKGROUND  
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Better understand process of outreach and promotion of Compete 
• Understanding of process of including Support agencies  
• Levels of satisfaction amongst Support agencies  
 
B1. How did you first hear about Compete?  
e. Advertisement  
f. Business association  
g. Word of Mouth  
h. Other……… 
 B2. Was the grant application process easy to understand?  
c. Yes 
d. No 
 B3. Was the grant application process easy to complete?  
c. Yes 
d. No 
 
B4. If no, was support available to assist with application?  
c. Yes  Details: ……………….  
d. No 
 
B5. Can you describe the process of your application and how agreement was reached with Compete?:  
 B6. What were the greatest challenges of the process?  
o Details  
 Details of assistance  
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Understand the context of facilitating a supportive business landscape  
• Understand the context of how firms engaged Support agencies which Compete supported  
 B7. Please describe details of your agreement and the different aspects of support provided by Compete (explore the following to prompt):  
 Workforce development     Grants/Financial  
Technical assistance      Linkage to business advisors  
Strengthened capacity of Support Agencies   Workforce development  
Market access       Other  
• Document key differences  between interviewee understanding and documents provided by Compete  
 
B8. Describe your approach to engaging SMEs and how you provided support to them.  
• Details  
 B9.Does your approach support an export orientation?  
• Details  
 
B10. Does your business/association/coop receive support from other agencies?  
• If yes, who?  
• Explore significance of Compete support compared to other support.  
o Details  
  
89 
 B11. Women  
Were any specific approaches put in place to support women’s participation?  
• If so, what?  
 
Impact of assistance from Compete  
 Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Achieve textured understanding of impact of support  
• Identify gaps that could have further progressed the approach 
• Understand the contribution of project support to Support agencies  
 B12. What have been the major changes your organization has experienced through Compete support? (allow 
them to self identify initially, then prompt with specific questions below related to different facets of support):  
o Details  
 B13. What has been the impact of Compete support on your business in terms of:  
• B13.a Innovation – w hat changes have you made to your approach?  
o Details  
 
• B13.b Investment – Have you further invested in your company/association since receiving support from 
Compete? Was Compete support a factor in your decision to invest further?  
o Details  
 
• B13.c Market orientation – what has changed for you in terms of interest in the services you provide? (try to 
quantify)  
o Details  
 
• B13.d Export orientation – Has your support enhanced the export orientation of clients?  
o Details  
 • B13.e Domestic orientation – Has your support enhanced client ability to better engage and expand in local 
market place?  
o Details  
 • B13.f Value adding – are your approaches helping support value adding and the achievement of better prices?  
o Details  
 Sustainability  
Objectives of this sect ion of interview:  
• The degree that the support organization is a contributing factor to sustainability  
• Are there gaps in Compete model that could be added to enhance effectiveness and sustainability of the model 
 
B15. Thinking about the range of assistance provided through Compete, what other types of support would 
further strengthen the business landscape you operate within.  
 
B.16 Will you be able to maintain the contribution you make to that landscape without further support?  
 
B.17 Over the next 24 months,  do you expect to employ:  
a. The same number of people  
b. More people  
c. Less people  
 
B.18 Overall, how would you assess the direction of the business landscape that you work on over the next 
two years?  
a. Will worsen  
b. Stay the same as now   
90 
 c. Improve modestly  
d. Improve sign ificantly  
 
B.19 If USAID is to commence another private sector promotion type project in the WB and Gaza, would you suggest their approach be? More or less the same, or evolved?  
o Details  
 B.20 Women  
Are there opportunities to strengthen women’s participation and contribution to your business landscape?  
 B.21 Youth  
Are there opportunities to strengthen youth participation and contribution to your business landscape?  
 Unintended consequences  
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Have there been unintended consequences (positive or negative?  
 B.22 Have they observed Compete efforts benefitting non-direct project beneficiaries? (Skills, through business associations, technical advances, replication of new technologies, approaches to new markets, etc..)  
 B.23 Have they observed any negative consequences  
• Unsupported actors being squeezed out of market  
• Market distortions e.g land prices, monopolies  
 B.24 Has the project contributed to greater consideration of women’s needs and inclusion on your business 
landscape /sector?  
 
Project management 
Objectives of this section of interview:  
• Determine suitability of management approach to different client groups’ reality  
• Determine degree that management system was able to listen and respond to participants perspectives/concerns  
• Re-emphasize confidentiality!  
 B.25 Thinking of your overall relationship with Compete, have they been responsive and easy to work with? (quite possibly, the relationship might have been both good and bad at times)  
• If yes, examples?  
• If no, examples?  
 
B.26 What management and/or communication approaches would have assisted the project approach?  
o Details  
 
 
Other notes  
   
91 
 Category C: Key Informant Interviews – Government agencies  
 
Objectives of interviewing of Government agencies:  
• Understand relationship maintained with key government agencies  
• Assess degree that approaches and results have been communicated to Government partners  
• Understands sector needs as perceived by Government  
• Determine levels of satisfaction amongst Government agencies of Project approa ch 
 
 
BACKGROUND  
C1.  Can you describe the history of the relationship between your Ministry and Compete since it 
commenced in 2012?  
• Clarity around the approach  
• Depth of engagement  
• Frequency of engagement  
• Potential for Ministry to contribute to thinking ar ound needs within the sector  
 
DETAILS OF RELATIONSHIP  
C2.  How would you describe the role of your Ministry on the Compete landscape? What is your 
contribution to the project?  
 C3.  What are the most commons forms of communication between the project and your Ministry?  
 C4.  Compete has a range of different approaches to private sector development. Can you comment on 
the contribution and effectiveness of the following approaches in progressing your sector of interest:  
• Access to high quality business develo pment advice  
• Support to business strategy development  
• Support for innovation  
• Availability of grants  
• Workforce development  
• Technical assistance  
• Support to the broader business landscape  
o strengthened business associations  
o more reliable supply lines  
o etc. 
• Market development  
• Support for enhanced expert orientation  
• Improved operating environment i.e. helping reduce market constraints (through lobbying of Israeli 
government)  
 C5.  What systems and resources does the Ministry have in place to support private sector development 
itself?  
 C6.  Would you say there is complementarity between how Compete operates in your sector and your 
own strategy and objectives for the sector?  
• your approach to engaging SMEs and providing support to them  
• your approach to improve the sector’s export orientation (or engaging external markets)  
• your approach to addressing market constraints  
  C7.  Do you have any specific approaches in place for enhancing women’s participation in the sector?  
 
C8.  Do you have any specific approaches in pl ace for enhancing youth participation in the sector?  
 
C.9  Has Compete contributed to improving opportunities for women and/or youth in your sector?  
  
92 
 C.10 Has Compete worked well with other private sector development actors active in your sector?   
 
Impact of assistance from Compete  
 
C11.  How would you describe the overall contribution of Compete to your sector specifically, and private 
sector development more generally?  
 C.12  What have been the major changes you have observed in relation to the following facets of support:  
• C12.a Innovation  
o Details; examples  
o Is there evidence of spillover from Compete to others in the sector?  
 
• C12.b Investment – Are businesses more confident to invest through receiving support from Compete?  
o Details; examples  
o Is there evidence of spillover from Compete to others in the sector?  
 
• C12.c Market orientation – Are Compete supported businesses better able to expand their markets?  
o Details; examples  
o Is there evidence of spillover from Compete to others in the sector?  
 • C12.d Export orientation – Have Compete supported business become more export orientated?  
o Details; examples  
o Is there evidence of spillover from Compete to others in the sector?  
 • C12.e Domestic orientation – Are Compete supported businesses better able to engage and  expand in the 
local market place?  
o Details; examples  
o Is there evidence of spillover from Compete to others in the sector?  
 
• C12.f Value adding – Do you observe Compete supported businesses being effective in value adding? Are 
they achieving better prices?  
o Details; examples  
o Is there evidence of spillover from Compete to others in the sector?  
 
• C12.g Employment – what do you observe in Compete supported businesses in relation to employment?  
o has the overall employment context of your sector improved?  
o Have oppor tunities arisen for women and youth?  
 
• C12.h Revenue/profit – what do you know of the revenues and profitability being achieved by Compete 
supported companies?  
o Details  
• C12.i Support Organizations (Component B)  
o Has Compete been effective in building the overall market landscape in terms of support to Support entities; 
business associations; supply chains; back houses; access to technical expertise  
 • C12.h Supporting opportunities for women – has the project worked to encourage women’s inclusion in 
your bus iness model?  
o If yes, how?  
o If yes, what has been the impact of that support?  
 
C13. How have all of the above impacted upon and affected your Ministry’s position and capacity to 
progress your sector? 
• Do you feel strengthened in your role following Compete?  
• Do you feel the sector has been strengthened following Compete?   
   
  
93 
 Unintended consequences  
C.14  Have you observed Compete efforts benefitting non- direct project beneficiaries? (Skills, through 
business associations, technical advances, replication of new  technologies, approaches to new markets, etc..)  
 
C.15  Have you observed any negative consequences  
• Unsupported actors being squeezed out of market  
• Market distortions  
 C.16  Has the project contributed to greater consideration of women’s needs and inclusion on your 
business landscape/sector?  
 Project management 
 
C.17  Thinking of your overall relationship with Compete, have they been responsive and easy to work 
with? (quite possibly, the relationship might have been both good and bad at times)  
• If yes, examples?  
• If no, examples?  
 C.18  What management and/or communication approaches would have strengthened the project 
approach?  
o Details  
 
Future directions/sustainability  
 C19.   Do you believe the approach employed by Compete has sufficiently taken sustainability issues into 
account? Are/will supported companies be able to continue to progress their businesses after Compete support stops?  
 C20.  Thinking about the range of assistance provided through Compete, what other types of support 
would further str engthen the private sector landscape of your areas of interest?  
 C21.  What approaches would you like to see in future private sector promotion type projects in the WB 
and Gaza?, What is most important in terms of further evolving your sector?  
o Details  
 
C22. Are there opportunities to strengthen women’s participation and contribution to your business 
landscape?  
 C23. Are there opportunities to strengthen youth participation and contribution to your business 
landscape?  
 
Other notes  
   
94 
 Category D: Key Informant  Interviews – Donors and other Development Actors interested in 
Private sector development  
 
Objectives of interviewing of donors and other development agencies:  
• Understand relationship maintained by Compete with other actors interested in private sector development  
• Assess degree that dialogue exists with other actors interested in private sector development  
• Understand sector needs as perceived by other actors interested in private sector development  
  
BACKGROUND  
D1.  Can you describe your understanding of Compete and the nature of your relationship with them?  
• Frequency and nature of engagement  
 
D2.  What programming are you currently undertaking in support of private sector development?  
• Agriculture?  
• ICT? 
• Stone and Marble?  
• Tourism?  
• Garments?  
• Fisheries?  
 D3.  How do you see the private sector development landscape in general, and within these sectors in 
particular?  
 DETAILS OF RELATIONSHIP  
 
D4.  Compete has a range of different approaches to private sector development. Can you comment on 
1/ their contribution and effectiveness and 2/ current needs and opportunities in the following respects:  
• Access to high quality business development advice  
• Support to business strategy development  
• Support for innovation  
• Availability of grants  
• Workforce development  
• Technical assistance  
• Support to the broader business landscape  
o strengthened business associations  
o more reliable supply lines  
o etc. 
• Market development  
• Support for enhanced expert orientation  
• Improved operating environment i.e. helping reduce market constraints (through lobbying of Israeli 
government)  
 
D5.  What other actors are active and undertaking programming in these areas? What do you regard to 
be best practice in private sector development currently, noting the many unique constraints faced in the 
West Bank and G aza?  
 
D6.  What differences do you observe in terms of promoting private sector development in West Bank 
and Gaza?  
 D7.  Would you say there is complementarity between how Compete operates in your sector and your 
own strategy and objectives for the sector ? 
• your approach to engaging SMEs and providing support to them  
• your approach to improve the sector’s export orientation (or engaging external markets)  
• your approach to addressing market constraints   
95 
  
D.8 Do you have any specific approaches in place for enhancing women’s participation in the sector? 
What have you observed as being effective practice in enhancing women’s private sector participation?  
 D.9  Do you have any specific approaches in place for enhancing youth participation in the sector? What 
have you observed as being effective practice in enhancing youth private sector participation?  
 D.10  Do you regard Compete as having made a positive contribution to improving opportunities for 
women and/or youth in the private sector?  
 D.11 Are there any p articular sectors where you regard Compete performance to stand out – either 
positively or negatively?  
 Unintended consequences  
D.12  Have you observed Compete efforts benefitting non- direct project beneficiaries? (Skills, through 
business associations, te chnical advances, replication of new technologies, approaches to new markets, etc..) 
 D.15  Have you observed any negative consequences coming from Compete implementation? For e.g.  
• Unsupported actors being squeezed out of market  
• Market distortions  
 D.16  H as the project contributed to greater consideration of women’s needs and inclusion on your 
business landscape/sector?  
 Project management 
 
D.17  Thinking of your overall relationship with Compete, have they been responsive and easy to work 
with? (quite possibly, the relationship might have been both good and bad at times) • If yes, examples?  
• If no, examples?  
 D.18  What management and/or communication approaches would have strengthened the project 
approach?  
o Details  
 
Future directions/sustainability  
 D19.   Do you believe the approach employed by Compete has sufficiently taken sustainability issues into 
account? Are/will supported companies be able to continue to progress their businesses after Compete support stops?  
 D20.  Thinking about the range of assistance provided through Compete, what other types of support 
would further strengthen the private sector landscape of your areas of interest?  
 D21.  What approaches would you like to see in future private sector promotion type projects in the WB 
and Gaza? What is most important in terms of further evolving your sector?  
o Details  
 
D22. Are there opportunities to strengthen women’s participation and contribution to your business 
landscape?  
 
D23. Are there opportunities to strengthen youth participation and contribution to your business 
landscape?  
 Other notes  
  
96 
 Annex (C) - Final Sample of Firms/ Farmers Interviewed  
 Y1 Y2 Y 3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Y7
1 Kufr Dan Cooperative WB Jenin Agriculture Baby Cucumber M 3 FY5 2 1 90,138.00 $                
2 Shiraz Adel Ghalib Maree WB Jenin Agriculture Baby Cucumber M 1 FY5 1 856.80 $                      
3 Mahmoud Saleh Mounir Abed WB Jenin Agriculture Baby Cucumber M 1 FY5 1 856.80 $                      
4 Tubas Company for Packaging and Marketing Agricultural P    WB Tubas A griculture Carrots M 2 FY3 2 547,238.16 $              
6 Al Furat Agricultural Co. (Mwaffaq Daraghmeh) WB Tubas Agriculture Potatoes M 5 FY1 2 1 1 1 201,988.80 $              
8 Al Far'a and Albuqe'a Farm WB Tubas Agriculture Potatoes M 2 FY2 1 1 112,156.73 $              
9 Osama Abu Al Rub WB Jenin Agriculture Hanging Strawberry M 3 FY3 1 1 1 123,267.00 $              
10 Farmer Khaled Mohammed Yassin Abu Al rob WB Jenin Agriculture Hanging Strawberry M 1 FY5 1 13,786.95 $                
11 Raeda Hasan Mohammed Assous WB Jenin Agriculture Hanging Strawberry F 3 FY4 1 1 1 40,361.00 $                
12 Al Ard Company for Palestinian Agricultural Products WB Nablus Agriculture Olive Oil M 1 FY6 1 21,000.00 $                
13 Palestinian Center for Agriculture Research and Developme    WB Nablus A griculture Olive Oil M 4 FY2 2 2 403,328.00 $              
14 Canaan Fair Trade WB Jenin Agriculture Olive oil M 10 FY1 2 5 3 506,303.10 $              
15 Daraghmeh Company for Agricultural Production and Medi  WB Tubas A griculture Fresh herbs M 4 FY1 1 3 157,200.00 $              
16 Thimar Al Tabi’a Company for Agricultural Investment and     WB Jericho A griculture Fresh herbs M 6 FY1 3 2 1 287,165.50 $              
17 Haifa Company WB Tubas Agriculture Dried Herbs 1 FY5 1 79,060.00 $                
18 Hamza Abu Thabet WB Jordan Valley Agriculture Post Harvest M 1 FY6 1
19 Jenin Agricultureal Vegetables Company WB Jenin Agriculture Post Harvest M 1 FY7 1 69,300.00 $                
20 Al Junaidy Modern Nursery WB Nablus Agriculture Nursery M 1 FY3 1 142,222.00 $              
21 Al Nakheel Nursery WB Jenin Agriculture Nursery M 1 FY5 1 2,400.00 $                   
22 Tamer Mohammad Mahmoud Hamdan WB Nablus Agriculture Grapes M 2 FY3 1 1 12,132 $                      
23 Ibrahim Abdul Rahman Abdul Jalil Sa'da WB Hebron Agriculture Grapes M 1 FY5 1 1,760.00 $                   
24 Akram Mahmoud Abdul Rahman Karajeh WB Hebron Agriculture Grapes M 1 FY5 1 2,200.00 $                   
25 Ibrahim Shehadeh Balawneh WB Jordan Valley Agriculture Grapes M 2 FY3 1 1 9,702.45 $                   
26 West Bank Salt WB Jericho Agriculture Food Processing M 5 FY1 2 1 1 1 151,072.80 $              
27 Al Salam Company WB Hebron Agriculture Food Processing M 4 FY1 1 1 1 1 322,619.00 $              
28 Nmotion Company for Digital Technology-Nmotion Studios WB Ramallah & Al Bireh I CT Service provider M 1 FY7 1 7,000.00 $                   
29 Palestine Polytechnic University WB Hebron ICT Organization M 2 FY5 1 1 119,213.00 $              
30 Infinite Tiers WB Nablus ICT Software  Development M 2 FY1 1 1 255,162.00 $              
31 H+W Mena WB Ramallah & Al Bireh ICT S oftware  Development M 4 FY1 1 1 1 1 312,511.50 $              
32 Leaders/ e-Zone WB Ramallah & Al Bireh ICT S tartup M 3 FY2 1 1 1 301,363.62 $              
33 Ibdaa'- Intelligent Care System WB N ablus ICT Startup M 1 FY5 1 1,300.00 $                   
34 Murad Resort Hotel WB Bethlehem Tourism Hotel M 1 FY4 1 11,152.00 $                
35 Beauty Inn Hotel WB Ramallah & Al Bireh Tourism Ho tel M 1 FY5 1 1,168.33 $                   
36 AlBader Hotel Company Diamond Hotel  WB B ethlehem Tourism Hotel M 1 FY6 1 6,000.00 $                   
37 Bandak Tourism & Investment Company “Grand Hotel Beth WB Bethlehem T ourism Hotel F 1 FY5 1 6,408.00 $                   
38 Holy Land Incoming Tour Operators Association (HLITOA) WB Bethlehem Tourism Organization F 3 FY2 1 1 1 671,915.35 $              
39 Bethlehem University WB Bethlehem Tourism Organization M 2 FY3 1 1 255,143.85 $              
40 PalClean for Cleaning Services WB Ramallah & Al Bireh Tourism S ervice provider M 1 FY2 1 52,850.00 $                
41 Alternative Business Solutions/ Visit Palestine  WB B ethlehem Tourism Service provider M 1 FY3 1 144,621.43 $              
42 Centre for Cultural Heritage Preservation - CCHP WB Bethlehem .Tourism Service provider M 1 FY1 1 2,244,360.00 $          
43 Handicraft Village  - Dar Sabab WB Beit Sahour Tourism Site  Renovation F 2 FY6 1 1 492,561.68 $              
44 Rozana Association WB Birzeit Tourism Trail Development M 1 FY2 1 36,670.00 $                
45 Laila Tours and Travels WB Bethlehem Tourism Tour Operator F 3 FY5 3 16,514.00 $                
46 Samara Tourist & Travel Agency WB Jerusalem Tourism Tour Operator F 1 FY2 1 147,985.00 $              
47 Technological Company to Engrave Marble and Granite WB Bethlehem Stone & Marble Decorative Stone M 2 FY5 1 1 245,664.00 $              
48 Abu Kamil Modern Automatic Brick Factory WB Nablus Stone & Marble Environmental stone products M 3 FY3 1 1 1 161,838.00 $              
49 Creative Building Solutions WB Ramallah & Al Bireh Stone & Marble Environmental stone products 2 FY2 1 1 122,635.00 $              
50 H.L Jerusalem Stone & Marble Company WB Hebron Stone & Marble Traditional Stone M 1 FY4 1 18,273.00 $                
51Sabrin Atef Abdul Qadir AlTabanGSDeir Al Balah AgricultureHerbs F 2 FY6 1 1 29,447.00 $                
52 Abdul Fattah Khader Mohammed Al Khatib GS B eit Lahia Agriculture Strawberry M 1 FY5 1 5,298.00 $                   
53 Mahmoud Ahmad Saled Ikhlil GS Beit Lahia Agriculture Hanging Strawberry M 1 FY5 1 46,546.00 $                
54 Abdrabbo Abd Abdrabbo Al Tabaan GS Deir Al Balah Agriculture He rbs M 2 FY6 1 1 29,447.00 $                
55 Mohammad Mahmoud Mohammad Al Shaar GS K hanyounis Agriculture Potatoes M 1 FY7 1 5,922.00 $                   
56 Hamdy Jebril Said Aljerjawi Company GS Deir Al Balah Agriculture P ost Harvest M 1 FY6 1 147,668.00 $              
57 Husny Abdallah Shihadeh and Sons Company for General T GS Deir Al Balah Agriculture P ost Harvest M 1 FY5 1 133,922.00 $              
58 Sofyan Kuhail Fish Farm GS Ga za Fishing Onshore M 1 FY5 1 150,152.00 $              
59 Fish Fresh GS K hanYunis Fishing Onshore M 1 FY5 1 162,600.00 $              
60 Jaber Brothers Company for Construction and Commerce GS Gaza Garment Ga rment M 1 FY5 1  $                 70,699.00 
61 Hasan Shihadeh and Brothers Company for Industry and Tra  GS Gaza Ga rment Garment M2F Y5 1 1 28,647.00 $                
62 Al Tariq GS Ga za ICT Software  Development M 2 FY2 1 1 220,789.00 $              
63 Ggateway GS Gaza ICT Organization F 1 FY6 1 9,570.95 $                   
64 Baskalet Company for Electronic Game Production  GS Gaza ICT Startup M 2 FY6 1 1 8,500.00 $                   
65 Palestinian Committee for Hotels Restaurants & Touristic S GS Gaza T ourism Organization M 1 FY5 1 29,674.50 $                No. Start Value of AssistanceYears of Assistance
Beneficiary Sector Region Governorate Sub-Sector Owner Count of Assitance
 
97 
 Annex (D)- Summary Analysis of Compete Data and Sample Selection Considerations  
  No. of Firms/Farms       
Sector  Sub-Sector/VC  Total  WB GS Min Investment  Max Investment  Average Investment  Total Investment  % of total Investment w/in 
Sector  
Agriculture  Baby Cucumbers  240 240 0  $                      405.00    $                40,000.00    $                      887.00    $             212,965.00   2% 
Agriculture  Carrots  5 5 0  $                  2,129.00    $             547,238.00    $             130,532.00    $             652,662.00   5% 
Agriculture  Dates  10 10 0  $                  2,458.00    $             207,556.00    $                53,115.00    $             531,157.00   4% 
Agriculture  Dried Herbs  10 10 0  $                  2,458.00    $             178,169.00    $                50,553.00    $             505,534.00   4% 
Agriculture  Food Processing  5 4 1  $                  4,620.00    $             151,072.00    $                48,071.00    $             240,359.00   2% 
Agriculture  Fresh Herbs  20 20 0  $                  7,200.00    $             287,165.00    $                52,796.00    $          1,055,935.00   8% 
Agriculture  Fresh Produce  47 47 0  $                  9,958.00    $             417,626.00    $             101,652.00    $             813,221.00   6% 
Agriculture  Grapes  440 440 0  $                  1,444.00    $                34,012.00    $                  3,287.00    $          1,446,147.00   11%  
Agriculture  Hanging Strawberries  23 21 2  $                13,786.00    $             123,267.00    $                37,347.00    $             858,989.00   6% 
Agriculture  Herbs  16 0 16  $                  2,439.00    $                30,998.00    $                27,621.00    $             441,940.00   3% 
Agriculture  Lychee  1 1 0  $                28,922.00    $                28,922.00    $                28,922.00    $                28,922.00   0% 
Agriculture  Meat & Dairy  7 7 0  $                18,900.00    $                55,588.00    $                28,426.00    $             198,988.00   1% 
Agriculture  Mushroom  1 1 0  $             164,947.00    $             164,947.00    $             164,947.00    $             164,947.00   1% 
Agriculture  Nureseries  7 7 0  $                  2,400.00    $             163,709.00    $                74,218.00    $             371,091.00   3% 
Agriculture  Olives  65 65 0  $                  2,077.00    $             506,303.00    $                16,779.00    $          1,090,670.00   8% 
Agriculture  Agri. Organizations  3 3 0  $                45,818.00    $             124,743.00    $                86,318.00    $             258,954.00   2% 
Agriculture  Post Harvest  7 2 5  $                69,300.00    $             149,700.00    $             124,836.00    $             749,020.00   6% 
Agriculture  Potato  62 6 56  $                  3,948.00    $             364,825.00    $                27,627.00    $          1,712,876.00   13%  
Agriculture  Service Providers  6 6 0  $                  2,400.00    $             203,019.00    $                79,512.00    $             477,075.00   4% 
Agriculture  Strawberries  85 0 85  $                  4,301.00    $                  5,382.00    $                  4,585.00    $             389,775.00   3% 
Agriculture  Sweet Potato  7 0 7  $                14,535.00    $                14,535.00    $                14,535.00    $             101,745.00   1% 
Agriculture  Treated Waste Water  9 9 0  $                14,616.00    $             382,112.00    $                74,688.00    $             672,198.00   5% 
Agriculture  Vegetables  145 2 143  $                      900.00    $                11,050.00    $                  2,182.00    $             316,515.00   2% 
Agriculture  Total  1221  906 315  $                      405.00    $             547,238.00    $                10,885.90    $       13,291,685.00   100%   
98 
 Fishing  On-Shore  4 0 4  $                50,500.00    $             162,600.00    $             116,488.00    $             465,952.00   98%  
Fishing  Off-Shore  1 0 1  $                  7,125.00    $                  7,125.00    $                  7,125.00    $                  7,125.00   2% 
Fishing  Total  5 0 5  $                  7,125.00    $             162,600.00    $                94,615.40    $             473,077.00   100%  
Garment  Garment  33 0 33  $                  1,800.00    $                70,699.00    $                20,185.00    $             624,467.00   100%  
Garment  Total  33 0 33  $                  1,800.00    $                70,699.00    $                20,185.00    $             624,467.00   100%  
ICT Organizations  4 3 1  $                  9,570.00    $             412,066.00    $             167,696.00    $             838,483.00   22%  
ICT Service Providers  7 1 6  $                  4,130.00    $                24,925.00    $                12,466.00    $                87,122.00   2% 
ICT Software Developers  33 25 8  $                      900.00    $             312,511.00    $                59,159.00    $          1,952,263.00   51%  
ICT Startups  75 68 7  $                      750.00    $             301,363.00    $                36,491.00    $             985,264.00   26%  
ICT Total  119 97 22  $                      750.00    $             412,066.00    $                32,463.29    $          3,863,132.00   100%  
Toursim  Hotels  75 74 1  $                  1,168.00    $                14,738.00    $                  3,014.00    $             226,117.00   2% 
Toursim  Organizations  8 7 1  $                29,674.00    $             671,915.00    $             264,721.00    $          1,853,050.00   18%  
Toursim  Retsaurants  3 0 3  $                  7,140.00    $                12,200.00    $                  9,223.00    $                27,670.00   0% 
Toursim  Service Providers  4 4 0  $                52,850.00    $          2,244,360.00    $             659,544.00    $          2,638,179.00   26%  
Toursim  Site Rennovation  24 24 0  $                36,670.00    $             517,124.00    $             203,265.00    $          4,878,364.00   48%  
Toursim  Tour Operators  12 12 0  $                  2,800.00    $             147,985.00    $                43,565.00    $             566,346.00   6% 
Toursim  Total  126 121 5  $                  1,168.00    $          2,244,360.00    $                80,870.84    $       10,189,726.00   100%  
Stone & Marble  Decorative Stone  8 8 0  $                  1,990.00    $             245,664.00    $                94,633.00    $             757,086.00   35%  
Stone & Marble  Environmental Stone  16 16 0  $                  1,294.00    $             161,838.00    $                24,070.00    $             385,135.00   18%  
Stone & Marble  Organizations  1 1 0  $                23,585.00    $                23,585.00    $                23,585.00    $                23,585.00   1% 
Stone & Marble  Service Providers  1 1 0  $             109,041.00    $             109,041.00    $             109,041.00    $             109,041.00   5% 
Stone & Marble  Traditional Stone  20 20 0  $                      438.00    $             297,913.00    $                45,110.00    $             902,213.00   41%  
Stone & Marble  Total  46 46 0  $                      438.00    $             297,913.00    $                47,327.39    $          2,177,060.00   100%  
TOTAL  1550  1170  380      
  
99 
  
Basis of sample calculation:  
Total Number of working days Team is in -country: 29; Total planning, analysis and de -briefing days: 9; Total days available for field -visits and meetings: 20, of which 
about 5 are for travel and meetings with DAI/USIAD/Stakeholders; Total days available for field work:  15. 
With a total of ~15 field work days for 2 consultants @ 3 firms per day each (assumes that we will split up and to allow for other interviews), we can plan on 
visiting ~62 firms/farmers (WB: 46; GS:16). Based on above, these could be broken down as follows  Sector Number of sub-sectors WB GS Total% of total 
firms/farmers 
supported WB GS Total% of total 
Contribution
Agriculture 23 906 315 1,221                        79% 10,922,980.00$       2,368,706.00 $          13,291,686.00 $              43%
Fishing 2 0 5 5                                0% - $                            473,077.00 $             473,077.00 $                    2%
Garment 1 0 33 33                              2% - $                            624,467.00 $             624,467.00 $                    2%
ICT 4 97 22 119                            8% 3,369,580.00 $          493,551.00 $             3,863,132.00 $                13%
Tourism 6 121 5 126                            8% 10,128,742.00$       60,984.00 $                10,189,726.00 $              33%
Stone & Marble 5 46 0 46                              3% 2,177,060.00 $          2,177,060.00 $                7%
Total 41 1170 380 1,550                        100% 26,598,362.00$       4,020,785.00 $          30,619,148.00 $              100%
Note: in ICT one company is in Israel bringing the total to 127.
Sector WB GS Total WB GS Total
Agriculture 74% 26% 100% 82% 18% 100%
Fishing 0% 100% 100% 0% 100% 100%
Garment 0% 100% 100% 0% 100% 100%
ICT 82% 18% 100% 87% 13% 100% WB GS Total
Tourism 96% 4% 100% 99% 1% 100% 75% 25% 100%
Stone & Marble 100% 0% 100% 100% 0% 100%
Total 75% 25% 100% 87% 13% 100%
Sector WB GS Total WB GS Total Sector WB GS Total
Agriculture 77% 83% 100% 41% 59% 100% Agriculture 50% 50% 49%
Fishing 0% 1% 100% 0% 12% 100% Fishing 0% 15% 4%
Garment 0% 9% 100% 0% 16% 100% Garment 0% 15% 5%
ICT 8% 6% 100% 13% 12% 100% ICT 15% 15% 15%
Tourism 10% 1% 100% 38% 2% 100% Tourism 30% 5% 23%
Stone & Marble 4% 0% 100% 8% 0% 100% Stone & Marble 5% 0% 4%
Total 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Total 100% 100% 100%No. of Firms/Farmers Supported Total AID Investment
Percentag of Firms/Farmers Supported within Region Prcentage Distribution of AID Investment within RegionRegional Distribution of firms Regional Distribution of AID Investment
Regional Distribution of firms For Sampling
Percentag of Firms/Farmers Supported 
within Region to be Sampleds a mple
consideration
s a mple
consideration 
100 
  
 Sector WB GS
Agriculture 25 8
Fishing 0 2
Garment 0 2
I
CT 6 3
Tourism 12 1
Stone & Marble 3 0
Total 46 16
VCsNumber to be 
sampled VCsNumber to be 
sampled
Baby Cucumbers 2 Strawberries 2
Carrots 2 Herbs 2
P
otato 3 Potato 2
Hangining Strawberies 2 Hangining Strawberies 0
Olives 3 Olives 0
Fresh Herbs 3 Fresh Herbs 0
Post Harvest 2 Post Harvest 2
Nurseries 2 Nurseries 0
Grapes 4 Grapes 0
Food Processing 2 Food Processing 0
Total 25 Total 8
On-Shore 0 On-Shore 1
Off-Shore 0 Off-Shore 1
Total 0 Total 2
Garment 0 Garment 2
Total 0 Total 2
Organizations 1 Organizations 0
Service Providers 1 Service Providers 1
Software Developers 2 Software Developers 1
Startups 2 Startups 1
Total 6 Total 3
Hotels 3 Hotels 0
Organizations 2 Organizations 1
Retsaurants 0 Retsaurants 0
Service Providers 3 Service Providers 0
Site Rennovation 2 Site Rennovation 0
Tour Operators 2 Tour Operators 0
Total 12 Total 1
Decorative Stone 1 Decorative Stone 0
Environmental Stone 1 Environmental Stone 0
Organizations 0 Organizations 0
Service Providers 0 Service Providers 0
Traditional Stone 1 Traditional Stone 0
Total 3 Total 0
TOTAL 46 16Agriculture SectorWB GS
Toursim
Stone & MarbleFishing
Garment
ICTRepresentation criteria to be applied in 
selecting Farmers/Companies  
1) Value of Investment (low, average, and high)  
2) Geographic Distribution within regions to extent 
possible  
3) Year of support (ensuring that at least 60% of the 
firms/farmers selected have received support after 
MTR)  
4) Representation of the various forms of assistance 
provided (workforce development, techincal 
assiatnce, equipment, etc..)   
101 
 Planned Evaluation Sample  
 Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Y7
1 Imad Mohammed Ahmad Bsharat WB Tubas Agriculture Baby Cucumber M 1 FY5 1 2,400.00 $                   
2 Ayda Shihadeh Ahmad Salahat WB Tubas Agriculture Baby Cucumber F 1 FY6 1 405.00 $                      
3 Tubas Company for Packaging and Marketing Agricultural Products " TUPACK" WB Tubas Agriculture Carrots M 2 FY3 2 547,238.16 $              
5 Al Furat Agricultural Co. (Mwaffaq Daraghmeh) WB Tubas Agriculture Potatoes M 5 FY1 2 1 1 1 201,988.80 $              
7 Al Far'a and Albuqe'a Farm WB Tubas Agriculture Potatoes M 2 FY2 1 1 112,156.73 $              
8 Osama Abu Al Rub WB Jenin Agriculture Hanging Strawberry M 3 FY3 1 1 1 123,267.00 $              
9 Farmer Khaled Mohammed Yassin Abu Al rob WB Jenin Agriculture Hanging Strawberry M 1 FY5 1 13,786.95 $                
10 Al Ard Company for Palestinian Agricultural Products WB Nablus Agriculture Olive Oil M 1 FY6 1 21,000.00 $                
11 Palestinian Center for Agriculture Research and Development/ Near East Foundation WB Nablus Agriculture Olive Oil M 4 FY2 2 2 403,328.00 $              
12 Canaan Fair Trade WB Jenin Agriculture Olive oil M 10 FY1 2 5 3 506,303.10 $              
13 Daraghmeh Company for Agricultural Production and Medical Herbs WB Tubas Agriculture Fresh herbs M 4 FY1 1 3 157,200.00 $              
14 Thimar Al Tabi’a Company for Agricultural Investment and Marketing - Thimar/ Imad Nseibeh WB Jericho Agriculture Fresh herbs M 6 FY1 3 2 1 287,165.50 $              
15 Majdi Daraghmeh WB Tubas Agriculture Fresh herbs M 1 FY2 1 13,350.00 $                
16 Hamza Abu Thabet WB Jordan Valley Agriculture Post Harvest M 1 FY6 1
17 Jenin Agricultureal Vegetables Company WB Jenin Agriculture Post Harvest M 1 FY7 1 69,300.00 $                
18 Al Junaidy Modern Nursery WB Nablus Agriculture Nursery M 1 FY3 1 142,222.00 $              
19 Al Nakheel Nursery WB Jenin Agriculture Nursery M 1 FY5 1 2,400.00 $                   
20 Abd Al Malek Al Jaber farm WB Jericho Agriculture Grapes M 2 FY1 1 1 34,012.45 $                
21 Ibrahim Abdul Rahman Abdul Jalil Sa'da WB Hebron Agriculture Grapes M 1 FY5 1 1,760.00 $                   
22 Akram Mahmoud Abdul Rahman Karajeh WB Hebron Agriculture Grapes M 1 FY5 1 2,200.00 $                   
23 Ibrahim Shehadeh Balawneh WB Jordan Valley Agriculture Grapes M 2 FY3 1 1 9,702.45 $                   
24 West Bank Salt WB Jericho Agriculture Food Processing M 5 FY1 2 1 1 1 151,072.80 $              
25 Al Qasrawi Industrial & Trading Co. ltd WB Hebron Agriculture Food Processing M 4 FY2 1 1 1 1 55,834.10 $                
26 Nmotion Company for Digital Technology-Nmotion Studios WB Ramallah & Al Bireh ICT Service provider M 1 FY7 1 7,000.00 $                   
27 Palestine Polytechnic University WB Hebron ICT Organization M 2 FY5 1 1 119,213.00 $              
28 Infinite Tiers WB Nablus ICT Software  Development M 2 FY1 1 1 255,162.00 $              
29 H+W Mena WB Ramallah & Al Bireh ICT Software  Development M 4 FY1 1 1 1 1 312,511.50 $              
30 Leaders/ e-Zone WB Ramallah & Al Bireh ICT Startup M 3 FY2 1 1 1 301,363.62 $              
31 Ibdaa'- Intelligent Care System WB Nablus ICT Startup M 1 FY5 1 1,300.00 $                   
32 Murad Resort Hotel WB Bethlehem Tourism Hotel M 1 FY4 1 11,152.00 $                
33 Beauty Inn Hotel WB Ramallah & Al Bireh Tourism Hotel M 1 FY5 1 1,168.33 $                   
34 AlBader Hotel Company Diamond Hotel  WB Bethlehem Tourism Hotel M 1 FY6 1 6,000.00 $                   
35 Holy Land Incoming Tour Operators Association (HLITOA) WB Bethlehem Tourism Organization F 3 FY2 1 1 1 671,915.35 $              
36 Bethlehem Municipality WB Bethlehem Tourism Organization M 1 FY5 1 54,456.00 $                
37 PalClean for Cleaning Services WB Ramallah & Al Bireh Tourism Service provider M 1 FY2 1 52,850.00 $                
38 Alternative Business Solutions/ Visit Palestine  WB Bethlehem Toursim Service provider M 1 FY3 1 144,621.43 $              
39 Centre for Cultural Heritage Preservation - CCHP WB Bethlehem .Tourism Service provider M 1 FY1 1 2,244,360.00 $          
40 Handicraft Village  - Dar Sabab WB Beit Sahour Tourism Site Renovation F 2 FY6 1 1 492,561.68 $              
41 Abraham's Path WB Bethlehem Tourism Site Renovation M 1 FY3 1 36,670.00 $                
42 Laila Tours and Travels WB Bethlehem Tourism Tour Operator F 3 FY5 3 16,514.00 $                
43 Samara Tourist & Travel Agency WB Jerusalem Tourism Tour Operator F 1 FY2 1 147,985.00 $              
44 Technological Company to Engrave Marble and Granite WB Bethlehem Stone & Marble Decorative Stone M 2 FY5 1 1 245,664.00 $              
45 Abu Kamil Modern Automatic Brick Factory WB Nablus Stone & Marble Environmental stone products M 3 FY3 1 1 1 161,838.00 $              
46 H.L Jerusalem Stone & Marble Company WB Hebron Stone & Marble Traditional Stone M 1 FY4 1 18,273.00 $                
48 Mohammed Mousa Naji Al Shahhad GS Beit Lahia Agriculture Strawberry M 1 FY5 1 5,243.00 $                   
50 Abdrabbo Abd Abdrabbo Al Tabaan GS Deir Al Balah Agriculture Herbs M 2 FY6 1 1 29,447.00 $                
51 Mohammad Mahmoud Mohammad Al Shaar GS Khanyounis Agriculture Potatoes M 1 FY7 1 5,922.00 $                   
53 Hamdy Jebril Said Aljerjawi Company GS Deir Al Balah Agriculture Post Harvest M 1 FY6 1 147,668.00 $              
54 Husny Abdallah Shihadeh and Sons Company for General Trading GS Deir Al Balah Agriculture Post Harvest M 1 FY5 1 133,922.00 $              
55 Ahmed Suliman Abonaja and Partners for General Trading and Contracting Company GS KhanYunis Fishing Offshore M 1 FY5 1 7,125.00 $                   
56 Fish Fresh GS KhanYunis Fishing Onshore M 1 FY5 1 162,600.00 $              
57 Jaber Brothers Company for Construction and Commerce GS Gaza Garment Garment M 1 FY5 1  $                 70,699.00 
58 Naser Ayyad and Partners Company GS Gaza Garment Garment M 1 FY6 1 38,800.00 $                
60 Al Tariq GS Gaza ICT Software  Development M 2 FY2 1 1 220,789.00 $              
61 Baskalet Company for Electronic Game Production  GS Gaza ICT Startup M 2 FY6 1 1 8,500.00 $                   
62 Palestinian Committee for Hotels Restaurants & Touristic Services GS Gaza Tourism Organization M 1 FY5 1 29,674.50 $                No. Start Value of AssistanceYears of Assistance
Beneficiary Sector Region Governorate Sub-Sector Owner Count of Assitance
 
102 
  
Annex (E) - Mapping of key ongoing donor programs and projects  
 
Program/Project  Donor  Lifetime  Implementing 
Partner(s)  Brief description  Sectors 
targeted  
Palestinian Market Development 
Program (PMDP) DfID and EU  2014-2018 DAI Europe  PMDP has been designed to improve market systems and improve the 
competitiveness of the Palestinian  private sector. It aims to improve private sector 
competitiveness through technical assistance and matching  grants. PMDP also aims 
to strengthen trade and investment linkages as well as linkages with. the Palestinian 
Diaspora to play an active role in economic development in the OPTs.  Key outputs are:  
• Improved private sector Skills and innovation.  
• Market system failures in specific sectors analyzed and addr essed to facilitate 
improved performance and value chain integration and sharing of knowledge and 
best practice.  
• Trade and investment linkages with international markets improved.  Agriculture, 
ICT, Tourism, Furniture.  
Market Development Program in 
the We st Bank and Gaza: 
Developing equitable agricultural production and market systems for resilient economic development in the occupied Palestinian territory  
 SIDA  2015-2019 Oxfam  This is a four -year program that aims to facilitate the development of a market  
model to attract increased investment into small -scale agriculture and 
simultaneously improve incomes for women and men small -scale producers (SSPs), 
synthesizing commercial business development with poverty reduction. The program interventions are planne d to directly benefit 5,000 -6,000 producers, while 
also facilitating systematic improvements in production, processing, and marketing systems of targeted value chains. The program has five inter -related outcomes: (1): 
Small- scale agricultural production sy stems are more productive and resilient, with 
more visible influencing power of women producers. (2): Market channels for small-scale producers are more transparent, inclusive and fair. (3): More inclusive 
and enabling policies and plans, including local e conomic development plans, to 
stimulate investment and enable better functioning small -scale agricultural 
production and market systems are put in place. (4): Key policies, imposed by the Government of Israel (GoI) that are in violation of International Humanitarian Law (IHL) and International Human Rights Law (IHRL) and that hinder small -scale 
agriculture are challenged by international stakeholders. (5): Capacities of local partners and relevant sector organizations to undertake pro -poor market 
agricultur al development are strengthened and are more resilient.  Agriculture 
and food processing  
Australian Middle East NGO Cooperation Agreement (AMENCA 3): Palestinian Farmers Connecting to Markets  Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT)  2016- 2020 Oxfam, APHEDA, and Care International AMENCA 3 aims to make agriculture a driver of economic growth, by increasing the productivity and competitiveness, and thus the income, of Palestinian farmers. It aims to achieve this objective through engagement with the private sector. Accordingly, the program focuses on achieving an increase in the market readiness of women and men, as well as the development of a more sustainable and profitable value chain by farmers.  
AMENCA 3 also has a focus on developin g a more viable business model to ensure 
supply is able to effectively reach the market. The program seeks to utilize Agriculture  
103 
 Program/Project  Donor  Lifetime  Implementing 
Partner(s)  Brief description  Sectors 
targeted  
agriculture as a tool to strengthen the community fabric, by adopting a community -
based approach, with a specific desired outcome that wil l see women and youth 
being economically empowered.  
Improved Access to Markets for 
Female and Male Fresh Fruits and 
Vegetable (FFV) Small Scale Producers  SDC and 
DANIDA  2017-2021 Oxfam  With focus on private sector -led agriculture and agribusi ness, this program pursues 
systemic change in the agriculture sector and supports business modalities that favor small -scale producers in the occupied Palestinian territory. The overall goal is 
to contribute to build a resilient economy with equitable agri cultural growth, whilst 
contributing to protect small -scale producers’ entitlements to natural resources 
and access to markets.  
 Agriculture  
Reform and Development of 
Markets, Value Chains and Producers’ Organizations  Co-financed 
by SDC, EU, the Netherlands Representative Office (NRO), Denmark (DANIDA) and Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation 
(AECID)  2017-2021 FAO This program aims at improving income and productivity in the agriculture sector, 
through improved access to market s, increased share of local market, enhanced 
competitiveness and profitability of Palestinian agribusinesses.  
 Agriculture  
Market -oriented and sustainable 
high value crops development in 
the West Bank and Gaza Strip  Netherlands 
Representative 
Office  2013-2018 FAO This program aims to sustainably improve the capacities and self -reliance of small - 
and medium -scale farmers to  cultivate, market and export high value crops (HVCs) 
in order to compete in national and  international markets.  Agriculture  
Palestinian Land Development and High Value Crops project FAO  Netherlands Representative 
Office  2017- 2021 FAO This project follows a value chain and market development approach to improve the competitiveness and market readiness of Palestinian producers in  the 
agricultural sector.    Agriculture 
A.Support to the 
Development of Cultural 
Tourism  
 EU 2014-2018 UNDP  The overall objective of this program is to contribute to national economic growth 
through developing the Palestinian tourism sector by revitalizing cultural 
infrastructure and increasing Public -Private Partnerships (PPPs).  More specifically, 
the program aims to: contribute towards conserving and protecting cultural 
infrastructure; improve the potential for cultural, eco -tourism and creative 
industries for an inclusive economic growth; raise awareness of the local 
communities about the importance of cultural heritage; provide job opportunities 
mainly for young professionals and women (craftsmanship, tourism and cultural 
management), and improved engagement with the local private sector; and increase 
the number of tourists and visitors in addition to adding new touristic routes with 
the new concept of connecting the landscape with the environmental, 
archaeological sites and historical buildi ngs. Tourism   
104 
 Program/Project  Donor  Lifetime  Implementing 
Partner(s)  Brief description  Sectors 
targeted  
B. Digital Economy 
Program   2016-2019 Mercy Corps  In partnership with Oasis 500, a leading investment organization in the region, this 
program is working to develop Gaza as an innovative tech hub by providing funding 
and mentorship to local Gazans with startup dreams.  The program builds on past 
work implemented by Mercy Corps to bring  training, start- up weekends and 
hardware resources  to young Gazans. Through the business accelerator Gaza Sky 
Geeks, startup teams receive seed money from Oasis 500, in addition to 
participating in several months of intensive training before having a chance to pitch 
outside investors.  ICT 
 
   
105 
  
Annex (F) - Field Work Schedule  
# Stakeholders Name  Stakeholder 
Category Governorat
e Sector  Sub-Sector  Contact Person  Day # of part -
icipants  
1 Kufr Dan Cooperative  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Baby Cucumber  Mohammad Fehmi Nimr Marei  Sun 2 
2 Shiraz Adel Ghalib Maree  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Baby Cucumber  Shiraz Adel Ghalib Maree  Sun 1 
3 Mahmoud Saleh Mounir Abed  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Baby Cucumber  Mahmoud Saleh Mounir Abed  Sun 1 
4 Jamal Fahmi Miri'  Non-
Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Baby Cucumber  Jamal Fahmi Miri'  Sun 1 
5 Al Nakheel Nursery  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Nursery  Mohammed Zayyod  Sun 1 
6 Osama Abu Al Rub  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Hanging 
Strawberry  Osama Abu Al Rob Sun 1 
7 Khaled Mohammed Yassin Abu Al rob Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Hanging 
Strawberry  Khaled Abu Al Rob  Sun 1 
8 Raeda Hasan Mohammed Assous  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Hanging 
Strawberry  Raeda Hasan Mohammed Assous  Mon  2 
9 Canaan Fair Trade  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Olive oil Ahmad Abu Farha  Mon  1 
10 Jenin Agricultureal Vegetables Company  Beneficiary  Jenin  Agriculture  Post Harvest  Allam Taher Khalouf  Mon  1 
11 Al Furat Agricultural Co.  Beneficiary  Tubas  Agriculture  Potatoes  Mwaffaq Daraghmeh  Mon  1 
12 Tubas Company for Packaging and Marketing 
Agricultural Products " TUPACK"  Beneficiary  Tubas  Agriculture  Carrots  Farouq Abdelrazek  Mon  1 
13 Daraghmeh Company for Agricultural 
Production and Medical Herbs  Beneficiary  Tubas  Agriculture  Fresh herbs  Mohammad Abu Khaizran  Mon  1  
106 
 # Stakeholders Name  Stakeholder 
Category Governorat
e Sector  Sub-Sector  Contact Person  Day # of part -
icipants  
14 Haifa Company (Aqqaba)  Beneficiary  Tubas  Agriculture  Dried Herbs  Sulaiman Abu Yousef  Tue 1 
15 Al Far'a and Albuqe'a Farm  Beneficiary  Tubas  Agriculture  Potatoes  Abd Alhakeem Mustafa Abdelrazek  Tue 1 
16 Atoofco Company for Trade Agricultural 
Products  Beneficiary  Tubas  Agriculture  Carrots  Younis Bani Odeh  Tue 1 
17 Ibrahim Shehadeh Balawneh  Beneficiary  Jordan 
Valley  Agriculture  Grapes  Ibrahim Shihadeh  Tue 1 
18 Tamer Mohammad Mahmoud Hamdan  Beneficiary  Nablus  Agriculture  Grapes  Tamer Mohammad Mahmoud Hamdan  Tue 1 
19 Hamza Abu Thabet  Beneficiary  Jordan 
Valley  Agriculture  Post Harvest  Hamza Abu Thabet  Tue 1 
20 Abu Kamil Modern Automatic Brick Factory  Beneficiary  Nablus  Stone & 
Marble  Environmental 
stone products  Kamil Abdelmajid Ahmad Hasan Aqel  Wed  1 
21 Al Ard Company for Palestinian Agricultural 
Products  Beneficiary  Nablus  Agriculture  Olive Oil Subhi Anabtawi  Wed  1 
22 Al Junaidy Modern Nursery (Deir Sharaf after 
Anabtawi  Beneficiary  Nablus  Agriculture  Nursery  Samir Hasan Husain Yasin  Wed  1 
23 Palestinian Center for Agriculture Research and 
Development/ Near East Foundation  Beneficiary  Nablus  Agriculture  Olive Oil  Salah Abu Eisheh & Faris Al -Jabi Wed  2 
24 Infinite Tiers  Beneficiary  Nablus  ICT Software  Develop
ment  Ahmed Aqel  Wed  1 
25 Ibdaa' - Intelligent Care System  Beneficiary  Nablus  ICT Startup  Rasem Suwan  Wed  1 
26 Palestine Polytechnic University  Beneficiary  Hebron  ICT Organization  Makawi Diab Makawi Hraiz, Loai Shaheen, 
Samir Khader  Thu 3 
27 Al Salam Company  Beneficiary  Hebron  Agriculture  Food Processing  Wajdi Natsheh  Thu 3  
107 
 # Stakeholders Name  Stakeholder 
Category Governorat
e Sector  Sub-Sector  Contact Person  Day # of part -
icipants  
28 Ibrahim Abdul Rahman Abdul Jalil Sa'da  Beneficiary  Hebron  Agriculture  Grapes  Ibrahim Sa'da  Thu 1 
29 Akram Mahmoud Abdul Rahman Karajeh  Beneficiary  Hebron  Agriculture  Grapes  Akram Mahmoud Abdul Rahman Karajeh  Thu 1 
30 Leaders/ e -Zone  Beneficiary  Ramallah  ICT Startup  Shadi Mahmoud Khalil Atshan, Nidal 
Zahran  Thu 2 
31 H+W Mena  Beneficiary  Ramallah  ICT Software  Develop
ment  Firas Al -Zaghal  Mon  1 
32 Nmotion Company for Digital Technology -
Nmotion Studios  Beneficiary  Ramallah  ICT Service Provider  Baseem Mayala  Mon  1 
33 PalClean for Cleaning Services  Beneficiary  Ramallah  Tourism  Service Provider  Tariq Ghosheh  Mon  1 
34 Bandak Tourism & Investment Company “Grand Hotel Bethlehem”  Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Tourism  Hotels Duha Bandak  Tue 1 
35 AlBader Hotel Company Diamond Hotel  Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Tourism  Hotels Sameer Musallam, Rima Halabi, Abeer Nassar  Tue 3 
36 Center for Cultural Heritage Preservation - CCHP Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Tourism  Service Provider  Issam Juha, Luma Qumseya  Tue 2 
37 Icon School  Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Tourism  Site Rennovation  Nikola Juha  Tue 1 
38 Peace By Piece Tours Beneficiary  Beit Sahour  Tourism  Site Rennovation  Osama Awwad, Ra'fat Shomali, Rana 
Salman  Tue 3 
39 Technological Company to Engrave Marble and Granite  Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Stone & Marble  Decorative Stone  Nejib Khalil Nejib Nasser  Wed  1 
40 USAID Program team  USAID  Jerusalem  Donor  Donor  Tayseer Edeas  Wed  6 
41 Murad Resoirt Hotel  Beneficiary  Dar Salah  Tourism  Hotels Jamil Murad,  Laila Abu Hadba  Wed  2  
108 
 # Stakeholders Name  Stakeholder 
Category Governorat
e Sector  Sub-Sector  Contact Person  Day # of part -
icipants  
42 Handicraft Village  - Dar Sabab  Beneficiary  Beit Sahour  Tourism  Site Rennovation  Ibrahim Shu'aibat, Nivin Awad  Wed  2 
43 Ministry of Agriculture  Government  Ramallah  Government  Ministry of Ag  Isam Nofal  Wed  1 
44 Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities  Government  Bethlehem  Government  Government  Ihab Daoud, Sami Abu Arqoub, Ruwaida 
Jaber  Wed  3 
45 COMPETE  DAI Ramallah  Project Team  Project Team  Imad Qamhawi, Mira Estephan, and Caroline  Denman, Said Abu Hijleh Thu 4 
46 Creative Building Solutions  Beneficiary  Ramallah  Stone & Marble  Environmental stone products  Ammar Mousa Hanna Ammar, Joyce Ilyas Jubran- Ammar  Thu 2 
47 USAID  USAID  Jerusalem  Donor  Donor  Matthew Hutcherson  Fri 5 
48 EC Donor  Jerusalem  Donor  Donor  Ricardo Rossi, Rateb Radi, Joaqim???  Fri 3 
49 Oxfam  INGO  Ramallah  NGO  NGO  Mohammad Sawafta Sun 1 
50 USAID Mid term debrief  USAID  Tel Aviv  Donor  Donor   Mon  11 
51 Al Tariq  Beneficiary  Gaza  ICT Software  Develop
ment  Tarek Eslim  Tue 1 
52 Jaber Brothers Company for Construction and 
Commerce  Beneficiary  Gaza  Garment  Garment  Marwan Jabr, Ismail Jabr  Tue 2 
53 Hasan Shihadeh and Brothers Company for Industry and Trading LTD  Beneficiary  Gaza  Garment  Garment  Hasan Shihadeh, Mohammad Shihadeh  Tue 2 
54 Abdul Fattah Khader Mohammed Al Khatib  Beneficiary  Beit Lahia  Agriculture  Strawberry  Abdul Fattah Al Khatib  Tue 1 
55 Mahmoud Ahmad Saled Ikhlil  Beneficiary  Beit Lahia  Agriculture  Hanging 
Strawberry  Mahmoud Ikhlil  Tue 1  
109 
 # Stakeholders Name  Stakeholder 
Category Governorat
e Sector  Sub-Sector  Contact Person  Day # of part -
icipants  
56 Sabrin Atef Abdul Qadir AlTaban  Beneficiary  Deir Al 
Balah  Agriculture  Herbs  Bassem Al -Tabaan  Wed  1 
57 Abdrabbo Abd Abdrabbo Al Tabaan Beneficiary  Deir Al Balah  Agriculture  Herbs  Abdrabbo Al Tabaan  Wed  1 
58 Golden Gate Tours  Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Tourism  Tour Operator Richard Elias  Wed  1 
59 Husny Abdallah Shihadeh and Sons Company for General Trading  Beneficiary  Deir Al Balah  Agriculture  Post Harvest  Ashraf Husni Shehada, Ibrahim Bashir, Yousef Matar, and 3 drivers  Wed  6 
60 Alternative Business Solutions/ Visit Palestine  & HILTOA (2 Organizations)  Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Tourism  Service Provider  Sami Basem Khoury  Wed  1 
61 Hamdy Jebril Said Aljerjawi Company  Beneficiary  Deir Al Balah  Agriculture  Post Harvest  Hamdy Jebril Al -Jerjawi  Wed  1 
62 Bethlehem University  Beneficiary  Bethlehem  Tourism  Organization  Hassan Costantini, Mousa Rabadi, Nabeel 
Mufdi  Wed  3 
63 Ameena Hasan Madi  Beneficiary  Rafah  Agriculture  Potatoes  Issam Madi, Tahsin Madi  Wed  2 
64 Mohammad Mahmoud Mohammad Al Shaar  Beneficiary  Khanyounis  Agriculture  Potatoes  Mohammad Al Shaar  Wed  1 
65 Fish Fresh  Beneficiary  KhanYunis  Fishing  Onshore  Khaled Sarhan  Wed  1 
66 PMDP  DAI Gaza  Implementing Partner  Project Team  Halim Halabi, Hajar Masoud  Wed  2 
67 Sofyan Kuhail Fish Farm  Beneficiary  Gaza  Fishing  Onshore  Suhail Kuhail  Thu 1 
68 Ggateway  Beneficiary  Gaza  ICT Organization/ICT  Rasha Abu Safieh  Thu 1 
69 Palestinian Committee for Hotels Restaurants 
& Touristic Services  Beneficiary  Gaza  Tourism  Organization/Tourism  Samir Salim Skaik, Salah Abu Hasira, Wa'el Elshurafa, Muna Ghalayini  Thu 4  
110 
 # Stakeholders Name  Stakeholder 
Category Governorat
e Sector  Sub-Sector  Contact Person  Day # of part -
icipants  
70 Beauty Inn Hotel  Beneficiary  Ramallah  Tourism  Hotels Nazih Dahdal  Thu 1 
71 Baskalet Company for Electronic Game 
Production Beneficiary  Gaza  ICT Startup/ICT  Mohammad Al madhoun  Thu 1 
72 Compete (Sector Leads)  DAI Gaza  Project Team  Project Team  Basel Abu Daka, Ali Saqa, Salah Skaik, Basem Al- Ashi  Thu 4 
73 El-Wafa  El-Wafa  Gaza  M&E Service Provider  Team  Mohammad Abu Lamzi, Ala' Elshurafa, Ibrahim Elshatri  Thu 3 
74 PICTI IT Association  Gaza  ICT Organization  Abdallah Tahrawi  Thu 1 
75 West Bank Salt  Beneficiary  Jericho  Agriculture  Food Processing  Hussam Othman Hussain Hallak  Sun 1 
76 Rozana Association  Beneficiary  Jerusalem  Tourism  Trail Development  Raed Saadeh  Sun 1 
77 PMDP  DAI Ramallah  Implementing Partner  Implementing Partner  Maher Hamdan, Mohammad Nuseeibeh  Mon  2 
78 Ministry of National Economy  Government  Ramallah  Government  Government  Abeer Odeh, Fadi Abdel Latif  Mon  2 
79 Samara Tourist & Travel Agency  Beneficiary  Jerusalem  Tourism  Tour Operator Christina Khamees Samara - Kandalaft  Mon  1 
80 FAO  UN Jerusalem  UN UN Ciro Fiorillo, Azzam Saleh  Mon  2 
81 PALTRADE  Beneficiary  Ramallah  Support Org  Support Org  Hanan Taha, Yousef Lahham  Tue 2 
82 SDC Donor  Ramallah  Donor  Donor  Ayman  Daraghmeh  Tue 1 
83 Compete (M&E Manager )  DAI Ramallah  Project Team  Project Team  Rozana Salim Tue 1  
111 
 # Stakeholders Name  Stakeholder 
Category Governorat
e Sector  Sub-Sector  Contact Person  Day # of part -
icipants  
84 DfID  Jerusalem  Donor  Donor  Sidney Augustin and Zack Sabella  Wed  2 
85 Briefing to USAID WBG Mission Director  Ramallah  Donor  Donor  USAID Mission Director  Wed  6 
86 Final Debrief - USAID   Tel Aviv  Donor  Donor   Fri 10 
Total  166 
 
   
112 
 Annex (G) - Compete Component A and Component B Results Framework performance measurement, PMP Indicators and 
Measurement  
KRA Indicator  Years  Baseline  LOP target  LOP 
Achievement  Dropped  Captured 
somewhere else  
IR 1- Exports and Investment Increased  
Increased revenues for Palestinian 
firms   Percent increase in sales of assisted  
Palestinian agribusiness firms  Y1-Y6 Yes No No No No 
 Percent increase in sales of assisted 
Palestinian Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) firms  Y1-Y6 No No No No No 
 Percent increase in sales of assisted 
Palestinian stone and marble firms  Y1-Y6 Yes No No No No 
 Percent increase of sales of assisted 
Palestinian tourism firms  
Y5 Yes No No Yes No, no act.to feed this 
indicator and in 
decline business  
 Percent increase in sales of assisted 
Palestinian fishing firms  Y5-Y6 Yes No No No No 
 Percent increase in sales of assisted 
Palestinian textile and garment firms  Y5-Y6 Yes No No No No 
Improved image of Palestinian products and 
services in local market places  No Related Indicators  
Increased added value by Palestinian for 
products exported to Israel and   Percent increase in exports of assisted  
Palestinian agribusiness firms  Y1-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, value of exports  
 Value of exports of targeted agricultural 
commodities as a result of USG 
assistance  Y1-Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
 Percent increase in exports of assisted 
Palestinian Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) firms  Y1-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, value of exports  
 Value of exports of targeted ICT firms as 
a result of USG assistance  Y4-Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
 Percent increase in exports of assisted 
Palestinian stone and marble firms  Y1-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, value of exports   
113 
 KRA Indicator  Years  Baseline  LOP target  LOP 
Achievement  Dropped  Captured 
somewhere else  
 
      
Value of exports through group and 
specialized Palestinian stone and marble 
marketing companies and consortia  Y2-Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
 Percent increase in exports of assisted 
Palestinian Tourism Firms  Y1-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 
 Value of exports of targeted textile and 
garment firms as a result of USG 
assistance  Y5-Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
No indicator for Fishing Exports  
Increased market share for Palestinian 
products and services in WBG  Domestic sales= Total Sales -Exports 
Increased number of international markets 
for Palestinian products and services   Number of new markets accessed by 
assisted Palestinian agribusiness firms   Y1-Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
 Number of new markets accessed by 
assisted Palestinian Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) firms  Y1-Y6 No No Yes No No 
 Number of new markets accessed by 
assisted Palestinian stone and marble  
firms  Y1-Y6 NA No Yes No No 
Improved number, reliability and 
dependability of the relationships between 
Palestinian firms and Israeli and International 
firms   Number of new Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) 
contracts executed with international 
buyers/firms for Palestinian products or 
services  Y1-Y4 No Yes Yes Yes No 
 Number of new agribusiness contracts 
executed with international buyers/firms for 
Palestinian products or services  Y1-Y4 NA Yes Yes Yes No 
 
 
No sufficient indicators for measurement   
114 
 KRA Indicator  Years  Baseline  LOP target  LOP 
Achievement  Dropped  Captured 
somewhere else  
 
IR 2- Innovation of products and services improved  
Increase in both new and improved 
Palestinian products and services  4.5.2(2): Number of hectares under 
improved technologies or management 
practices as a result of USG assistance  Y1-Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
 Number of new or improved Palestinian 
products produced by assisted Palestinian 
agribusiness firms  Y1-Y6 NA Yes Yes No No 
 Number of New ICT Start -up companies 
established  Y1-Y6 NA Yes Yes No No 
 Number of ICT assisted start -ups that 
have developed products or signed 
contracts  Y1-Y6 NA Yes Yes No No 
 Number of new or improved assisted 
tourism sites and tourism trails  Y2-Y6 NA Yes Yes No No 
 Percent of hotels adopting mandatory 
hotel classification system  Y2-Y5 Yes Yes Yes No Measurement 
stopped in Y6 
 Number of Palestinian tourism and 
hospitality establishments adopting new 
technology and tools. (such as booking 
platforms, payment gateways, market access information and corporate social 
media presence)  Y1-Y3 No No No Yes  No, set to capture 
new technology and 
tools, and have been 
already captured 
before!  
 Number of Palestinian stone and marble 
firms adopting new technologies or 
investing in new equipment  Y2 No No No Yes No 
 Number of innovations supported through 
USG assistance with demonstrated uptake by the public and / or private sector  
Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
Increase in the quality of Palestinian 
products  No Related Indicators  
Improved image of Palestinian products and 
services in local market places  No Related Indicators  
Demonstration effects being replicated at 
equal or higher levels without further project 
support  No Related Indicators   
115 
 KRA Indicator  Years  Baseline  LOP target  LOP 
Achievement  Dropped  Captured 
somewhere else  
IR 3- Employment increased, job skills expanded  
Increased employment in firms  targeted by 
the Compete project   Percent increase in employment of 
assisted Palestinian agribusiness firms  
Y1-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, # of new jobs 
created; not 
disaggregated by 
sector in the PMP  
 Percent increase in employment of 
assisted Palestinian Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) firms  Y1-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, # of new jobs 
created; not 
disaggregated by 
sector in the PMP  
 Percent increase in employment of 
assisted Palestinian tourism firms  Y1-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, # of new jobs 
created; not 
disaggregated by 
sector in the PMP  
 Percent increase in employment of 
assisted Palestinian stone and marble firms  Y2-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes, # of new jobs 
created; not 
disaggregated by 
sector in the PMP  
 Number of new jobs created as a result of 
USG assistance  Y5-Y6 No Yes Yes No 
No 
Increased employment by youth (under 30 
years old)  Number of youth gaining employment or 
better employment as a result of 
participation in USG -funded programs  Y3-Y6 No Yes Yes No No 
 Number of businesses started by youth 
with USG assistance, disaggergated by 
sex of founder  Y3-Y4 NA Yes Yes Yes Yes, # of  ICT start-up 
companies; assuming 
that all are owned by 
youth   
116 
 KRA Indicator  Years  Baseline  LOP target  LOP 
Achievement  Dropped  Captured 
somewhere else  
 Total number of start -up capital raised by 
youth, disaggregated by sex  Y3-Y6 No Yes Yes No No, but the results are 
not disaggregated by 
sex on PMP  
 Number of businesses started by youth 
with USG assistance that are still in 
operation one year later, disaggregated by 
sex of founder  Y3-Y4 No Yes Yes Yes No, assuming that # 
of new start -up 
companies 
established  
No related KRA but feeds into job skills 
expansion within IR 3  for select sectors   Number of individuals who have received 
USG supported short -term agricultural 
sector productivity or food security training  Y2-Y6 NA Yes Yes No 
No 
 Number of individuals who have received 
USG supported short -term agriculture 
sector productivity or food security training 
- Male Y5-Y6 NA No No No 
No 
 Number of individuals who have received 
supported short -term agriculture sector 
productivity or food security training-
Female  Y5-Y6 NA No No No 
No 
 Number of training courses developed 
and delivered through the hospitality school  Y2-Y4 No Yes Yes Yes  No, hospitality school 
will not materialize 
during the project life!  
 Number of women participants in training 
and capacity building courses that improve skills in the ICT and Tourism sectors.    Y3-Y4 No No Yes Yes Yes, captured under 
OP_st (GNDR -2) 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
117 
 KRA Indicator  Years  Baseline  LOP target  LOP 
Achievement  Dropped  Captured 
somewhere else  
Component B  
NO KRAs in Compete RF, the below are 
Component B expected results from Compete 
contract:  
Increased use of BSOs by Palestinian firms to 
resolve constraints to global competitiveness 
of specific products and services targeted by the project.  
 
Increased use of BSPs by Palestinian firms in 
acquiring needed services to improve such 
things as packa ging, branding, and marketing 
of products and services.  
 
Increased use of business -to-business 
services in the areas of accounting, transport, 
ICT, and other services.
  Number of new services provided by 
targeted business service providers and 
business ser vice organizations to targeted 
sectors by the project.  Y2-Y6 NA Yes Yes No No 
 Percentage increase in number of firms 
that received services from business 
service organizations / providers, as a 
result of USG assistance.  Y2-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes No, Compete  
justification: "This is 
irrelevant since 
compete is not 
intending to work with 
BSOs to increase 
number of firms. ( 
Compete reached the 
peak over the last 4 
years)." 
Increased financial viability of BSOs providing 
needed services for Palestinian firms 
competing in the global marketplace.   Percentage increase in revenues of 
business service organizations from new 
services delivered to theor memebers as a 
result of USG assistance.  Y2-Y4 Yes Yes Yes Yes  No, Compete 
justification:” This is 
irrelevant since 
compete is not 
intending to work with 
BSOs to establish 
new revenue 
generating activities"  
  
 118 Annex (H) -  Quantitative Data Tables  
Assisted entities by Compete (Y1 -Y7)47 
 
Sector  Subsector  WBG  WB Gaza  
Agriculture  Baby Cucumber  243 243 0 
Carrots  5 5 0 
Dates  10 10 0 
Dried Herbs  10 10 0 
Food Processing  5 4 1 
Fresh Herbs  20 20 0 
Fresh Produce  47 47 0 
Grapes  440 440 0 
Hanging Strawberry  23 21 2 
Herbs  16 0 16 
Lychee  1 1 0 
Meat and Dairy  7 7 0 
Mushroom  1 1 0 
Nursery  7 7 0 
Olive Oil  65 65 0 
Organizations  2 2 0 
Post-Harvest  7 2 5 
Potatoes  63 6 57 
Service Providers  6 6 0 
Strawberry  85 0 85 
Sweet Potato  7 0 7 
Treated Waste Water  9 9 0 
Vegetables  146 3 143 
Total  1228  911 317 
Tourism  Hotel  75 74 1 
Organization  8 7 1 
Restaurant  3 0 3 
Service Providers  4 4 0 
Site Renovation  24 24 0 
Tour Operator  13 13 0 
Total  127 122 5 
Stone & 
Marble  Decorative Stone  8 8 0 
Environmental stone products  16 16 0 
Organization  1 1 0 
Service Provider  1 1 0 
Traditional Stone  20 20 0 
Total  46 46 0 
Fishing  Onshore  4 0 4 
Offshore  1 0 1 
Total  5 0 5 
Garment  Garment  33 0 33 
ICT Organization  5 4 1 
Service Providers  7 1 6 
Software Development  33 25 8 
Start-ups  75 68 7 
Total  120 98 22 
 
                                                
47 Source: Compete internal database, March 2018.   
 119  
 
Compete Investment (Y1 -Y6)48  
 
Region   Sector  Y1 
($M)  Y2 
($M)  Y3 
($M)  Y4 
($M)  Y5 
($M)  Y6 
($M)  Total 
($M)  
WB Agriculture  0.2 1.9 3.4 1.4 1.8 1.9 10.8 
ICT 0.0 1.1 1.7 0.9 0.6 0.4 4.7 
Stone & 
Marble  0.0 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.2 
Tourism  0.1 0.7 2.3 2.7 0.4 1.0 7.2 
Total  0.4 4.2 8.2 5.3 3.1 3.6 24.9 
Gaza  Garment/Furnit
ure 0 0 0 0 0.1 0.4 0.4 
Agriculture  0 0 0 0 1.3 1.0 2.3 
ICT 0 0 0 0 0.0 0.1 0.1 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 0.0 0.0 0.1 
Total  0 0 0 0 1.4 1.5 2.9 
WBG  Agriculture  0.2 1.9 3.4 1.4 3.1 2.9 13.0 
ICT 0.0 1.1 1.7 0.9 0.7 0.4 4.8 
Stone & 
Marble  0.0 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.2 
Tourism  0.1 0.7 2.3 2.7 0.4 1.1 7.3 
Garment/Furnit
ure 0 0 0 0 0.1 0.4 0.4 
Total  0.4 4.2 8.2 5.3 4.5 5.1 27.7 
 
  
Total Investment by Component (Y1 -Y6)49 
Entity  Sector  Component A  Component B  Total  
USAID  Agriculture  9.3 2.8 12.1 
ICT 3.0 1.2 4.2 
Stone & Marble  1.9 0.2 2.1 
Tourism  3.7 2.5 6.1 
Fishing, Garment  &Furniture  0.9 0 0.9 
Total  18.8 6.6 25.4 
Beneficiary  Agriculture  6.5 0.7 7.2 
ICT 3.7 0.9 4.6 
Stone & Marble  3.3 0.1 3.4 
Tourism  0.1 0.4 0.6 
Fishing, Garment  &Furniture  1.2 0 1.2 
Total  14.8 2.2 17.0 
Total USAID & Beneficiary  33.6 8.8 42.5 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 Compete attributed Exports (Y1 -Y6)50
  
                                                
48 Source: Compete response to data inquiry by ET. ET further analysed the data in the above format.  
49 Source: Compete activity matrix generated from GeoMIS in February 2018 and that further analysed by sector and Component by E T.  
50 Source: Compete response to data inquiry by ET. ET further analysed the data in the above format.   
 120  
 Region  Sector   Y1($M)  Y2($M)  Y3($M)  Y4($M)  Y5($M)  Y6 ($M)  Total  
WBG  Ag 1.1 18.1 23.8 31.6 33.5 39.1 147.3  
ICT 0.2 0.9 1.4 2.4 5.4 5.7 16 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Stone &Marble  0 6.5 6.8 6.6 8.0 $                  
7.6 35.4 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0.1 0.1 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0.8 2.5 3.3 
Total  1.2 25.4 32.0 40.7 47.7 55.1 202.1  
Gaza  Ag 0 0 0 0 0 8.4 8.4 
ICT 0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.9 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Stone &Marble  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0.1 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0.8 2.5 3.3 
Total  0 0.1 0.2 0.2 1.0 11.3 12.7 
WB Ag 1.1 18.1 23.8 31.6 33.5 30.8 138.9  
ICT 0.2 0.8 1.2 2.3 5.2 5.4 15.0 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Stone &Marble  0 6.5 6.8 6.6 8.0 7.6 35.4 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  1.2 25.4 31.8 40.5 46.6 43.8 189.4  
 
Compete attributed Sales (Y1 -Y6)51  
 
 Region   Sector  Y1($M)  Y2($M)  Y3($M)  Y4($M)  Y5($M)  Y6 ($M)  Total($M)  
WBG  Ag 1.1 20.0 32.5 39.3 56.8 68.0 217.7  
ICT 0.2 0.7 1.4 1.7 6.1 6.9 17.0 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 1.7 1.6 3.3 
S&M 0 6.5 6.8 6.6 8.2 8.1 36.2 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0.3 3.8 4.0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 1.1 8.2 9.3 
Total  1.2 27.2 40.6 47.7 74.2 96.6 287.5  
WB Ag 1.07 19.97  32.47  39.35  56.69  53.19  202.73  
ICT 0.15 0.68 1.23 1.56 5.88 5.80 15.30  
Tourism  0 0 0 0 1.74 0.11 1.85 
S&M 0 6.46 6.79 6.59 8.19 8.14 36.16  
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  1.22 27.12  40.48  47.49  72.49  67.23  256.04  
Gaza  Ag 0 0 0 0 0.13 14.82  14.95  
ICT 0 0.05 0.15 0.18 0.24 1.10 1.72 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 0 1.46 1.46 
S&M 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0.25 3.77 4.03 
Garment  0 0 0 0 1.08 8.21 9.29 
Total  0 0.05 0.15 0.18 1.71 29.36  31.44  
 
 
Compete attributed Domestic Sales (Y1 -Y6)52 
 
 Region  Sector   Y1($M)  Y2($M)  Y3($M)  Y4($M)  Y5($M)  Y6 ($M)  Total($M)  
                                                
51 Source: Compete response to data inquiry by ET. ET further analysed the data in the above format.  
52 Calculated by ET by subtracting exports from total sales as per Compete adopted measurement for domestic sales.   
 121 WBG  Ag 0 1.9 8.7 7.7 23.3 28.9 70.4 
ICT 0 -0.1 0 -0.7 0.7 1.2 1.0 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 1.7 1.6 3.3 
S&M 0 0 0 0 0.2 0.5 0.7 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0.3 3.6 3.9 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0.3 5.7 6.0 
Total  0 1.8 8.7 7.0 26.5 41.5 85.4 
Gaza  Ag 0 0 0 0 0.1 6.5 6.6 
ICT 0 0 0 0 0 0.8 0.8 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 0 1.5 1.5 
S&M 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0.3 3.6 3.9 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0.3 5.7 6.0 
Total  0 0 0 0 0.7 18.0 18.7 
WB Ag 0 1.9 8.7 7.7 23.2 22.4 63.9 
ICT 0 -0.1 0 -0.7 0.7 0.4 0.3 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 1.7 0.1 1.8 
S&M 0 0 0 0 0.2 0.5 0.7 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  0 1.8 8.7 7.0 25.8 23.4 66.7 
 
Women Employment (Y1 -Y6) 53 
 
Region  Sector  Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Total  
WBG  Ag 0 397 50 45 51 399 942 
ICT 2 23 33 48 53 66 225 
Tourism  0 2 7 9 7 3 28 
S&M 0 6 8 9 8 5 36 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  2 428 98 111 119 473 1231  
WB Ag 0 397 50 45 51 393 936 
ICT 2 20 33 48 48 53 204 
Tourism  0 2 7 9 7 3 28 
S&M 0 6 8 9 8 5 36 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  2 425 98 111 114 454 1204  
Gaza  Ag 0 0 0 0 3 6 9 
ICT 0 0 0 0 5 13 18 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
S&M 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  0 0 0 0 8 19 27 
 
 
 
Employment (Y1 -Y6) 54 
 
Region  Sector  Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 Y6 Total  
WBG  Ag 0 928 203 207 278 2879 4495 
ICT 31 77 142 129 148 119 646 
                                                
53 Source: Compete response to data inquiry by ET. ET further analysed the data in the above format.  
54 Source: Compete response to data inquiry by ET. ET further analysed the data in the above format.   
 122 Tourism  0 46 46 34 24 12 162 
Stone and Marble  0 47 37 47 45 34 210 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 5 22 27 
Garment  0 0 0 0 12 132 144 
Total  31 1098  428 417 512 3198  5684  
WB Ag 0 928 203 207 278 2414 4030 
ICT 31 77 142 129 133 95 607 
Tourism  0 46 46 34 22 8 156 
Stone and Marble  0 47 37 47 45 34 210 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Garment  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  31 1098  428 417 478 2551  5003  
Gaza  Ag 0 0 0 0 0 465 465 
ICT 0 0 0 0 15 24 39 
Tourism  0 0 0 0 2 4 6 
Stone and Marble  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Fishing  0 0 0 0 5 22 27 
Garment  0 0 0 0 12 132 144 
Total  0 0 0 0 34 647 681 
 
Summary Employment by Sector, Region and Gender 55 
Sector  WBG 
(M) WBG 
(F) Total 
WBG  WB 
(M) WB 
(F) Total 
WB Gaza 
(M) Gaza 
(F) Total 
Gaza  
Agricultu
re 3553 942 4495 3094 936 4030 459 9 468 
ICT 421 225 646 403 204 607 21 18 39 
Tourism  134 28 162 128 28 156 6 0 6 
S&M 174 36 210 174 36 210 0 0 0 
Fishing  27 0 27 0 0 0 27 0 27 
Garment  144 0 144 0 0 0 144 0 144 
Total  4453  1231  5684  3772  1204  4976  657 27 684 
 
  
                                                
55 Source: Compete response to data inquiry by ET. ET further analysed the data in the above format.   
 123 Annex (I) -  Statements of Difference s 
 
 
 
Compete Evaluation Technical Team Statement of Differences  
December 20, 2018   
________________________________________________________________________  
The USAID Economic Growth and Infrastructure technical team appreciates the efforts of the QED 
Evaluation Team to review the team’s comments from late July 23, 2018.   
 
Specific Responses to Conclusions in the Compete Evaluation Report  
 5.1.7  Approach to skills transfer and workforce development  
Across the sample of firms consulted by the evaluation team, few had received any form of capacity 
building support from Compete. While Compete does undertake efforts to assess capacity prior to 
commencing a relati onship with a firm, and in some cases will make it conditional that firms receive 
capacity building prior to assistance being provided, more generally it appears that Compete’s 
approach to skills transfer is based in recognition that it is companies themse lves that are best placed 
to identify and direct required capacity development. While this has merit, it also carries some risk 
since it assumes that companies sufficiently know their business and understand their needs, and that 
they have a clear understanding of best practice and current trends within a sector.  
 
Technical Team Response:  
While Compete’s strategy focused on building the capacity within firms based on assessment 
conducted by Compete per firm, Compete also looked at the workforce development  at value chain 
and sector level and designed special programs to address that. For examples, Agronomist training, 
SAP training for ICT sector, and design engineering with National Instruments. The combination of 
both resulted in a more sustainable workfor ce development.  
 
5.1.8  Relationships with other agencies/mechanisms of relevance  
A key conclusion of the evaluation is that Compete has not been a particularly active member of the various communities of practice related to its sectors of focus, and privat e sector development more 
generally. While it is the case that USAID has responsibility for leading coordination with donors, there are various less formal mechanisms and modalities focused on specific issues of interest where 
Compete could both contribute  and achieve value by participating.  
More active participation in coordination mechanisms is not only good ‘citizenship’, it also opens the 
door to complementary relationships. Such relationships offer particular potential for a project such 
as Compete whi ch is heavy on ‘hardware’ capacity (provision of materials) but limited in terms of 
‘software’ (the capacity to provide people on the ground to support skills development, inclusion or 
troubleshoot) – which is the opposite situation for many partners, espe cially NGOs who often can 
contribute staff and technical support, but cannot address material deficiencies.  
Technical Team Response:  
Compete worked, met, advised and coordinated with other projects, donors, NGOs and the Israeli 
Ministry of Agriculture thro ughout the life of the project including, among others, Portland Trust, 
FAO, Oxfam and USDA projects. For example, Compete worked jointly with Oxfam to assist 
Dawlina Company and was fully aware of the FAO cold store assistance to Kufr Dan Cooperative and considered it part of Kufr Dan cost share as this assistance is under component B. Furthermore, 
Compete coordinated with KFW on the TWW project in Dier Sharaf, with PMDP on many projects including in the Nurseries, fish hatcheries and the dates sector in G aza.   
 
5.1.9  Project gender and youth performance  
Compete’s gender performance has been limited in terms of the higher -level outcomes aspired to 
within the gender strategy pillars for inclusion, promotion and empowerment of women within the Palestinian pr ivate sector.  
 
 124 The lack of detailed analysis of the gender dynamics within the targeted value chains/sub -sectors, 
combined with Compete’s lack of sub -denies the project the opportunity of utilizing a market 
systems analysis process to inform broader landsc ape understanding of gender dynamics.  
Technical Team Response:  
Compete does have a detailed gender strategy, and women’s integration and empowerment are an 
integral part of the strategy and design of programs under each sub -sector or value chain. 
Addition ally, the design of the delivery mechanism (FLAP) offers higher cost share contribution by 
Compete to women to better facilitate their participation.  
5.5 Implementation approach and management  
Compete needs to be acknowledged for the breadth of its reach  and its ability in the most part to 
astutely tailor support to the context of its many different sub- sectors and sub -sector actors, each of 
which faces its own unique challenges and opportunities.   Project identification and start up in Gaza also deserves acknowledgment for being well conceived 
and swift in its response, allowing for a lot to be achieved within a relatively short time. More 
generally, the project has identified sub -sectors and a cohort of partners within Gaza who all have 
the capacity to either directly or indirectly get their produce out of Gaza. This is a very important 
lesson learned and points to the importance of addressing macro issues related to movement of 
people and goods, since those businesses that do enjoy that privilege  demonstrate that they are very 
capable of being competitive even within the myriad constraints that currently affect Gaza.  
 Efforts in the agriculture sector deserve particular mention given they touch virtually every agricultural value chain of importance. Success in value chains such as baby cucumber highlights the potential of Compete when it has sophisticated understanding, is deeply engaged and active across 
multiple points of a value chain. These successes provide a road map for sector engagement and  beg 
the question of whether the project spread itself too thin by being involved across 23 agriculture 
value chains. Deeper initial analysis leading to deeper engagement of fewer sub-sectors might well 
have yielded better results.  
 
It is also noted that a griculture remained a project priority throughout, whereas approaches to ICT 
and Tourism significantly changed course during implementation. While the rationale for these changes appears sound, it equally appears that these changes were not clearly communi cated or 
justified to those who felt they had contributed a lot to helping Compete establish a strategy within those sectors.  
 While the project monitoring and evaluation approach is expansive, it is not sufficiently tailored to measurement of the results that the project describes in its Results Framework. This is particularly 
true of more qualitative results such as ‘reliability and dependability’ of relationships; ‘increase in 
‘improved’ products’; or the ‘improved image’ of Palestinian goods. Even within the more quantitative result areas, data gathering has been inconsistently collated and often incompatible with the baseline 
data that had been assembled.  
 
PIRS in relation to attribution of increase in exports, sales and employment are generous and run the 
risk of inflating results beyond what should be genuinely attributed to Compete. One aspect of this is a lack of recognition of the contribution being made to firms by other stakeholders and donors.  
 Overall, the process of PIRS review/update appears t o have not paid sufficient attention to how such 
changes affect the evaluability of the project and was overly focused on addressing weaknesses identified in indicator measurement year -on-year. Ideally, more attention would have been paid to 
ensuring the M &E system was capable of generating data that enables more holistic and revealing 
monitoring and evaluation of the project over its entire lifetime  
 Overall, it is the ET’s perspective that an opportunity was missed with the way M&E was conducted 
over the life of the project, by not being sufficiently focused on ‘monitoring for learning’, as opposed 
to monitoring to aid reporting.  In depth understanding and documentation of successes and failures would be a great asset as USAID moves towards funding a similarly focused program. Clear understanding of issues related to wastewater use; reasons underpinning the failure of the Gaza  
 125 greenhouse strawberry intervention; unpacking of the concept of ‘better jobs’; or drilling down in to 
the complexity of issues rela ted to ‘women led’ businesses are examples of activities worthy of 
documented research. 
 
Technical Team Response:  
The team disagrees with the ET’s conclusion regarding M&E. Compete is not required to have an M&E system tailored to “monitoring for learning” , this concept was introduced by USAID on 
February 21
st. 2018, near the end of Compete’s contract. All of Compete M&E PMP plans and 
indicators were submitted prior to February 21, 2018 and were approved and monitored by USAID.  
 
   
 126  
Annex (J) -  Signed Discl osure of conflict of interest  
 
(Original signed forms are attached separate ly) 
 
  
 
 127  
  
 
 128  
  
 
 129  
 
  
 
 130 Annex (K) - Evaluation Team Curriculum Vietas 
 
 
Evaluation Team Leader  
1. Name:    Scott William RANKIN - 
2. Nationality:    Australian  
3. Education:   
Institution  
[Date from - Date 
to] Degree(s) or Diploma(s) obtained:  
2009-11 Master of Evaluation and Assessment  
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia (awarded 2011)  
 
1991-2 Post-Graduate Diploma in Development Studies  
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia (awarded 1992)  
 
1982 – 1985 Bachelor of Education (Secondary)  
 
 
4. Language skills:  on a scale of 1 to 5 (1 - excellent; 5 - basic)  
Language  Reading  Speaking  Writing  
English  1 1 1 
Spanish  2 3 3 
Bahasa Indonesia  3 3 3 
Khmer   4  
 
5. Present position:  Senior  Evaluation Specialist, Research Communications Group   
  
Senior Evaluation Specialist within a niche global consulting team providing high quality technical assistance to a 
range of clients along the research, design, monitoring, evaluation continuum, including support to strategic 
planning, community engagement , private sector engagement, business development, project management, 
development of monitoring and evaluation frameworks and training in knowledge management approaches. 
Clients have included the private sector, government agencies (local, state and nati onal), UN agencies, 
development banks, leading international NGOs and local/indigenous NGOs. I bring extensive hands on 
experience and advanced capacity for problem solving ensuring flexibility and the capacity to quickly 
comprehend and address the unique context and needs of each individual client. This diverse experience across 
time, sector, organisation type and region ensures sophisticated appreciation of the ‘bigger picture’ and the perspectives, mind set, capacity and constraints of different stakehol der groups.  
 Core competencies include the ability to:  
• blend experience with new ideas, ensuring approaches that are appreciative of current trends and 
practise, while also considerate of what is known to have worked – and not worked - in the past  
• constr uct findings that are rigorously evidence based, while also being positioned with nuance within the 
specific context and information needs of different stakeholders  
• utilise a toolbox of quantitative and qualitative evaluation approaches, and tailor to the unique context 
and needs of individual clients (including consideration of feasibility and efficiency of approaches)  
• ensure approaches are reflective of cultural norms, while also ensuring active consideration of gender 
issues and inclusion of marginalised  groups  
• calibrate training approaches to existing capacity and the information needs of different client groups  
• work inclusively and harmoniously with local staff to ensure ownership and confidence in approaches  
• foster strong, mutually supportive teams  
• build respectful and constructive relationships with key clients and key stakeholders  
  
 131 The umbrella under which the vast majority of my work sits is the resilience of rural communities. Areas of 
particular interest include value chain development, private sec tor engagement, rural employment, gender and 
strategies for knowledge management that bring genuine clarity to program performance.   In 2011, I completed a Masters of Assessment and Evaluation at the University of Melbourne, with the aim of 
further streng thening and consolidating my evaluation understanding and capacity. An impact of this study has 
been capacity for deliberate blending of qualitative and quantitative analysis into my work.  
 
6. Specific countries of overseas experience: 
Africa  Asia Latin Ameri ca Middle East  Pacific 
Angola Afghanistan  Argentina  Iraq PNG 
Ethiopia  Cambodia  Bolivia  Jordan  Solomon Islands  
Ghana China  El Salvador  Lebanon   
Malawi  India  Palestinian 
Territories   
Mali Indonesia     
Mozambique  Lao PDR     
Tanzania  Myanmar     
Zimbabwe  Thailand     
 Timor Leste     
 Viet Nam     
 7. Other information of relevance   
Member  Australasian Evaluation Society 
Member  American Evaluation Association  
Member  International Association for Public Participation  
Recipient  Australian Humanitarian Overseas Service Medal  
 (issued by Australian Government in 2004 for service in Cambodia)  
 
Recipient  Cambodian Service Medal  
(issued by the Royal Government of Cambodia in 2006 for services to mine action in 
Cambodia) 
 132 8. Professional  experience - past five years  
Date 
from/to  Loca
tion Company  Positio
n Description  
Jan – Feb 
2018 Iraq World 
Vision Iraq  Strate
gy 
Advis
or Facilitating process in support of World Vision realigning its operational 
mandate and strategy from a humanitarian orientated ‘Syria Response’, to one 
that is ‘whole of Iraq’ focused and better positioned to support return, 
resettlement and rehabilitation post Mosul. Approach involved vulnerabil ity 
mapping, stakeholder consultations and internal review of current and future 
needs.  
Oct – 
Dec  
2017 Cam
bodi
a Oxfam 
Cambodia  Evalua
tion Advis
or Review of Oxfam efforts to engage private sector to strengthen extractive 
industries governance in Mekong region. Assess effectiveness of project 
facilitated capacity building efforts and multi -stakeholder platforms to bring 
together government, private sector, civil society and affected communities 
with aim of ensuring social and environmental responsibility of mining projects.  
June – 
Dec 
2017 USA, 
Ghana and 
Tanz
ania US Agency 
for International 
Developme
nt Evalua
tion Team Leade
r Led external performance evaluation of the USAID Feed the Future  Assets and 
Market Access ‘Innovation Lab’ , which conducts applied research globally in 
relation to market’s role in overcoming persistently low levels of adoption by 
smallholder farmers of proven new technologies. The research portfolio aim is 
to better understand and identify solutions that help build rural households’ 
resiliency, food security, and participation in agriculture -led economic growth. 
The $35 million program is managed by the University of California – Davis  
May – 
July 2017  Aust
ralia Victorian 
Dept of Environmen
t, Land, 
Water and 
Planning  Evalua
tion Advis
or Develop a ‘place based’ monitoring and evaluation framework to measure 
progress of community engagement practices in building capacity, strengthening 
partnerships and enhancing resilience through a ‘place based approach’ to 
disaster mitigation.  
Feb – 
May 
2017 Aust
ralia Salvation 
Army  Evalua
tor Performance evaluation of the Australian Department of Health funded 
BridgeLink program, aimed a t supporting women experiencing drug and/or 
alcohol related issues and housing difficulties to make positive changes in their 
lifestyle, through supporting entry into the workforce.  
Sep – 
Dec 
2016 Aust
ralia Australian 
Red Cross  Evalua
tor Assessment of rel evance, effectiveness and value for money of Red Cross 
recovery (from disasters) programming, including development of performance measurement framework aimed to strengthening the overall performance of 
Australian Red Cross in the disaster preparedness and  recovery space.  
Aug – 
Sep 2016  Egyp
t Save the Children  Trainer/ 
Evalua
tor Prepare evaluation framework and provide training and leadership for roll out of Disaster Risk Reduction assessment and mapping processes to identify risks 
and responses related to  the influx of Syrian refugees into Egyptian communities 
in general, and schools in particular.  
June – 
July 2016  Australia Consortia of 
Australian NGOs  Facilita
tor/ 
Write
r Facilitated process for reaching agreement amongst a consortia of leading 
Australian NGOs (CARE, Caritas, Oxfam, Save the Children, World Vision) in 
relation to a joint bid to Australian DFAT for NGO management of the Australian Humanitarian Partnership Support Unit (the key body for activation 
and funding of Australian NGO disaster resp onse).  
Oct 
2015 – 
June 
2016 Afric
a (six 
coun
tries)  US Agency 
for 
Internation
al 
Developme
nt Team 
Leader Led performance assessment across six African countries of USAID funded $55 
million Africa RISING program, a five year ‘research for development’ program funding CGIAR and private sector entities to identify and validate scalable 
options for sustainable intensification of key African farming systems. Country 
programs assessed were Ethiopia, Ghana, Malawi, Mali, Tanzania and Zambia.  
Jul – Aug  
2015  Pales
tinian 
Terri
torie
s World 
Vision  Lead 
Researcher Lead and coordinate team of researchers to investigate the impact on children 
of Israel’s blockade of the Gaza Strip, requiring interviews of a broad spectrum of informants ranging from children to senior UN negotiators.  
June – 
July 2015  Aust
ralia Oxfam 
Australia  Advis
or/Team 
Memb
er One of five evaluation advisors undertaking a global review of Oxfam Australia 
progress towards achievement of its Global Program level outcomes. Specific 
responsibility for  assessment of Oxfam’s ability to build resilience of rural 
communities and promote the right of marginalised peoples to be heard.   
 133 Date 
from/to  Loca
tion Company  Positio
n Description  
May – 
Jun 2015  Pales
tinia
n 
Terri
tories ActionAid  Resear
cher Preparation of a paper considering the effectiveness of ActionAid strategies in 
‘building resilience’ within the Hebron area of West Bank, looking at questions of greater inclusion of women and youth in building resilience; enabling factors 
need to be in place for resilience building to be genuinely effective; the profile of 
social capital in poor rural communities of the oPTs; and whether or not economic empowerment can be an effective community strengthening 
approach.  
March – 
July 2015  Aust
ralia Emergency 
Managemen
t Victoria  Evalua
tor Support across Victoria’ s emergency management sector to assess its 
preparedness and capacity to support greater community involvement in disaster risk preparedness efforts (notably fire), with the aim of ensuring 
harmonised approaches across the sector.  
Dec 
2014 – 
March 
2015 Pales
tinia
n 
Territorie
s Australian 
DFAT  Design 
Team 
Leade
r 
 Led design team in consultations and preparation of program framework and 
substantive guidelines for tendering of a $42.5 million Australia Middle East 
NGO Cooperation Agreement (phase 2) program of assistance to the 
Palestinian Territories focused on agricultural value chain development, private 
sector strengthening and rural resilience and civil society support.  
Nov 
2015 – 
Jan 2015  Pales
tinia
n 
Territorie
s ActionAid  Evalua
tor Lead role in overseein g an end of project, external evaluation to strengthen 
future programming efforts to support vulnerable women and youth in the 
West Bank, as well as identify learning around strategies for building resilience, 
the empowerment of women and young people with in the Palestinian context.  
Sept - 
Nov 
2014  Pales
tinian 
Territorie
s Australian 
DFAT  Evalua
tion 
Team 
Leader 
 Led review of A$35 million Australia Middle East NGO Cooperation 
Agreement (phase 1), requiring program level analysis of the contributions of 
four implementing consortia (ActionAid, APHEDA, CARE, World Vision) in 
towards achievement of program goal of improving livelihoods and reducing the socio -economic vulnerability of Palestinian people, notably women, youth and 
farmers.  
Aug – 
Sept 
2014 Aust
ralia Emergency 
Management Victoria  Com
munity Engage
ment Advis
or Preparatory work related to planned commencement of an ‘all -agencies’ 
approach to emergency management planning in the State of Victoria. 
Consideration of the overall logic of the proposed approach and 
recommendations regarding a strong monitoring and evaluation framework to support its implementation.  
July 2014  Arge
ntina ADY 
Resources Ltd Stakeh
older Engage
ment  Coordinated systematic and holistic process of stakeholder liaison, includin g 
evaluation of existing community focused projects, resulting in recommendations for restructuring of company’s Sustainability Department  
Nov 
2013 – 
June 2014 (multiple 
prior 
inputs)  Boliv
ia LionGold 
Corp (previously 
Republic Gold Ltd.)  Senior 
Manag
er Responsible for overall coordination of community relations related to a highly 
complex gold project in Bolivia’s poorest province. Work included stakeholder liaison, negotiation of land access agreements with indigenous communities 
affected by the project, and establishment of a framework for monitoring and evaluation of both community risk and community projects aimed at reducing 
risk. 
October 
2013 Arge
ntina ADY 
Resources 
Ltd Evalua
tion Advisor Independent assessment of company efforts towards achievemen t of a social 
licence to operate, for their proposed lithium project to be implemented amongst indigenous communities of the northern Argentinian ‘altiplano’, including preparation of a report for distribution to the company board of 
management and potenti al investors.  
Sept 
2013 Laos World 
Vision  Advis
or Analysis and definition of the program parameters most essential for World 
Vision Laos to achieve its goal of child well being, focusing on issues of resourcing, geography, population, partnering capacity and criteria for selection 
of sponsored children.  
Various over 
2011 - 
2013 Boliv
ia Republic Gold Ltd  Community 
Relati
ons Leadership of process of strategic planning aimed at ensuring holistic 
consideration of community issues and perspectives in relation to achieving a 
social licence to commence mining for gold in the Bolivian highlands. The 
process involved coordination of a process of stakeholder mapping, initiation of  
 134 Date 
from/to  Loca
tion Company  Positio
n Description  
Advis
or a broad series of community and stakeholder consultations, and awareness 
raising regarding indigenous governance and decision -making structures, 
resulting in a coordinated organisational plan to guide communi ty relations.  
April – 
Sept 
2013 Mek
ong Region Oxfam 
America  Lead 
Evaluator Evaluation of Oxfam’s Mekong region ‘Civil Society and Extractive Industries 
Program’, which aimed to strengthen civil society capacity to effectively advocate for best practice in extractive industries, with a particular focus on 
areas with high concentrations of indigenous peoples. The evaluation was 
regarded as particularly effective in that it helped break down barriers that had 
previously existed between NGOs, the mining sector and relevant government 
departments.  
Jul – Oct 
2012 Afgh
anistan World 
Vision  Design  
Team Leade
r Led design process for development of an ‘Area Rehabilitation Program’ for 
Badghis province, aimed at identifying a suitable implementation model for a ‘fragile state’, that helped transition the program from an emergency context to 
a longer term developme nt model.  
Jan – 
April 
2012 Afgh
anistan World 
Vision  Team 
Leader Evaluation and subsequent baseline assessment of the highly sensitive STI & 
HIV/AIDS Prevention and Education project in Herat province focused on harm reduction and communication with at -risk groups in relation to diseases such as 
hepatitis B and C, and HIV -AIDS. Evaluation and baseline included 
representation of religious and education authorities.  
Sample of other professional experience in Mekong Region 1992 – 2011 (full CV available on r equest)  
Date 
from/to  Locati
on Compan
y Position  Description  
Sept – 
Dec 2011 Laos Oxfam 
Hong Kong  Progra
m Design 
Team 
Leader  Led a multi -disciplinary team through a program design process looking at the 
impact of agribusiness in indigenous communities in the uplands of northern 
Laos, through development a multi -year plan and framework for a rights -driven 
and well -being orientated program in Phongsali Province.     
Feb – 
Apr 2011  Laos Oxfam 
Hong 
Kong  Lead 
Evaluat
or Review of Integrated Upland Agricultural Livelihoods in Huaphan Province, 
including training of a multi- disciplinary team of Government, Programme and 
Community representatives.  
Jun – Aug 
2010 Camb
odia World 
Bank 
Group  Civil 
Society Engagement 
Consult
ant Coordinate a civil society response to th e proposed Pilot Program on Climate 
Resilience Support Facility being commenced in Cambodia by the World Bank, 
ADB and UNDP. Objective of assignment was to facilitate a process of consultation and consensus building with civil society, and to prepare an ag reed 
position paper defining the scope of support required.  
Feb – 
May 2010 Meko
ng 
region  Oxfam 
Internati
onal Team 
Leader  Final evaluation of Oxfam International’s ‘Mekong Region Anti Human Trafficking Programme’, involving field work across four countries  of the 
Mekong region, focussing on both Programme performance, the institutional 
arrangements under which it occurred, and outcomes achieved. Gender 
performance of the Programme was also a priority focus of the evaluation.  
Oct – 
Dec 2009 Laos Australia
n DFAT  Facility 
Design 
Consult
ant Development of an Australian funded financing facility to address unexploded 
ordnance in Laos, focused on (i) capacity building for UXO Lao, (ii) operations 
and standards support for the National Regulatory Authority, and (i ii) assistance 
to the Lao Ministry of Foreign Affairs in preparation for the first States Party 
Meeting of the Convention on Cluster Munitions, scheduled for 2010.  
Mar – 
May 2009 Myan
mar CARE 
Australia  Design 
Team 
Leader  Management of a multi -ethnic/ multi-language design team responsible for 
development of a ‘women’s empowerment program’ for northern Shan state, 
including implementation of a Household Livelihood Security Assessment  
Nov 2008 – 
Feb 2009  Cambodia 
United Nations 
Development 
Program  Facilitat
or/ 
Writer  Facilitated process to develop Cambodia’s first National Strategy for Mine Action strategy. The task involved negotiating with stakeholders to identify 
agreed approaches and standards, to ensure alignment and support of key players. The proc ess was also used to prepare the Government’s ‘extension 
request’ to the Ottawa Convention banning anti -personnel mines.  
Jan 2008 
– Dec 
2010 Camb
odia  Sky (a 
SDC 
supporte
d health 
initiative)  Produc
er/ 
Evaluat
or A ‘Visual Evaluation’ to study an Australian  Development Research Award - 
‘Combining Health Equity Funding and Community -Based Health Insurance to 
protect the poor’. The output was a video aimed at assessing options for the use of Health Equity Funding and Community -Based Health Insurance to 
provide  financial access to health services for the poor?   
 135 Date 
from/to  Locati
on Compan
y Position  Description  
Nov 
2005 – 
Feb 2006  Camb
odia World 
Vision  Design 
Team 
Leader  Design of a $3.5 million program aiming to reduce human and community 
impact of land mines and UXO’s through an integrated approach that paired  
mine clearance program with support to agriculture livelihoods strategies for 
beneficiaries of demined land.  
Jan 2003 
– Dec 
2009 Camb
odia Australia
n Voluntee
rs 
Internati
onal Progra
m Manage
r (Part time) Manager of an Australian DFAT supported program supp orting 
development of Mine Action Planning Units. MAPUs were cross -sectoral units 
chaired by Provincial Governors, and provided technical assistance by the Cambodian Mine Action Authority, with responsibility to investigate and make 
recommendations in rela tion to Provincial Demining Plans.  
Jun 1997 
– May 
2001 Meko
ng Regio
n United 
Nations 
Develop
ment 
Program  Progra
m Manage
r Responsible for management and coordination of the UN Regional Highland 
Peoples Program, implemented across Cambodia, China, Laos, Thailand and 
Viet Nam, which focused on identifying and responding to the special needs of 
ethnic minority peoples living in highland areas of the Mekong sub -region, 
promoting the more active participation of minorities in development planning 
as one part of the solution to the widespread poverty in these areas.  
Sept 
1992 – 
Jun 1997  Austr
alia Australia
n 
Voluntee
rs 
Internati
onal Progra
m Manage
r Responsible for ongoing design and management of programs across the Asia 
region, with specific responsibility for Cambodia and a ‘Distance Education for 
Burmese Refugees’ - a program that offered Australian accredited training to 
refugee communities.  
 
 
 
Market Development Specialist  
Amer Madi  
KEY SKILL AREA:  
 Project Planning, Monitoring, Evaluation; Systems Approaches to Livelihood Development (M4P/MSD); Food 
Security Analysis; Qualitative Socio -Economic Research; Facilitation and Training. 
 
EDUCATION:  
 1998 - 2000  MBA (Hons) – Concentration in Operations Management, Eastern Michigan University 
(Ypsilanti, Michigan – USA)  
 
1993 – 1997 BA, [combined] Economics and Business Administration, Hope College (Holland, Michigan – 
USA)  
 
LANGUAGES:  
 
  Spoken            Read         Written             Level  
 Arabic       x       x               x       Mother tongue  
 English       x       x              x             Fluent  
 PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE:  
 
Al-Sahel Company for Institutional Development and Communication 
  Jan 2004– to date  
Managing Partner   
 136  
Consultancy Assignments:  
 
Program/Project Design, Monitoring, and Evaluation; and Socio- Economic Research  
January 2018 – ongoing: International Labour Organisation (ILO), Institutional Assessment of the 
Palestinian Fund for Employment and Social Protection (PFESP)  
The objective of this exercise is to assess the role of the PFESP in relation to its original mandate and identify the 
strengths, weaknesses/gaps and opportunities in the institutional capacity of the PFESP to effectively assume its role in employment policy advisory, coordination and monitoring and evaluation. The assessment –currently 
underway- is expected to ultimately help the Fund design it s strategic plan and will also identify capacity building 
needs to ensure effective and proactive involvement of the Fund in assuming its role.  
November 2017 – ongoing: INTRAC, Impact Evaluation of the British Council’s Active Citizens 
Programme in the MEN A Region  
Co-leading this evaluation which is set to examine the impact of the Active Citizens Program –one of the British 
Council’s flagship programmes - on individuals, communities, and partner organisations through a story -based 
evaluation approach that involves cross -case analysis from four target countries (Morocco, Egypt, Palestine and 
Lebanon), contribution analysis, and case studies.   
November – December 2017: The QED Group, LLC, Civil Society Assessment  
Managed and assumed a quality assurance function on this assessment which was intended to provide programmatic 
recommendations to USAID –assessment commissioner- for supporting governance and civic engagement through 
Palestinian civil society.  The Assessment was conducted within the framework of a su b-contractual agreement 
between AL- Sahel and The QED Group.  
September – December 2017: United Nations Education, Science and Culture Organisation 
(UNESC), Programme Evaluation - Local Development through Rehabilitation and Revitalization of 
Historic Enviro nment in Palestine Programme  
Led a team of three specialists who undertook this final evaluation.  The evaluation provided an independent, in -
depth assessment of the achievements of programme results and the implementation modality, which involved 
UNESCO s erving as Secretariat and four implementing cultural heritage organisations, as well as provided detailed 
actionable recommendations for a new phase of the programme. The evaluation was commissioned by UNESCO 
with funding from SIDA, the programme donor.  
March - July 2017: International Labour Organisation (ILO), Employment Policy Diagnostic Study: 
Mapping and analysis of labour market trends, governance, employment programmes and services in the OPT  
Undertook this diagnostic study over a period of 90 days with the overall objective of enabling ILO and its social 
partners to develop a complete understanding of the labour market trends, existing services and programmes, and 
labour market challenges facing the OPT.  The study mapped existing employment programm es and services (both 
private and public), while assessing their impact and identifying their strengths and main shortfalls.  It provided an 
in-depth understanding of the nature of the deficiency of productive employment, and the context -specific 
constrain ts, challenges and opportunities for increasing productive employment through sustainable and inclusive 
job-rich growth as a basis for a sharper and more effective focus of employment policy in the OPT.  The study 
provided entry points for the ILO in suppo rting its tripartite constituents in developing their own vision, policy 
framework and plan for the future of employment in the OPT . 
 
March – April 2017: SDG -F Secretariat/UN Women, Final Evaluation of the One -Stop -Shop (OSS) 
for Sustainable Business Joint Programme  
The OSS was a two year programme funded by the Sustainable Development Goals Fund (SDGF) and implemented jointly by UN Wom en, Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and the International Trade Center (ITC) in the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip.  The The OSS -JP aimed to contribute to creating greater economic empowerment, 
improved livelihoods and access to decent work for Palestinians through (i) supporting the development and  
 137 growth of women -owned or  women -run micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME’s) and cooperative 
associations working in the cultural and agricultural sectors, and (ii) improving the enabling environment for 
inclusive economic growth and empowerment through policy development and promotion of gender -sensitive 
business practices.  The evaluation used a participatory qualitative approach, with a utilisation focus.   The 
evaluation followed UNEG Guidelines and was based on OECD -DAC criteria  
October 2016 – January 2017: ILO, Assessment of the Working Conditions in the Domestic Work 
Sector in the West Bank  
Undertook this preliminary study which focusd on identifying and assessing of the issues faced by Palestinian domestic workers in the West Bank, focusing on Ramallah, Nablus and Hebron governorates and communities in 
Area C of the Jordan Valley (areas under sole Israeli jurisdiction). The study examined how workers negotiate 
their employment, what kind of wages and benefits they have, and the possibilities for organizing or otherwise supporting domestic workers in Palestine.  Qualitative analysis was conducted through in -depth interviews and 
focus group discussions with domestic workers and employers.  ILO pubished bo th the assessment report and 
the policy brief produced within the framework of the study  
2016: Yesh Din, Yesh Din’s Legal Aid Interventions from Beneficiaries’ Perspective: A Review  
Led this review of Yesh Din’s (Israeli Human Rights NGO) legal aid interventions benefiting Palestinian victims of human rights violations.  The review employed a mixed -method approach, relying on both qualitative and 
quantitative data collection tools to gather the information used in its analysis. 
2016 (ongoing since 2014): Oxfam GB, Market and Enterprise Development Advisor  
Advising Oxfam’s Economic Justice Team in areas related to programme design and strategy analysis within the 
framework of three separate projects funded by SDC, SiDA, and DFAT -Australia.  Key inputs provi ded include, 
inter alia: facilitating participatory processes for the selection and prioritisation of sub -sectors, leading value chain 
and market systems assessments, training and coaching project staff on market system development approaches, formulating concept notes for intervention strategies, designing of measurement plans for market systems 
development interventions, and technical writing of proposals to donors.   
2016 (ongoing): ILO, National Liaison on Social Security Schemes and Fiscal Space Analys is 
Supporting and serving as a local focal point for a multi- disciplinary team of ILO experts in developing several 
social protection floor studies (SPF) including: a) a mapping study on all existing social protection schemes; b) a mapping study of existing health care risk pooling arrangements in Palestine; c) fiscal space analysis; d) impact 
assessment of current and proposed social protection schemes on poverty and vulnerability; e) a costing study of 
SPF.  
2015: Mokoro Ltd., WFP Country Portfolio Evalua tion- State of Palestine  
Senior Evaluator in a five -person core team of independent consultants tasked with the evaluation of WFP portfolio 
in the State of Palestine over the years 2011- 2015. Thematic responsibility for food security and livelihoods as well 
as leading on Palestine contextualization; and, in collaboration with the team’s economist, evaluating the cash and 
voucher modality of WFP’s interventions over the evaluation period.  
2015: We Effect (formerly Swedish Cooperative Center), Evaluation of a two -year humanitarian project 
funded within the framework of the CAP Process  
Led this summative evaluation, which was conducted by a team of three experts and based on a qualitative 
assessment approach.  The evaluation aimed at providing an overall judgm ent on the project’s performance and 
value added, using OECD- DAC criteria.  Project interventions evaluated included cottage industries, agricultural 
land rehabilitation, off -farm income -generating projects, and in -kind food distribution.    
2015: Norwegian People’s Aid (NPA), Evaluation of the NPA’s Humanitarian Programme in the West Bank and Gaza Strip  
Co-led this evaluation which examined NPA’s humanitarian assistance program in Palestine since 2011.  The 
evaluation focused on assessing NPA’s approach of  working with and through Palestinian NGO partners.  
2015: INTRAC, Review of the Partnership Model Used by Oxfam GB in the Implementation of the EC and SDC Funded From Grove to Market Programme   
 138 Providing technical backstopping and quality assurance support to INTRAC’s lead consultant undertaking the 
review, which aimed at assessing the degree to which the Programme Management Unit (PMU) partnership model 
has added value to Programme implementation and impact, with the view of generating lessons for Oxfam in 
strengthening its partnerships’ work.   
2014/2015: Oxfam GB, Programme Design/Improving Market Access for Small -Scale Men and Women 
Farmers in the West Bank (using M4P approach)  
Within the framework of a programme inception phase financed by SDC, facilitated the process of sub -sector 
shortlisting and selection, on the basis of a consultative process and M4P methodology; led the development of market system analysis for the selected value chains using a standardized set of M4P tools adapted to the West 
Bank context; contributed to commodity -specific stakeholder analysis and mapping, including exploring potential 
private/public sector investments in fresh produce agricultural value chain development; supported capacity 
development of partners and stakeholders during the inception phase of the Programme; contributed to the design 
of the project document.  
2014/2015: World Food Programme (WFP- oPt), Impact Evaluation of the Cash Transfer Modalities in the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip  
Led this mixed method evaluation w hich involved an assessment of the impact of the following food assistance/cash 
transfer modalities: voucher -only, conditional voucher, and combined voucher modalities.  The quantitative 
component of the evaluation was based on an experimental study design , where non -beneficiary households were 
surveyed to provide counterfactual evidence to the evaluation.  
2014: Food Security Sector, Damages and Losses Assessment in the Agriculture Sector in the Gaza Strip  
Led this assessment which aimed at providing an in- depth understanding of the livelihood conditions and needs of 
farmers in the Gaza Strip in the aftermath of the war.  More specifically, the objectives of the assessment were to 
assess the level and scale to which Gaza farmers (in plant, livestock and fish ery sub -sectors) have resumed 
production, according to the level of damage and losses sustained in the various farming communities; identify the 
constraints facing Gaza farmers to resume production at pre -assault levels, with a focus on constraints that remain 
largely unaddressed; and make actionable programming recommendations for supporting early and long-term recovery in the agriculture sector.  
2014: Food Security Sector, Emergency Food Security Assessment (EFSA) in the Gaza Strip  
Led this rapid assessment  which aimed to guide possible adjustments of food security, agriculture and livelihood 
interventions in the aftermath of a 51- day Israeli assault against the Gaza Strip. The assessment’s specific objectives 
were: (i) to assess ch anges in Gaza households’ food access and consumption patterns, cash sources to meet other 
priority basic needs and coping mechanisms used to respond to the specific effects of the war; (ii) to evaluate Gaza households’ resilience capacity; (iii) to evalua te wholesale and retail markets current functionality and early 
recovery capacity for supplying food to consumers; and (iv) To determine the profile of population groups 
requiring food, agriculture and other livelihood support assistance (including the cur rent caseload of humanitarian 
agencies as well as additional groups if appropriate), and the type of assistance required for each of these groups.   
2014: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Impact Evaluation of FAO’s Plan or Action 2011- 2013  
Leading this qualitative and quantitative evaluation of FAO’s interventions over the period 2011 -2013, with the 
main objective of identifying actionable recommendations for the formulation of FAO’s Country Assessment Framework which is currently under formulation,  and lessons learned for wider consideration.   
2014 and 2011/2012: World Food Programme (WFP -oPt), Secondary Impact Assessment of the Urban Food 
Voucher Programme (UVP)  
Led this assessment which examined the impact of the UVP on beneficiary households, pa rticipating shops, dairy 
producers and farmers.  The assessment, which took place in 2011/2012 and repeated in 2014, involved the use of mixed method approach and reliance on study and control groups to ascertain impact.     
 
2013: Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF), Pre -Feasibility of Amalgamating the Villages of 
Talfit, Jaloud, Jourish, Qaryout & Qusra  
Within the framework of the Local Development Programme- Phase III funded by the Government of Denmark, 
commissioned by the MDLF to assess the fe asibility of amalgamation of five villages in southeast Nablus 
Governorate and to assess the level of public support within these five villages for the amalgamation. The  
 139 assessment culminated in long - and short -term recommendations for moving forward with the amalgamation, 
which have been endorsed and adopted by MDLF.  
 
2012: UN Women, Project Final Evaluation, Establishment, Rehabilitation and Activation of Eight Women’s Centres in the Gaza Strip and West Bank  
Led the final evaluation of the this Saudi -fund ed project that aimed to improve Palestinian women’s social and 
economic situation through training and women empowerment - oriented infrastructure development initiatives. 
The evaluation provided strategic inputs to the design of the second phase of the pr oject, which was eventually 
funded two years later.    
 
2011/2012: Oxfam -GB, A Roadmap for Agribusiness Development in the Occupied Palestinian Territories: 
An analysis of the Vegetables & Herbs, Dairy, and Sheep & Goats Subsectors.   
Within the framework of this assessment, had the direct responsibility for managing and ensuring the engagement 
with smaller and most vulnerable farmers/sharecroppers, especially women, and their organizations in the process 
of market systems analysis and identification of sectoral development  opportunities;  mapping existing assets and 
infrastructure in representative farms and communities identified through the analysis; and contributing high- level 
insights regarding cross -cutting issues including the institutional framework and policy constraints, gendered 
market analysis, cooperative governance; water, sanitation, public health, environment and other contributing 
factors to the effectiveness of the local market systems.   
2012: UN Women, Project Final Evaluation, Socially R esponsible, Women Run School Canteens -Phase II  
Led the final evaluation of the second phase of this project which was funded by the Government of Norway and 
aimed at strengthening the economic security of Palestinian women and their organizations in the We st Bank 
through enabling them to associate and run school canteens.   
2012: Swiss Development Cooperation (on behalf of a four -donor consortium: Denmark, Netherlands, 
Sweden and Switzerland), Evaluation of the Human Rights and Good Governance Programme  
Co-led this evaluation which focused on providing SDC and the programme donors (Netherlands, Denmark, and 
Sweden) with an objective assessment of the HR/GG Programme Secretariat (managed jointly by the NGO Development Center and the Programme donors) with the view of generating practical and  programmatic 
recommendations for the management of the planned next phase of the Programme.    
2012: International Labour Organization and the Union of Women Savings and Credit Association, Evaluation of a Capacity Deve lopment and Economic Empowerment Grant Programme  
Led the evaluation of this pilot programme which was designed to build the organizational capacity of 28 women 
cooperatives operating in the West Bank towards enhancing economic opportunities and leadership of their 
members.  The evaluation relied on a mixed -method approach, on which basis a preliminary schematic design and 
intervention logic was formulated for scaling- up the programme.       
. process of the Consolidated Appeals Process (CAP), leading this a ssessment which aimed at identifying problems 
facing Palestinian refugees and herders in the West Bank and identifying priority needs in various sectors of analysis 
(food, cash, health, education, water and sanitation, and cross -cutting issues of gender, d isability and protection). 
The assessment is being informed by a survey of a representative sample of refugee and herder households, as well as a series of focus group and community discussions.  Assessment planned for completion by end of September 2010. 
 
2010: World Food Programme (oPt) and Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the oPt, 
Assessment of Impact of the Expansion of “Buffer Zone” on the Agricultural Sector in the Gaza Strip  
Given what is known about the significance of the border area to local agricultural production and livelihoods, co -
led this assessment which aimed to gauge the impact of the expansion of the Buffer Zone on the local food security and livelihoods.   
2010: W orld Food Programme (WFP -oPt) and Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the 
oPt (OCHA -oPt), Assessment of Impact of Tunnel Trade on Circumventing the Effects of the Protracted 
Blockade on the Gaza Strip  
Leading this assessment which –throu gh a mixed method approach - aimed to explore, from a humanitarian point 
of view, if and to what extent has the tunnel system indeed created an adequate  alternative to the crossings?  The  
 140 assessment will be used as a key input into OCHA’s advocacy initiatives aiming at lifting the Blockade imposed on 
the Gaza Strip since June 2007.  
2010: The Palestinian Center for Peace and Democracy (PCPD) and Kvinna Till Kvinna, Project Evaluation  
Led the evaluation of a women leadership building project in the West Bank.  The evaluation was based on 
qualitative evaluation techniques and examined the project design, strategic relevance, and results.  The evaluation 
provided detailed actionable recommendations for strengthening the achievements of the first two of 
implementa tion and improving the design of an anticipated future phase of the project.  
2009: UNIFEM, Project Evaluation, Socially Responsible, Women Run School Canteens  
Leading the evaluation of a two -year project funded by the Government of Norway that aimed at st rengthening 
the economic security of Palestinian women through enabling them to associate and run school canteens.  
2009: World Food Program (WFP), Market Review  
Undertook an assessment of the staple food market in the West Bank and Gaza Strip which focused on examining 
the performance of markets from a Structure -Performance -Conduct perspective, covering such issues as food 
availability, price integration, market concentration and supply chain analysis.  The assessment was primarily 
intended to inform WFP’s  programming decisions .   
2009: World Food Program (WFP), Targeting Review  
Leading a review of the beneficiary targeting criteria and processes under the WFP’s Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation in the West Bank.  The review is intended to provide gu idance for the design of activities in 
2009 and the review of WFP compliancy procedures for program implementation. More specifically, the review 
aims to evaluate the adequacy of WFP beneficiaries with WFP beneficiary targeting criteria; to evaluate the 
compliance of Cooperating Partners (Ministry of Social Affairs, CHF, CRS, NEF, and Ard Al- Atfal) with WFP 
targeting guidelines and operational procedures; to assess the strengths and weaknesses of WFP procedures and 
guidelines regarding beneficiary targeting; and, to identify priority areas and recommend alternative targeting 
mechanisms for enhancing beneficiary targeting within WFP programs in the West Bank.  
2009: ACPP, Final Evaluation of the “Emergency Action to Improve the Access to a Diversified and Quality 
Diet of Vulnerable Rural Palestinian Household’s Project”  
2008: ACDI/VOCA, Final Evaluation of the West Bank Food Security Program  
Leading the final evaluation of this USAID -funded Program (US$ 5 million), which included five cooperative  development 
and growth, agribusiness and rural household support projects.  The evaluation was conducted by a team of four 
experts, who utilized qualitative and quantitative evaluation tools. 
 
2008: Movemiento por de La Paz(MPDL), Project Final Evaluation  
Leading a fin al evaluation of a project funded by the Spanish Agency of International Cooperation for Development 
and implemented by MPDL with the purpose of promoting democracy, participation and empowerment among 
Palestinian youth.  
2008:     UNDP/PAPP and Ministry of  Education and Higher Education, Mid -Term Review of the Support 
to Palestinian Education Program (SPEP)  
Led a mid -term review of SPEP’s progress against planned results.  Evaluation team included five senior experts in 
pedagogy, education planning, ICT and  civil engineering.  Responsible for the design of the overall evaluation 
methodology and tools, team coordination, and drafting the evaluation report and concept paper for a second phase of the project.  
2008: Palestinian Hydrology Group, Final Impact Eval uation 
Led two final evaluations of two ECHO -funded emergency water and food security projects.  The evaluation 
focused on measuring the impact of these projects on the livelihood of the direct beneficiaries as well as on the communities in which they were  implemented.  Qualitative and quantitative evaluation methods were utilized.  
 
2008:  UNRWA, WFP, and FAO, Qualitative and Quantitative Socio -Economic Assessment of the Changes 
in the Food Systems in the West Bank and Gaza   
 141 Leading this assessment which focuses on examining the effect of, inter alia, the price increases of consumer 
products and staple food items, frost, drought, and closures on the food security of the refugee and non -refugees 
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.   
2008:  Movemiento por de La P az, Final Evaluation of the CBR Program in West Hebron  
Team leader for a final evaluation of an EC -funded Community Rehabilitation Program targeting five rural 
communities in the Hebron Governorate.  
2008:  Hilfswerk Austria, Final Evaluation of the Stakeholder Participatory Water Management at Farm Level Project in Jordan and Palestine (MEDWA)  
Co-leading a final evaluation of MEDWA, which is a project funded by the EC’s MEDA Program.  The evaluation 
focused on assessing the effectiveness, efficiency and impact of the project as implemented in both Jordan and Palestine. 
2007:  World Food Programme, Qualitative and Quantitative Socio -Economic Assessment  
Co-led a qualitative and quantitative survey of the factors affecting food insecurity in Gaza Strip, which aims at 
providing timely information on the household food security status of the target population to various 
development and humanitarian organizations. 
2007: Addameer Prisoners Support and Human Rights Association, Organizational Assessment  
Led an  organizational performance assessment and a governance audit of this human rights organization.  The 
assessment was conducted upon the request of Addameer’s consortium of donors to be the main input into the 
strategic planning and organizational development process planned for 2008.  
2007: Oxfam -GB, Final Evaluation of an ECHO- funded Food Security Project  
Led the evaluation of the Promoting Food Security in the oPt, a project that aimed at reducing the poverty and vulnerability of Palestinian households in  Western Hebron Governorate and Gaza.  The evaluation involved 
qualitative and quantitative evaluation tools, including a household survey of a representative sample of the beneficiaries and in -depth case studies.  
2007:  ACDI/VOCA, Project Baseline Survey -West Bank Food Security Program  
2007:  World Food Programme, Review of the Food for Work and Food for Training Programs  
Team Leader for a comprehensive evaluative study of the Protracted Relief and Recovery Operations of the World Food Program (WFP) emphas izing generating lessons learned and detailed recommendations for the redesign of 
the Food -for-Work and Food -for-Training Programs for the years 2007 -2009.   
2007:  Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and Nippon Koei Co., Ltd., Baseline Survey  
Team member in a comprehensive baseline survey (qualitative and quantitative) of the agricultural sector in the 
Jordan River Rift Valley.  Mainly responsible for establishing baseline indicators on farming households’ utilization 
of water resources for irrig ation.  
2007:  Jerusalem Legal Aid and Human Rights/Legal Aid Center (JLAC), Evaluation of the JLAC Core 
Program 2004 -2006  
Led an evaluation of the JLAC’s performance against its Strategic Plan 2004 -2006.  The evaluation focused on 
issues of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability, as well as an in -depth review of the 
governance systems and process.   
2007:    Institución Académica Internacional -Chile, Institutional Self -Assessment  (client: Ministry of Education 
and Higher Education/T ertiary Education Project),  
Local team member on a long- term consultancy assignment aiming to establish guidelines for institutional self-
assessment and development in planning, management and quality assurance and enhancement in Palestinian higher 
educat ion.   
2007:    ICCO, Evaluation of Stop- the-Wall Campaign   
Local team member on a short -term evaluation mission (a consulting team of two experts) of the Stop- the-Wall 
Campaign.    
 142 2006:  United Nations Development Programme/Programme of Assistance to the Palestinian People, 
Project Design  
Co-led the design process of a community -action oriented poverty alleviation project, including the drafting of a 
funding proposal for AGFUND.  
2006:  Institute for Community Partnership, Bethlehem University, Fairtrade Re adiness Assessment  
Led a readiness assessment of seventeen cooperatives for membership in the Fairtrade Organization.  The 
assessment was geared towards designing an intervention program to assist these cooperatives in becoming Fairtrade Organizations.  
2006:  World Food Program (WFP), Qualitative Verification Assessment  
Led a qualitative assessment of the factors affecting food insecurity in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to guide the 
future programming of WFP.  
2006:  Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Market Fragmentation Study   
Participated in a study examining the extent of market fragmentation and its effect on food systems in the West 
Bank and Gaza Strip.  This study was intended to assist the UN organizations delivering humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people in improving the effectiveness of their intervention programs, especially in urban and 
remote communities.  
2006:  United Nations Development Programme, Program Design  
Participated in a study aiming at identifying the needs of 1,300 poor households being targeted by a UNDP -Islamic 
Development Bank (IDB) poverty alleviation/enterprise development project.   
2006:  Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committees, Baseline Survey  
Participated in preparing a baseline study for a large -scale drought -mitigation and food security program 
implemented by PARC.  
2006:  Birzeit University, Review of the International Studies Program  
Undertook a review of the International Studies Program components that were funded by the Swiss Development 
Cooperation (SDC).  The review focused on assessing the Program’s achievements against plans and its impact. 
The review report findings and recommendations wee used to guide the formulation of a new proposal to SDC 
and other donors.  
      2006:  World Bank, Final Evaluation of the Education Action Project  
Conducted an evaluation of a US$ 7 million World Bank funded project which aimed at improving the Ministry of 
Education’s capacity in planning and public financial management.  The evaluation process included numerous focus 
group meetings, group interviews, and semi- structured interviews.  Responsible for conducting the entire 
evaluation as well as drafting an Implementation Completion Report on behalf of the World Bank and a detailed 
Final Evaluation Report, as well as facilitating a workshop with key stakeholders to discuss the evaluation findings 
and recommendations.   
2006:  ACDI/VOCA, Final Evaluation of the Agribusiness Development Program i n the West Bank  
Team Leader for the evaluation of the ACDI/VOCA’s Agribusiness Development Program in the West Bank and 
Gaza.  In addition to the overall responsibility for drafting the evaluation report, responsible for managing a team of three experts a nd field researchers who comprised the evaluation team, and for designing and facilitating several 
focus group discussions among other things.   
2005:  ACDI/VOCA, Final Evaluation of 416(b) Grants Management Program in the West Bank  
Team Leader for the ev aluation of the USDA -funded ACDI/VOCA Program in the West Bank, which was geared 
towards drought mitigation and agricultural development through grants provided to eight local and international 
non-governmental organizations working in agriculture.  This w as a participatory evaluation that spanned two 
months and was conducted by a team of three experts.  The evaluation methodology included a beneficiary survey, 
semi-structured interviews, and several focus group discussions.  Responsible for drafting the ev aluation report, 
reviewing and incorporating input from evaluation team members into the evaluation report, supervising the overall process and quality of the evaluation, and leading focus group discussions and conducting focus groups.   
 143  
2005: Ministry of Detainees and Ex- Detainees Affairs, Final Evaluation of Phase III and the Transitional 
Phase of the Ex -Detainees Rehabilitation Program  
Co-led an evaluation of a multi- faceted ex -detainees rehabilitation program which aims at rehabilitating and 
reintegrati ng the Palestinian ex -detainees into the society through providing them with services through which 
they are able to acquire needed skills, knowledge, and financial resources to be self -supported and to contribute 
to the process of building and development .  Specific responsibilities included: analyzing the program’s management 
arrangements, assessment of the project’s electronic databases, compiling focus group findings into a comprehensive Focus Groups Report, supervising the team of field researchers who  were conducting the 
beneficiaries survey, and contributing to the drafting of the evaluation report.    
 
2005: Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committees, Development of Strategic Plan for the Savings and 
Credit Program  
Co-Led a three- week consultancy mis sion with an international micro -finance expert to develop the strategic plan 
for the network of women Savings and Credit Associations.   
 
2005: World Vision International, Design of an Agricultural Development Program in the Gaza Strip for 
an AustAid (AME NCA) Grant  
Contributed to the design and development of a one million dollars agricultural development project in the Gaza 
Strip.  Provided technical advice on the project design and proposal writing process, designed questionnaire for 
gathering baseline data, and drafted the final proposal in close collaboration with the lead consultant.   
 
2005:  World Vision International, Community Needs Assessment (ADP -Ramallah)  
Led an assessment of the physical infrastructure and community services needs in two rural communities in 
Ramallah Governorate, using several participatory needs assessments tools.  
 
2004:  ACDI/VOCA, Mid -Term Evaluation of 416(b) Grants Management Program  in the West Bank and 
Gaza Strip  
Member of a four -person evaluation team, with the responsibility of assessing the contractual arrangements of the 
Grants, reviewing the Program’s participatory techniques in terms of project planning and implementation, and  
analyzing the cost effectiveness of particular Program outputs.   
 
2004:  ACDI/VOCA, Update of Baseline Survey and Monitoring of the Drought Mitigation Program  
Responsible for updating the Program’s Baseline Survey Report through a combined literature rev iew and new 
field data [from new project beneficiaries and additional target areas] analysis.  This consultancy also included 
participating in Program Monitoring Mission, which produced a concise Monitoring Report and an update of the 
Indicative Program Performance Tables.    
 
2004: Arab Network for Sustainable Agriculture, Program Performance Evaluation  
Conducted an evaluation of the performance of a two -year operational plan of this Pan -Arab network of 
agricultural non -governmental organizations.  The evaluation of the networks performance followed a tailored 
evaluation framework for lobbying and advocacy networks, which was designed to provide the network members 
with an objective assessment of the network’s performance over the preceding two years and to inform any future 
plans through offering a number of lessons learned.   
 
2004: Care International: S ocio-Economic Impact Study of Water Situation on the Livelihood of Four 
Rural Communities in Jenin Governorate   
 144 Lead Economist in a four person team undertaking a study to evaluate the extent of socio -economic impact water 
shortages have on the livelihood o f four communities in rural Jenin.  This study was the basis on which Care 
International launched a global fund -raising mission aimed at addressing problems highlighted in the study.   
 
Organizational Development, Capacity Building and Training  
 
2015: Appl ied Research Institute of Jeruslame (ARIJ), Training on Policy Analysis  
Designed and facilitated a three- day training workshop for the benefit of ARIJ staff and staff of partner 
governmental organisations on policy research and analysis.  The training focu sed on assessing environmental 
policies using the Integrated Environmental Assessment Framework.  
   
2013: International Labour Organisation (ILO), Business Development Advisor to the Cooperative 
Extension Workers at the Ministry of Labour  
Commissioned to b uild the capacity of 11 cooperative extension workers in the West Bank in the area of preparing 
cooperative feasibility studies and business plans.  The capacity building approach involved training, coaching and 
accompaniment over a period of two months, c ulminating in 11 high -quality feasibility assessments and 3 -year 
business plans.     
 
2012: International Labour Organisation (ILO), Technical Assistance and Strategic Planning Facilitation 
for the benefit of the Gender Unit at the Ministry of Labour  
Undertook an assessment of the capacity of the Gender Unit and assisted the Unit in formulating an action plan 
for the years 2012 -2014. 
 
2012 : International Labour Organisation (ILO), Coaching Cooperative Extension Workers ’ at the Ministry 
of Labour  
Co-led this consultancy which aimed at building the capacity of cooperative extension agents at the Ministry of 
Labour on assessing the performance of Palestinian cooperatives, with a particular emphasis on formulating intervention plans to help these cooperativ es improve their business oprations.  
 
 
2011: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Preparation of a Ready -to-Use Training 
Package on Mainstreaming Gender and Poverty Analysis in the Lifecycle of Agricultural and Rural 
Development Projects  
Commissioned to produce a set of ready -to-use training materials which conform to good instructional design 
standards. The training package aims to enable IFAD -supported staff to undertake gender analysis and integrate 
gender issues in the design, impleme ntation, and monitoring and evaluation of agricultural and rural development 
projects.  
 
2010: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Design of a Monitoring and Evaluation 
Systems for the Project Developing a Monitoring and Evaluation Syst em for the Project: “Improved 
Livelihoods of Small Farmers in Iraq through Integrated Pest Management and Organic Fertilization”  
Member of a two -expert team responsible for revising the project design and developing an M&E system for the 
project.  Tasks included facilitating a five -day workshop with the project team from Iraq, ICARDA, and IFAD (held 
in Amman) which culminated in rev ised logframe and budget, and a preliminary design of M&E data collection 
tools; and coaching through correspondence and follow -up workshops.     
  
 145 2010:  World Food Programme (Rome), Preparation of a Comprehensive Training Package on Qualitative 
Assessment  Approaches for Food Security and Poverty Analysis  
Based on the materials already available in WFP and OMXF and most up -to-date knowledge from external sources 
related to qualitative analysis methodologies, commissioned to produce a set of ready-to -use tra ining materials 
which conform to good instructional design standards. The training package aims to enable WFP to upgrade the 
skills of WFP and partner field -based assessors worldwide on methods for conducting good qualitative analysis and 
for combining it with quantitative analysis.  
2009 and 2010: The German Technical Cooperation (GTZ), Organizational Development Consultancy for 
the Benefit of the Ministries of Labor and Interior  
Within the framework of GTZ Policy Advice and Reform Fund to the Palestinian A uthority, commissioned to 
undertake an organizational development exercise that involves a design of a regulatory, organizational and operational framework for enabling the Directorate General of Cooperatives at the Ministry of Labor and the 
General Direct orate of Non -Governmental Organizations to carry out their functions of organizing and overseeing 
the cooperative and NGO sectors in Palestine.  This includes a process mapping and re -engineering (including the 
preparation of an operations manual), conducting a capacity assessment of staff and physical resources, and conducting staff training on developed manual.  
   
2009: The NGO Development Center (NDC), Technical Assistance for NGOs on the Adoption of the 
Palestinian NGOs’ Code of Conduct  
Leading a team o f six senior experts (law, capacity building, participatory planning, communication, lobbying and 
advocacy, and financial management) in providing long- term technical assistance to 15 NGOs in the southern and 
middle West Bank on the basis of pre -prepared o rganizational development plans.  TA includes, inter alia, training 
provision, administrative and financial systems development, strategic planning, organizational restructuring and formulating job descriptions and staff appraisal systems.   
 
2009: ACDI/VO CA and The Ministry of Labour, Leading the Organization of the “Reality and Prospects 
of the Palestinian Cooperative Movement Conference”  
In close collaboration with the General Directorate for Cooperatives in the Ministry of Labour, and with funding 
from ACDI/VOCA, led the process of organizing this conference.  Responsibilities included technical oversight of 
the preparation of four working papers that were presented in the conference, logistical preparations and arrangements, and preparing the conference  proceedings report.  
 
2009:  Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committees (PARC) and the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD), Organizational Capacity Assessment and Development Planning for the Women Savings and Credit Associations and the  Savings and Credit Union  
Co-led this assessment which involved carrying out a comprehensive, in -depth analysis of the services, systems, 
procedures, financial situation and membership standing of the 12 apex SCAs in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, with the purpose of formulating a program of actionable recommendations to bridge capacity gaps within the SCAs 
and improve the financial performance and sustainability thereof.  The assessment also included an in depth organizational review of the Savings and Cred it Union. 
 
2008: CordAid, Organizational Assessment and Strategic Planning for Partner Organizations in Palestine  
Commissioned by CordAid (Dutch NGO) to assist PYALARA in undertaking and organizational assessment with 
the view of formulating a five -year st rategic plan that focuses on enhancing responsiveness to youth’s needs, 
improving services and programs, and paving the way for sustainability.  
       
2008: International Labor Organization (ILO), Institutional Assessment of Palestinian Cooperatives   
 146 Member  of a three -member team of consultants tasked with assessing the institutional and legal environment 
surrounding the work of Palestinian cooperatives in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.  The assessment was intended 
to serve as an input into formulating intervention policies and programs by ILO, UNDP and the Ministry of Labor.  
 
2005:  World Vision International, Capacity Needs Assessment of Thirty Community Based Organizations 
in Rural Bethlehem  
Local Government Policy Specialist in a three person team conducting an assessment of the capacity building and 
institutional development needs of thirty local community bodies.    
 
2005: Municipality of Jericho, Organizational Development and Restructuring  
Conducted a rapid diagnosis of the organization structure, wage bill, and staffing levels of the Municipality of Jericho 
and proposed a plan of action towards restructuring and staff retrenchment.  Also, provided advice and 
recommendation on detailed organizational development work that is needed for implementing a 
downsizing/retrenchment scheme.  
 
2005: Birzeit University Center for Continuing Education, Design and Delivery of Training in the Field of 
Strategic Communication 
Designed a forty- hour training module on strategic communication.  Delivered a pilot training c ourse to a group 
of executive secretaries from Birzeit University.  
 2004: Women’s Center for Legal Aid and Counseling, Institutional Performance and Capacity Assessment, 
and Strategic Planning Consultancy    
 
Public Sector Reform and Financial Management  
 
2005 - 2006: Ministry of Planning, Public Administration and Civil Service Reform Program, Public sector 
planning and financial management  
Planning Expert on a long -term mission tasked with reviewing public sector planning and reform initiatives and 
public sector financial management and providing recommendations to form the basis for the introduction of a 
government -wide Medium -Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). Responsible for reviewing planning and financial 
management and accountability arrangements and making proposals for institutional reforms, including the definition of skills required to support planning and financial management. Also responsible for providing input into 
the design and implementation of three -year intervention program in support of integration of planning and 
budgeting (IPB) within the PA.  Achievements: Co -authored a Diagnostic Report of the planning and public financial 
management functions in the Ministries of Health and Agriculture, drafted a policy briefing note and later a det ailed 
proposal for a Cabinet Decision for introducing (IPB) (adopted in November 2005);  facilitated the design of a 
one-year work plan for strengthening the planning and budgeting capacity in the Ministries of Health and 
Agriculture; and provided technical inputs into the drafting of a detailed overall approach for introducing an MTEF 
in Palestine.  
 
2006 - 2007:  Birzeit University, Good Governance Monitoring  
Lead a team of multidisciplinary experts in the design of a good governance monitoring system to assess the 
performance of the three branches of government.  The first monitoring report was published in November 2006.  
While a second report was being prepared for publication, a political crisis in June 2007 put the whole initiative on hold.  
    
  
 147 Unite d Nations Development Programme                              November 2001 –March 2005  
Program Management Officer            
Responsible for managing programs and projects in the area of local rural development. Management portfolio 
included projects funded  by USAID, European Commission, Japan, Spanish Cooperation, Development 
Cooperation Ireland, Australian Aid, and Italian Cooperation.   
• Managed capital assistance, emergency job creation, local governance, rural and agricultural development, and 
institutio nal strengthening programs (value of projects portfolio managed: US$ 35 million).  
• Formulated new programs and mobilized substantive financial resources (US$ 8 million in additional funding);  
• Conducted output / results monitoring and put in place a PM&E and  Reporting system for the Local Rural 
Development Program (LRDP);  
• Organized and facilitated workshops for local/international stakeholders and beneficiaries;  
• Led the design of the capacity building and institutional strengthening component of the Local Rur al 
Development Program (LRDP), which principally focused on strengthening the capacity and institutionalization of Joint Service Councils (later used by MDLF as an entry point for amalgamation of local authorities);  
• Ensured efficient financial and administ rative/operational management of projects portfolio (annual budget ~ 
US$ 35 million);  
• Provided technical oversight and contributed to the preparation of programs’ annual work plans, and progress reports; and,  
• Designed profiles for audit missions and ensured MOSS standards program compliance.   
 
United Nations Relief and Works Agency                           July 2000 -June 2001  
Administrative Officer/Human Rights Project  
• Responsible for financial, administrative  and logistics management of project;  
• Advised Project Coordinator on operational and administrative issues, and acted as the Officer -in-Charge in the 
absence of the Project Coordinator;  
• Organized training workshops for UNRWA school teachers and counselors;  
• Prepared progress reports and annual work plans for the project;  
• Led the recruitment process for project consultants and personnel;  
• Designed a dissemination and public awareness strategy for project outputs, including making logistical 
arrangements for de livery of project outputs to target schools.  
 
Global Management Consulting Group                  January 2001 -June 2001  
Junior Business Consultant                            
• Responsible for the Studies and Market Research Unit: coordinated sub -contractor  (outside consultants) 
activities, evaluated sub -contractor performance, conduct extensive research on a wide -range topics, wrote 
technical proposals and reports.  
• Drafted the Wadi Gaza Development Project proposal for the benefit of UNDP/PAPP, which receiv ed 
favourable recognition and funding from USAID (US$ 3.5 Million).  
 
Eastern Michigan University                 September 1998- April 2000  
Undergraduate Students Advisor   
 148 
• Advised College of Business undergraduate students in their areas of academic concentration, created and 
compiled the College of Business Student Handbook, helped students with registration process, reviewed 
academic progress, processed applications to the College of Business, worked on the Self Evaluation Report for 
the American Assembly Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB) reaccredidation and verified compliance with the University and the AACSB guidelines.  
 
Padnos Iron & Metal Company                            February 1998 -August 1998  
Assistant To Quality Manager  
• Assisted Qual ity Manager in implementing a Q -S9001 project and obtaini ng certification, led internal quality 
audits, prepared audit reports, assisted in improving APQP in two machines, trained employees on the use of 
the SPC.  
 
Padnos Iron & Metal Company         September 1997 –February 1998 
Assistant To Warehouse Manager, Intern                  
• Monitored and controlled inventory levels through cycle counting and back- flushing, generated inventory 
purchase orders, conducted routine shipping and receiving activities, assis ted in the implementation of a bar -
code system within the warehouse.  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation Systems Specialist  
 Ruba Abdelrahman Al -Adham  
 
 
 Nationality: Jordanian (hold Palestinian ID) 
 
CAREER OBJECTIVE   
To succeed in an environment of growth and excellence, where I can utilize my combined management and 
technical skills efficiently. I am keen to build an innovative career that contributes to organizational growth 
through sheer  
commitment, dedication and eagerness to enrich my knowledge .  
SUMMARY   
A professional with 11 years of experience in the fields of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and reporting, 
engineering research and quality assurance. Have knowledge and experience in managing M&E function of USAID 
and DFID funded projects focusing on community development, infrastructure, good governance, humanitarian assistance, market systems, women empowerment and gender mainstreaming. Solid experience in developing 
and implementing assessments and evaluations in addition to managing external evaluator s. Proven team player 
with strong communication and problem solving skills. Have  diversified analytical skills supported by engineering 
background, research and quality assurance work experience.   
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE  
 
Monitoring, Evaluation, Reporting and Communications (MERC) Specialist  
USAID WBG Performance Monitoring and Evaluation Project (PMEP)  
January 2018 to present  
QED Group LLC.  
Ramallah - Palestine  
 
Main responsibilities:  
 
• Develop M&E plans, define project indicators, and collect and review monitoring data.   
 149 • Contribute to performance and impact evaluations through questionnaire development. Key informant in-
depth interviewing, managing survey data collection, reviewing data, preparing datasets, analyzing quantitative 
or qualitative data, and r eport writing.  
• Interpret outcomes of implementation through data or other evidenced -based sources and provide program 
recommendations as needed.  
• Provide support to the USAID’s Geographic Management Information System.  
• Assist in the management of field moni toring, evaluation design, empirical and statistical analysis, environmental 
compliance, and management of information systems.  
• Provide quality assurance/quality control for local subcontractors.  
•  Collect and verify data on technical implementation, coordinate with both technical and operation staff and 
contribute to overall project reporting requirements as per contractual agreements including quarterly and 
weekly reports, evaluation and case studies, success stories, etc.  
• Work closely with project leaders hip and manage directly project efforts to effectively design and implement 
dissemination strategies and activities to communicate analytical products developed under the project as part of learning and/or strategic communications and public outreach agend a. 
• Take the lead in supporting learning agendas, collaboration, learning and adapting, and knowledge management 
activities; all aimed at facilitating effective collaboration and promote learning and sharing among stakeholders.  
 
Monitoring, Evaluation and L earning Manager  
Arab Women Enterprise Fund (AWEF) - DFID- funded Program (Regional Program in Palestine, 
Jordan and Egypt).  
February - December 2017  
Development Alternatives, Inc. (DAI)  
Ramallah - Palestine  
 Main responsibilities:  
 
• Lead for AWEF in country on the development of a detailed and robust MEL system in collaboration with Market 
Share Associates (MSA), including defining and operationalizing the results framework (logical framework) for 
market strategies and other supporting tools which meet DFID’s  standards and are fit for the purpose this 
program focusing on the inclusion of women.  
• Lead on monitoring, evaluation and learning activities for the AWEF in collaboration with the country team and MSA and collaborate with other AWEF MEL Managers on MEL activities in their countries and overall Log- frame 
progress and planning.  
• Provide support to Program Partners on the construction and commissioning of the M&E and Results Chain 
framework, and ensure baseline, midline and end -line data is collected taking  ownership of the dataset for AWEF, 
and routinely monitoring against it;  
• Monitor the implementation of all activities on an on -going basis through site visits, receiving reports from 
implementing partners and obtaining feedback from the recipients of assis tance  
• Uphold high standards of monitoring and evaluation principles and ensure adherence to DFID and Donor Committee for Enterprise Development (DCED) principles  
• Contribute to incorporation of Value for Money indicators into MEL systems which balance Equity and Effectiveness with Efficiency and Economy dimensions, ensuring that AWEF monitors, demonstrates and learns 
from VfM;  
• Provide timely and accurate inputs into the Inception Report, Operations Manual and quarterly and annual 
reports.  
• Learning Hub : Ensure that program data is reliably disaggregated (according to agreed criteria) and captured, 
stored safely and securely (using adapted standard database software) and robustly analyzed  
• Set database of studies (baseline studies) and plan dissemination a ctivities including quarterly report, information 
platforms, websites and publications.  
  Monitoring and Evaluation and Reporting Manager  
Local Government and Infrastructure Program (LGI) - USAID -Funded Project 
($104.7 million) April 2016 - January 2017   
 150 Global Communities West Bank & Gaza - 
Formerly CHF Al -Bireh -Palestine  
 
Monitoring and Evaluation and Reporting Officer  
Local Government and Infrastructure Program (LGI) - USAID -Funded Project 
($104.7 million) September 2013 - March 2016   
Global Communities West  Bank & Gaza- 
Formerly CHF Al -Bireh -Palestine  
 
Main responsibilities:   
• Prepare and update program performance management plan and key performance indicators related to 
program goals and objectives.  
• Maintain and update the USAID Geo -MIS system and TraiNet, including data quality control and supporting 
documents.  
• Maintain and oversee quality control of the LGI internal database. Support program staff in utilizing the internal 
database and ensuring processes is clear and as streamlined as possible.  
• Write biwee kly, quarterly and annual reports submitted to the donor.  
• Gather specific data as requested by the LGI management team that may relate to more in -depth analysis or 
donor inquiries.  
• Prepare, review and update M&E and evaluation tools, forms, reporting syste m and procedures.  
• Collection and analysis of data from LGI conducted internal program assessments, surveys and evaluations.  
• Design and conduct qualitative and quantitative evaluations (surveys, focus group discussion and in- depth 
interviews) for infrastructure, governance, gender and humanitarian assistance interventions in addition to 
conducting case studies and regular reviews of program interventions.  
• Manage the external evaluation firm conducting citizen perception survey of LGI program.  
• Oversee the M&E  function of humanitarian assistance interventions in Gaza, namely Cash for Work program. 
In addition, supervise M&E officer and assistants in a Gaza to assume their roles effectively.  
• Assist communications team in preparing success stories highlighting pr ogram achievements.  
  Researcher  
Capacity Building and Institutional Reform for Integrated Water /Wastewater Management in 
Rural Areas of West Bank Project - funded by Austrian Development Cooperation  
August 2010 - April 2013 
Palestinian Water Authority 
(PWA) Ramallah -Palestine  
 
Main responsibilities:   
• Assist research work in the field of sanitary services. 
• Monitor and report on the performance of small scale wastewater treatment plants constructed in rural areas 
of West Bank  
• Assist in building PWA baseline for sanitary services in West Bank. 
• Survey the environmental state of art of olive mills in West Bank and propose feasible alternatives for best 
management of olive mill wastewater.  
 Project coordinator - Part Time  
Women's Leadership for Greater Economic Pa rticipation Program : focusing on improving the quality 
of life of  Palestinian women in southern Hebron villages. 
August 2009 - January 2010   
CEDPA "Center for Development and Population Activities”, Washington DC - USA  
 
Main responsibilities:   
• Coordinate project activities with stakeholders. 
• Assist in organizing awareness/ training workshops for project beneficiaries.  
• Write progress reports and prepare presentations highlighting project achievements.  
  
 151 
Quality Assurance Inspector   
July 2007 - July 2009  
Jerusalem Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd  
Al-Bireh – Palestine  
 
Main responsibilities:   
• Monitor the quality of production and line clearance functions according to GMP regulations.  
• Internal GMP, ISO 9001:2000, ISO 14001:2004 audit.  
• Conduct cross –functional investigations for products, processes, and system failures.  
• Prepare Annual Product Review (APR) to assure that processes are operating under state of control, monitor 
deviations and propose corrective, preventive or development actions  
• Non-conforming mate rials/product control and documentation  
• Continuous review and assessment of quality manual: prepare and review Quality Procedures (QP) and 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) that comply with European GMP requirements.  
 
 
CONFRENCES AND PUBLICATIONS  
 
• Empo werment - forward Poverty Measurement: Real - Time Learning from the Arab Women’s Enterprise 
Fund’s Disadvantaged Assessment, Laura Kim; Market Share Associates, Erin Markel; Market Share Associates 
and Ruba Aladham;  Arab Women ’s Enterprise Fund. To be presented in the SEEP Network Annual 
Conference, October 2017.  
•  Palestinian -Dutch academic cooperation program on water (PADUCO) second conference, The Hague, 
November 28, 2015 (speaker and participant).   
• Palestinian Dutch Cooperation Conference and Bilateral Forum, The Hague, November 29, 2015 (participant).   
• Global Communities' International Conference entitled "Raising the Bar on M&E", Silver Spring, Maryland -USA, 
August 18- 20, 2015. Presentation title “Municipal Capacity Index for Performance Monitoring".   
• OLITREVA International Conference on Olive Mills Waste. Speaker and poster presenter; paper title "Removal 
of Polyphones from Olive Mills Wastewater using Activated Olive Stones." Bethlehem -Palestine November 
19-20, 2014.   
• The Second International Conferen ce on Olives in Palestine. Speaker and participant; paper title: "Removal of 
Polyphones from Olive Mills Wastewater using Activated Olive Stones." Palestine Technical University, 
Tulkarm -Palestine November 25 -26, 2013.   
• The first International Civil Engine ering Conference in Palestine. Speaker and participant; paper title: "Removal 
of Polyphones from Olive Mills Wastewater using Activated Olive Stones." Ramallah - Palestine, October 24 -
25, 2013.  
   
EDUCATIONAL BACKGROUND  
 
Master of Science in Water and Environmental Engineering  
2010 –2012  
An-Najah National University 
Nablus, Palestine   Full scholarship granted by Palestinian Water Authority and funded by Austrian Development 
Cooperation. Thesis title: Removal of polyphenols from olive mill wastewater using activated olive 
stones   
GPA: 3.81 (Excellence)  
 
Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering  
2002 - 2007 
University of Jordan Amman, Jordan   
GPA: 3.65 (Excellence)   
 152 
 
General High School Certificate  
2000-2002 Kamal Junblat High School,  
Nablus, Palestine   
Average: 97.2% 
  
PROPF ESSIONAL TRAINING   
• Women’s Economic Empowerment in Market Systems Development – Key principles and definitions, Market 
Share Associates, Ramallah - Palestine. January 2017.  
• Geo-MIS Training, USAID- West Bank & Gaza Mission Office, Jerusalem -Palestine, September 2015.   
• Data Quality Assessment (DQA) refresher training, USAID West Bank & Gaza, Ramallah -Palestine, July 2015.  
• Geo-MIS Training, USAID West Bank & Gaza, Ramallah - Palestine, October 2013.  
• Operation of effluent infiltration basins, Middle East Desalination Research Center (MEDREC), Tel -Aviv, June 
29 –July 7, 2013.  
• Use of software packages for the design of activated sludge systems [ASS], Palestinian Water Authority/GIZ, 
Ramallah -Palestine, April 2012.  
• Reforming environmental education in Palestine, EU- TEMPUS project, University of Loughborough- UK, May 
2011. 
• Engineering project management in water and sanitation systems, Palestinian Water Authority (PWA), Ramallah -Palestine, December 2010.  
• "Women's Leadership for Greater Econom ic Participation", Center for Development and Population Activities 
(CEDPA). Round I: Amman - Jordan, April, 2009, Round II: Washington DC -USA, December 2009.  
• Project Management Certificate, Birzeit University Center for Continuous Education, Ramallah - Palestine, July, 
2008 (40 credit hours).  
• MS–Project Certificate, AMIDEAST, Ramallah -Palestine, February 2008 (20 credit hours).  
• Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) compliance training course, Ministry of Health, Ramallah -Palestine, June 
2008, (40 credit hours).  
 LA NG U AG ES   
Arabic: Native   
English: Excellent (speaking and writing), (iBT TOEFL score=114)  
COMPUTER SKILLS  
 Microsoft Office, SPSS, PSPP, ArcGIS, Geo -MIS, MS -Project, AutoCAD, Matlab, HEC- HMS, MODFLOW, Aqua 
Designer, HYSYS, ESOLVE, Polymath, C++.  
   
 
 
Performance Evaluation: Enterprise Development for Global Competitiveness (Compete) Project  
 1  
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
 
 