            UNESCO Series on Journalism EducationSETTING THE GENDER AGENDA 
FOR COMMUNICATION POLICY
New proposals from the Global Alliance on Media and GenderPublished in 2018 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2018
ISBN: 978-92-3-100321-9
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 
IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users accept to be bound by 
the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository ( http://www.unesco.
org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en ). The designations employed and the 
presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the expression 
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the 
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The ideas and opinions expressed in 
this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO 
and do not commit the Organization.
Editors:  Aimée Vega Montiel and Sarah Macharia
Contributing Authors:  (in order of chapters): Claudia Padovani; Carolyn Byerly; 
Karen Ross; María Eugenia Chávez; Sarah Macharia; Aimée Vega Montiel; Julie 
Posetti and Hannah Storm; Mindy Ran; Anita Gurumurthy, Amrita Vasudevan and 
Nandini Chami; UNESCO UNITWIN University Network on Gender, Media and ICTs; 
Amina Lemrini Elouahabi; Evelyne Faye; Sian Rolls.
Graphic design:  Goo LTD
Cover design: Cover:  Max Hofstetter https://unsplash.com/photos/gAHXt2pMRyk
Illustrations:
Section 1: Grace Ho https://unsplash.com/photos/454SNPax-BY
Section 2: Ian Dooley https://unsplash.com/photos/FgSyP02I0gw
Section 3: Anders Hansen https://unsplash.com/photos/uBmr-pvTelo
Section 4: Carli Jeen https://unsplash.com/photos/HJqzDHuWQqQ
Case Studies: Paweł Czerwiński https://unsplash.com/photos/OZqyLo7LQS0
Original images re-worked by Brad Collicott and Goo LTD
Copy editor:  Mindy Ran
Typeset:  UNESCO
Printed by:  UNESCO
Printed in France
Published by UNESCO and GAMAG
SETTING THE GENDER AGENDA 
FOR COMMUNICATION POLICY
New proposals from the Global Alliance on Media and GenderForeword 
Preface ………………………………………………………………………………………………… 1
SECTION I. MEDIA POLICY, STRUCTURES AND EMPLOYMENT  ………………… 8 
1. The Challenge of Mainstreaming Gender 
Through Media and ICT Policy and Regulation ………………………………………… 9  
 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………… 9 
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………... 11 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 14 
 Resources and Good Practice ……………………………………………………………… 18 
 References ………………………………………………………………………………………… 19 
2. Gender Equality, Policy and Media Structures …………………………………… 23  
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 24 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 30 
 References ………………………………………………………………………………………… 33 
3. A Hard Ladder to Climb: Women and Power in Media Industries ……… 35  
 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………… 35 
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 36 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 38 
 Resources and Good Practice ……………………………………………………………… 40 
 References ………………………………………………………………………………………… 42 
4. Women in Community and Indigenous Media …………………………………… 45  
 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………… 45 
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 46 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 48 
 References ………………………………………………………………………………………… 50 
SECTION II. MEDIA CONTENT AND VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  ……… 52
5. Addressing Gender Issues in Media Content …………………………………… 53  
 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………… 53 
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 58 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 60 
 Resources and Good Practice …………………………………………………………… 62 
 References ………………………………………………………………………………………… 64 
6. Violence Against Women in Media and Digital Contents …………………… 67 
 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………… 67 
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 68 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 71 
 Resources and Good Practice ……………………………………………………………… 72  References …………………………………………………………………………………………… 72 
7. Violence Against Women Journalists – Online and Offline ………………… 75 
 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………… 75 
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 77 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 83 
 References …………………………………………………………………………………………… 86 
8. Triple Jeopardy: A Trade Union Perspective 
on Gender-Based Violence against Women Journalists ………………………… 93  
 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………… 93 
 Evidence ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 95 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………… 96 
 Resources and Good Practice ……………………………………………………………… 99 
 References ………………………………………………………………………………………… 100 
SECTION III. DIGITAL MEDIA SPHERE …………………………………………………… 102 
9. A Feminist Perspective on Gender,
Media and Communication Rights in Digital Times ……………………………… 103 
 The Public Sphere in Digital Times - Implications for Media Plurality,
  Representation and Participation ……………………………………………………… 104 
 Gender-Based Violence Online ……………………………………………………….… 111
 Digital Regimes of Intellectual Property
 and the Enclosure of Knowledge ……………………………………………………… 115 
 Equitable Access to Digital Communication Architecture …………………… 116 
 Recommendations ……………………………………………………………………………. 117 
SECTION IV. MEDIA EDUCATION  …………………………………………………………… 122 
10. Gender Mainstreaming in Media and Journalism Curricula ……………… 123  
 Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………………… 123 
 Evidence …………………………………………………………………………………………… 124 
 Recommendations …………………………………………………………………………… 127 
 Resources and Good Practice …………………………………………………………… 128
 References ………………………………………………………………………………………… 129 
CASE STUDIES  ………………………………………………………………………………………… 132 
Case 1. The Broadcast Media Regulators: Gender Equality Drivers ……… 133 
Case 2. African Union of Broadcasting: 
Gender Integration in African media ………………………………………………… 139 
 Case 3. Sustaining Women-Led Community 
Media in the Pacific region; the femLINKpacific Experience ……………… 145
APPENDIX: UNESCO's work on media and gender ………………………………… 154FOREWORD
It is sometimes said that talk is cheap, and that what really counts is action. 
But words are not always cheap. People often pay a high personal cost for what they 
say – including when they dare to speak out in favour of gender equality.
Such high-cost speech is especially valuable in the face of other kinds of speech, 
which are unfortunately increasingly common, where words (and images) incite and 
normalise discrimination and violence against women and girls. 
This is why the Position Papers in this book dealing with key policy issues are so vital. 
They constitute brave statements in a difficult climate. Every voice in favour of gender 
equality matters, and the ones featured here have the power to help change society. 
Even without action, words are key components for progressive norms. Without them 
there is no beacon for policy to aspire to, nor a standard to use for assessing practice. 
The contributions to this book help precisely to illuminate the beacon we need. They 
signal how we can benchmark what is happening on the ground.
To the extent that the words in these Position Papers also serve a purpose of “preaching 
to the converted”, let’s recall that it is always important to strengthen morale. And at the 
same time, the contents in these pages go further than inspiration and reinforcement.
The contributors systematically, and holistically, unpack a range of dimensions – each 
and every one of which is relevant to the quest for Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG) 5 for the world to “achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls”. 
The deadline for humanity to get to this milestone is 2030, and much remains to be 
done.This is why UNESCO continues to champion gender equality as a global priority in all 
its work. It is also why the Organization’s specialised media development programme, 
the International Programme for the Development of Communication (IPDC), has co-
funded the production of this book.
It was under the leadership of the then IPDC Chair, Albana Shala, in 2017, that funds 
were allocated via a financial contribution from The Netherlands. That support led 
to an international joining of forces inside the Global Alliance for Media and Gender 
(GAMAG) to identify the topics and commission the experts to deliver the Position 
Papers. GAMAG is the result of an initiative of UNESCO that now has a life of its own. 
See gamag.net
In producing the contents of this book, many of the authors took part in sessions at 
the Commission on the Status of Women at the UN General Assembly in March 2018. 
Besides impacting on the talks and their outcomes, the collective also convened a 
special panel to present their drafts and gain peer feedback.
The Position Papers that now see the light of day show us how to tackle the gaps between 
fine-sounding policies and actual practices, between words and implementation.
What they show is that if implementation is flawed, then there may have been flaws 
in the basic policy – due inter alia to knowledge gaps that led to substantive obstacles 
being overlooked. This insight, along with others in the Papers, helps us to bridge talk 
with action.
This is because we have here a resource that unpacks the complexity and thereby allows 
for strategic policies and programmes to be effective in advancing gender equality in 
media and through media (including social media). Governments, companies, NGOs, 
academia, individuals all have a huge contribution to make – together and in the space 
of their own efficacy. No single actor can do it alone in these digital times. For its part, 
UNESCO has undertaken many actions to support the quest for gender equality in and 
through media (see Appendix to this book). Amongst other initiatives, UNESCO created 
1and has promoted worldwide the Gender Sensitive-Indicators for Media (GSIM) to help 
produce knowledge for change.
A significant step was taken in 2018 when the IPDC gave the green light to new 
UNESCO indicators to assess the Internet. This is a framework with strong gender 
considerations throughout.
Called the Internet Universality Indicators (IUIs), this framework complements the 
Position Papers here. It opens up the doors for gender-sensitive analysis, on a per 
country-basis, of the most influential communications facility of our era.
In this way, both the Position Papers, the GSIM and the IUIs hold the promise to 
empower us to understand fast-moving digital developments.
Together, they can provide the knowledge for words to be a springboard for action. 
For designing information and communications policies that work – for governments, 
in companies and other institutions, and even for and by individuals.
Policies that help to realize SDG 5 – and SDG 16 target 10 which calls for “public access 
to information and fundamental freedoms”.
This is our opportunity to help ensure gender equality in public access to information 
and fundamental freedoms. If we fail, sustainable development fails. 
Guy Berger
Secretary of IPDC
GMMP: Global Media Monitoring Project
VAW: Violence Against Women
VAWG: Violence Against Women and Girls
UNESCO: United Nations Scientific, Educational and Cultural Organisation
2PREFACE
 The global media landscape has evolved dramatically in the more than twenty 
years since the Fourth UN World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995) was held, 
when media were recognized as critical for the advancement of women and 
the achievement of equality between women and men.1 Section J of the Beijing 
Platform for Action underlined several issues, among them, gender bias in media 
organisations, degrading and suggestive pornographic media images of women, and 
the unexploited potential of information technology for women’s progress. At the 
time, less than one percent of the world’s population was online, while presently, 
approximately 50 percent2 have access to the Internet. Of these, three quarters 
are active on social media platforms3 that have emerged since the beginning of the 
millennium. Seven out of 10 people4 today own a cell phone capable of transmitting 
instant messages or connecting to the Internet. Online media content reproduces 
the exclusion and ghettoization of women – characteristic of traditional media forms 
– within the media product and in the comments and responses of new interactive 
audiences.5 While the number of women working in media and communications has 
increased more broadly, their presence in top management remains negligible. For 
instance, only six of the 100 largest international media corporations in the world 
had female CEOs in 2017.6
 Since the dimensions of the women and media experience were reflected in the 
Beijing Platform, transformations, and corresponding and emerging gender issues 
1 Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 1995
2 International Telecommunication Union, 2017
3 We Are Social & Hootsuite, 2018 
4 GSMA, 2018 
5 The New York Declaration, 2017
6 Edström & Facht, 2017
3of the last two decades make it important to take stock and suggest a way forward if 
intervention strategies on media and information and communication technologies 
(ICTs) are to be relevant. Thus the position papers in this collection, which emerged 
out of conversations on the need to update the issues arising since Beijing, while at 
the same time make a case for the centrality of media and ICTs for gender equality 
and women’s rights’ struggles. That the Commission on the Status of Women 
resolved to discuss the media and ICTs theme at its 62nd session (CSW 2018) made 
the development of these papers even more pertinent. 
 Organised in four sections, the papers present the salient issues respective to 
the facet under discussion, the evidence on progress, persistent gaps and emerging 
concerns, good practice examples, and authors' recommendations directed primarily 
at media organisations and relevant State bodies.
 Rooted in holistic and intersectional principles, the papers provide ideas for 
various stakeholders to respond to urgent needs. These include research to inform 
policy; promoting regulatory and auto-regulatory mechanisms at national, regional 
and international levels, implementing frameworks for algorithmic transparency, 
incorporating methods such as third party audits, promoting media and digital 
literacy programmes with a gender component that specifically focuses on building 
the information and media literacy of women and girls, and encouraging efforts 
by women’s organisations in using digital media and online spaces to amplify their 
stories ensuring safe conditions for women journalists and professionals in media 
and telecommunications corporations and organisations, and tackling online and 
offline gender-based harassment and violence, and immunity from the law. 
 Section I considers media policy, structures and employment. Padovani argues 
that despite prescriptions since Beijing for media policies that empower women and 
normative frameworks for gender equality in the media, recommendations to review 
existing policies and to strengthen self-regulatory mechanisms and codes of conduct 
are still not a priority for governments, media companies, international organizations 
and the research community. Tracing the legacy of policy-related recommendations, 
4the paper provides theoretical insights and operational inputs towards making policy 
development a priority. Byerly contributes an analysis on gender representation on 
boards of some media conglomerates around the world to conclude that women 
are peripheral to control of and benefit from the world’s communication companies. 
She offers recommendations that address women’s relationship to media structures 
and argues for the need to develop policy frameworks that include gender equality 
requirements. Discussing media employment, Ross underscores the gender gaps in 
career advancement, remuneration and leadership positions in the industry, citing 
workplace cultures and practices as some of the contributing factors. She suggests 
that enlightened media employers understand both the ethical and the business case 
for gender diversity given the steps taken to implement policies and practices which 
nurture the talent of their whole workforce. Valdéz, Quintero, Farbman, Montiel and 
Chávez analyse the access and participation of women in community and indigenous 
media. 
 Section II covers the longstanding historical issues of both the misrepresentation 
and under-representation of women in media content, and the epidemic of violence 
against women (VAW) in and through media and ICTs that has entered into everyday 
public discourse in the recent past thanks to the #MeToo movement. Macharia 
contributes insights drawn from the longitudinal Global Media Monitoring Project 
(GMMP) study that has followed gender patterns in the world news media since 
1995, arguing that the power to change rests with governments, the media and 
ordinary audiences. Three papers discuss Violence Against Women in media and 
ICTs. Vega Montiel analyses the role media and ICTs have played in reinforcing the 
normalization of violence against women and girls in contents. Posetti and Storm 
call attention to the violence against women journalists online and offline. Ran 
offers a view on gender-based violence from a journalists’ trade union perspective 
and includes labour organizations’ recommendations on tackling violence in the 
workplace.
 A utilitarian perspective has reigned in most debates on gender and ICTs with 
emphasis on the role that the latter can play for women’s empowerment. Left out 
5of such discussions are concerns about Internet media monopolies, algorithms, 
surveillance, trolling and other questions that impact women disproportionately. 
In Section III, Gurumurthy, Vasudevan and Chami offer a feminist perspective on 
these and other digital sphere issues, underlining actions for global organisations, 
governments and civil society.
 In Section IV, the UNESCO University Network on Gender, Media and ICTs 
discusses education as a strategic domain to advance gender mainstreaming 
in communication and journalism curricula. The Network posits that gender 
mainstreaming is a necessary part of the process if the gender equality gaps in 
training institutions and the media industry are to be addressed.
 Three case studies are presented: On broadcast media regulators as gender 
equality drivers based on the Moroccan High Authority of Audiovisual Communication 
experience (Lemrini Elouahabi), on gender integration in African media (Faye) and on 
sustaining women-led community media in the Pacific (Rolls).
 The papers reflect the diversity of voices within the Global Alliance on Media 
and Gender (GAMAG), with many of the authors linked to organisations from 
both the global south and north that lead the debates on the international stage. 
This collection demonstrates GAMAG’s commitment to link with the international 
community to advance gender equality in and through the media and ICTs.
 This publication was supported with funding from the Kingdom of the 
Netherlands through UNESCO’s International Programme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC-UNESCO) and from the International Association for Media 
and Communication Research (IAMCR).
Aimée Vega Montiel and Sarah Macharia, Editors 
6REFERENCES
Edström, M and Facht, U. 2017  Men and (a few) women in the top 100  
international media corporations.  Nordicom. 
GSM (Groupe Spéciale Mobile) Association GSMA. 2018. The mobile economy. 
https://www.gsma .com/mobileeconomy/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/
The-Mobile-Economy-2018.pdf  
(Accessed 8 August 2018) 
International Telecommunication Union. 2017. ICT facts and figures 2017 . 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2017.pdf  
(Accessed 8 August 2018) 
United Nations. 1995. Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action , adopted at the 
Fourth World Conference on Women, 27 October 1995 
WACC. 2017. The New York Declaration: outcome of the Gender & media: 
challenges and opportunities in the post 2015 era conference. 
11 March 2017. http://tiny.cc/NYDeclaration  
 (Accessed 8 August 2018) 
We Are Social & Hootsuite. 2018. 2018 Q3 Global Digital Statshot.  
https://www.slideshare.net/wearesocialsg/digital-in-2018-q3-global-digital-statshot  
(Accessed 8 August 2018)
78SECTION I.  
Media Policy, Structures 
and Employment
1. The Challenge of Mainstreaming Gender 
Through Media and ICT Policy and Regulation
Claudia Padovani 7
INTRODUCTION
 Many initiatives and advocacy interventions have been implemented over the 
years to address gender inequalities in the media, but unless those efforts are 
properly embedded within policy frameworks and agreements, their effects are 
likely to be scattered and their impact is likely to be weakened. 
 Developing gender aware policies for the media has been indicated since the 
UN Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women (1995) as one of the steps to be 
taken to meet the goals of Section J of the Beijing Platform for Action those of 
promoting equal access to the media and decision-making (J1), and eliminating 
gender stereotypes in media content (J2). Section J clearly stated that governments 
and other actors are called upon to promote ‘an active policy of mainstreaming 
of a gender perspective in (media) policies and programs’ (par. 237) and should 
support research that reviews existing media policies (par. 239.b). The document 
7 Director of the Center for Gender Studies @ SPGI Department, University of Padova (Italy); 
Member of IAMCR Task Force for GAMAG and of the GAMAG Research and Policy Committee; 
University of Padova Focal point to the UNITWIN University Network on Gender Media and ICT
9
also encouraged ‘the participation of women in the development of professional 
guidelines and codes of conduct or other appropriate self-regulatory mechanisms 
to promote a balanced and non-stereotypical portrayals of women by the media’ 
(par. 241.d), while also calling for media organizations themselves to ‘elaborate and 
strengthen self-regulatory mechanisms and codes of conduct’ to comply with the 
objectives in Section J (par. 236 and 244.a/b). 
 During the 2003 Commission on the Status of Women, participants highlighted 
that the lack of, or insufficient attention to gender perspectives in media and 
communication policies needed to be addressed. The Commission indicated, as 
a very first recommendation for action, that of ensuring “women’s early and full 
participation in the development and implementation of national policies, legislation, …  
strategies and regulatory and technical instruments in the field of information and 
communication technologies (ICT) and media and communications”. It also urged 
stakeholders to create adequate “monitoring and accountability mechanisms to 
ensure implementation of gender-sensitive policies and regulations as well as to 
analyse the gender impact of such policies” (par. 4a). Furthermore, the Commission 
recommended the constitution of partnerships, to develop ‘self-regulatory gender 
sensitive guidelines for media coverage and representation, for public and community 
media to work in support of gender equality’ with a specific reference to the need to 
provide financial resources and other support measures to this end (per. 4e), including 
resources to support research to ‘review existing media and ICT policies’ (par. 4f). 
 More recently, the centrality of codes, policies and governing arrangements in 
combating persisting inequalities has been reaffirmed in international initiatives, 
including the Global Alliance for Media and Gender (GAMAG) and its Research and 
Policy Committee; the UN Women Global Compact ‘Step it up for gender equality in 
the media’; the UNITWIN University Network for Gender Media and ICT, as well as by a 
number of advocacy and scholarly contributions to the debate (UNESCO/IAMCR, 2014). 
 At the same time, attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals, in 
particular Goal 5 – Gender Equality – but more broadly the comprehensive set of 
10
SDGs, requires serious consideration of the necessary normative frameworks to 
be put in place, at all levels, from the local to the global in order to make gender 
mainstreaming a reality in the media and ICT sector.
Evidence shows that, as of today, these recommendations have not been prioritised 
in practice by governments, international and regional organizations, and media 
companies as well. Thereby, scrutiny of the interplay between gender, politics, 
and media policies remains crucial: (a) to develop necessary knowledge on the 
contradictions and structural problems that prevent gender equality from becoming 
a reality in the sector, and (b) to elaborate sound policy proposals that are needed 
to foster actions aimed at redressing persisting inequalities. 
 Therefore, the GAMAG calls for multi-stakeholder efforts to elaborate, adopt, 
foster and monitor gender-aware media and ICT policies and normative frameworks 
at organizational, national and international levels.
EVIDENCE
 Feminist researchers have engaged with supranational fora - such as UNESCO 
and the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), the Internet Governance 
Forum and others - denouncing the low level of attention for gender concerns in the 
formulation, implementation and evaluation of international normative frameworks 
for the media and ICT, as well as in policy venues where relevant debates took place 
(Gallagher, 2008, 2011; Jensen, 2008, 2010; Droussu and Jensen, 2005; McLaughlin 
and Pickard, 2005; Gurumurthy and Chami, 2014). 
 A number of policy-related studies of media gender inequalities with a regional 
focus – from North America (Beale, 2002; Shade, 2014) to Europe (Sarikakis and 
Nguyen, 2009; Padovani, 2016; Ostling and Nenadich, 2017) and Latin America 
(Chaher, 2014) – highlighted very limited commitments towards the Beijing 
Platform for Action policy recommendations. In the European Union, the European 
Commission, the Council and the European Parliament have often addressed these 
11
problems on the basis of contrasting priorities (Ross and Padovani, 2017); while 
‘soft policies’ – essentially non-binding, self-regulatory measures – e have mostly 
been adopted at the level of media organizations (Sarikakis and Nguyen, 2009; 
EIGE, 2013). In the Southern African Development Community (SADC), consistent 
regulatory mechanisms have been put in place, but this has only been possible 
thanks to sustained nongovernmental advocacy (GenderLinks, 2017). 
 Looking at the national level, what emerges from the preliminary findings of 
a UNESCO Global Survey on Gender and Media (2016) is that only 35% of world 
governments have mainstreamed gender issues by integrating them in national cultural 
policies; while in 37% of cases, gender equality strategies do not even mention the role 
and accountabilities of the media in fostering change. Some positive developments 
have characterised recent Latin American communication laws - particularly in 
Argentina (Chaher, 2014; Justo, 2017) and Mexico (Vega Montiel, 2014) - and yet 
sustainability of the adopted measures over time is recognized as a major issue.
 Shortcomings in gender mainstreaming have also been highlighted in relation 
to ICT policies: ‘digital agendas’ in Canada, India, the MENA region, Europe and 
Australia are all characterized by limited inclusion of gender concerns (Padovani 
and Shade, 2016); while Internet Governance as a space of policy discourse has 
been criticised for the limited degree of women’s participation, the marginality of 
substantive women’s issues addressed and the rhetorical nature of gender-relevant 
statements in formal provisions (Association for Progressive Communications, 
2012; Doria, 2015). 
 Two major international projects have included a systematic focus on media 
organizations’ internal policies and support mechanisms. The International Women’s 
Media Foundation (IWMF) Global Report on the Status of Women in the Media 
(IWMF, 2012) showed that slightly more than half of the (500) companies surveyed 
have an established company-wide policy on gender equity. These ranged from 16% 
in Eastern European to 69% in both Sub-Saharan Africa and Western Europe (IWMF, 
2012, p. 34). According to the European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) Report 
12
on Advancing Gender Equality in Decision Making, only one quarter of the major (99) 
media organizations across 28 EU countries have a gender equality policy or code 
of conduct, and only one fifth have adopted an equality of opportunities or diversity 
policy (EIGE, 2013, p. 37; see also Ostling and Nenadich, 2017). Moreover, wide 
variations in the adoption of gender-related policies can be found both between 
and within the different regions. 
 Overall, the low level of adoption of media and communication policies and 
regulatory frameworks is highly problematic, especially if we consider the diverse 
functions these measures play. They are, in fact, crucial to expose and address 
inequalities in as much as they define principles and goals, and provide benchmarks 
to assess progress and change (Gallagher, 2011; 2017). At the same time, they 
contribute to the profound cultural transformation that is needed to achieve a 
redistribution of symbolic and material resources necessary overcome gendered 
inequalities (Chaher, 2014). Such measures can also contribute to guarantee 
sustainability over time of positive changes towards gender equality (Gallagher, 
2011; 2017) when it is clear that progress is not a given and step-backs are always a 
possibility (WACC, 2015; Ross and Padovani, 2017). 
 Examples of good practice in the adoption of gender equality policies and 
support mechanisms, particularly by public service television, can be found in 
countries like Sweden, the UK, Spain, Austria and South Africa; and measures 
to enforce gender-equality in the audio-visual media have been adopted by 
independent regulatory authorities in countries like France and Morocco. However, 
even when media internal policies and national regulatory frameworks are in 
place, this is not a sufficient condition to produce better gender-responsive media 
outputs in terms of content, access and participation. Issues of implementation and 
sustained commitment, also through adequate funding and support mechanisms, 
remain challenges to make media and ICT gender equality a reality. 
 In this context, scrutiny of the interplay between gender, media and ICTs 
policies remains crucial to develop necessary knowledge on the contradictions 
13
that prevent gender equality from becoming a reality in this sector. Structural and 
cultural barriers to equality need to be fully appreciated in their interaction with 
communication and ICT policy developments. Hence, more research that is focused, 
intersectional, transnational, and comparative is needed to gain a comprehensive 
understanding of how governing arrangements relate to gender equality in practice, 
and in different geo-cultural and socio-economic contexts.
RECOMMENDATIONS
 Goal 5 of the Sustainable Development Goal states that “providing women and 
girls with equal access to education, health care, decent work, and representation in 
political and economic decision-making processes will fuel sustainable economies 
and benefit societies and humanity at large”. What needs highlight is the centrality 
of gender-aware and gender-responsive media and ICT policies to the attainment 
of such goal; also in view of its crucial interplay with all other SDGs. In fact, the 
intersection of various dimensions of gender inequality have implications for the 
promotion of better educational, health and living conditions for women and men 
across societies; and this calls for the development of consistent norms, institutions, 
and governing arrangements that contribute to reducing gender inequalities, as well 
as ending other forms of exclusion and discrimination in contemporary knowledge 
societies. 
Building on the above, the authors' Recommendations  are :
GOVERNMENTS SHOULD:
• Ensure the full realization of gender mainstreaming in national communication 
governance. This implies a commitment to mainstream gender equality in national 
media policies and digital strategies, and also an explicit acknowledgement of the 
role and relevance of media and ICTs within gender equality strategies. 
• Include in national media and ICT policy initiatives reference to fundamental 
principles, as well as indicate concrete and sustained measures to foster media 
14
gender equality, through the involvement of gender expertise, organizing 
transformative gender training activities and developing monitoring and 
assessment mechanisms. Adequate resources should be made available for the 
implementation of such strategies.
• Promote a better understanding of the difficulties, challenges and opportunities of 
including gender equality principles and support measures in the media and ICT 
sector and its governance at the national level. This should be done through the 
conduct of comprehensive studies and analyses. 
• Avail adequate resources for the conduct of research activities – at the national 
level and cross-national – to produce methodologically sound reviews of existing 
policy measures, and to elaborate evidence-based proposals for future policy 
interventions.
UN AGENCIES SHOULD:
•  Make media and ICT gender equality a priority in the context of the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development, also through networking and strengthening existing 
international normative frameworks - from CEDAW to the Beijing Platform for 
Action to the final documents adopted at the 62nd session of the Commission on 
the Status of Women. 
• In view of elaborating sound and sustainable programs to foster media gender 
equality at national and regional level, commit towards a global research plan, 
focused on media and ICT governing structures and arrangements across the 
world’s regions. This would aim at better understanding to what extent and under 
what conditions public policy and regulatory interventions may produce/facilitate/
support the necessary change towards making the media and ICTs more gender 
equal. This research activity may be conducted in close collaboration with the 
GAMAG’s Policy and Research Committee. 
15
• In particular, UN Women and UNESCO should promote interdisciplinary and 
inter-sectorial policy-focused, multi-stakeholder encounters, aimed at exchanging 
information, knowledge and good practice. These should be organized on a regular 
basis and be institutionally supported, to create the conditions for an on-going 
dialogue between gender and media scholars, professionals and actors involved 
in the governance of communications, so as to develop the capacity to address 
the challenges deriving from future digital communication developments through 
adequate policy interventions, with a forward-looking gender mainstreaming 
perspective.
MEDIA INDUSTRY ORGANIZATIONS AND PROFESSIONALS SHOULD:
• Take steps to address the lack of formal adoption of gender equality policies, 
gender-related normative frameworks and support mechanisms. 
• Integrate equality strategies (such as equality or diversity policies, parental leave 
policies, policies for return to job after maternal leave), including within self-
regulatory measures (such as codes of conducts and guidelines).
• Accompany these measures with support mechanisms for monitoring 
(observatories and ad hoc units), evaluation (regular gender-assessment plans) 
and implementation. These measures are important for an equality ethos to be 
firmly embedded in each organization’s operations, to favour gender-sensitive 
transformation in the organizational culture, and to give a clear signal that 
equality issues are taken seriously, thus fostering sustainability of gender-equal 
transformations over time.
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS SHOULD:
• Continue promoting awareness and disseminating knowledge – transnationally 
and through collaborative initiatives – about the challenges and opportunity of 
gender equal media and ICTs, with a specific goal to foster the adoption of relevant 
16
policies and mechanisms to address structural and cultural unequal power 
relations in the sector.
• Provide expert and diverse knowledge towards the formulation, adoption 
and implementation of policy measures – at the organizational, national and 
international levels – that will inform gender-aware media and future technological 
developments. 
RESEARCHERS SHOULD:
• Further map out, critically investigate and analyse media and ICT policy measures 
and governing arrangements from a gender equality perspective. They have a 
crucial role to play in better understanding policy challenges in national contexts. 
Furthermore, they can harness the potential of existing international networks – 
like the GAMAG’s Policy and Research Committee, the UNITWIN Network on Gender 
Media and ICT or the International Association for Media and Communication – to 
participate in transnational comparative projects. 
• Should adequate resources be made available by governments and international 
agencies – as per the above recommendations – elaborate coordinated research 
plans for policy oriented investigation on media gender equality, including analytical 
frameworks, adequate multi-method approaches, and multi-level perspectives. 
These investigations may focus on the various aspects of policy-making processes, 
including: policy process and involvement of different stakeholders, discursive 
approaches to gender equality framing in media policy arrangements, the use 
and implication of digital technologies in policy development, and analyses of the 
implementation of gender equality policies.
RESOURCES AND GOOD PRACTICE
 A collection of good practice related to media policies and normative frameworks 
for gender equality in the media is being created as part of an EU funded project: 
17
Advancing Gender Equality in Media Industries (AGEMI). 
 The project is supported by the ‘Rights, Equality and Citizenship/Justice’ 
programme of the European Union and coordinated by Karen Ross (University of 
Newcastle, UK) and Claudia Padovani (University of Padova, Italy). The Resources 
Bank will feature good practice derived from a global survey and informed collection. 
It will be online by late 2018.
For further information, contact: 
agemi.eu@gmail.com  or claudia.padovani@unipd.it
• Further relevant resources concerning good practice gender-aware national 
policies, media organization’s codes of conduct, and journalist unions’ guidelines, 
can be found in the following collections: 
• International/European Federation of Journalists (2012). A Handbook on Gender 
Equality Best Practices in European Journalists’ Unions.  Brussels: International 
Federation of Journalists (IFJ). 
• WACC/IFJ (2012). Resource kit for Gender-Ethical Journalism and Media House 
Policy.  Toronto/Brussels: WACC and IFJ.
• UNESCO (2012). Gender-sensitive Indicators for the Media. Framework of indicators 
to gauge gender sensitivity in media operations and content.  Paris: UNESCO. 
• European Parliament (2013). Study on Women and Girls as subjects of Media’s 
Attention and Advertisement Campaign: The Situation in Europe, Best Practices 
and Legislations.  Brussels: EP. 
• EIGE (2014). Women and the Media: Methods, Tool and Good Practices in the field 
of Women and Media. Policy review in EU Member States.  Vilnius: EIGE. 
18
• Council of Europe. Gender Equality Commission (2014). Gender equality and media 
at national level: compilation of good practices from Member States.  Brussels: 
Council of Europe.
• EIGE (2014). Collection of methods, Tool and Good Practices in the field of Women 
and Media.  Vilnius: EIGE. 
• Council of Europe (2015). Handbook on the implementation of Recommendation 
CM/Rec(2013)1 of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on gender 
equality and media.  Brussels: Council of Europe.
• Council of Europe (2017). Media, Election and Gender. Study on media coverage 
of election with a specific focus on gender equality.  Prepared by the committee of 
experts on media pluralism and transparency of media ownership (MSI-MED). 
• Hertie School of Governance (2017). Women in culture and media: A European 
comparison. 
• European Parliament (2018). Gender Equality in the Media Sector. Study for the 
FEMM Committee. 
• Also relevant is the experience of GenderLinks in the Southern African region. 
Policy focus on gender and media, and examples of good practices available here: 
http://genderlinks.org.za/what-we-do/media/policy/
REFERENCES 
Association for Progressive Communications (APC). 2012. Critically Absent. 
Women’s Rights in Internet Governance.  APC Issue Papers. 
Beale, A. 2002. Gender and Transversal Cultural Policies. M. Raboy (ed.) Global  
Media Policy in the New Millennium.  Luton, University of Luton Press. 
19
Chaher, S. (ed.) 2014. Public policies on communication and gender in Latin 
America: the Path Ahead of Us.  Asociación Civil Comunicación para la Igualdad 
(English text: pp. 98-192). 
Doria, A. 2015. Rights, Gender and Internet Governance.  APC papers. 
Drossou, O. and Jensen, H. (eds). 2005. Visions in process II. The World Summit on 
the Information Society 2003-2005.  Berlin, Heinrich Böll Foundation. 
European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE). 2013. Advancing gender equality in 
decision-making in media organizations.  Vilnius, EIGE. 
Gallagher, M. 2008. Feminist issues in the global media system. L. Shade and K. 
Sarikakis (eds) Feminist Interventions in International Communication. Minding the 
gap.  Lanham, Rowman and Littlefield. 
Gallagher, M. 2011. Gender and communication policy: struggling for space. R. 
Mansell and M. Raboy (eds). The Handbook of global media and communication 
policy. Oxford, Wiley-Blackwell. 
Gallagher, M. 2017. Gender and Media: A critical analysis after 20 years of the 
Beijing Platform for Action. ComPol , Vol. 2. 
GenderLinks. 2017. SADC Protocol barometer. Media, Information and 
Communication, Ch. 9. Johannesburg: GenderLinks. 
Gurumurthy, A. and Chami, N. 2014. Gender equality in the information society.  
ITforChange. International Women’s Media Foundation (IWMF). 2012. Global 
Report on the Status of Women in the News Media, 2011.  http://www.iwmf.org/
wp-content/uploads/2013/09/IWMF-Global-Report-Summary.pdf  
(Accessed 13 January 2016). 
20
Jensen, H. 2008. Engendering Internet Governance Research: The Example 
of Censorship.  Paper presented at the Global Internet Governance Academic 
Network (GigaNet) 2008 Annual Symposium. 
Jensen, H. 2010. Global Feminist Politics Concerning Media, ICTs: Past Lessons and 
Present Challenges. Women in Action,  1. 
Justo, C. 2017. Gender and Sexualities in Contemporary Communication Policies 
in Argentina. Comunicazione politica. Quadrimestrale dell'Associazione Italiana di 
Comunicazione Politica  2/2017, pp. 233-250, doi: 10.3270/87222 
Macharia, S. 2015. Who makes the news? Global Media Monitoring Project 2015.  
World Association of Christian Communication (WACC). 
http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-thenews/Imported/reports_2015/global/
gmmp_global_report_en.pdf  
McLaughlin, L. and Pickard, V. 2005. What is bottom up about global Internet 
governance? Global Media and Communication,  Vol. 1, No. 3. 
Ostling, A. and Nenadich, I. 2017. Public service media in Europe: Gender equality 
policies and the representation of women in decision-making roles. ComPol , Vol 2. 
Padovani, C. 2016. Gendering the European Digital Agenda: The challenge of 
gender mainstreaming twenty years after the Beijing World Conference 
on Women. Journal of Information Policy, 6. 
Padovani C. and Shade L. (eds). 2016. Gendering Global Media Policy: Critical 
Perspectives on Digital Agendas.  Journal of Information Policy  (Special issue). 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/jinfopoli.6.issue-2016  
Padovani, C. and Pavan, E. 2011. Actors and interactions in Global Communication 
Governance: the heuristic potential of a network approach. R. Mansell and M. 
21
Raboy (eds). The Handbook of Global Media and Communication Policy . Oxford, 
Blackwell Publishing, pp. 543-563. 
Padovani, C and Pavan, E. 2017. The Politics of Media Gender Equality. Lessons 
learned and struggles for change twenty years after the Beijing Fourth World 
Conference on Women. Comunicazione politica. Quadrimestrale dell'Associazione 
Italiana di Comunicazione Politica  2/2017, pp. 177-190, doi: 10.3270/87219 
Ross, K. and Padovani, C. (eds). 2016. Gender Equality in the Media: A Challenge for 
Europe.  London, Routledge. 
Sarikakis, K. and Nguyen, E. T. 2009. The trouble with gender: media policy and 
gender mainstreaming in the European Union. Journal of European Integration,  
Vol. 31, No. 2. 
Shade, L.R. 2014. Missing in Action: Gender in Canada's Digital Economy 
Agenda’. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society , Vol. 39, No. 4. 
UNESCO/IAMCR. 2014. Media and Gender: A Scholarly Agenda for the Global 
Alliance on Media and Gender.  A. Vega Montiel (ed). Paris: Unesco. 
UNESCO. 2016. Global Survey on Gender and Media  (Preliminary findings). 
http://www.unesco.org/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/Events/wmn2016_
preliminary_report.pdf  
United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women. 1995. Platform for Action. 
United Nations, September 1995. 
United Nations Commission on the Status of Women 47. 2003. Participation in and 
Access of Women to the Media. Agreed Conclusions. United Nations, March 2003.
22
2. Gender Equality, Policy and Media Structures
Carolyn M. Byerly, Ph.D. 8
INTRODUCTION
 The convergence of traditional print, broadcast and cable with digital (computer) 
formats requires that we understand ‘ICTs’ (information and communications 
technology) to include the wide array of media used for personal, interpersonal, and 
mass communication in today’s world. Women must have full access to these media, 
at ownership, employment and personal levels. This paper responds specifically to 
Goal Number 5 of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for 2015-2030. 
That goal is to Achieve Gender Equality and Empower all Women and Girls, and 
proposed target ‘5.b’ specifically concerns the use of ICTs to promote women’s 
empowerment.
 However, having a greater ability to own and control media companies will also 
affect women’s ability to benefit from other SDGs as well. Greater communication 
will enable them to: articulate their aspirations for greater peace and justice (SDG-
16); to participate more actively in the expansion of industry and infrastructures 
(SDG-9), especially related to the communications sector in their respective nations; 
advocate more actively for clean water and sanitation (SDG-6), affordable and clean 
energy (SDG-7), ways to end hunger (SDG-2) and poverty (SDG-1); and to more 
actively purvey information about all of the many other issues related to sustainable 
development in which women’s interests are firmly embedded.
8 Professor and Chair, Department of Communication, Culture & Media Studies, 
Howard University, Washington, DC. Interim Chair, Research and Policy Committee, 
Global Alliance on Media and Gender (GAMAG)
23
 If the monitoring of media content over the last 40 years has shown anything, 
it is that women’s right to be seen and heard has not progressed at the same rate 
as their real-life roles or their needs to fully participate in society. Since the 1970s, 
women have benefited from women’s liberation movements and taken ever greater 
leads in business, education, politics, and public life. Yet, they are still unable to 
speak in their own self-interest in the news media of most countries – either as 
expert sources, or to articulate pro-feminist opinions (World Association of Christian 
Communication, 2015). Women are similarly under-represented in Hollywood 
films, which are viewed all over the world (Hunt, Tran, Sargent and Díaz, 2017). 
Regional studies show that women’s voices and images are similarly marginalised in 
traditional, as well as new digital, media formats of both developed and developing 
nations (Byerly, forthcoming).
 Much of the focus in both research and human rights groups has been on 
women’s access  to ICTs, with a particular concern with the digital divide between 
men and women. A moderate share of the concern has also been with gaps in 
infrastructure  (i.e., availability) and with user issues, such as the dominance of 
English in web-based information (Annan, 2005). Therefore, this paper seeks to 
broaden attention on women’s relationship to the structures  of the industries that 
still thwart them from exercising their right to communicate. Structural relations 
are present and perpetuated in the macro-level of the media landscape and include 
finance, policy, and governance.
EVIDENCE  
 The right to expression was recognized as a human right by Article 19 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948. Adopted by the United Nations’ 
General Assembly, Article 19 states: 
 ‘Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes 
freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart 
information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers’ (Article 19). 
24
 Yet current research shows women’s difficulty in exercising that right to 
communicate within the industries. In media professions, they remain prevented 
from entering decision-making roles both within news and entertainment sectors 
(Byerly, 2011; Hunt et al., 2017, Lauzen, 2017; Ross and Padovani, 2017; Vega 
Montiel, 2012). As the Table 1 below illustrates, few women are allowed to accede to 
the prestigious role of policy-making exercised by boards of directors in large digital 
media conglomerates (Byerly, forthcoming). These companies provide both the 
infrastructure and content of the vast majority of all communication, the world over. 
They also control an enormous amount of wealth, wealth that their mostly male 
governors use to help elect pro-corporate legislators and to shape media policy in 
their favour.
Digital Media 
CompanyWhat is owned 
(example 
of brands)Also owns 
stake inMarket 
value (in 
billions, 
USD)Number 
of 
women 
on board
Alphabet 
Google
(USA) YouTube, Android, 
Chrome, Nexus, 
Pixel, Blogger, 
Zagat, Google 
Search (and 
Gmail, Hangouts 
and other apps), 
Chrome, Nest, 
Verily, Waze$553 1 (of 13), 
8%TABLE 1: OWNERSHIP, WORTH AND GENDER 
REPRESENTATION ON BOARDS OF SELECTED MEDIA 
CONGLOMERATES IN LARGE MARKETS (CURRENT 2017)
25
Amazon.com, 
Inc. 
(USA)Amazon Prime 
(and Cloud Drive, 
Web Services, 
Marketplace, 
Echo, Fire TV), 
Kindle, Audible, 
Twitch.tv, 
Washington Post$388 3 (of 10), 
30%
Facebook, Inc. 
(USA)Face book, 
WhatsApp, 
Instagram, 
Oculus, Facebook 
Messenger, 
Internet.org$371 2 (of 8), 
25%
AT&T, Inc. 
(USA)AT&T, DirecTV, 
Cricket Wireless, 
U-verse, YP.com 
(aka Yellowpages.
com), Sky Brasil$227 4 (of 13). 
31%
Verizon 
Communications, 
Inc. (USA)Verizon Wireless, 
Fios, AOL, 
Huffington 
Post, Engadget, 
TechCrunch, 
TerremarkComplex 
Media, 
Awesome -
nessTV,  
Seriously 
TV,  
RatedRed.
com$198 4 (of 12), 
33%Digital Media 
CompanyWhat is owned 
(example 
of brands)Also owns 
stake inMarket 
value 
(billions, 
USD)Number 
of 
women 
on board
26
Walt Disney Co. 
(USA)ABC News, ESPN, 
Disney Channel, 
Walt Disney 
Studios, Pixar, 
Marvel, Lucasfilm, 
Disneyland and 
other parks and 
resortsVice 
Media, 
A&E, 
Lifetime, 
Hulu$151 4 (of 12), 
33%
Comcast Corp/
NBC Universal 
(USA)Xfinity, NBC 
Network, MSNBC, 
CNBC, Telemundo, 
Bravo, USA 
Network, 
Universal Pictures, 
Universal Studios 
and other parks 
and resortsBuzzFeed, 
Hulu, 
Eater, 
Recode, 
Flipboard, 
Slack$146 2 (0f 12), 
17%
Time Warner, 
Inc. 
(USA)CNN, HBO, 
Warner Brothers 
Entertainment 
(also Records, 
Motion Pictures), 
TBS, TNT, NCAA.
com, TMX.com, DC 
ComicsThe CW, 
Hulu$68 2 (of 9), 
22%Digital Media 
CompanyWhat is owned 
(example 
of brands)Also owns 
stake inMarket 
value 
(billions, 
USD)Number 
of 
women 
on board
27
BCE 
(Canada)Cable TV stations, 
specialty channels 
(Bravo, Canal D, 
Book TV, etc.), Bell 
Broadcast Radio 
group, wireless 
technologies.$64 4 of 13, 
(31%)
Grupo Televisa 
(Mexico)Broadcast 
TV stations, 
radio stations, 
Videocine film, 
Editorial Televisa 
publishing, 
Televisa Digital 
(Internet), Televisa 
Musica, football 
teams, Aztec 
stadium$15 0 of 19 
(0%)
Grupo Globo 
(Brazil)Broadcast TV 
stations, Globostat 
channels, 
Radio Globo, 
newspapers, 
internet services, 
books and 
magazines, 
record labels, film 
production.$4 0 of 7 
(0%)Digital Media 
CompanyWhat is owned 
(example 
of brands)Also owns 
stake inMarket 
value 
(billions, 
USD)Number 
of 
women 
on board
28
 Media conglomeration characterises the great majority of the world’s 
communication systems today where women are marginalized at decision-
making levels, as has been shown. We may thus conclude that women are 
presently peripheral to both the control of, and related benefits from, the world’s 
communication technology companies and what they provide. The salient question 
to pose with this realization is how will women become full participants in their 
societies if they cannot affect the telling of their own stories, if society does not 
see the wide array of images and roles they occupy, and people cannot obtain the 
information they need for societies advancement by addressing gender inequality?
 Source: Data in table adapted from Byerly, C. M. (forthcoming), Gender, Media, Oligopoly: 
Connecting Research and Action. In N. Benequista and S. Abbott (eds.), International Media 
Development: Historical Perspectives and New Frontiers . New York: Peter Lang Publishing. (Note: 
Data gathered from selected company websites in 2017, with focus on the largest markets and 
companies to illustrate the problem of conglomeration. It is not meant to be representative of the 
situation in all nations.)Zee 
Entertainment 
(owned by 
Essel) 
(India)34 TV channels, 
Zee Mundo 
(Spanish), 
production 
studios (Zee 
telefilms), music 
companies (Zee 
music), digital 
platforms, 
theaters, Reliance 
Broadcast 
Network, Big 
Magic, Big 
Gangsta, Big FMStar Den, 
Den 
Networks, 
Zee Turner 
Ltd., 9X 
Media, INX 
Music$110 
million1 of 8 
(13%)Digital Media 
CompanyWhat is owned 
(example 
of brands)Also owns 
stake inMarket 
value 
(billions, 
USD)Number 
of 
women 
on board
29
 Women have paid less attention to the national, regional and international policy 
governing communication systems than they have to more practical realities, such as 
information available (or not, within those systems) and access to jobs. There is little 
research to date on whether, and to what extent, gender equality figures in national 
level communication policies. Male scholars have avoided the subject for the most 
part, and both feminist scholars and activists have given it only minor attention 
(Gallagher, 2014). Yet, as Gallagher (2011) insists, any discussion of freedom of 
expression must ask, ‘whose freedom, defined by whom?’ (p. 457). It should not 
be defined, as it typically has, as men’s right to utilize the profits of communication 
companies to secure their own economic and political power, or continue to omit 
and stereotype women in the content of their news and programming.
 Despite the passage of international documents like the Beijing Platform for 
Action in 1995, with its Section J calling for gender equality in the media, or the 
Convention for the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), there 
has been little success in securing a place for gender and media concerns on the 
international agenda (Gallagher, 2011, p. 459; Ross and Padovani, 2013; Media 
Compact, 2015). The next frontier for media research and activism, therefore, is at 
national and international policy levels, something that gatherings of women, such 
as the annual U.N. Commission on the Status of Women meetings in New York City 
affords the opportunity to develop.
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 In order to respond to the points of GAMAG’s position on women’s relationship 
to media structures, it is essential to develop policy frameworks that incorporate 
requirements for gender equality, for mechanisms that enable those policies 
to function as intended, and for monitoring activities that assess progress and 
efficacy of those policies. The development of such policy frameworks will require 
the involvement and support of international governmental agencies and non-
governmental organizations concerned with communication rights. Toward these 
ends, GAMAG supports the following recommendations: 
30
GOVERNMENTS SHOULD:
• Adopt public policies that enable greater numbers of women to own media 
companies that serve both local and national populations.
• Fund academic and NGO projects to monitor media companies as regards gender 
equality in national level media policy and industry compliance. 
• Require appropriate national-level agencies to monitor women’s status in all levels 
of employment within both traditional and new digital media companies. 
UN AGENCIES SHOULD: 
• Assist in moving gender equality in media ownership onto both national and 
international agendas of the forums where communication rights and relevant 
issues such as SDGs are addressed. 
• Adopt requirements and methods that allow full participation by women in the 
World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) process. 
• Convene panels of experts on media policy, ICTs and women’s communication to 
update gender sensitive indicators and guidelines for national level and corporate 
level media policies. 
• Underwrite research projects aimed at identifying policies already in place that can 
serve as models, as well as identify efforts where media activism is advocating for 
gender equality in communication policy. 
MEDIA INDUSTRY ORGANIZATIONS AND PROFESSIONALS SHOULD:  
• Adopt, implement and monitor workplace policies that assure gender equality in 
hiring, training, promotion, and placement of media professionals.
31
• Develop employee performance standards that are free of gender bias. 
• Develop guidelines for programming and news production that assure gender 
balance and sensitivity in content.
• Monitor, evaluate and correct (as needed) policies and practices aimed at assuring 
gender sensitivity in companies and their programming and news.
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS SHOULD:
• Identify problems in access to new media (ICTs) for women, and develop strategies 
for policy changes at national and company levels. 
• Advocate for gender equality in training and employment within media companies.
• Advocate for national level policy aimed at increasing women’s media ownership 
and service on boards of directors. 
• Form coalitions with communication trade unions, women’s organizations, and 
activist scholars/researchers to develop multi-stakeholder advocacy for gender 
equality in and throughout the media industries. 
• Move gender equality in media ownership onto both national and international 
agendas of the forums where communication rights and other issues are 
addressed.
RESEARCHERS SHOULD:
• Generate empirical data that reveal the level of gender equality in communication 
policies at national levels and within industries of individual nations, with respect 
to media ownership, technology access, and employment in media. 
32
•  Conduct empirical studies that evaluate men’s and women’s experiences in media 
industries with respect to training on ICTs. 
• Establish longitudinal studies that track gender equality in media employment, 
ownership, and governance (boards).
• Promote theory-building to explain conditions within media industries that both 
hinder and enable gender equality to exist within companies.
REFERENCES
Annan, K. 2005. Gender equality and empowerment of women through ICT.
Women 2000 and beyond.
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/public/w2000-09.05-ict-e.pdf  
Article 19. Universal Declaration of Human Rights . International Council on Human 
Rights Policy (website). http://www.ichrp.org/en/article_19_udhr  
Byerly, C. M. (forthcoming). Gender, Media, Oligopoly: Connecting Research and 
Action. N. Benequista and S. Abbott (eds) International Media Development: 
Historical Perspectives and New Frontiers . New York, Peter Lang Publishing. 
Byerly, C. M. 2011. Global Report on the Status of Women in News Media . 
Washington, International Women’s Media Foundation. 
Byerly, C. M. and Valentin, A. 2016. Women’s Access to Media: Legal Dimensions of 
Ownership and Employment in the United States. R. A. Lind (ed), Race and Gender 
in Electronic Media . New York and London, Routledge Taylor and Francis Group. 
Gallagher, M. 2014. Media and the representation of render. C. Carter, L. Steiner 
and L. McLaughlin (eds), The Routledge companion to media and gender . London 
and New York: Routledge Taylor and Francis, pp. 21-31. 
33
Gallagher, M. 2011. Media and communication policy: Struggling for space. R. 
Mansell and M. Raboy (eds), The handbook of global media and communication 
policy . Malden, MA, Wiley Blackwell. 
Hunt, D.A., Tran, M., Sargent, A. and Díaz, V. 2017. Hollywood diversity report: 
Setting the record straight . Los Angeles, Ralph J. Bunche Center for African 
American Studies at UCLA. 
Lauzen, M. 2016. The celluloid ceiling: Behind-the-scenes employment of  
women on the top 100, 250, and 500 films of 2016 . 
http://womenintvfilm.sdsu.edu/  
 
Macharia, S. 2015. Who makes the news? Global Media Monitoring Project 2015 . 
World Association of Christian Communication (WACC). 
http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-thenews/Imported/reports_2015/global/
gmmp_global_report_en.pdf 
Media Compact. 2015. UN Women (website). Retrieved from 
http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-focus/csw59/feature-stories
www.unwomen.org/en/news/in-focus/csw59/feature-stories  
Ross, K. & Padovani, C., 2013. Review of the Implementation of the Beijing Platform 
for Action in the EU Member States: Women and the Media Report.  Luxembourg: 
European Institute for Gender Equality.
Vega Montiel, A. (ed). 2012. Communication and human rights . Mexico City, 
Mexico, National Autonomous University of Mexico.
34
3. A Hard Ladder to Climb: 
Women and Power in Media Industries
Karen Ross 9
9 Professor of Gender and Media, Director of Research at the School of Arts and Cultures, 
Newcastle University, U.K.INTRODUCTION 
 When women media professionals attain very senior editorial positions, their 
achievement continues to make front page news, as it is such a rare occurrence. 
When Jill Abramson became the first woman editor at the New York Times in 2011, 
she broke a run of 160 years of male editors. When Katharine Viner did the same 
thing at the Guardian in 2015, she ended an even longer reign of exclusively male 
editing history. One of the world’s most respected media institutions, the BBC, 
has never appointed a woman Director General since it began life under John 
Reith in 1922. Further, its publication of top earner salaries in the summer of 2017 
revealed startling differences, in some cases as much as 300% between women 
and men doing the same job. These three examples demonstrate that even media 
organizations which enjoy a significant reputation for their content seem to ignore 
issues of gender equality in relation to who produces and edits such content. Media 
and journalism courses are dominated by women – students – trend which has been 
rising over the past two decades – who graduate and enter the industry in higher 
numbers than men (Reid, 2015). It seems odd, then, if we assume that women and 
men are equally competent when entering the industry, to find men advancing more 
quickly than women, earning a higher salary for work of equal value and routinely 
achieving very senior positions, leaving their female colleagues languishing in the 
less prestigious media jobs and rarely getting beyond junior management posts. 
35
How can we account for this phenomenon and the problem of gender inequality 
which, we argue, lies at its heart? 
EVIDENCE 
 While we have had decades of research looking at the broader gender and media 
agenda, especially looking at issues of representation and consumption, there has 
been rather less research on working practices, careers and promotion within media 
industries themselves. One of the first efforts to document and analyse the specific 
issue of women and decision-making was commissioned by UNESCO and reported on 
as Women and Media Decision-making: The Invisible Barriers  (1987). In her introduction 
to the book, Gallagher (1987, p.14) commented that ‘men’s attitudes, beliefs and even 
organizational procedures [showed a] surprising degree of consistency across the 
studies.’ Successive studies over the following decades showed, more or less, the 
same kind of patterns (Gallagher, 1995; Robinson, 2005; Smith, 2015; North, 2016a; 
Jenkins & Finneman, 2018; de Vuyst & Raeymaeckers, 2019), finding that despite the 
numbers entering the industry, women advanced unevenly into decision-making 
roles compared to men, often doing better in larger organizations. 
 In 2011, the International Women’s Media Foundation (IWMF) published findings 
from its study of women’s employment in news companies (conducted and managed 
by Carolyn Byerly) covering 59 nations and 522 organizations, finding that men held 
75% of both top management and board positions: women’s presence was strongest 
in routine news gathering roles and weakest in technical roles (e.g. camera work, 
creative direction, etc.). In 2013, the European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) 
published the findings from a study of all the (then) EU Member States plus Croatia (28 
countries) into gender and decision-making in 99 large-scale European media houses. 
That study, conducted and managed by Karen Ross and Claudia Padovani, found that, 
of 3376 senior posts they coded, 30% were held by women. When we looked a little 
closer, we found that 16% of CEOs were women, as were 21% of Chief Operating 
Officers, demonstrating that although a proportion of women are in positions of 
authority, they are much less likely to be in positions of power.
36
 These studies are important, not only because of their findings, but because 
of their comparative scope and geographical reach. National studies are often 
dismissed because of the specificity of the socio-cultural context, but where cross-
cultural studies show similar trends and patterns, they command more credibility 
for the suggestion that ‘something’ is happening which is structural, rather than 
situational, and requires explaining. 
 We suggest that there are any number of factors in play at any one time in any 
one media organization, but the point is that these factors are found universally, 
exerting more or less influence in different ways at different times. Factors such as 
routine gender-based discrimination, workplace harassment, non-existent or poorly 
implemented gender equality policies and informal promotion processes, serve 
to produce a working environment that does not support women or their career 
aspirations. While some studies have provided slightly more optimistic findings, the 
general trend shows little significant progress over time and even in studies where 
improvements have been noted, they have tended to occur in individual countries 
or individual media organizations (Djerf-Pierre, 2007), or specific media forms such 
as digital media (De-Miguel et. al., 2017). The most recent scholarship shows that 
progress for women into decision-making positions remains painfully slow, for all 
the reasons we have sketched out (Löfgren Nilsson and Örnebring, 2016; North, 
2016b; Melki and Mallat, 2017).
 So far, we have looked at academic studies, but other stakeholders have also 
been involved in exploring the issues which women face in developing their media 
careers, most notably professional associations such as the International Federation of 
Journalists (IFJ), the European Women’s Lobby (EWL) and various working groups of the 
European Commission and Council of Europe (see, for example, European Commission, 
2010; EWL, 2010). These studies produce the same conclusions as the rest.
 Importantly, the structural and cultural barriers which prevent women’s 
advancement into managerial and editorial positions also operate to prevent 
women’ occupation of boardroom seats. In the EIGE (2013) study mentioned above, 
37
the percentage of board members who were women was 27%, but women occupied 
few (22%) deputy positions. In October 2012, European Commissioner Viviane 
Reding formally proposed that the European Parliament should enact legislation 
to accelerate the number of women in the boardrooms of public companies. The 
proposal aimed to achieve a 40% presence of the ‘under-represented’ sex (for which 
we should read ‘women’) among non-executive directors of the top 5000 publicly-
listed companies by 2020, and by 2018 for publicly-funded organizations. Her 
proposal was, more or less, immediately rejected by her fellow Commissioners on 
the grounds that it contravened the Commission’s own regulations. The proposed 
legislation was subsequently reframed as an ‘objective’ and thus has no prospect of 
achieving the change required.
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 A number of studies discussed above have made recommendations and 
suggested actions which could be taken to address the long-standing problems, 
both structural and cultural, which impede women’s efforts to pursue their career 
aspirations and fulfil their potential. It really does not make sense at any level, ethical 
or business-wise, to deliberately or unconsciously under-utilize the talents of 50% 
of the media workforce. One significant problem in working for change has been 
a lack of knowledge by media managers about the scale of the issue and potential 
solutions.
GOVERNMENTS SHOULD:
• Require all organizations with 500+ employees to produce Gender Equality Plans 
on an annual basis with sanctions on organizations which: (a) do not comply and/
or (b) which fail to meet their own targets for improving the gender balance of 
their workforce at all levels of the organization.
38
UN AGENCIES SHOULD:
• Support the development of prizes for excellent practice in gender equality for 
different media categories, similar to the Prix Iris or Pulitzer. 
 MEDIA ORGANIZATIONS SHOULD:
• Undertake a Gender Audit of the workforce to identify women and men’s presence 
at all levels of an organization.
• Where there is an under-representation of women or men at a particular level, 
review recruitment and promotion policies to ensure they are fair and transparent. 
The audit should be undertaken on a regular basis to identify patterns and trends 
and to enable progress to be measured year-on-year. 
• The findings from such an audit should be analysed and interpreted and a plan 
of action developed to monitor and act upon persistent gender imbalances. 
Such audits could be required as part of continuing funding arrangements for 
organizations which are wholly or partly publicly or government funded.
• Organize a staff survey on equality and diversity to better understand workplace 
culture and to act on the findings if they suggest that staff believe that gender-
based, or any other forms of discrimination, are taking place.
• Ensure that there are policies in place for reporting discrimination, and enforce 
clear sanctions where behaviour of staff is found to be in breach of such policies.
•  Take positive action to redress gender imbalances at senior levels by appointing 
the woman when deciding between a female and male candidate of equal merit. 
Members of shortlisting, recruitment and promotion panels should participate in 
equality awareness training to ensure that they are not introducing unconscious 
bias into their decision-making processes. 
39
• Where algorithms are used in recruitment processes, these should be investigated 
for gender bias and revised (or even abandoned) if such biases are seen to be 
operating. 
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS 
(MEDIA UNIONS AND WOMEN FOCUSED NGOS) SHOULD:
• Develop partnerships at global, regional and national level, to recommend and 
assess the implementation of women-friendly working practices developed by 
media organizations.
• Share best practice between each other and liaise with the academic research 
community to disseminate good practice.
ACADEMIC RESEARCH COMMUNITY SHOULD:
• Promote further and larger-scale research projects to measure women’s 
inclusion in decision-making positions in both large and small organizations, 
including the digital media sector, to identify patterns, as well as good practices, 
where they exist. 
• Devise action and dissemination projects, including online repositories, which 
share research findings and good practices amongst the wider practitioner and 
stakeholder community.
RESOURCES AND GOOD PRACTICE 
DATABASES 
• A collection of good practices in relation to women, decision-making and power 
is currently being curated as part of an EU-funded project: Advancing Gender 
Equality in Media Industries  (AGEMI),10 coordinated by Karen Ross (University of 
40
Newcastle, UK) and Claudia Padovani (University of Padova, Italy) and will be online 
in late 2018. For further information, contact: agemi.eu@gmail.com
• European Institute for Gender Equality11 – a number of online (and downloadable) 
resources around gender and media. 
CAMPAIGNS AND INITIATIVES PROMOTING GENDER EQUALITY  
• Step it Up for Gender Equality.12 
• End News Media Sexism.13 
• The Women’s Room14 (UK) and SheSource15 (US) are databases of women experts 
established as a resource for journalists to encourage more women’s voices in 
the media. 
PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS THAT SUPPORT WOMEN – TRAINING 
AND NETWORKING  
• International Association for Women in Radio and Television.16 
• Alliance for Women in Media17 (US). 
• Women in Film and Television18 (UK). 
• International Women’s Media Foundation.19 
• Women in News.20 
10 Co-funded by the “Rights, Equality and Citizenship/Justice” programme of the European Union 
11 http://eige.europa.eu/
12 http://www.unwomen.org/en/get-involved/step-it-up 
13 http://whomakesthenews.org/articles/wacc-launches-campaign-end-news-media-sexism-by-2020 
14 http://thewomensroom.org.uk/
15 http://www.womensmediacenter.com/shesource/
16 https://www.iawrt.org/ 
17 https://allwomeninmedia.org/
18 https://wftv.org.uk/
19 https://www.iwmf.org/ 
20 https://womeninnews.org
41
MEDIA PRIZES PROMOTING GENDER CONTENT 
AND WOMEN MEDIA PROFESSIONALS  
• Alliance for Women in Media – the Gracie Awards. 
• IWMF – Courage in Journalism  Awards.
• Alliance of Women Film Journalists21 - EDA Awards recognize women filmmakers 
and photojournalists. 
• Women in News WAN-IFRA Editorial Leadership Award.22 
TEXT BASED RESOURCES  
• Directorate General for Internal Policies Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and 
Constitutional Affairs Women’s Rights and Gender Equality . Gender Equality in the 
Media Sector . European Union. 
 http://www.europarl.europa.eu/supporting-analyses  
• Edström, M. and Mølster, R. (2014) Making Change- Nordic Examples of Working 
Towards Gender Equality in the Media . Nordicom. 
• European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) (2013) Review of the implementation 
of the Beijing Platform for Action in the EU Member States.  
 http://eige.europa.eu/rdc/eige-publications/advancing-gender-equality-decision-
making-media-organisations-report  
21 http://awfj.org/
22 http://www.wan-ifra.org/press-releases/2018/03/13/wan-ifra-women-in-news-editorial-leadership-
award-call-for-nominations
42
• World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers (2016) WINing Strategies: 
Creating Stronger Media Organizations by Increasing Gender Diversity . WAN/IFRA. 
 http://www.wan-ifra.org/sites/default/files/field_media_image_file_attach/WAN-
IFRA_WINning_Strategies.pdf
• UNESCO Gender Sensitive Indicators for Media (2012) http://www.unesco.org/new/
en/communication-and-information/resources/publications-and-communication-
materials/publications/full-list/gender-sensitive-indicators-for-media-framework-
of-indicators-to-gauge-gender-sensitivity-in-media-operations-and-content/  
REFERENCES 
Byerly, C. M. (ed) 2013. The Palgrave Handbook of Women and Journalism . New York, 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
De Vuyst, Sara and Raeymaeckers, Karin (2019) ‘Gender as a multi-layered issue in 
journalism: a multi-method approach to studying barriers sustaining gender inequality 
in Belgian newsrooms.’ European Journal of Women’s Studies,  26(1): 23-38.
De-Miguel, Roberto; Hanitzsch, Thomas; Parratt, Sonia; Berganza, Rosa. 2017. ‘Women 
journalists in Spain: An analysis of the sociodemographic features of the gender gap.’ 
El profesional de la información , Vol. 26, No. 3, pp 497-506. 
Djerf-Pierre M. 2007. The gender of journalism: the structure and logic of the field in 
the twentieth century. Nordicom Review , Jubilee Issue, pp 81-104. 
European Commission. 2010. More women in senior positions – key to economic 
stability and growth . Luxembourg, EU. 
European Institute for Gender Equality. 2013. Review of the implementation of 
the Beijing Platform for Action in the EU Member States: Women and the Media – 
Advancing gender equality in decision-making in media organizations . Luxembourg, 
Office of the European Union. 
43
European Women’s Lobby. 2010. From Beijing to Brussels: An Unfinished Story . http://
www.womenlobby.org/spip.php?article124&lang=en
Gallagher, M. 1995. An unfinished story: gender patterns in media employment.  Paris: 
UNESCO. 
International Women’s Media Foundation. 2011. Global Report on the Status of 
Women in the News Media.  Washington, DC: IWMF. 
http://www.iwmf.org  
Löfgren Nilsson, M. and Örnebring, H. 2016. Journalism Under Threat. Journalism 
Practice , Vol.10, No. 7, pp. 880-890. 
Jenkins, Joy and Finneman, Teri (2018) Gender trouble in the workplace: applying 
Judith Butler’s theory of performativity to news organizations.’ Feminist Media Studies, 
18(2): 157-172.
Melki, J. P. and Mallat, S. E. 2016. Block her entry, keep her down and push her out. 
Journalism Studies , Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 57–79. 
North, Louise 2016a. ‘The gender of “soft” and “hard” news.’ Journalism Studies, 17(3): 
356-373.
North, L. 2016b. Damaging and daunting: female journalists’ experiences of sexual 
harassment in the newsroom. Feminist Media Studies , 
Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 495-510. 
Reid, A. 2015. Women outnumber men on UK journalism degrees . 
https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/women-outnumber-men-on-uk-journalism-
degrees/s2/a563890/
Smith, Vivian (2015) Outsiders still: why women journalists love and leave their 
newspaper careers.  Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
UNESCO. 1987. Women in media decision-making: The invisible barriers . Paris: UNESCO.
44
INTRODUCTION 
 Female members of the World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters 
(AMARC) are taking advantage of the organizing presence of community and 
indigenous media outlets that are active in GAMAG globally. This is in order to address 
the lack of clear and specific rules recognizing women’s rights to communication and 
the transformation of gender stereotypes into laws and public policy. It is also so 
that these outlets develop their own instruments to support women’s participation 
and negotiation within their own collectives, networks, movements and national 
and local decision-making bodies.
 Although there are different expressions and disparities between countries and 
contexts, generally speaking, women have found community radio to be an ideal 
medium for participation. These spaces for participation have been occupied by 
women, regardless of legal or political restrictions that might exist in community 
media within each country, or the presence or absence of a gender perspective 
in these media. Furthermore, there is undeniable evidence that where there are 
explicit legal or political conditions in place to promote women’s participation on 
an equal footing with male colleagues in the media, the process of integration and 
strengthening can take place more quickly, and indicators can be found to measure 
the progress of these efforts.
 4. Women in Community and Indigenous Media
María Eugenia Chávez. 23
23 For this chapter the author consulted: Mónica Valdés, Colombia, Regional Vice President 
of AMARC ALC; Wi Wendy Quintero, Nicaragua, Vice President of the AMARC ALC Women’s 
Network; Celeste Farbman, AMARC programme ‘Nos Quemaron Por Brujas’, Argentina, and; 
Norma Montiel, Representative of the Women’s Network of AMARC Mexico.
45
 This chapter seeks to offer some answers to the question of what progress has 
been achieved by women participating in community radio projects between 2013 
and 2018, based on experiences in Colombia, Nicaragua, Mexico and Argentina. The 
answers show that conditions differ country to country, and that women’s position 
in community media is also fairly disparate.
EVIDENCE 
NICARAGUA 
 There are no specific laws concerning community media in the country. 
Community radio programs that do exist were formed out of grass-roots adherence 
to the concepts of community radio broadcasting. These radio stations depend 
on advertising and funding raised from other types of projects. The women who 
participate in these programs depend on whatever revenues are at hand, and the 
work of network organizing depends on the availability and time each woman has 
to devote to it. So, in general, conditions are unfavorable for this form of media. 
For example, the women’s network of AMARC Nicaragua has made an effort to 
draft gender policies that encourage women’s presence in community radio, but 
their organizational processes have not been enough for them to complete the 
process. 
COLOMBIA 
 In Colombia there is a law on the books regarding community media, but it does 
not incorporate a gender perspective. Community media have played a crucial role 
in the peacebuilding process in that country, and in this, women’s involvement has 
been fundamental. However, there have been no specific efforts to strengthen and 
support women in their work with this type of media. Within the Colombian political 
context, the priority is placed on efforts to build peace, but this has not yet included 
specific measures for women to organize or establish minimum criteria for gaining 
a stronger foothold in such media. In Colombia, therefore, there is no organization 
46
of women, nor the express manifestation of the need to address this sector in 
particular.
ARGENTINA 
 The Audiovisual Media Law of Argentina was, at the time of its promulgation, 
Latin America’s most progressive law on freedom of expression, but this distinction 
did not necessarily guarantee a gender perspective in the media, including in 
community media. 
 According to Emi Farías of Red Nosotras en el Mundo; a gender perspective is not 
present in the law, even less after recent decrees that repealed various articles of the 
law. However, the ‘Defensoría del Público’ (Office of the Public Defender) still exists, 
one of the remaining vestiges of the Law’s original intent. This Office is, in practice, 
the entity that protects the rights of audiences, community media and women. 
Speaking more specifically of women’s participation in the media, Argentine women 
have created huge mobilizations in favor of women’s rights. In the past two years, they 
have organized large-scale movements claiming justice in femicide cases, protesting 
violence against women and demanding decriminalization of abortion. The Argentine 
women involved in community media have organized themselves around the feminist 
moment, so they have not generated long-term organizational structures, but their 
organization around specific issues has built lasting ties of solidarity.
MEXICO 
 Mexico’s situation is that most community radio concessions are members 
of the World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters, and it is within this 
Association that the necessary conditions have been created for women to organize 
to defend freedom of expression and their right to information. AMARC has 
incorporated Gender Policy into its internal organizational policies, and it is through 
these that compliance indicators can be established in keeping with the respective 
context. 
47
 The network is growing every day. Some of the indicators used to consider a 
radio station’s membership application are: the number of women participating, 
mechanisms for increasing women’s participation, the mainstreaming of a gendered 
perspective across the full range of programming, the use of inclusive language, etc. 
While these indicators may be somewhat subjective and contextual, the challenge is 
to establish these indicators on a methodological and institutional level.
CONCLUSIONS 
 •  The articulation of women’s participation in community radio broadcasting 
may lack mechanisms of organization. However, this does not prevent gender 
equality from playing an important role in the organization and mobilization of 
organizations and women around situations in which rights are violated.
• Women in community communications are fundamental in social peace efforts, 
such as in Colombia’s peacebuilding process.
• Organizing outside of an organization, or non-institutional organization, is valuable 
and important, but the creation of legal or regulatory frameworks can be useful 
tools for advancing toward substantive equality.
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 More needs to be done to ensure that women are appropriately introduced 
and represented in this sector, according to Miglioretto and Randhawa (2017). 
They propose strategies to improve women’s position in community radio and to 
promote good regulatory practices. The set of recommendations presented below 
are aimed mainly at regulatory bodies:
48
ENCOURAGE DIVERSITY OF REPRESENTATION 
IN APPLICATIONS FOR RADIO LICENSES
• The decision to grant a license to an applicant should take into account the diversity 
that exists within the committee or representatives applying for a licence. This 
is not limited to the issue of gender, although this is undoubtedly an important 
component. The applicants should also demonstrate that a serious effort has 
been made to include a diversity of voices from other marginalized segments of 
the community including, for example, indigenous women, Dalit women (one of 
the lower castes in India), migrant women, disabled or differently abled women 
and/or LGBTQI people.
• In cases where a licence applicants are found to be insufficiently diverse, regulators 
may ask them to present a plan to improve diversity and ensure the inclusion of 
diverse voices, both on the air and in station management.
INDICATE A COMMITMENT TO INVOLVE 
DIVERSE PERSONS IN THE STATION  
• Licence holders should state on their application how they ensure the full and 
equal participation of women in the station, from voices on the air to station 
management, working with technical equipment and volunteers. This should 
include how prospective women volunteers and the radio team will be included, as 
well as measures taken to ensure that marginalized communities are represented, 
and how training programs will be created and implemented.
APPLICATIONS FOR STATIONS MANAGED 
AND MADE UP EXCLUSIVELY OF WOMEN 
• While the radio frequency spectrum operates equally for all genders, community 
radio licenses should be granted to committees made up exclusively of women. 
It is expected that the applicants in these cases comply with the diversity criteria 
49
indicated above. Here, diversity would mean a fuller range of experience among 
participating women, with an emphasis on the involvement of women from 
marginalized groups and prioritization of these voices.
COMMITMENT TO FUND 
AND TRAIN WOMEN IN RADIO BROADCASTING
• Licence applications should include a summary of how women’s radio broadcasting 
and the training of women in technical positions, on the air and in station 
management will be carried out; with special emphasis on how these aspects of 
the station will be financed on an ongoing basis. 
• The station must commit to introducing gender policies or, when the station has 
no gender policy, it should provide a timeline for when these will be drafted and 
implemented.
REFERENCES 
Chaher, Sandra. 2016. Políticas públicas de comunicación y género en América 
Latina: Entre andares y retrocesos. Comunicación para la Igualdad, Defensoría del 
Público: Argentina. 
Informe sobre el estado de los medios comunitarios en América Latina y el Caribe. 
2017. El Observatorio Latinoamericano de Regulación, Medios y Convergencia 
(OBSERVACOM).
Ley Federal de Telecomunicaciones y Radiodifusión. 2014. México. 
Miglioretto, Bianca y Radhawa, Sonia. (unpublished) Guidelines with gender 
perspective for national radio regulations. AMARC/WACC: 
Sánchez, Gloria Cecilia. 2003. Legislación sobre radiodifusión sonora comunitaria. 
50
Estudio comparativo de legislaciones de trece países. UNESCO. 
United Nations. 1995. Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action , adopted at the 
Fourth World Conference on Women, 27 October 1995.
Vega Montiel, Aimée. 2014. A Scholarly Agenda for the Global Alliance on Media 
and Gender . Paris: UNESCO. 
51
52SECTION II.  
Media Content and 
Violence Against Women
5. Addressing Gender Issues in Media Content
Sarah Macharia 24
INTRODUCTION  
 In 1995, governments participating in the Fourth World Conference on Women 
in Beijing reached consensus on specific strategic objectives and related actions 
to advance equality, development and peace for all women. One objective – to 
“promote a balanced and non-stereotyped portrayal of women in the media” 
(Section J on “women and the media”, Beijing Platform for Action, 2015) – listed 
several actions, inter alia, promoting research and implementing an information, 
education and communication strategy, encouraging the media to refrain from 
exploitation, sexualisation and commodification of women, and promoting the idea 
that sexist stereotypes in media are gender discriminatory, degrading and offensive.
 Eight years later in 2003, the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) 
recognized “the potential of the media and of information and communication 
technologies to contribute to the advancement and empowerment of women” 
(Agreed conclusions , CSW47, 2003). The CSW proposed 24 actions for governments, 
the UN system, international financial institutions, civil society, the private sector 
24 Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP), Gender & Communication Manager at the 
World Association for Christian Communication (WACC), Toronto
53
and other stakeholders. The Commission underlined the need to prioritise 
gender perspectives in ICT and media policy and regulations, to support research, 
education and training, to strengthen inter-stakeholder partnerships, to tackle 
media-based violence against women and to allocate adequate resources. These 
recommendations and commitments reappear in various global, regional and 
national gender equality and women’s rights frameworks adopted over time (see 
Table 1).
 The 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) ‘seek to realize the human rights 
of all and achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls 
(Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development , UN General 
Assembly, 2015). The role of media in advancing gender equality is mentioned 
specifically in the Post-2015 development blueprint under Goal 5 on enhancing the 
use of ‘information and communications technology to promote the empowerment 
of women’. 
 At the same time, it is clear that media are implicated in the achievement of 
gender equality aspirations in all 17 SDGs, in as far as their role in maintaining social 
and cultural norms underpinning discrimination and inequality across all thematic 
areas is concerned. For instance, if media content that channels negative gender 
stereotypes, belittles, degrades and sexualises women, and normalises gender 
violence, how could removal of social barriers to the empowerment of girls and 
women (Agenda 2030 Declaration, para 8), or eliminating gender violence (para 20) 
be addressed? Media output that clearly challenges gender stereotypes provides 
the exposure needed to eliminate the prejudices, attitudes, norms and practices 
that sustain gender-based discrimination, marginalisation and inequality.
 The Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
(CEDAW) recognizes the role of stereotypes in ‘giving rise to the multitude of legal, 
political and economic constraints on the advancement of women (Introduction, 
CEDAW, UN General Assembly, 1979). Article 5 of the Convention obliges States 
parties to take measures to ‘modify the social and cultural patterns of conduct 
54
of men and women with a view to achieving the elimination of prejudices and 
customary and all other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority or 
the superiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for women and men’. 
Combatting sexist stereotypes in the media is a necessary part of this process.
TABLE 1. POLICY INSTRUMENTS CONTAINING 
EXPLICIT GENDER AND MEDIA INDICATORS
Instrument Indicators
Protocol to the African 
Charter on Human 
and Peoples’ Rights 
on the Rights of
Women in Africa
(2003)3.3: States Parties shall adopt and 
implement appropriate measures to
prohibit any exploitation or degradation 
of women.
12.1(b): States Parties shall take all 
appropriate measure to eliminate all
stereotypes in textbooks, syllabuses 
and the media, that perpetuate such
discrimination.
South African Development 
Community Protocol on 
Gender and Development 
(2008)29.1 – States Parties shall ensure that gender is 
mainstreamed in all information, communication 
and media policies, programmes, laws and 
training in accordance with the Protocol on 
Culture, Information and Sport and other regional 
and international commitments by member 
States on issues relating to media, information 
and communication.
55
29.2 – States parties shall encourage the media 
and media-related bodies to mainstream gender 
in their codes of conduct, policies and procedures, 
and adopt and implement gender-aware 
ethical principles, codes of practice and policies 
in accordance with the Protocol on Culture, 
Information and Sport.
30.1a - States Parties shall take measures 
to discourage the media from: promoting 
pornography and violence against all persons, 
especially women and children, b) depicting 
women as helpless victims of violence and abuse, 
c) degrading or exploiting women, especially in 
the area of entertainment and advertising, and 
undermining their role and position in society; 
and d) reinforcing gender oppression and 
stereotypes.
30.2 – States Parties shall encourage the media to 
give equal voice to women and men in all areas 
of coverage, including increasing the number 
of programmes for, by and about women on 
gender specific topics and that challenge gender 
stereotypes.
30.3 – States Parties shall take appropriate 
measures to encourage the media to play a 
constructive role in the eradication of gender-
based violence by adopting guidelines which 
ensure gender sensitive coverage.Instrument Indicators
56
European Union: Roadmap 
for Equality Between 
Women and Men (2006)V. (Elimination of Gender Stereotypes in Society). 
Key Actions – the Commission will support actions 
to eliminate gender stereotyping in education, 
culture and on the labour market by promoting 
gender mainstreaming and specific actions in the 
European Social Fund, ICT programmes and in EU 
education and culture programmes. 
The Commission will support awareness-raising 
campaigns and exchange of good practices in 
schools and enterprises on non-stereotyped 
gender roles and develop dialogue with media to 
encourage a non-stereotyped portrayal of women 
and men.
Council of Europe 
Convention on Preventing 
and Combating Violence 
against Women and 
Domestic Violence (Treaty 
No. 210) (2014)III.17.1: Parties shall encourage the private sector, 
the information and communication technology 
sector and the media, with due respect for 
freedom of expression and their independence, to 
participate in the elaboration and implementation 
of policies and to set guidelines and self-
regulatory standards to prevent violence against 
women and to enhance respect for their dignity.
Inter-American 
Convention on the 
Prevention, Punishment 
and Eradication of 
Violence Against Women 
‘Convention of Belem 
Do Para’ (1994)Chapter III (Duties of the States) 
8) (g) encourage the communications media to 
develop appropriate media guidelines in order to 
contribute to the eradication of violence against 
women in all its forms, and to enhance respect for 
the dignity of women.Instrument Indicators
57
EVIDENCE 
 While state media regulators, media industry bodies and media organizations 
have, to varying extents, made efforts to translate the global, regional and national 
commitments into implementable policies, codes and guidelines for the media, the 
results remain uninspiring. The evidence below is confined to the news media due 
to the availability of a volume of data gathered over time and across multiple nation 
states. 
 Results from Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP) 20-year research on 
gender in news media content reveal that the rate of progress towards media 
gender parity has been very slow (Macharia, 2015): 
• Globally, women make up only 24% of the persons heard, read about or seen in 
newspaper, television and radio news. In 20 years, the needle towards parity has 
moved by only seven points. The gender gap is narrowest in stories on science and 
health and widest in news about politics and government, in which women are 
only 16% of the people in the stories. Secretariat of the 
Pacific Community: 
Recommendations and 
Outcomes of 12th Triennial 
Conference of Pacific 
Women (2013)(74) to recognize that community media and 
women’s media networks are important for 
collaboration and partnerships; (75) Ensure that 
government communication and media strategies 
effectively promote their gender equality 
commitments; (76) to recognize and fully respect 
the knowledge held by women; (77) research with 
gender analysis, on the impact of inappropriate 
uses of ICTs, and called for the development of 
national regulatory infrastructure and policy.Instrument Indicators
58
• As news sources, women appear most as persons providing testimony based on 
personal experience (38%) and least as experts (19%). Across 10 years, women’s 
voice as experts has increased by only two points.
• Progress towards news representation that acknowledges women’s participation 
in productive life remains elusive. Globally women hold approximately 40% of paid 
employment, while a large proportion work in the informal sector, particularly in 
Global South contexts. In the world depicted in the news, only 20% of the total 
workers in the formal labour force are women, while 67% of the unemployed and 
stay-at-home parents are women.
• Only one out of ten stories since 2000 has focussed centrally on women. That 
this proportion has remained constant across almost two decades suggests 
that women’s value as newsworthy has not changed, and perhaps a continued 
disinterest of reporters, producers and editors in women’s lives, stories and 
experiences. Economic news, followed by political news, are least likely to focus on 
women, at 5% and 7% of stories in these topics respectively.
• Many stories present opportunities to highlight gender equality or inequality 
issues, yet, only 9% do so globally. While this number signals a steady rise since 
2005, it remains under the 10% - or one in ten – mark. The largest strides in 
integrating a gender equality perspective have been in science and health news, 
followed by economic, and crime/violence stories.
• Similarly, many stories present opportunities to challenge gender stereotypes, 
but only 4% do so, a negligible one percentage point change since 2005. Gender 
stereotypes have remained firmly embedded in news media output over the past 
decade. In 10 years there has been no progress in the proportion of political news 
stories that clearly challenge gender stereotypes, while stereotypes appear to 
have increased in social and legal news.
59
• Women’s relative invisibility in traditional news media has crossed over into 
digital news delivery platforms. The roles in which they appear mirror the results 
from traditional print and broadcast news. Only 4% of news media tweets 
clearly challenge gender stereotypes, exactly similar to the overall percentage of 
television, radio and print news stories.
 The next GMMP research is scheduled for 2020, at which time the statistics 
will be updated. The 2020 monitoring will generate new evidence on changes in 
progress towards closing the gender gap in sources, experts and other indicators of 
gender equality in news media content. 
 News is a genre governed by professional codes and can be held to a different 
standard compared to fictional media. The critique, however, cuts across all 
media forms that are just as, and oftentimes more, complicit in the sexualisation, 
trivialisation and objectification of women, as well as the normalisation of violence 
against girls and women.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 The research evidence suggests that more than two decades since Beijing, 
gender issues in media content remain pertinent. The power to change lies with 
governments, the media and ordinary audiences.
 Governments need to acknowledge the important place of media and 
communication within the broader objective of promoting gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. Professional media, in particular, have a fundamental 
obligation, following industry ethics, to present balanced, fair and accurate content. 
Media organizations need to be accountable to the societies in which they operate 
and the audiences they serve. Gender equality is embraced as a global goal and 
media have a significant role in promoting or in sabotaging its achievement. 
Weak and inconsistent implementation of gender policies needs to be addressed. 
Institutionalisation of a gender-sensitive journalistic culture remains paramount. 
60
 Specific Recommendations  offered by the GMMP Network25 include the 
following: 
STATE MEDIA REGULATORY AGENCIES SHOULD: 
• Require media houses to adopt and enforce an agreed gender policy and guidelines 
for gender-sensitive reporting.
• Include, in media evaluation criteria, issues of gender balance and demonstrated 
adherence to the gender policy.
• Impose meaningful fines on media houses found liable of sex discrimination or 
other actions of non-compliance of their agreed gender policy. 
• Build capacity of staff responsible for hearing cases on media non-compliance of 
the gender policy.
MEDIA SHOULD:
• Develop a gender policy and gender-aware ethics and practice codes, with action 
plans and targets for implementation.
• Engage with community media organizations and citizens’ media networks to 
advance gender equality in content production.
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS SHOULD:
• Advocate for fair and equal representation of women and men in news media. 
Lobby for gender policy adoption and implementation for and by media; 
25 In Macharia, 2015
61
• Establish gender focussed media watches and apply the results as evidence for 
public and media awareness, for actions to hold media accountable through state, 
industry and media house complaints mechanisms, and to support media houses 
committed to gender equality.
FUNDING AGENCIES SHOULD:
• Support the strengthening or establishment of media watch networks.
• Support media development work that emphasises gender equality in content 
production, media in-house policies and practices.
 
RESOURCES AND GOOD PRACTICE 
POLICY 
• Canadian Association of Broadcasters’ Equitable Portrayal Code (2008) 
 http://www.cbsc.ca/codes/cab-equitable-portrayal-code/  
• Press Council of Botswana Gender Code of Ethics (2011). A 4-page Code on Equitable 
treatment of women and men in media coverage; professional accountability; 
balance, credibility and impartiality in reporting; gender stereotyping and 
reporting gender-based violence discussed under a general clause on minimizing 
harm; advertising.
• Tanzania Media Gender Code of Ethics (2009). On accuracy and fairness, balance, 
credibility and impartiality, accountability, gender stereotyping, language, marke -
ting and advertising, and gender sensitivity within workplaces. 
 http://www.mediawise.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/10/Tanzania-Media-
Gender-Code-of-Ethics.pdf  
 
62
PRACTICE  
• BBC Academy's Expert Women initiative: The BBC Academy's Expert Women 
initiative aims to address a need to grow the pool of specialist presenters and 
contributors available to editors and commissioners via a series of training days. 
Database - http://www.bbc.co.uk/academy/en/collections/expert-women  
• The Network of Women in Media, India, is an association which aims to provide 
a forum for women in media professions to share information and resources, 
exchange ideas, promote media awareness and ethics, and work for gender 
equality and justice within the media and society. http://www.nwmindia.org/  
• Sancharika Samuha (SAS) is a Forum of women journalists and communicators in 
Nepal established in 1996 with the objective of promoting a healthier and gender-
sensitive media. http://www.sancharika.org/portal/index.php  
• The Learning Resource Kit for Gender-Ethical Journalism and Media House Policy  
(WACC and IFJ, 2012) is a two-volume resource for media professionals seeking: 
(i) to understand how gender intersects with media professional ethics, and (ii) to 
apply a gender lens in covering news stories on various thematic issues. Book 1 
will appeal to media decision makers interested in gender media policy adoption 
or improvement. Book 2 provides practical guidelines for gender-ethical reporting 
on various thematic areas such as climate change, disaster and economy. 
 http://whomakesthenews.org/journalism-kit
 MEDIA MONITORING 
• The Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP) has, since 1995, documented change 
in the gender gap in news content at global, regional and country levels, based 
on indicators such as who appears in print, broadcast and online news and how 
they are portrayed, who reports the news, patterns in gender stereotyping and 
women’s centrality in news content. The GMMP is also a process of building the 
63
skills of ordinary audiences to monitor the media from a gender perspective and 
to apply the evidence to advocacy for gender-sensitive media policies, regulation 
and practice. http://whomakesthenews.org/gmmp  
• Adaptable gender-focussed media monitoring tools.
 http://whomakesthenews.org/media-monitoring/methodology-guides-and-
coding-tools
ADVOCACY 
• New York Declaration: A Feminist Vision for the Media – Statement and Plan of 
Action (2017) 
REFERENCES 
African Union, Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People's Rights on 
the Rights of Women in Africa, 11 July 2003. http://www.au.int/en/sites/default/
files/treaties/7783-file-protocol_on_the_rights_of_women.pdf  
(Accessed 8 August 2018). 
Council of Europe, The Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and 
Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence , November 2014,  ISBN 
978-92-871-7990-6. http://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/
rms/090000168008482e  (Accessed 8 August 2018). 
Macharia, S. 2015. Who makes the news? Global Media Monitoring Project 2015 . 
World Association of Christian Communication (WACC). 
http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-thenews/Imported/reports_2015/global/
gmmp_global_report_en.pdf  
Organization of American States (OAS), Inter-American Convention on the 
Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women ("Convention 
64
of Belem do Para") , 9 June 1994. 
http://www.oas.org/juridico/english/treaties/a-61.html  
(Accessed on 8 August 2018).
 
UN Commission on the Status of Women. March, 2013. Participation in and access 
of women to the media, and information and communication technologies and 
their impact on and use as an instrument for the advancement and empowerment 
of women , Agreed Conclusions. 
UN General Assembly. 1979. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women , 18 December 1979, A/RES/34/180. 
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/text/econvention.htm . 
(Accessed on 8 August 2018).
UN General Assembly. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development , 21 October 2015, A/RES/70/1.
 http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E . 
(Accessed on 8 August 2018).
United Nations, Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, adopted at the Fourth 
World Conference on Women , 27 October 1995. 
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/  
(Accessed on 8 August 2018).
65
6. Violence Against Women 
in Media and Digital Contents
Aimée Vega Montiel 26
26 Researcher at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM)INTRODUCTION 
 Defined by the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
Against Women (CEDAW), adopted in 1979 by the UN General Assembly, as any 
distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or 
purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, 
irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of 
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, 
civil or any other field, violence against women (VAW) constitutes the main obstacle 
for women’s human rights.
 Based on the theoretical framework of feminism, nowadays legal definitions 
on VAW have adopted a holistic perspective which recognizes both types (physical, 
sexual, psychological, economic and femicide), and modalities (institutional, 
community, workand school) of violence against women and girls.
 Most recently, the Sustainable Development Goal 5 Target 5.2 calls on 
governments and other actors to eliminate all forms of violence against all women 
and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking, sexual and other 
types of exploitation. 
 The CEDAW recognizes the centrality of media in the elimination of VAW. Actions 
promoted by the Commission include urging Member States to adopt mechanisms 
67
to eliminate sexist stereotypes in media and advertising, to encourage media to 
establish codes of production and to stimulate a public debate on this issue.
 The Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA) in 1995 called explicitly on governments 
to take effective measures, including appropriate legislation against pornography 
and the phenomenon of violence against women and children in the media (UN, 
1995, p.102). The BPfA also recommended media industries to establish guidelines 
to address violent, degrading or pornographic materials concerning women, 
including advertising and to disseminate information aimed at eliminating all forms 
of violence against women.
 However, instead of decreasing, sexism and misogyny in media has increased 
dramatically the last decades. The initial issues around the accountability of media 
institutions and media actors to end violence against women, are still at the core 
of international debates. In addition, the new media environment has exacerbated 
some existing problems and brings new challenges that need to be addressed – 
such as sex trafficking and misogynistic pornography. 
EVIDENCE 
 Reviewing feminist research during the last 50 years provides evidence of 
the prevalence of violence against women in media contents. In addition, the 
complexity of theoretical and methodological frameworks has increased as types 
and modalities of representing VAW have changed.
 Early studies focused on the representation of sexual violence to demonstrate 
how, through the commodification of women’s bodies, media content contributed 
to the normalisation of sexual assault and other forms of sexual violence and 
how they reinforced gender inequalities. These studies were identified by their 
interdisciplinary nature. Influenced by psychoanalysis, Laura’s Mulvey male gaze 
and sexual objectification categories evidenced the patriarchal order existing in 
the film industry and how these categories discriminated against women in society. 
68
Guided by the questions: “how do media portray women?” and “how do these 
portrayals limit women lives?” sociologist Gaye Tuchman called attention to the 
symbolic annihilation of women in media discourse, through omission, trivialisation 
and condemnation. 
 The next phase was linked to social intervention. Content analysis served to 
produce quantitative statistical data about gender portrayals. These data supported 
campaigns against stereotyped representations in both media contents and 
advertising, which evidenced the presence of different forms and modalities of VAW 
in contents – for example, in regard to domestic violence. 
 Current research promotes holistic analysis, in order to look at different forms 
and modalities of gender-based violence in media discourse (Vega Montiel, 2014) 
Findings have demonstrated how media content reproduces sexist stereotypes 
that associate male identity with violence, domination, independence, aggression 
and power, while women are linked to emotions, vulnerability, dependency and 
sensitivity (Elasmar, Hasegawa and Brain, 1999; McGhee and Frueh, 1980; Thompson 
and Zerbinos, 1995).
 In particular, news reports of violence against women tend to represent women 
as victims and as responsible for the violence of which they are victims. Usually, 
aggressors are not part of news reports. VAW is not shown as a structural problem, 
which is the consequence of inequality between women and men in society, but as 
a mere individual experience that happens in domestic spaces (Diez, 2002; Vega 
Montiel, 2007).
 With the development of ICT, cyber VAW is emerging as a global problem. Almost 
three quarters of women have been exposed to some form of violence online. Types 
of cyber-violence include: hacking, surveillance, harassment, malicious distribution 
and death threats (Broadband Commission for Digital Development, 2015).
69
 The report (cited above) argued that violence online and offline feed into each 
other. ‘Abuse may be confined to networked technologies or may be supplemented 
with offline harassment including vandalism, phone calls and physical assault. 
Similarly, the viral character of distribution is now explosive. What was once a 
private affair can now be instantly broadcast to billions of people across the digital 
world’ (Broadband Commission for Digital Development, 2015: 7).
 In countries such as Mexico, cyber violence has been at the core of public 
debates in recent years. In 2016, at least ten young women denounced through 
social networks they had been harassed by men in public spaces. These women 
identified the alleged aggressors and, in response, they became victims of both 
sexual violence and death threats from Facebook and Twitter users. A very powerful 
counter-response came from young women in the country. Through the hashtag 
#MyFirstHarassment (#MiPrimerAcoso, in Spanish), a hundred thousand women 
told of their first experience as victims of sexual violence. 
 A similar movement emerged in October 2017, in the USA. The hashtag #MeToo 
was used to denounce the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein as a sexual 
aggressor. The hashtag was promptly popularised worldwide for millions of women 
to publicise personal experiences of sexual harassment or assault. 
 At the same time, online and social media have also become new and powerful 
vehicles for misogynistic threats and harassment which can result in the silencing 
of women. While fewer women than men access the Internet today. There are 
currently 200 million fewer women online than men – it is no less the case that 
both new sexist media and new sexist discourses can exacerbate violence against 
women and girls.
 Another dimension of the sexist nature of online discourses, is the widespread 
circulation of pornography. Some statistics suggest that there are more than four 
million websites that offer pornography - 12% of the total number of websites in the 
world. The online pornography industry turns over 97.06 billion dollars per year, 
70
more than Microsoft, Google, Yahoo, Amazon, Netflix and Apple combined (Feminist 
Peace Network, 2006). An estimated 100,000 offer child abuse imagery. 
 There is also sex trafficking of women, girls and boys that has been enhanced by 
the new media. Sex trafficking used to happen mainly in countries that correlate with 
a lack of regulation and policy, including the Internet, and particularly in countries 
where there is a high percentage of poor women. 
 So, what to are the conclusions about violence against women offline and 
online? The initial feminist research questions - coming from the 1960’s - are still 
relevant at the core of theory and research on media contents. ‘This still resolves 
around the most basic questions of power, values, access and exclusion’ (Gallager, 
2002: pp 5).
 In addition, the new media environment has opened possibilities for contestation 
while also exacerbated some existing problems and new challenges that need to be 
addressed.
“Media sexism and male-dominated power structures are continually shifting and 
finding new forms of representation and practice... [so] our critique can never be 
static or one-dimensional, but we must act collectively… Across disciplines and 
sectors and across countries and regions” (Gallagher, 2015). 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 In view of the evidence, we call on the UN and the international community to 
put into global focus the accountability of media and ICT industries in eliminating 
violence against women and girls. This is crucial to promoting discussion and to 
enhancing public visibility and awareness.
71
THE UN AND INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY SHOULD:
• Commission and produce global comparative reports on VAW in traditional and 
digital media contents, with a cross-national and cross-regional perspective, 
emphasising advances and challenges. These reports must include the analysis of 
the dimensions involved in this problem: existing legislation, policy and regulation, 
self-regulation and co-regulation forms, content of media and ICT, media and 
information literacy programs.
• Call on Member States to introduce or strengthen regulation and policy aimed at 
preventing the spread of gender-based violence through the media and ICT.
• Encourage media and ICT organizations to: adopt gender mainstreaming mecha -
nisms for monitoring, evaluation and action; adhere to national and internatio -
nal legislation to end VAW; improve gender mainstreaming training programs for 
content producers.
• Encourage media unions and journalists’ groups to adopt basic principles for the 
production of news on VAW free of sexist stereotypes.
• Promote the exchange of best practices to end VAW in media and online contents 
and link with the research community.
RESOURCES AND GOOD PRACTICE 
• Initiative: ‘End Violence: Women’s rights and safety online’ 
 NGO: Association for Progressive Communication.
 URL: https://www.apc.org/en/project/end-violence-womens-rights-and-safety-
online 
 
72
REFERENCES 
Broadband Commission for Digital Development. 2015. Cyber-Violence Against 
Women and Girls: A World-wide Wake-up Call . 
http://www.unesco.org/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/images/wsis/
GenderReport2015FINAL.pdf  (Accessed 2 May 2017). 
Díez, P. 2002. Representación de género en los informativos de radio y television. 
Madrid, Instituto de la Mujer. 
Elasmar, M., Hasegawa, K. and Brain, M. 1999. The portrayal of women in U.S. 
prime time television. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media , 
Vol. 44, No. 1, pp. 20-34. 
Feminist Peace Network. 2006. Pornography Revenue Statistics http://www.
feministpeacenetwork.org/2010/10/20/pornography-the-obscene-statistics/  
 (Accessed 13 April 2011). 
Gallagher, M. 2015. Gender, Media, ICTs and Journalism: 20 Years after 
the BPfA Forum , Keynote lecture. 
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/1_2_keynote_
lecture_margaret_gallagher.pdf  (Accessed 12 May 2016). 
Gallagher, M. 2002. Women, Media and Democratic Society: In Pursuit of Rights 
and Freedoms  http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/ download?doi=10.1.1.535.447
8&rep=rep1&type=pdf  (Accessed 12 May 2016). 
McGhee, P. and Frueh, T. 1980. Television viewing and the learning of sex-role 
stereotypes. Sex Roles , Vol. 6, No. 2, pp.179-188. 
Meyers, M. 1997. News coverage of violence against women . 
London: Sage Publications. 
73
United Nations (1995) Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. 
Beijing, United Nations. 
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/pdf/BDPfA%20E.pdf  
(Accessed 2 October 2005). 
Thompson, T. and Zerbinos, E. 1995. Gender roles in animated cartoons: Has the 
picture changed in 20 years? Sex Roles , Vol. 32, No. 9/10, pp.651-673. 
Vega Montiel, A. 2014. Violence against women and media: advancements and 
challenges of a research and political agenda. A. Vega Montiel (ed). Gender and 
Media: A Scholarly Agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and Gender.  Paris, 
UNESCO/IAMCR, pp. 17-21.
74
7. Violence Against Women Journalists 
– Online and Offline
Julie Posetti and Hannah Storm 27
INTRODUCTION 
 Women journalists face disproportionate risk and experience of violence 
and intimidation for the work they do – both on and offline. They are affected as 
members of a profession that is increasingly becoming a target in conflicts, in the 
context of terrorism, and as a feature of the rising global tide of populist politics. 
They are vilified and attacked for the messages they share and questions they ask. 
In some cases, they are even targeted for daring to speak at all. In addition to the 
risks and threats experienced by their male counterparts, they are also exposed 
to gender-based harassment and violence in the field and in the newsroom. Such 
attacks can be physical or virtual in nature, and they are frequently sexualized. 
 Traditionally, the news industry has been dominated by men. From behind 
the editor’s desk to the front page, it’s men who predominate in prestigious field 
assignments, and men who overwhelmingly have occupied positions of greatest 
power and highest profile (Ross, Boyle, Carter and Ging, 2018). This also translates 
to news content, where male sources and male voices dominate.28 This gender 
27 Julie Posetti is Senior Research Fellow with the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism at the 
University of Oxford. Hannah Storm is Director of the International News Safety Institute (INSI), a UK 
registered charity which focusses on the safety of journalists.
28 Note: The Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP) is the largest international study of gender in 
the news media. It has been carried out every five years since 1995. It involves hundreds of volunteers 
collecting data on indicators of gender in the news on one specific day across the world. 
See: http://whomakesthenews.org/gmmp/gmmp-reports  (Accessed 14/8/18)
75
imbalance is also reflected in lower salaries29, fewer senior positions held and less 
secure working conditions for women. 
 The newest threats faced by women journalists and media workers (along with 
their female sources) exist in the digital realm, particularly on social media sites. 
These risks range from pernicious, gendered online harassment to overt, targeted 
attacks that frequently involve threats of sexual violence. Increasingly, they also 
include digital security breaches from the exposure of identifying information 
(exacerbating the offline risks) through to malicious misrepresentation using 
Artificial Intelligence technologies.30 
 As a result of these convergent risks, women journalists and media workers are 
both less visible and more vulnerable - a double-edged sword that delegitimises 
their roles, while simultaneously increasing their burdens and taxing their 
resilience. 
 In recent years, women’s involvement in media and in public discourse has 
increased, albeit slowly (Global Media Monitoring Project [GMMP], 2015), but 
this has coincided with a parallel rise in the violence and threats they face. In 
the case of online harassment. Emerging research indicates that the resulting 
chilling effect is causing increasing numbers of women reporters to withdraw from 
public conversation and to leave the profession (Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe [OSCE], 2016).
 News organizations and civil society groups have begun to recognize the scale 
of the problem and moves are now afoot to pay heed to the specific safety issues 
faced by women journalists in some media organisations, within certain countries, 
29 See for example: The BBC’s China Editor Carrie Gracie’s resigned from the Corporation in January 
2018, saying she could not ‘collude’ in a policy of ‘unlawful pay discrimination’ BBC (2018) BBC's Carrie 
Gracie ‘could not collude’ in pay discrimination 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-42601477  (Accessed 14/8/18)
30 Note: See later discussion of online threats
76
and at the international level through media support groups, civil society organi -
sations, journalist unions, regional bodies like the OSCE and the United Nations. 
 The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of 
Impunity (UNESCO, 2012) highlights the need for a gender-sensitive approach in 
relation to the safety of journalists. UNESCO coordinates the plan, which includes 
Journalism Safety Indicators that involve a gendered aspect and training for women 
journalists. In addition, each year UNESCO collaborates with GAMAG on Women 
Make the News, a global initiative to raise awareness of issues relating to gender 
inequality in and through the media. 
 It is crucial that any initiatives focussing on the safety of women journalists 
exist within the broader framework of conversations aimed at meeting the specific 
targets of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal 5 to achieve gender equality and 
empower all women and girls, and recognize that much of the violence that women 
journalists face stems from more deeply rooted gender-based discrimination and 
inequality in the media industry, and society at large. 
EVIDENCE 
 Specific data detailing the exact numbers of women involved in journalism vis-
à-vis men globally, and the scale of the violence and intimidation they face, remains 
scarce. UNESCO’s World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development  
report (UNESCO, 2018) notes that while progress has been made, gender equality 
has not been reached. 
31 See: https://en.unesco.org/womenmakenews  (Accessed 14/8/18)
32 Note: The Sustainable Development Goals, or SDGs, are a set of 17 global goals launched in 2015 
by the UN sending an agenda (the 2030 agenda) of achieving 169 targets by 2030. The focus of SDG 5 
is to ‘achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls’ through nine targets, ranging from a 
focus on ended gendered violence to increasing the participation of women in politics. 
More information about the SDGs can be viewed here:
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/SDG5  (Accessed 14/8/18)
77
 In November 2017, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution 
(UN 2017b) with a particular gender focus, ‘condemning unequivocally’ all ‘specific 
attacks on women journalists in the exercise of their work, including sexual and 
gender-based discrimination and violence, intimidation and harassment, online and 
offline’. The resolution reflects many of the recommendations in a UN Secretary 
General’s report from earlier in 2017 on the safety of women journalists (UN 2017a) 
which came at a pivotal moment in the history of women’s involvement in journalism.
 The average percentage of women journalists killed between 2006 and 2016 
was seven percent of the total (UNESCO, 2017), but in 2017 that figure rose to 19 
percent of the overall total (Beiser, 2018). The historic difference may be explained, 
in part at least, by the fact that traditionally fewer women journalists have covered 
conflict zones. However, simply pointing to a perceived rise in the numbers of 
women working in war zones in recent years does not adequately account for the 
increased casualty numbers, because most of the women journalists killed in 2017 
were not working in active war zones. Lauren Wolfe, director of the ‘Under Siege’ 
program at the Women’s Media Center, says it could be because women are also 
covering more dangerous beats, as well as reporting from dangerous locations 
(Chacar, 2017). Arguably, it could also be because the risks are spreading to states 
considered as generally lower risk environments for journalists.
 The International News Safety Institute’s 2012 publication, No Woman’s Land: 
On the Frontlines with Female Reporters  (Storm and Williams, 2012) was collated 
after the sexual assault of CBS correspondent Lara Logan in Egypt’s Tahrir Square. 
In it, forty women journalists paint a global picture of the daily risks of mob-related 
attacks, harassment from public officials and sexual advances often perpetrated by 
those who are supposed to protect them in their work. 
 The recent momentum of the #metoo movement has empowered some 
women to share their experiences of sexual harassment and abuse within domestic 
newsrooms in developed democracies, and a number of high profile men alleged to 
have perpetrated these abuses have been fired.33 
78
 In 2014, a joint report by INSI and the International Women’s Media Foundation 
(IWMF, with support from UNESCO) found that women journalists have long-suffered 
sexual violence and harassment at work (Barton and Storm, 2014). Respondents to 
the project survey, completed by almost 1000 women, found that nearly two-thirds 
of respondents had experienced ‘some kind of intimidation, threats or abuse in 
relation to their work’. Most of the incidents had occurred in the workplace and were 
perpetrated by male bosses, supervisors and co-workers. It also found that most 
incidents of harassment and violence were never reported, even though a majority 
of women said it had psychologically affected them. Many women expressed fear 
of repercussions that reporting such abuse could have on their careers, a cultural 
and professional stigma that gender-based violence and harassment still carries 
(Chacar, 2017).
 Any risk assessments that are completed rarely include specific gendered 
considerations, be that how to deal with unwanted harassment from contacts, fixers 
or colleagues, or the need to factor risk into assignment budgets – for example, 
when public transport is likely to be more dangerous than private alternatives. 
Because these structures are generally designed by, and for, men these elements 
simply do not become part of the normative framework. This, again, underscores the 
particular vulnerabilities of certain groups of female journalists, such as freelancers 
and those working in conflict scenarios heavily dominated by men (Harris, Mosdell 
and Griffiths, 2016).
33 Note: In this context, a group of journalists, editors and academics (including the authors of this 
chapter) published an open letter on sexism and misogyny in the news business with 14 recommen -
dations for change. You can read it here: http://www.niemanlab.org/2018/06/how-to-end-misogyny-in-
the-news-industry-an-open-letter-to-the-international-journalism-community/  (Accessed 12/8/18).
79
WOMEN JOURNALISTS AS TARGETS OF SEXUALIZED ONLINE ABUSE 34 
 The newest and broadest threat facing women journalists is the global 
proliferation of online abuse targeting reporters and commentators online. This 
scourge has led the UN (including UNESCO35), the OSCE, IWMF, INSI, Reporters Sans 
Frontiers (RSF, 2018), and other civil society organisations to recognize the problem, 
commissioning research into its impact and calling for actions and solutions.
 Early research highlighting the misogynistic nature of harassment experienced 
by women bloggers in the pre-social media era serves as a beacon for the rampant 
cyber-misogyny now experienced by women journalists in the age of ‘social 
journalism’ (Filipovic, 2007; Seelhoff, 2007; Citron, 2009). The expectation is that 
journalists be actively embedded on social platforms like Facebook and Twitter 
to facilitate the direct audience engagement that is now integral to journalistic 
research, production and content dissemination (Posetti, 2013). This however, has 
placed women media workers on the frontline of a massive problem. The ‘pile on’ 
effect (organic, organized, or robotic mass attacks against a person online) worsens 
the impacts of online harassment experienced by women media workers, along 
with their female audiences and sources (Posetti, 2017b).36 
 About 20% of respondents said they had experienced some form of online 
abuse or attack. Women who report on issues of gender, technology and migration 
also find themselves at greater risk of increased attack according to more recent 
accounts. Also, in 2014, a study by British think-tank Demos, which examined 
34 Some of the content in this section is drawn from research produced for UNESCO for the book tit -
led Journalism, ‘Fake News’ and Disinformation co-edited by Julie Posetti, one of this chapter’s authors. 
http://en.unesco.og/fightfakenews
35 See: Posetti, J. (2017a) Fighting Back Against Prolific Online Harassment: Maria Ressa in L. Kilman 
(Ed) An Attack on One is an Attack on All Successful Initiatives To Protect Journalists and Combat 
Impunity: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002593/259399e.pdf  See also: Resolution 39 of 
UNESCO’s 39th General Conference which notes “the specific threats faced by women journalists 
including sexual harassment and violence, both online and offline”: 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002608/260889e.pdf  (Accessed 29/03/18).
80
hundreds of thousands of tweets, found that journalism was the only category 
where women received more abuse than men, with female journalists and TV news 
presenters receiving roughly three times as much abuse (Bartlett, et al., 2014) as 
their male counterparts. The keywords for the abusers were ‘slut’, ‘rape’ and ‘whore’. 
 In 2016, the OSCE published research that demonstrated the international impact 
of online abuse of female journalists, whom it described as being disproportionately 
targeted for ‘hate trolling’. The study found that ‘female journalists, bloggers and 
other media actors are disproportionately experiencing gender-related threats, 
harassment and intimidation on the Internet, which has a direct impact on their 
safety and future online activities’ (OSCE, 2016).37 
 Another hallmark of this online abuse of women media workers (and others 
producing verifiable information in the public interest across a range of digital 
platforms) is the use of disinformation tactics: lies are spread about their character 
or their work as a means of undermining their credibility, humiliating them, and 
seeking to chill their public commentary and reporting. In some instances, journalists 
have been targeted in acts of ‘astroturfing’38 and ‘trolling’39, experienced as deliberate 
attempts to ‘mislead, misinform, befuddle, or endanger journalists’ (Posetti, 2013). 
In other cases, they faced cyberattacks designed to reveal their sources, breach 
their privacy to expose them to risk, identify their sources. Attacks may also aim 
to access their unpublished data through phishing (King, 2014), doxing40, malware 
attacks and identity spoofing.41 Computational propaganda (Woolley and Howard, 
2017) has increased the risks for journalists dealing with ‘astroturfing’ and ‘trolling’. 
36 See a summary of the gender elements from the UNESCO study Protecting Journalism Sources in 
the Digital Age here: https://blog.wan-ifra.org/2015/09/18/gender-dimensions-of-protecting-journa -
lism-sources-in-the-digital-age  
(Accessed: 20/7/18).
37 See also: Clark, M & Grech, A (2017) Journalists under pressure: Unwarranted Interference, fear, and 
self-censorship in Europe, Council of Europe: https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/
DisplayDCTMContent?documentId=090000168070ad5d  
(Accessed 12/8/18). 
81
This involves the use of bots to disseminate well-targeted false information and 
propaganda messages on a scale designed to look like an organic movement. 
Frequently, these attacks involved gendered elements and threats of sexual 
violence. Concurrently, AI technology is being leveraged to create ‘deepfake’ porn 
videos and other forms of content designed to discredit women journalists.
RECOMMENDATIONS 
STATES SHOULD: 
• Act in response to the UN Secretary General’s report (UN, 2017a) on the safety of 
women journalists that urges measures to ‘inform a gender-sensitive approach to 
38 Note: ‘Astroturfing’ is a term derived from a brand of fake grass used to carpet outdoor surfaces to 
create the impression it is natural grass cover. In the context of disinformation, it involves spreading 
fake information, targeting audiences and journalists with an intention to redirect or mislead them, 
particularly in the form of ‘evidence’ of faux popular support for a person, idea or policy. 
See also Technopedia definition: https://www.techopedia.com/definition/13920/astroturfing  
(Accessed 20/06/18). 
39 Note: ‘Trolling’ in its Internet related application refers to acts that range from gentle teasing, tricking 
and goading to deliberate deception. However, it is increasingly deployed as a term to cover all acts 
of online abuse. This is potentially problematic as it conflates a wide range of activities and potentially 
underplays the seriousness of online harassment. 
40 From Technopedia: Doxing is the process of retrieving, hacking and publishing other people’s infor -
mation such as names, addresses, phone numbers and credit card details. Doxing may be targeted 
toward a specific person or an organization. There are many reasons for doxing, but one of the most 
popular is coercion. Doxing is a slang term that is derived from the word ‘.doc’ because documents 
are often retrieved and shared. Hackers have developed different ways to dox, but one of the most 
common methods is by obtaining the victim’s email and then uncovering the password to open their 
account to obtain more personal information: https://www.techopedia.com/definition/29025/doxing  
(Accessed 29/03/18).
41 From Technopedia: Spoofing is a fraudulent or malicious practice in which communication is sent 
from an unknown source disguised as a source known to the receiver. Email spoofing is the most 
common form of this practice. A spoofed email may also contain additional threats like Trojans or 
other viruses. These programmes can cause significant computer damage by triggering unexpected 
activities, remote access, deletion of files and more: 
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/5398/spoofing  (Accessed 29/03/18). 
42 The term ‘deepfake’ is a portmanteau of ‘deep learning’ and ‘fake’. It involves AI technology in the 
creation of fraudulent content, sometimes of a pornographic nature, that is virtually undetectable. 
It is used in cyberattacks to discredit people, including journalists. See:
82
the issue of the safety of women journalists that is located in the broader context 
of gender-based discrimination and inequality’. 
• Follow up the UN General Assembly Resolution (UN, 2017b) on the safety of 
journalists and the issue of impunity which ‘ condemns unequivocally the specific 
attacks on women journalists in the exercise of their work, including sexual 
and gender-based discrimination and violence, intimidation and harassment, 
online and offline’ and also calls upon States  ‘to tackle sexual and gender-based 
discrimination, including violence and incitement to hatred, against women 
journalists, online and offline, as part of broader efforts to promote and protect 
the human rights of women, eliminate gender inequality and tackle gender-based 
stereotypes in society’. 
Additionally, it calls upon  States to: 
‘…create and maintain, in law and in practice, a safe and enabling environment for 
journalists to perform their work independently and without undue interference, 
inter alia…including with a strong focus on combating sexual and gender-based 
discrimination, and violence against women journalists, as well as the particularities 
of online threats and harassment of women journalists; (c) regular monitoring 
and reporting of attacks against journalists; (d) collecting and analysing concrete 
quantitative and qualitative data on attacks or violence against journalists, that 
are disaggregated by, among other factors, sex; (e) publicly and systematically 
condemning violence and attacks; (f)dedicating the resources necessary to 
investigate and prosecute such attacks and to develop and implement gender-
sensitive strategies for combating impunity for attacks and violence against 
journalists, including by using, where appropriate, good practices such as those 
identified in Human Rights Council resolution 33/2;10 and (g) putting in place 
safe gender- sensitive investigative procedures, in order to encourage women 
journalists to report attacks against them and provide adequate support, including 
psychosocial support, to victims and survivors’. 
83
• Follow the UN Action Plan on the Safety of Journalists’ recommendation to 
disaggregate data from a gender-perspective to allow for a better understanding 
of the specific threats facing women journalists.
• Review legal and normative frameworks to determine the applicability of 
existing laws/guidelines and the potential amendment (or introduction of new 
laws/guidelines) to defend the freedom of expression rights of all who produce 
journalism in the public interest (on and offline), being mindful of the need to 
avoid censorship.
• Consider supporting public information campaigns and broad media literacy 
training designed to address the problem.
CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANISATIONS AND MEDIA EMPLOYERS SHOULD:
• Operate a zero-tolerance approach to sexual harassment in newsrooms (on and 
offline) and the promotion of cultures of inclusion where everyone feels safe to 
speak out about their experiences and empowered to act if they witness something 
inappropriate happening.
• Provide physical security, technical assistance, legal advice and psychological 
support as required when dealing with women journalists affected by sexual 
violence and sexual harassment – on or offline.
• Develop holistic strategies by involving security/cybersecurity staff, senior editors, 
editorial trainers, workplace health and safety teams, social media editors in 
developing and disseminating policies and guidelines when dealing with incidents 
involving offline or online threats, recognising that these problems now interact 
and overlap.43 
• Customise gendered safety training – safety training should be more bespoke. 
Most existing safety training is run by men, and where it does address specific 
84
issues facing women journalists, it is rarely done so sensitively. This requires 
greater understanding of the emotional/psychological aspects of violence that 
impact on women journalists.
• Ensure better access for women in news organizations to the kinds of support 
(confidential where necessary) that they need to help them reintegrate physically, 
psychologically and emotionally, and ensure their careers are not negatively 
impacted if they suffer violence or harassment that requires them to take time 
away from their duties.
• Implement of gender-sensitive safety risk assessments and digital threat 
assessments that are integrated where required.
• Recognise and acknowledgement of the seriousness of online harassment from 
senior management to junior reporters (noting that policies and action plans 
should be disseminated to all staff).
• Escalate early reporting of serious incidents of abuse – on or offline - to the police 
where appropriate.
• Invest in online community engagement management (including clear policies and 
guidelines for intervention, along with adoption and communication of effective 
abuse reporting tools/processes) and adding misogynistic terms to comment 
moderation guidelines.
• Devote editorial resources to coverage of these issues.
43 Note: Several of the recommendations pertaining to online harassment presented here were first 
published by Fairfax Media in an article about the problem written by co-author Julie Posetti in 2016: 
https://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/swedish-broadcaster-alexandra-pascalidou-describes-online-
threats-of-sexual-torture-and-graphic-abuse-20161124-gswuwv.html  (Accessed 20/7/18).
85
• Make a plan to deal with potential online harassment at the commissioning stage 
of ‘lightning rod’ stories (i.e. stories that are likely to attract online harassment of 
women journalists or sources, such as stories about feminism).
• Provide greater support for freelancers and those who are more vulnerable, such 
as interns, women of colour, non-binary people, and members of the LGBTQ 
community.
RESEARCHERS SHOULD:
• Consider the gender aspects and impacts when undertaking research on 
journalism safety and impunity issues.
• Consider the gender aspects and impacts of digital communications issues as they 
affect women journalists and media workers.
• When researching gender issues in media, consider digital and non-digital issues 
in tandem, recognising the interplay of both online and offline experiences.
• Make research of gender-related violence and harassment of women journalists a 
priority to support the defence of women’s freedom of expression rights globally.
 
REFERENCES 
Article 19. 2018. UN GA Resolution calls for an end to attacks on women 
journalists: https://www.article19.org/resources/unga-resolution-calls-end-attacks-
women-journalists/  (Accessed 14 August 2018).
Article 19. 2016. Mexico: Fear in the Newsroom:  
https://www.article19.org/resources/mexico-fear-in-the-newsroom/  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
86
Ayyub, R. 2018. In India, journalists face slut-shaming and rape threats in The New 
York Times: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/22/opinion/india-journalists-slut-
shaming-rape.html  (Accessed 23 July 2018).
Bartlett, J., Norrie R., Patel S., Rumpel R., Wibberley S. 2014. Misogyny on Twitter , 
Demos: https://www.demos.co.uk/files/MISOGYNY_ON_TWITTER.pdf  
(Accessed 30 July 2018).
Barton, A. & Storm, H. 2014. Violence and harassment against women in the news 
media: A global picture . INSI/IWMF: 
https://newssafety.org/uploads/IWMF.FINALA.PDF  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
Aro, J. 2016. The cyberspace war: propaganda and trolling as warfare tools. 
European View.  Sage Journals, June 2016, Volume 15, Issue 1. 
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1007/s12290-016-0395-5  
(Accessed 20/07/2018).
Beiser, E. 2018. In absence of fresh military conflict, journalist killings decline again:  
https://cpj.org/reports/2017/12/journalists-killed-iraq-crossfire-murder-mexico.
php (Accessed 14 August 2018).
Brown, L. & Willis, C. 2018. Calls for justice mark six months since Daphne Caruana 
Galizia’s murder: 
https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2018/04/calls-for-justice-mark-six-months-
since-daphne-caruana-galizias-murder/  (Accessed 14 August 2018).
Carmon, I. and Brittain, A. 2017. Eight women say Charlie Rose sexually harassed 
them — with nudity, groping and lewd calls , The Washington Post: https://www.
washingtonpost.com/investigations/eight-women-say-charlie-rose-sexually-
harassed-them--with-nudity-groping-and-lewd-calls/2017/11/20/9b168de8-caec-
11e7-8321-481fd63f174d_story.html?noredirect=on&utm_term=.6aa2c9bf162c  
87
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
Chacar, H. 2017. An Unusually Deadly Year For Women Journalists Around The 
World, Report Finds , The Intercept: https://theintercept.com/2017/12/21/an-
unusually-deadly-year-for-women-journalists-around-the-world-report-finds/  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
Chick, K. 2018. Photojournalism’s moment of reckoning , Columbia Journalism 
Review: https://www.cjr.org/special_report/photojournalism-sexual-harassment.
php/  (Accessed 14 August 2018).
Citron, D. 2009. Law's Expressive Value in Combating Cyber Gender Harassment , 
108 Mich. L. Rev. 373: http://repository.law.umich.edu/mlr/vol108/iss3/3 
(Accessed 12 August 2018).
Filipovic, J. 2007. Blogging while female: How internet misogyny parallels 
real-world harassment . Yale: JL & Feminism, 19, 295. 
Gallagher, M. 2001. Reporting on Gender in Journalism , Nieman Reports: Vol. 55, 4, 
pp 63-65.
Global Media Monitoring Project. 2015. http://whomakesthenews.org/gmmp-2015  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
Gottipatti, S. 2018. My friend Kim Wall's disappearance in Denmark shows: female 
journalists face danger everywhere , The Guardian: https://www.theguardian.
com/commentisfree/2017/aug/20/kim-wall-reminder-female-journalists-danger  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
Gray, S. 2018. The Silencing of Daphne . Reuters: https://www.reuters.com/
investigates/special-report/malta-daphne/  (Accessed 14 August 2018).
88
Haffajee, F. 2017. Ferial Haffajee: The Gupta fake news factory and me . HuffPost 
South Africa: https://www.huffingtonpost.co.za/2017/06/05/ferial-haffajee-the-
gupta-fake-news-factory-and-me_a_22126282/  
(Accessed 6 July 2018).
Harris, J, Mosdell, N & Griffiths, J. 2016. Gender, Risk and Journalism , Journalism 
Practice, 10:7 pp902-916.
King, G. 2014. Spear phishing attacks underscore necessity of digital vigilance , CPJ: 
https://cpj.org/blog/2014/11/spear-phishing-attacks-underscore-necessity-of-dig.
php (Accessed 29 July 2018).
Lees Munoz, E. 2018. Why We Should Prioritize Women Journalists’ 
Safety  Mediashift: 
http://mediashift.org/2017/11/need-prioritize-women-journalists-safety/  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
OHCHR. 2018. UN experts call on India to protect journalist Rana Ayyub from 
online hate campaign: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.
aspx?NewsID=23126&LangID=E  (Accessed 17 July 2018).
Ortiz, E. and Siemaszko, C. 2017. NBC Fires Matt Lauer after sexual misconduct 
review , NBC News: https://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/sexual-misconduct/nbc-
news-fires-today-anchor-matt-lauer-after-sexual-misconduct-n824831  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
OSCE. 2016. Countering Online Abuse of Female Journalists . OSCE: http://www.
osce.org/fom/220411?download=true
(Accessed 30 July 2018).
89
Posetti, J. 2013. The ‘Twitterisation’ of investigative journalism  in S. Tanner & N. 
Richardson (Eds.), Journalism Research and Investigation in a Digital World (pp. 88-
100): Oxford University Press. 
Posetti, J (2016) Swedish Broadcaster describes online threats of sexual torture 
and graphic  abuse online in The Sydney Morning Herald https://www.smh.com.au/
lifestyle/swedish-broadcaster-alexandra-pascalidou-describes-online-threats-of-
sexual-torture-and-graphic-abuse-20161124-gswuwv.html  
(Accessed 20 July 2018).
Posetti, J. 2017a. Fighting Back Against Prolific Online Harassment: Maria Ressa in 
L. Kilman (Ed) An Attack on One is an Attack on All Successful Initiatives to Protect 
Journalists and Combat Impunity. Paris: UNESCO: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0025/002593/259399e.pdf  
(Accessed 2 August 2018).
Posetti, J. 2017b. Protecting Journalism Sources in the Digital Age , Paris: UNESCO 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002480/248054E.pdf  
pp 36-137 (Accessed 15 July 2018).
Posetti, J. 2018. ‘F*ke news’, journalism and disinformation: Fighting back is now 
mission critical,  European Journalism Observatory: https://en.ejo.ch/comment/fke-
news-journalism-and-disinformation-fighting-back-is-now-mission-critical  
(Accessed 12 August 2018).
Ressa, M. 2016. Propaganda War: Weaponising the Internet , Rappler: https://www.
rappler.com/nation/148007-propaganda-war-weaponizing-internet  
(Accessed 30 June 2018).
Ross, K., Boyle, K., Carter, C. and Ging, D. 2018. Women, Men and News, Journalism 
Studies , 19:6, 824-845, DOI: 10.1080/1461670X.2016.1222884.
90
RSF. 2018. Online Harassment of Journalists: Attack of the trolls  
https://rsf.org/sites/default/files/rsf_report_on_online_harassment.pdf 
(Accessed 1 August 2018).
Safi, M. 2017. Narendra Modi criticised over Twitter links to abuse of shot 
journalist , The Guardian: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/sep/08/
narendra-modi-criticised-over-twitter-links-to-abuse-of-shot-journalist
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
Seelhoff, C. L. 2007. A chilling effect: The oppression and silencing of women 
journalists and bloggers worldwide . Off Our Backs, 37(1), pp18-21.
Storm, H. & Williams, H. 2012. No Woman's Land: On the Frontlines with Female 
Reporters  London: INSI.
UNESCO. 2018. Journalism, ‘Fake News’ and Disinformation: A handbook for 
journalism education and training.  http://en.unesco.org/fightfakenews
UNESCO. 2012. UN Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of 
Impunity http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/
official_documents/UN-Plan-on-Safety-Journalists_EN_UN-Logo.pdf  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
UNESCO. 2017. Contribution to Report of the Secretary-General on the safety 
of journalists and the issue of impunity: https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/
SafetyOfJournalists/Pages/SafetyOfWomenJournalists.aspx 
UNESCO (Accessed 14 August 2018).
UNESCO. 2018. World Trends in Freedom of Expression and Media Development 
2017/2018 http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002610/261065e.pdf 
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
91
United Nations. 2017a. UN GA Report of the UN Secretary General on the safety 
of journalists and the issue of impunity A/72/290: http://undocs.org/A/72/290 
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
United Nations. 2017b. A/RES/72/175 Resolution on the safety of journalists and 
the issue of impunity:  
http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/72/175  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
UN NEWS. 2018. Women journalists in Afghanistan defiant in the face of violence:  
https://news.un.org/en/story/2018/05/1008802  
(Accessed 14 August 2018).
Vega Montiel, A. 2017. Violence of Gender Against Women Journalists in Mexico  
Conference paper presented at IAMCR, Cartagena.
Woolley, S. & Howard, P. 2017. Computational Propaganda Worldwide: Executive 
Summary , Working Paper No. 2017.11, Oxford University: 
http://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/89/2017/06/Casestudies-
ExecutiveSummary.pdf  (Accessed 30 July 2018)
92
INTRODUCTION 
 In 1992, the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination 
against Women  (CEDAW, United Nations, 1992) adopted General Recommendation 
19 which explains that the prohibition of gender based discrimination includes 
violence. State parties to CEDAW must take all the necessary measures to eliminate 
violence, including legal sanctions, civil remedies, preventative measures, (such as 
public information and education campaigns) and protective measures (such as 
support services for women and girls who have experienced violence). 
 DEVAW, or the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women  
was adopted by a UN General Assembly resolution in 1993 (UN, 1993). While the 
Declaration does not create legally binding obligations for States, it does represent 
a clear consensus that ‘violence against women constitutes a violation of the rights 
and fundamental freedoms of women’. The Declaration explains that violence 
against women is ‘a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between 
men and women, which have led to domination over and discrimination against 
women by men and to the prevention of the full advancement of women.’ The Beijing 
Declaration and Platform for Action , adopted by the Fourth World Conference on 
Women in 1995 (UN, 1995), calls upon governments to take action to address critical 
areas of concern, among them violence against women. It states; ‘violence against 8. Triple Jeopardy: A Trade Union Perspective on 
Gender-Based Violence44 against Women Journalists
Mindy Ran45
44 Transgender persons suffer the highest rate of gender-based violence, and a small percentage of 
men and boys who challenge traditional gender roles are also at risk. However, for the purposes of this 
paper, GBV herein refers specifically to violence against women journalists.
45 Human Rights and Social Justice Journalist and Documentary Maker, International Federation of 
Journalists Gender Council Co-Chair
93
women is an obstacle to the achievement of the objectives of equality, development 
and peace. Violence against women both violates and impairs or nullifies the 
enjoyment by women of their human rights and fundamental freedoms. The long-
standing failure to protect and promote those rights and freedoms in the case of 
violence against women is a matter of concern to all States and should be addressed.’ 
DEFINING VIOLENCE 
 In 2006, the UN stated, “violence against women and girls is one of the most 
systematic and widespread human rights violations. It is rooted in gendered social 
structures rather than individual and random acts; it cuts across age, socio-economic, 
educational and geographic boundaries; affects all societies; and is a major obstacle 
to ending gender inequality and discrimination globally”, (UN General Assembly, 
2006). It defines violence against women as “any act of gender-based violence that 
results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering 
to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of 
liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life”. Women journalists face triple 
jeopardy: at risk as every other woman; the same risks as our male colleagues; and 
those risks that impact us specifically because we are women journalists, such as 
femicide and sexualized violence. 
 Direct forms of violence include: murder, femicide, sexual violence, death and 
familial threats, imprisonment, abuse of sedition and libel laws, bullying, harassment, 
sexual harassment, domestic partner violence, and online bullying/abuse. Indirect 
forms of violence include: being forced into insecure and temporary work, overt 
and systemic discrimination such as unequal pay for equal work, lack of access to 
training, jobs and promotion, and use of ‘gagging clauses’ or forced mediation. At 
the base, the root and cause of violence against women is inequality.
 Fear of loss of their work, loss of standing in the community or on the job, shame, 
stigma, further abuse and escalating violence, including online, have kept many 
women silent. These fears have a solid and enduring base in impunity; according 
94
to the Dart Center (2017), the impact of harassment is usually avoidance, denial or 
leaving the profession. It rarely ends with confrontation of the abuser. 
EVIDENCE 
INTERNATIONAL FEDARATOIN OF JOURNALISTS’ SURVEY 
 A survey by the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ, 2017) showed 
that “almost one in two women journalists have suffered sexual harassment, 
psychological abuse, online trolling and others forms of gender-based violence 
while working”.
 Almost 400 women journalists, across 50 different countries, were surveyed 
with 66% of those that had experienced some form of gender-based violence 
(GBV) acknowledging they had made no formal complaint. Of those that did, 85% 
responded that ‘no or inadequate action has been taken against perpetrators’, and 
that most workplaces (74%) have no reporting or support mechanisms.
 Since the IFJ has been recording killed female journalists, there have been around 
8 deaths reported per year but the true number could be higher as many deaths go 
unreported.For example, in 2015, the Communication and Information on Women 
Organisation, (CIMAC) in Mexico documented 184 cases of violence against women 
journalists since 2002, including 11 deaths - with a sharp increase in reported cases 
of violence since 2010.
 The IFJ Byte Back Campaign  (IFJ, 2017) highlights that the ‘virtual world mirrors 
the ‘real’ world, where women journalists are harassed, excluded and subjected 
to abuse for their work.’ The campaign calls on the public to expose trolling and 
harassment as a critical press freedom violation. Recent reports, including the IFJ 
survey, have cited this form of gender-based violence as the fastest growing.
 The #MeToo Movement has gone a long way to highlight the levels of impunity 
95
in terms of sexual harassment and the women willing to come forward face scrutiny 
and often further harassment and threats of violence. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS SHOULD:
• Through the UN, convene a multi-stakeholder, expert panel to develop an over-
riding strategy to tackle the many levels of gender-based violence and include 
representatives from: unions, states, civil society, academia and NGOs.
• Through the UN, exert more pressure on States that have not yet fully implemented 
already ratified agreements addressing gender-based violence, including CEDAW 
and UN Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security.
• Support the ILO Convention against violence in the world of work and pressure 
State actors to ensure other ILO Conventions are fully implemented.
TRADE UNIONS SHOULD: 
Put pressure on and convince their governments that they have a responsibility 
under international human rights law to: 
• Take action to address the causes of domestic abuse and to improve the services 
on offer to the victims.
• Prevent, investigate and punish acts of all forms of violence against women whether 
in the home, workplace, the community or society, in custody or in situations of 
armed conflict.
• Take all measures to empower women.
96
• Condemn violence against women and not invoke customs, traditions or practices in the 
name of religion or culture to avoid their obligations to eliminate violence against women.
• Develop and/or utilize legislative, educational, social and other measures aimed at 
the prevention of violence against women.
• Introduce or strengthen laws to give adequate protection and redress to victims of 
domestic abuse.46
JOURNALISTS’ TRADE UNIONS SHOULD:
• Keep better track of attacks, cases of bullying and harassment and murders of 
journalists, both locally and natoinally.
• Encourage ethical journalist initiatives agreed in collective bargaining as these 
provide a better balance, not only in reporting content, but also in who is labelled 
as experts and who is writing the news.
• Develop guidelines for coping with bullying and harassment (one example is the 
bullying and harassment for freelancers, from the entertainment unions in the 
UK47) and other model agreements, like the Dignity at Work, help to ensure a 
safer work environment and may help to convince employers that bullying and 
harassment may cost too much in terms of lost work hours to sick days.
• Investigate any suspected cases of workplace gender pay gaps to ensure equity of pay.
• Challenge and remove forced arbitration and other forms of gagging clauses that 
silence survivors, or worse protect the business and perpetrators. Instead, shift 
46 All recommendations under thes sub-heading Journalits’ Trade Unions come from 
https://www.ituc-csi.org/trade-unions-say-no-to-violence 
47 https://www.nuj.org.uk/documents/bullying-and-harassment-guidelines-for-freelances/ 
97
the focus towards support and protection of survivors.
EMPLOYERS SHOULD: 
• Give a renewed emphasis to combatting sexual harassment at work and to 
implementing workplace guidelines to prevent it.
• Research and monitor workplace policies, including documenting good practice 
agreements and policies in the workplace.
• Provide training programmes on bullying and harassment to ensure that there is a 
gender-dimension that addresses the causes and impacts of sexual harassment at work.
• Indentify sexual harassment as a core workplace health and safety riskthrough 
training programmes that includes specialised training for workplace 
representatives on how to prevent and tackle sexual harassment at work.48 
• Evaluate the risk of violence and ensure constant monitoring to determine potential  
 sources of violence and verify the enterprise’s state of readiness to react to it.
• Implement effective programmes to prevent violence in the workplace, be it verbal, 
physical, psychological or sexual, establishing a system where incidents of violence 
can be reported in confidence and appropriate disciplinary measures applied.
• Provide workers with training on the key elements of an anti-violence programme.
• Ensure that the workplace has a sexual harassment policy that takes into account 
the diversity of women workers.
48 Recommendations under the sub-heading of Employers have come from the ETUC: 
https://www.etuc.org/en/document/safe-home-safe-work-final-report-national-country-studies  
and ITUC: https://www.ituc-csi.org/trade-unions-say-no-to-violence
98
• Protect women journalists working in conflict areas, including local, freelance 
reporters and media workers.
• Teach self-help protection and awareness of the impact of trauma, while acknowledging 
that not all of those who experience violence and abuse are traumatized.
• R that the impact of abuse and violence will be different for each individual and 
educate journalists to raise awareness on impact of trauma.
RESOURCES AND GOOD PRACTICE 
• Canadian Labour Congress “Can Work Be Safe, When Home Isn’t?”, A guide on why 
intimate partner violence is a work and union issue and how to provide support 
mechanisms. http://canadianlabour.ca/issues-research/domestic-violence-work  
• Dart Center: Let's Talk: Personal Boundaries, Safety & Women in Journalism
 Tip Sheet: Maintaining Boundaries with Sources, Colleagues & Supervisors
 This tip sheet offers strategies for how to recognise, mitigate or address sexual 
harassment and other predatory behavior encountered while reporting. 
 https://dartcenter.org/resources/lets-talk-personal-boundaries-safety-women-
journalism?section=2  
• ETUC Safe at Work, Safe at Home, Country Reports A guide to useful tools 
collected across the EU, including clear guidelines used for workplace prevention, 
how allegations will be investigated and addressed, equality training, and 
recommendations from unions. https://www.etuc.org/documents/safe-home-
safe-work-final-report#.WpK8xIJG3KJ 
• EIGE Cyber violence against women and girls. http://eige.europa.eu/rdc/eige-
publications/cyber-violence-against-women-and-girls
• EIGE Gender Equality Index, EIGE has developed a way to measure GBV as part 
99
of its Gender Equality Index. The new measurement framework measures forms 
of violence from harassment to death (femicide). http://eige.europa.eu/gender-
equality-index/2015/domain/violence/BE
• IFJ Byte back Campaign provides a wide range of material on raising awareness 
of online harassment of women journalists and advocating with media houses 
to take actions to combat online abuse. http://www.ifj.org/regions/asia-pacific/
gender/ifj-byteback-campaign/  
• ITUC Stopping Sexual harassment at work ‘This brochure provides tools and guidelines 
to strengthen and reinforce trade union policies and actions to STOP Violence Against 
Women…Violence against women must be wiped out in our homes, societies and the 
workplace if women are to have equal opportunities to access Decent Work and a 
Decent Life.’ https://www.ituc-csi.org/stopping-sexual-harassment-at-work
• ITUC Trade Unions say NO to Violence. https://www.ituc-csi.org/trade-unions-say-
no-to-violence  
• ILO Conventions: http://www.ilo.org/ilolex/english/convdisp1.htm  
• ITUC/UN “Protect, Respect, Remedy”: Briefing Note for Trade Unionists Framework for 
Business and Human Rights and the United Nations Guiding Principles for Business 
and Human Rights. https://www.ituc-csi.org/the-united-nations-protect-respect
• National Union of Journalists (NUJ), UK and Ireland, guide to dealing with Bullying 
and Harassment in the Workplace. 
 https://www.nuj.org.uk/rights/health-and-safety/bullying-and-harassment/
REFERENCES 
Canadian Labour Congress. 2017. ‘Can Work Be Safe, When Home Isn’t’ , http://
canadianlabour.ca/issues-research/domestic-violence-work  (Accessed 13 June 2018). 
100
Communication and Information on Women (CIMAC). 2015. Organisation Report.  
Dart Center. 2017. Journalists and Harassment , https://dartcenter.org/content/
journalists-and-harassment  (Accessed 13 June 2018).
IFJ. 2017. IFJ survey: One in two women journalists suffer gender-based 
violence at work  http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-single-view/backpid/1/article/ifj-
survey-one-in-two-women-journalists-suffer-gender-based-violence-at-work/  
(Accessed 23 June 2018).
Macharia, S. 2015. Who makes the news? Global Media Monitoring Project 2015 . 
World Association of Christian Communication (WACC). http://cdn.agilitycms.com/
who-makes-thenews/Imported/reports_2015/global/gmmp_global_report_en.pdf  
(Accessed 13 June 2018).
Ran, M. (in Equal Times). 2018. The triple threat of violence facing female 
journalists , https://www.equaltimes.org/the-triple-threat-of-violence#.
W08YkH59jKI  (Accessed 13 June 2018).
UN General Assembly. 2006. Discrimination against Women , 
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/documents/ga61.htm  (Accessed 5 June 2018).
UN, 1992. Convention on the Elimination on all forms of Discrimination against 
Women , retrieved from: www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/cedaw27/tun3-4.pdf  
(Accessed 13 June 2018).
UN, 1993. General Assembly Resolution 48: DEVAW 
www.un.org/documents/ga/res/48/a48r104.htm  (Accessed 1 June 2018).
UN, 1995. Beijing Platform for Action www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/pdf/
BDPfA%20E.pdf  (Accessed 13 June 2018).
101
102SECTION III. 
Digital Media Sphere
9. A Feminist Perspective on Gender, 
Media and Communication Rights in Digital Times
Anita Gurumurthy, Amrita Vasudevan and Nandini Chami 49
INTRODUCTION 
 In 2005, the UN convened the second phase of the World Summit on the 
Information Society (WSIS). The resulting WSIS Tunis commitment acknowledged 
that ‘the full participation of women in the Information Society is necessary to ensure 
the inclusiveness and respect for human rights within the Information Society, 
(encouraging) all stakeholders to support women’s participation in decision-making 
processes and to contribute to shaping all spheres of the Information Society at 
international, regional and national levels.’50
 The digital metamorphosis of society was acknowledged in the 2015 Review of 
the Beijing Platform for Action. Para 311 recognizes that ‘media and information 
and communication technologies are fundamental to women’s and girls’ full and 
effective participation in civil, political, economic and social and cultural life.’51 A 
similar sentiment was expressed by Para 32 of the WSIS plus 10 Review, also in 
2015: ‘we recognize that ending the gender digital divide and achievement of SDG 5 
on gender are mutually reinforcing efforts.’52
49 IT for Change, India 
50 http://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/7.html
51 http://www.undocs.org/en/E/CN.6/2015/3  
52 WSIS Outcomes, General Assembly Review Outcome Document 2015, 
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN95707.pdf
103
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) have become an essential 
ingredient of a range of feminist action to advance gender justice.53 Women’s equal 
participation in all domains of life depends on their communication rights, including 
their right to access and use digital technologies.54 This position paper takes stock of 
the constituent processes and structures of the Information Society, looking at how 
digital media promotes or hinders women’s human rights.
THE PUBLIC SPHERE IN DIGITAL TIMES - IMPLICATIONS 
FOR MEDIA PLURALITY, REPRESENTATION 
AND PARTICIPATION 
NETWORK EFFECT AND ENTRENCHMENT OF MEDIA MONOPOLIES 
 In many countries, the Internet is slowly becoming the primary source through 
which news is accessed.55 In the initial years, the Internet’s potential for democratising 
content brought the hope that anyone could be a creator and publisher. However, 
the evolution of the information society has seen a disruption in the news landscape 
that, on the contrary, reflects a centralisation of content, with few digital corporations 
defining what gets consumed.56 Problematic features of old media structures, like 
media consolidation, have transposed onto new media as well. 
53 For example, 99% sexual rights activists (respondents) in the ‘Survey on Sexual Activism, Morality 
and the Internet’ believed that the Internet was useful for their work in advancing sexual rights 
including for public action and support and to network in safe conditions. 
http://www.genderit.org/articles/survey-sexual-activism-morality-and-internet
54 http://cdn.agilitycms.com/centre-for-communication-rights/Images/Articles/pdf/apc-charter-engish.
pdf. Also, see http://www.firstmonday.org/article/view/1102/1022
55 From 2014 to 2015, the share of print circulation of newspapers shrank 13 percent in Brazil.
https://knightcenter.utexas.edu/blog/00-17765-brazilian-newspapers-have-broken-audience-records-
and-digital-subscriptions-have-incre
56 Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism’s Digital News Report, 2017 shows that more than half 
of 70,000 online news consumers across 36 countries cited social media as a source of news, 
http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/
104
 Building on network effects, the digital behemoths consolidated their market 
share by transforming and acquiring entire sectors.57 As a result, an unprecedented 
vertical integration and monopolistic concentration of power is evidenced across 
sectors, from banking, automobiles to agriculture and news.58 Even though 
possibilities for citizen/community journalism abound, the political economy 
question of whose news is being consumed and shared, still remains relevant in the 
digital age. 
NEO-LIBERAL LOGIC, THE ALGORITHMIC TURN 
AND ENGINEERING OF NEWS
 Another change is the ubiquitous use of algorithms for the processing of 
troves of user data collected by digital corporations. Websites are forced to rely on 
advertising revenues, and so survive on algorithmic/ automated manipulations of 
data and traffic.59 The motivation is to create content or position news stories, as 
far as possible, in a way that is likely to garner traffic and hence, higher revenues. 
While sensationalism is no way an alien concept to media, digital media takes it to 
new heights. This influences how news travels or gets reconfigured, re-assembled, 
buried or amplified. For the majority of women in the global South, the ability to 
express, and the hope of being heard, are dictated by these configurations.
 The neo-liberal logic of online platform companies also implies a perverse 
confluence of interests that allows regressive gender and other ideologies to be 
perpetuated. In an investigation into the source of revenue of extremist websites, 
ProPublica found that a key source of income for many was facilitated through 
commission of ads from digital corporations like Amazon and Newsmax. These 
companies deflect responsibility by taking a laissez-faire approach to political 
57 https://hbr.org/2017/09/managing-our-hub-economy
58 https://www.cjr.org/analysis/facebook_and_media.php
59 http://searchengineland.com/time-for-google-to-rank-paid-news-content-better-220918
105
expression and claiming that the algorithms they employ, and not human 
intervention, are behind such actions.60 
PANSPECTRON61 FOR THE BUSINESS OF BIG DATA  
 The freebie model of the Internet is sustained by exploitative data collection 
practices.62 By monitoring user activity online and analysing their data trails, digital 
corporations violate people’s right to personal autonomy and bodily integrity. For 
instance, through algorithmic analysis, Facebook can ascertain to a great degree 
of accuracy users’ gender, race and sexuality.63 These companies are then able to 
quantify lives and monetise identity by deploying micro-targeted advertisements.64 
For women who wish to conceal their gender online or for sexual minorities who 
are persecuted in the country in which they reside, the lack of anonymity can leave 
them vulnerable. Despite the obvious privacy violation, weak data protection laws 
ensure impunity for violators.65 
 The premium on ‘data driven decision-making’ has led to the mushrooming 
of data brokers and analysts. In 2016, the estimated value of the EU data market 
was EUR 60 billion.66 Key international development actors are increasingly putting 
their weight behind data analytics – such as cases of tackling the Ebola crisis or the 
60 https://www.propublica.org/article/leading-tech-companies-help-extremist-sites-monetize-hate
61 The panspectron is a concept that is used to explain the disciplining effect of digital surveillance. It 
refers to a situation where data is being collected about all individuals at all times and then selectively 
recombined or analysed, as needed, to fulfill a set of surveillance requirements. This marks a shift 
from pre-digital surveillance societies which placed select individuals (identified as ‘deviant’ or ‘high 
risk’) in institutions where they visibly felt the disciplining gaze/ ‘eye of the state’ – the panopticon.
62 https://www.opendemocracy.net/hri/anita-gurumurthy-nandini-chami/concretising-right-to-privacy-
in-digital-times-reading-of-indias-supr
63 https://www.apc.org/sites/default/files/BigDataSexualSurveillance_0_0.pdf
64 A report by The Austrian revealed that Facebook shared its ability to predict when young users felt 
“insecure”, “worthless” and “need(ed) a confidence boost”, using its vast data with advertisers, 
http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/digital/facebook-targets-insecure-young-people-to-
sell-ads/news-story/a89949ad016eee7d7a61c3c30c909fa6
106
Nepal Earthquake. However, ‘hacking for development’ promotes a depoliticised 
solutionism, supplanting and erasing the voices and contexts of subaltern women 
in the name of scientific problem-solving.67 
AGGREGATOR MODEL, DEATH OF PLURALISM 
AND THE BIRTH OF FAKE NEWS 
 Just as they do with targeted advertisements, digital corporations use algorithms 
to push hyper-personalised news results to users. Working under the diktat of the 
attention economy, social media companies employ aggregators to rank news 
and publicise trending topics.68 Even dedicated media outlets are embracing the 
aggregator model.69 
 This paradigm of news dissemination has pushed the kill switch on media 
pluralism. News about socially under-represented groups is unlikely to trend.70 News 
that reflect the realities of marginalised women will hardly ever go viral and become 
mainstream. It is no wonder then that the ASL Ice Bucket Challenge featured more 
prominently than the Ferguson protests, a clear reflection of the skew in Facebook’s 
algorithm ranking system for trending topics.71 
65 An advertising company in America is using this technology to target anti-abortion ads at pregnant 
women, on behalf of pro-life organizations https://rewire.news/article/2016/05/25/anti-choice-groups-
deploy-smartphone-surveillance-target-abortion-minded-women-clinic-visits/
66 https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/will-big-data-transform-development_
us_5947bdd5e4b0d188d0280019
67 http://www.genderit.org/articles/data-new-four-letter-word-feminism
68 http://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/news/editors-vs-algorithms-who-do-you-want-choosing-
your-news
69 https://www.cjr.org/analysis/facebook_and_media.php
70 https://arxiv.org/pdf/1704.00139.pdf
71 https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2014/09/02/facebook-twitter-ferguson-icebuc -
ketchallenge/14818505/
107
 Algorithmic ascription of ‘the sensational’ has also led to the erosion of editorial 
standards and fact checking. This has consequently generated a fecund environment 
for the creation of fraudulent news.72 It is however, the anatomy of social media and 
the preference of the mobile phone as the point of access that has facilitated the 
proliferation of disinformation, posing as news. Affordances of social media such as 
low barriers of entry (negligible fixed costs), the ability to reach a wide audience and 
the fleeting nature of news in these times means that anybody can set up a news site 
without going through the pains of establishing reputational history. Further, since 
social media is designed to provide only short bursts of information (conducive to 
the small screen of a mobile) spotting a hoax story is even more difficult.73
 The method employed - of mining user data to build profiles based on search 
history to recommend news stories - has resulted in the creation of filter bubbles 
in which we only get to see more of the same viewpoint.74 Filter bubbles contribute 
to the perpetuation of fraudulent news, as one is less likely to come across diverse, 
or perhaps, even contradictory news stories.75 With algorithms being contained in 
virtual black boxes, we have no way of knowing why we are reading what we are 
reading.76 
 The Cambridge Analytica case also showed us how using psychometric profiling 
of users’ preferences can be mined and then gamed to push certain viewpoints. 
Feminist publishers have found it hard to keep pace with these Big Data games, 
unable to muster the resources it takes to stay in public memory, or counter the 
retrograde propaganda that is sponsored by the big players.77 
72 http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/08/28/who-owns-the-internet
73 https://web.stanford.edu/~gentzkow/research/fakenews.pdf
74 https://medium.com/i-data/israel-gaza-war-data-a54969aeb23e , Studies have shown how Facebook 
and Twitter tend to be more partisan than on the open web - https://cyber.harvard.edu/publica -
tions/2017/08/mediacloud
75 https://web.stanford.edu/~gentzkow/research/fakenews.pdf
76 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/04/google-democracy-truth-inter -
net-search-facebook
77 Interview with Nisha Susan founder of The Ladies Finger, a feminist news site in India.
108
 Even a celebrated case, such as #MeToo, took its Hollywood origins and the 
staying power of the New York Times  to build momentum, and yet, in many parts of 
the world, it met with limited or little success in mobilising ordinary women78. Under 
the circumstances, creating and disseminating progressive perspectives on gender 
equality and building the foundation for informed debates on deep structures and 
cultures of gender seems to be an uphill task. 
ORGANIZED TROLL INDUSTRY AND SYSTEMIC GAMING 
 Far right groups online, who also happen to enjoy political patronage, have the 
deep pockets and the wherewithal to make fraudulent news a veritable industry 
that can shape public opinion.79 Working as a well-oiled machine, these groups send 
out “thousands of links to other sites and together this has created a vast satellite 
system of right-wing news and propaganda that has completely surrounded the 
mainstream media system”.80 In many places, social media platforms, messaging 
apps like Whatsapp and an online troll army have been used by pro-establishment 
groups to spread doctored communal videos and incitement against minorities.81 
Research shows that governments also seek to leverage social media’s propensity 
for virality to push templated messages to counter negative coverage of policies.82 
78 https://metoorising.withgoogle.com/
79 http://www.niemanlab.org/2017/06/want-a-news-style-soft-article-thatll-be-15-or-splurge-and-
discredit-a-journalist-for-55000/,  http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/8005/6516#p4
80 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/04/google-democracy-truth-inter -
net-search-facebook
81 See for example, UNESCO (2015) Countering Online Hate Speech https://unesdoc.unesco.org/
ark:/48223/pf0000233231; UNESCO (2017) An attack on one is an attack on all. Successful initiatives 
to protect journalists and combat impunity - chapter "Fighting back against prolific online harassment: 
Maria Ressa" https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000259399; UNESCO (2018) Journalism, Fake 
News and Disinformation - a handbook for journalism education and training https://en.unesco.org/
fightfakenews; http://www.firstpost.com/india/how-alt-news-is-trying-to-take-on-the-fake-news-ecosys -
tem-in-india-3513879.html
82 https://itforchange.net/sites/default/files/1246/Voice_or_Chatter-%20Making%20ICTS%20work%20
for%20transformative%20engagement_Aug%202017_%20DRAFT_0.pdf
109
PLATFORM LOGIC, NON-LIABILITY AND REGULATORY DEFICIT  
 “Platforms”, the nomenclature preferred by digital companies, is a misnomer. 
It allows powerful digital corporations to make the argument that they are passive 
intermediaries. The reality is that social media and digital companies are publishers 
who exercise editorial discretion in ways such as ‘offering incentives to news 
organizations for particular types of content, such as live video, or by dictating 
publisher activity through design standards.’83 For example, social media’s design 
for maximising virality works as a disincentive for the creation of detailed pieces 
that engage deeply with an issue. If an article on the inhumane working conditions 
of women employed in garment factories in the global South exceeds the 280 
character limit of Twitter, it could end up as ‘tl;dr’ (short for ‘too long, didn’t read’).84 
 Decisions taken by platforms end up hurting women’s online freedoms of 
association, expression and access to information. Facebook, for example, pulled 
down the page of an organization that provided information on how abortion pills 
can be accessed in countries where such access is restricted, on the premise that 
the page promoted drug use. This was in spite of evidence that the information 
followed the protocols of the World Health Organization.85 
 Yet, social media giants insist that they are a mere conduit - a platform where 
third party content is hosted and consumed; and since they are not content 
producers, they should be immune from regulation of the kind of news circulating 
on their services. What this ideology of exceptionalism translates into is a 
reproduction of social prejudice, sexism and misogyny through actions of omission 
and commission by platform companies. On the one hand, search results throw up 
predominately affirmative responses to ‘are women evil?’ where blame is attributed 
83 https://www.cjr.org/tow_center_reports/platform-press-how-silicon-valley-reengineered-journalism.
php#executive-summary
84 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Too_long;_didn%27t_read
85 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/may/11/facebook-women-on-web-censored-
abortion-pills
110
to the algorithm;86 on the other, pictures of breast feeding mothers are removed in 
an ad hoc manner, in the name of community standards.87 
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE ONLINE  
PERVASIVE NATURE OF ONLINE VIOLENCE 
 For many women, the Internet represents a public, open space into which 
they can escape, where they can exist beyond persecution and in which they feel 
empowered to express and build friendships. The emancipatory gains that the 
Internet provides are, however, severely curtailed by acts of gender-based violence 
perpetrated online. World over, women’s participation online has been stymied by 
norms that allow cultures of gendered violence to perpetuate offline and online. 
A report by the UN Broadband Commission for Digital Development stated that a 
staggering 73% of women across the world have already faced cyber violence.88 
POOR TRACK RECORD OF DIGITAL COMPANIES IN TACKLING ONLINE GENDER 
BASED VIOLENCE, OPAQUE POLICIES AND IMMUNITY FROM THE LAW
 Social media is a site of pervasive gender-based violence.89 Digital corporations, 
86 https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/04/google-democracy-truth-inter -
net-search-facebook
87 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-health/11195373/Facebook-removes-mothers-breast -
feeding-photo.html
88 http://www.unwomen.org/~/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2015/
cyber_violence_gender%20report.pdf?v=1&d=20150924T154259
89 Findings from a survey conducted by the European Agency for Fundamental Rights on Violence 
Against Women in EU with 42000 female residents aged 18-74 years, show that one in 10 women had 
experienced inappropriate advances on social websites or subjected to sexually explicit emails or text 
(SMS) messages, https://globalvoices.org/2014/03/10/european-union-publishes-comprehensive-sur -
vey-of-violence-against-women/ . A nine country study across developing countries across Asia, Africa 
and Latin America revealed that 13% of the women respondents who used social media expressed 
that they had suffered abuse through e-mails or social media. Due to the high possibility of underre -
porting by women in those countries, the report cautions that the percentage could be much higher, 
http://webfoundation.org/docs/2015/10/womens-rights-online21102015.pdf
111
however, have been slow to react to gender-based violence perpetrated through 
their services. They have also been poor arbitrators for women, especially from 
the global South, seeking redress from gendered violence encountered on their 
services. Three leading tech companies (Facebook, Twitter and YouTube), tested 
by Take Back the Tech for their response to gender-based violence, performed 
dismally.90 
 The terms of use and opaque internal policies of these corporations betray 
inauthentic attempts at gender justice. Leaked Facebook internal guidelines for 
taking down of violent content revealed that the company had bench-marked for 
take-down a very white male experience of violence, ignoring the complex nature 
of online violence and hate speech that women face.91 Research by ProPublica also 
shows that Facebook’s ‘hate-speech rules tend to favour elites and governments 
over grassroots activists and racial minorities’.92 Internal rules that guide the teams 
of human censors employed by social media corporations remain a mystery.
  The task of adjudicating violations necessitates adequate knowledge of 
the context, and the sensitivity to trace the power relations operating within 
that particular context. Algorithmic decisions tend to be by template and hence 
unresponsive to the particular manifestations of discrimination arising from the 
highly contextual intersections of gender, race, caste and/or other locations. 
 The Cambridge Analytica episode has drawn attention to the place of ethical 
codes and self-regulation within social media corporations. However, as Article 
19 argues, without appropriate institutional frameworks and mechanisms that 
can access the logic of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and examine its validity and 
90 http://www.wunrn.org/news/2014/09_14/09_08/090814_take.htm
91 https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/may/21/revealed-facebook-internal-rulebook-sex-
terrorism-violence , http://theladiesfinger.com/facebook-hate-speech/
92 https://www.propublica.org/article/facebook-hate-speech-censorship-internal-documents-
algorithms
112
appropriateness vis-a-vis human rights, corporate self-regulation is, in and of itself, 
unlikely to be adequate93. Therefore, stakeholders need to be able to hold Internet 
intermediaries accountable, and to do so within reasonable exceptions that do not 
infringe on fundamental freedoms.
TRANSFER OF DATA FROM THE SOUTH TO THE NORTH 
 The flow of personal data of citizens from the global South into the hands of states 
and corporations situated in the global North has raised critical questions about 
control over individual citizens and communities.94 In the name of development, 
women’s bodies become sites for experimentation with big-money being pumped 
into various experiments in the ‘developing world’. For example, organizations like 
ARROW have documented the rise of apps that monitor menstruation and fertility 
with little regard for women’s privacy and how this sensitive data may be used.95 
THE CHILLING EFFECT OF SURVEILLANCE 
 Free speech and access to information, the cornerstones of a robust democracy, 
are reduced to a farce in the surveillance regime. The chilling effect of surveillance 
on speech is well-documented.96 For gender minorities, who are already 
disproportionately subject to online violence, the added threat of surveillance 
is a double whammy. Studies have also shown that people who live in fear of 
being watched will avoid looking for ‘controversial’ information that might draw 
93 https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2018-04/Privacy%20and%20Freedom%20of%20
Expression%20%20In%20the%20Age%20of%20Artificial%20Intelligence.pdf
94 https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2820580
95 http://arrow.org.my/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/AFC22.1-2016.pdf
96 In a poll that queried people whether they feel the Internet is a safe place to express their 
opinions- one in three people (36%) across the 17 countries polled said that they did not feel free 
from government surveillance and monitoring, http://www.globescan.com/images/images/pressre -
leases/2014-BBC-Freedom/BBC_GlobeScan_Freedom_Release_Final_March25.pdf
97 https://theintercept.com/2016/04/28/new-study-shows-mass-surveillance-breeds-meekness-fear-
and-self-censorship/
113
suspicion.97 There have also been instances of governments tapping into electronic 
communication of individuals to apprehend the work of Sexual and Reproductive 
Health and Rights (SRHR) and other gender rights activists.98 In a surveillance regime, 
it is then entirely plausible that fear of being ‘found out’ might prevent women and 
gender and sexual minorities from seeking out crucial SRHR material.99 
DIGITAL REGIMES OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
AND THE ENCLOSURE OF KNOWLEDGE 
COPYRIGHT MAXIMALISM THROUGH DRMS AND TPMS 
 Access to knowledge is curbed by unfair trade and intellectual property regimes 
that apply proprietary frameworks to information resources, from which women 
have been traditionally excluded. Women’s rights scholars have critiqued this 
possessive individualism underpinning copyright law, highlighting how it excludes 
ideas of shared and public ownership.100 
 The way copyright law is presently formulated perpetuates the ownership of 
creative resources by men, sustaining unequal economic relations between men 
and women. For example, copyright’s impact in terms of depleting resources of 
public libraries directly impacts women who depend on public libraries to access 
information.101
 Although the Internet is a potent force for the dissemination of information at 
negligible costs for reproduction, the neo-liberalisation of the information society 
has seen large scale control by corporations of information and knowledge. Digital 
98 https://www.apc.org/sites/default/files/FeministActionFrameworkOnDevelopmentAndDigitalTechno -
logies.pdf
99 https://www.apc.org/sites/default/files/FeministActionFrameworkOnDevelopmentAndDigitalTechno -
logies.pdf
100 http://journals.kent.ac.uk/index.php/feministsatlaw/article/view/7/54#txt2
101 http://digitalcommons.wcl.american.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1267&context=jgspl
114
rights management (DRM) and technology protection measures (TPM) are used 
to lock up copyrighted content on the Internet. These measures have become 
commonplace in copyright law post the two WIPO Internet treaties,102 and assume 
a maximalist stance that fails to recognize the need for differential access. The 
divisions in access to knowledge are not just between the North and South,103 but 
also gendered. Unequal earning capacity and lack of control over financial resources 
prevents most women from being able to access copyrighted works.104 DRMs and 
TPMs erect barriers that copyright laws explicitly allow.105 
EQUITABLE ACCESS 
TO DIGITAL COMMUNICATION ARCHITECTURE 
A PERSISTENT GENDER GAP IN ACCESS 
  Globally, 250 million fewer women than men are connected to the Internet.106 
While the gender digital divide is true across all the regions of the world, in Africa, 
the gender gap is widening.107 
 The persistence of the gender digital divide requires us to rethink connectivity 
policies that rely on the free market to reach connectivity to the last person.108 
Over-reliance on private actors can create distortions, such as when users think 
the Internet is just Facebook.109 Further, for women, who on average earn 25% less 
102 WIPO Internet Treaties are World Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty, and World 
Intellectual Property Organization Performances and Phonograms Treaty. Despite not ratifying either 
of these, sue to international pressure, India has amended its copyright law to include provisions that 
penalize the circumvention of DRMs.
103 http://wiredspace.wits.ac.za/jspui/bitstream/10539/19801/1/SAJIC-Issue-7-2006-Liang-Prabhala.pdf
104 http://tigerprints.clemson.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1069&context=cheer
105 http://lexpress.in/law-development/digital-rights-management-provisions-and-indian-copyright-law
106 https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G17/111/81/PDF/G1711181.pdf?OpenElement
107 http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2017.pdf
108 https://www.adb.org/publications/public-internet-rural-development-ict
109 https://webfoundation.org/2015/10/india-womens-rights-online/
110 http://www.a4ai.org/affordability-report/report/2015/
115
than men, the cost of connecting to the Internet in the laissez faire economy is often 
simply beyond their means.110 
 MULTIPLE BARRIERS TO ACCESS AND USE  
 Gender-blind connectivity policies are woefully unaware of social, cultural, 
political and economic impediments that dictate women’s use of technology. Cyber-
based gendered violence, lack of textual literacy, social monitoring of access and use 
of technology, the wage gap, dearth of relevant content in local languages, gendered 
division of labour and time burdens, all pose barriers to women’s meaningful use of 
technology. A study on connectivity among urban poor in nine developing countries 
by Women’s Rights Online Network shows that because of a combination of these 
barriers, women were 50% less likely to use the Internet as compared to men111. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
GLOBAL ORGANISATIONS SHOULD:
• Through the UN Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), take forward its work 
on shaping the digital agenda for women’s empowerment and gender equality, 
building on the progress made at its 55th and 57th Session. In its 55th Session, the 
CSW had highlighted the need for gender responsive design of technological 
innovations to ensure that they address women’s needs and priorities and expand 
women’s access to information sources and learning opportunities through online 
spaces.112 In its 57th Session, the CSW had called attention to the proliferation of 
violence against women and girls, and privacy violations online113. 
111 http://webfoundation.org/docs/2015/10/womens-rights-online21102015.pdf
112 https://www.itu.int/en/action/gender-equality/Documents/GlobalPlatformReferences.pdf
113 ibid
116
• Emphasise through the CSW, the significance of a rights-based approach to access, 
underscoring that women’s access to the Internet, first and foremost, needs to be 
unfettered and unconditional.
• Ensure that the Agenda 2030 review processes address the interconnectedness of 
Goals 16, 5b and 9c.
• Encourages a strong role for standards setting on anti-discrimination in outcomes 
of AI systems in media at the global level through a democratic and inclusive 
process; and proactive interventions from the Committee on the Elimination of all 
forms of Discrimination Against Women to tackle gender-based violence online.
GOVERNMENTS SHOULD:
• Through the Financing for Development Addis Ababa Action Agenda (2015), resolve 
“to undertake legislation and administrative reforms to give women equal rights 
with men to economic resources, including access to ownership and control over… 
appropriate new technology”. This commitment should serve as a key basis for 
policies and programmes to support women’s empowering use of digital media, 
backed by dedicated budget lines.
• Review, update and upgrade laws in order to keep pace with the changing 
landscape, addressing platform monopolies and their accountability. A legal 
framework defining the scope of intervention for Internet intermediaries in 
addressing online violence must be devised. This must be backed by due 
institutional process and judicial oversight, so that women users dissatisfied with 
the complaints mechanisms of social media have alternative recourse.114 
114 States have attempted walk this legal tightrope, an example of the same is New Zealand’s Harmful 
Digital Communication Act 2015 
https://www.itforchange.net/index.php/rethinking-legal-institutional-responses-to-e-vaw
117
• Hold companies to account who have have shifted to using Artificial Intelligence 
to enforce their terms of service. Even when they do declare that they abide by 
technical and ethical standards, these are usually inscrutable and, therefore, 
there is no way to hold them accountable. Enforceability remains a problem with 
such self-regulatory standards.115 Therefore, institutional safeguards that include 
frameworks for algorithmic transparency, that incorporate methods such as third 
party audits, are necessary. Algorithm audits provided by the EU General Data 
Protection Regulation suggest useful pointers in this regard.116
• Ensure online public-interest content produced by women’s groups is promoted 
through appropriate policies for subsidised broadband connectivity, local language 
content creation and so on.
• Provide institutional and policy measures that promote safe and enabling online 
spaces for women. This includes building a legal response – updating existing laws 
or introducing digitally specific ones – to technology-mediated violence against 
women that recognizes women’s agency, and adopts a ‘dignity and equality’ 
approach against a moralistic framing of the issue.117 
• In keeping with their extra-territorial obligations, countries where digital 
corporations are headquartered must co-operate with those in which platforms 
have not acted against violations of women’s human rights to hold platforms 
accountable.
• Ensure administrative, juidicial and parliamentary oversight of patriarchal 
surveillance with the male elite of local communities that seeks to discipline 
115 https://privacyinternational.org/sites/default/files/2018-04/Privacy%20and%20Freedom%20of%20
Expression%20%20In%20the%20Age%20of%20Artificial%20Intelligence.pdf
116 http://www.mlandthelaw.org/papers/goodman1.pdf
117 https://www.itforchange.net/rethinking-legal-institutional-responses-to-e-vaw
118
women in the emerging social, political and economic spheres. Women and girls 
must have access to information about their rights and avenues for remedy if 
victimized by such surveillance. 
• Incorporate expansive exemptions of national copyright law especially for 
educational material for teaching and research purposes, as well as to include 
women’s traditional knowledge.118 
• Develop connectivity policies that are gender responsive for ICTs to work for 
gender equality and women’s empowerment (Goal 5b),119 and for ‘universal and 
affordable access to the Internet in least developed countries by 2020’ (Goal 9c).. 
Policies for universal access must be sensitive to gender barriers and adopt multi-
pronged strategies:
 - A rights-based approach to the Internet can recognize women as equal 
participants in the online public sphere. Also, state provisioning of the Internet 
as a public good can address affordability concerns that act as barriers for 
women. A rights-based approach also calls for an independent regulator who 
can ensure that the Internet remains gender inclusive and is not captured 
by vested interests. To enable marginalised women to enjoy the gains of 
connectivity, the regulator should promote policies in spectrum allocation, 
backhaul inter-connectivity, competition and intellectual property that keep 
the Internet affordable for women.120 
 - Public access centres or public Wi-Fi spots should have women facilitators and 
women-only time slots to encourage the use of ICTs by women.121
118 http://www.genderit.org/node/2216
119 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/topics/sustainabledevelopmentgoals  
120 http://www.itforchange.net/sites/default/files/IT-for-Change-Submission-on-the-gender-digital-
divide.pdf
121 http://www.itforchange.net/sites/default/files/IT-for-Change-Submission-on-the-gender-digital-
divide.pdf
119
 - Gender budgeting mechanisms are a must in infrastructural policy – including 
for building public access centres and Wi-Fi hotspots, setting up municipal 
broadband networks, providing a minimum universal data allowances, etc.
• Enable women, especially from marginalized locations, to access content and 
engage actively, not just as consumers but creators of media and content, through 
policies for the widespread adoption of Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) 
and Creative Commons (CC) licensing. The deepening of such a public domain will 
have positive consequences not only for women’s information access, but also, 
media participation.122 
• Encourage efforts by women’s organizations in using digital media and online 
spaces to amplify their stories through digital literacy programmes which have 
a gender component that specifically focusses on building the information and 
media literacies of marginalized women.123 
CIVIL SOCIETY SHOULD:
 Civil society actors working in the space of women’s rights, digital rights and 
media freedoms should undertake the following set of actions:
• Combine forces to highlight and resist the unjust actions of powerful transnational 
corporations and state excesses in the digital media space. Advocacy efforts 
towards Goal 16, Goal 5b and Goal 9c should be synergised to ensure women’s 
communication rights are comprehensively addressed in Agenda 2030 review 
processes.
122 http://journals.kent.ac.uk/index.php/feministsatlaw/article/view/7/54#txt2
123 An excellent example of this is Khabar Lahariya, a news network run by marginalized rural women, 
in India, that covers media-dark areas. Published in local dialects, it effectively uses digital platforms to 
publish their stories. http://khabarlahariya.org/,https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khabar_Lahariya
120
• Become news creators and build dedicated audiences. Diversity in, and the 
localization of, news from a feminist perspective can be achieved only through 
bottom-up networking and network building. Posing a systemic challenge to 
distortions in the public sphere requires that women’s organizations capture the 
lived experiences of women, document the detail, invest in their own servers and 
set up news agencies. Piling one’s content onto market-led media platforms is not 
enough, and may even be harmful in the long run. 
• Carry out research. Global to local research on the rapidly changing media 
landscape is vital. This must include generating evidence about women’s varied 
use of the internet for expression, information access and networking, as well as 
the subjects of industry structures and laws governing media.
• Actively call for private sector accountability to human rights, including women’s 
human rights.124 Women’s groups must advocate for social media policies 
and terms of use that defer to the rule of law and to due processes of justice, 
demanding corporate transparency and accountability. 
• Be vigilant about enclosures of knowledge. The dominance of copyright in the 
information economy calls for active commitment of women’s groups to open 
source software and informational resources. It also requires monitoring of global 
to local policy processes, such as the debates around the Broadcasters Treaty at 
WIPO.125 Restrictions to the public domain in the name of safeguards against on -
line piracy are bound to work against the interests of women.126
124 http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/WGTransCorp/Pages/IGWGOnTNC.aspx
125 http://www.wipo.int/pressroom/en/briefs/broadcasting.html
126 https://thewire.in/86022/india-broadcasters-treaty/
121
122SECTION IV.  
Media Education
10. Gender Mainstreaming in Media 
and Journalism Curricula127
INTRODUCTION 
 The Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women (1995) Section ‘J’ on women and 
the media, called the attention on the centrality of media and ICTs for gender equality.  
Echoing the Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA), the 47th Session of the Commission 
on the Status of Women (CSW) in 2003 noted the responsibility of these industries 
to end the discrimination of women. More recently, the Sustainable Development 
Goal 5 also referred to the role of media and ICTs in women’s empowerment.
 Recommendations emerging from these initiatives include: combating sexist 
representations in media and ICT content; equal access and participation of women 
in media and ICTs industries, particularly to foster the participation of women in 
decision-making positions; access of women and girls to ICTs; development of 
gender sensitive media and ICT policy; and the promotion of media and information 
literacy programs for women and girls.
 However, progress has been slow and some areas have moved backwards - for 
example, the extended proliferation of violence against women in media and digital 
representations. One potential reason for the lack of progress is the absence of 
gender mainstreaming in higher education and of curricula that are gender sensitive 
within media and journalism programs globally. The institutions involved prepare 
127 Prepared by the UNESCO UNITWIN University Network on Gender, Media and ICTs.
123
future media and ICT professionals and journalists. Changes in curricula must be 
relevant to, and meet the needs of, communication and information industries 
whilst also educating emerging media and journalism practitioners to understand 
the importance of creating gender sensitive media structures and content. To 
date, they have often concentrated on technological innovation, but not on the 
implications of the production of content for gender equality or on the importance 
and significance of gender equity processes, or understanding of participation (and 
barriers to it) for gender equality. 
EVIDENCE 
 Since the publication of the Beijing Plan of Action (BPFA)in 1995, institutional 
efforts were concentrated in combating sexist stereotypes in media and ICT 
content. Gender sensitivity in media and journalism education was not regarded 
as the starting point to change media content and operations. It has been thanks 
to the influence of feminist scholars who, in linking with activists and women 
media workers, that public attention has been drawn to this issue, and that 
education has been recognized as a strategic domain to promote change. Most 
recently, the UNESCO UNITWIN University Network on Gender Media and ICTs 
has been highlighting the centrality of gender mainstreaming in the curricula 
of communication and journalism schools, to combat gender inequality in those 
institutions and the industries they feed. 
 To teach gender issues in journalism and communication schools has to do with 
understanding the construction and impact of the gendered production of media content, 
and also with the status of women in newsrooms, professional career opportunities, 
equal pay and eradication of sexual harassment, among other issues (North, 2010).
 According to Gertseema (2014), gender mainstreaming in journalism was 
adopted first by the Inter Press Service News Agency, which implemented this policy 
in 1994 to improve gender equality in both media structures and news content.
 Following this, together WACC and the IFJ launched the Learning Resource Kit for 
124
Gender-Ethical Journalism and Media House Policy  in 2012, a resource to promote 
gender ethical journalism. The kit is based on the insights of media practitioners, 
educators and scholars from all regions of the world. It includes guidelines for 
gender equality in media contents and encourages dialogue within media structures 
and self-regulatory bodies and NGOs.
 Implementing the gender mainstreaming principle in the media and journalism 
education field, relates to a diversity of dimensions: 
• Institutional normative framework – gender equality and gender mainstreaming 
principles implemented throughout the curricula; including through the adoption 
of a code and/or mechanisms to prevent discrimination, unequal treatment, and 
harassment, as well as to foster gender-responsive pedagogical approaches and 
consistent content.
• Promotion of parity of male and female students and scholars at schools, in all 
activities and programs.
• Curricula development and course content – existence of gender specific courses 
within programs that should be planned through a gender-sensitive perspective. 
• Teaching/learning - lecturers and students training on feminist theories and me -
thodologies, also building on the richness of gender analyses and approaches. 
• Learning materials – inclusion of texts, readings and pedagogical materials on 
gender equality, gender analysis, intersectionality.
• Assessments – gender equality as a standard criteria in university assessment tools.
• Research/publications – draw upon/foster and support research and publications 
that focus on gender in media and communication (Made, 2009), with the inclusion 
of publications and research that was written by both women and men.
125
 Using this model, the South African NGO GenderLinks conducted an audit of 
gender equality in media and journalism education in two Namibian universities, 
including with funding from UNESCO. Findings revealed lack of a formal gender policy 
at the institutional level and the absence of gender mainstreaming in the curricula. 
They also showed a dearth of gender specific courses and a lack of mechanisms 
to mainstream gender into undergraduate programs. The audit made evident that 
the incorporation of gender-related issues mostly depends on the lecturer’s own 
knowledge and on her/his feminist interests (Made, 2009); a situation that resembles 
the broader reality of media and journalism courses across the world.
 Indeed, similar results were found by North (2010) in a national study which 
included 30 universities in Australia. According to the study, no academic journalism 
program in Australia offers courses that address the portrayal of women in the 
media, neither gendered media culture nor gendered production of content. A 
few of them just include some aspects of gender in unit synopses. Also, women 
students outnumber men in communication and journalism programs in a ratio 
of approximately 2:1. However, according to North (2010, p. 104) there is an 
institutional resistance to including feminist theoretical or critical pedagogies in 
Australian journalism curricula. Thus, the lack of gender mainstreaming in curricula 
seems to be the consequence not only of the beliefs, values, knowledge and 
experiences of the course developers, but also of the patriarchal structure that 
resists the introduction of a feminist perspective in teaching (North, 2010). 
 Although there are exceptions, in most cases female students outnumber male 
students, and yet, when they enter the professional field, women tend to have less 
status. They occupy the lower-income positions and have difficulty reaching parity 
within media and ICT industries - including in gaining senior and managerial roles in 
media organizations – which, in turn, has an impact in media content. 
 This raises the question of why there is still resistance to introducing gender 
mainstreaming in the curricula of journalism and communication schools. North 
offers some insight into the importance of gender mainstreaming: 
126
 ‘To find reasons why journalism education should embrace gender in its 
curriculum, one just has to ask why men dominate in the editorial hierarchy. 
Why is sexual harassment a continuing problem in the newsroom and effectively 
unaddressed by media organizations? Why is there a disproportionate number of 
men graded higher than women of equivalent industry experience? And why are 
women more cynical about the industry?’ (North, 2010: 111).
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 In view of the evidence, the UNESCO UNITWIN University Network on Gender 
Media and ICTs calls on governments, member states, UN agencies, universities, 
researchers, civil society organizations and media and ICT industries to implement 
the actions listed below:
• A policy and a plan of action on gender equality should be in place/adopted by 
universities, particularly where journalism and communication programs are 
offered.
• All universities should guarantee gender mainstreaming in their journalism and 
communication programs (as per the above dimensions) with a special attention 
to digital transformations that have gendered implications for the profession. 
• Gender mainstreaming practices need to incorporate intersectional approaches to 
ensure a fully inclusive educational offer.
• With the support of the universities represented at the UNESCO UNITWIN University 
Network on Gender Media and ICTs, there is a need to promote the exchange of 
expertise, knowledge, materials and best practices for the development of gender-
sensitive curricula in journalism and communication.
127
• Governments, Member States, UN agencies, and universities should allocate ade -
quate resources should conduct research on gender equality in journalism and 
communication teaching programs, in view of strengthening a gender-aware ap -
proach to the educational offer.
• Through curricula that embed gender mainstreaming, there is a need to train 
gender-aware next generation professionals to contribute to implementing 
gender equality principles and gender equal practices in both media structures 
and content.
• Universities should conduct gender-focused monitoring of students’ performance 
during education and after graduation.
RESOURCES AND GOOD PRACTICE 
• Public Relations Institute of Australia (2016) Diversity and Inclusion Policy to 
tackle gender inequality. Available at: https://www.pria.com.au/priablog/diversity-
and-inclusion-policy-to-tackle-gender-inequity 
• Global Report on the Status of Women in News Media:
 https://www.iwmf.org/our-research/global-report/  
• UNESCO Baseline definitions of key concepts and terms: 
 http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/BSP/GENDER/PDF/1.%20
Baseline%20Definitions%20of%20key%20gender-related%20concepts.pdf  
• UNESCO Women’s and Girls’ Education:
 http://en.unesco.org/themes/women-s-and-girls-education/resources  
• UNESCO Priority Gender Equality Action Plan:
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002272/227222e.pdf 
128
• Media and gender: a scholarly agenda for the Global Alliance on Media and 
Gender. http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/
resources/publications-and-communication-materials/publications/full-list/media-
and-gender-a-scholarly-agenda-for-the-global-alliance-on-media-and-gender/  
• GenderLinks Gender in Media Education initiative. http://genderlinks.org.za/
what-we-do/media/coes-for-gender-in-media-education/  
• UNESCO UNITWIN University Network on Gender Media and ICTs.  
http://www.unitwin.net
• Gender-sensitive indicators for media: Framework of indicators to gauge gender 
sensitivity in media operations and content. http://www.unesco.org/new/en/
communication-and-information/resources/publications-and-communication-
materials/publications/full-list/gender-sensitive-indicators-for-media-framework-
of-indicators-to-gauge-gender-sensitivity-in-media-operations-and-content/  
• Advancing Gender Equality in Media Industries (AGEMI) Resource Bank of Good 
Practices. www.agemi-eu.org  
REFERENCES  
Gertseema, M. 2014. Gender mainstreaming in media and journalism education. 
A. Vega Montiel (ed). Gender and Media: A Scholarly Agenda for the Global Alliance 
on Media and Gender . Paris: UNESCO/IAMCR, pp. 70-73. 
 Made, P.A. 2009. Gender in media education: An audit of Gender in Journalism & 
Media Education and Training . Johannesburg, GenderLinks. 
North, L. 2010. The Gender 'Problem’ in Australia Journalism Education. 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2015844  (Accessed 9 July 2018).
129
Macharia, S. and Morinière, P. 2012. Learning Resource Kit for Gender-
Ethical Journalism and Media House Policy . World Association for Christian 
Communication (WACC) and the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ).
http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-single-view/browse/weiter/backpid/59/article/wacc-
and-ifj-resource-kit-to-strengthen-gender-ethical-journalism/  
(Accessed 9 July 2018).
French, L. 2015. Media Literacies for Empowering Females and Reducing 
Gender Inequalities. Media in Support of Sustainable Development and a 
Culture of Peace . UNESCO, Jakarta, pp. 34-38. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/
images/0023/002329/232923e.pdf  (Accessed 9 July 2018).
North, L. 2009. The Gendered Newsroom: how journalists experience the changing 
world of media . New York: Hampton Press.
 
United Nations. 2005. Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women through ICT.  
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/public/w2000-09.05-ict-e.pdf  
(Accessed 12 July 2018).
130
132CASE STUDIES
Case 1. The Broadcast Media Regulators: 
Gender Equality Drivers 
Amina Lemrini Elouahabi 128
INTRODUCTION 
 Despite the fact that its role is not well known, the broadcast regulator 
constitutes – through its mission and prerogatives – a main driver of the promotion 
of a media landscape that upholds democratic values, including gender equality 
in and through the audiovisual media. The aim of this position paper is to create 
awareness on the ‘ raison d’être ’ of the content regulators, in relation to gender 
equality, through highlighting the Moroccan experience of the High Authority of 
Audiovisual Communication.
WHO ARE THE REGULATORS 
OF THE AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA? 
 As outcomes of the democratic processes and the consolidation of fundamental 
freedoms, including freedom of opinion and of expression, these regulatory bodies 
are created and organized by law to accompany the liberalization of the sector. 
Mainly independent, executive power and from political and economic lobbies, 
these autonomous bodies act in the interest of the public through the prism of the 
128 President of the Moroccan High Authority of Audiovisual Communication. 
Co-President of the Working Group ‘Gender and Media’ of the Network of African Communication 
Regulatory Bodies (RIARC) 
Former Co-President of the Working Group ‘Gender and Media’ of the Network of the Mediterranean 
Bodies of Regulation (RIRM -2013-2015)
133
public and private media.129 They are accountable to parliaments and jurisdictions of 
financial control, and their decisions are liable to be overturned by judicial processes.
 By their raison d’être, the regulators watch over the balance between free 
competition and the principles of public interest, such as media pluralism and the 
diversity of media content. Additionally, they uphold freedom of communication, 
as a fundamental principle, by making sure that media respect human dignity, 
protect the young public, promote pluralism of thoughts and expression, as well 
as of cultural diversity, and contribute generally to the promotion of human rights, 
including equality of the sexes. 
 Of course, the institutional posture and the extent of powers of the regulator, 
and its fields of intervention, differ from one country to another. However, apart 
from the prerogatives of granting authorization of frequencies to radio and 
television stations, the majority of these bodies are endowed with the prerogatives 
of decision-making on regulations, monitoring and sanctions when necessary, 
alongside their capacity to make propositions. 
WHAT IS THEIR PRESENCE AT THE GLOBAL LEVEL? 
 The majority of the audiovisual regulatory bodies came about in the years 1980-
1990. They number about 100 bodies130 today. They are organized into, more or 
less, ten formal networks on a geographic basis (Africa, Europe, Mediterranean), 
linguistic (francophone, ibero-american, lusophone), or cultural (Islamic world).
 These networks meet frequently (annually or bi-annually) to touch base 
and establish road maps; they constitute platforms for common reflection and 
exchanges of experiences, expertise and good practice.
129 UNESCO adds the category of Community Media alongside public and private, as an holistic vision 
of broadcast pluralism.
130 Some bodies, such as the HACA, belong to more than one Network.
134
 The question of gender equality is one of the main thematic areas on which the 
exchanges have resulted in the adoption of solemn Declarations of Commitment, as 
well as working groups for follow-up. These are: 
• REFRAM (Réseau francophone des régulateurs des medias / the French Network of 
Media Regulators): Declaration of REFRAM  on equality between men and women 
in media (Brussels, 2011)131 
• RIRM: Declaration of RIRM  (Mediterranean Network of Regulatory Authorities) on 
fighting gender-based stereotypes in audiovisual media (Lisbon, 2012)132 ; 
WHAT CAN REGULATORS DO 
TO FAVOUR GENDER EQUALITY? 
 First of all, owing to the peculiarities of the audiovisual sector and of the role 
of the regulators,133 the latter are entrusted with a strategic mission vis-a-vis the 
stakeholders: it is about broadcasaters exercising their editorial freedom and 
respect of fundamental liberties and freedoms, including the right of women not to 
be discriminated against.
 It is in the vein of that basic paradigm that gives freedom and equality the 
same normative and ethical values as founding principles of human rights that the 
regulators can and should: 134 
131 http://www.refram.org/sites/default/files/REFRAM_20110919_declaration_egalite_hommes_
femmes_finale.pdf
132 http://www.rirm.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Declaration-on-the-fight-againts-gender-stereo -
types-2012.pdf
133 https://www.francophonie.org/IMG/pdf/REFRAM_20110919_declaration_egalite_hommes_femmes_
finale.pdf
134 These examples are based on the experience of the HACA of Morocco
135
• Contribute to the legal recognition of gender equality in the media by consistently 
giving their opinions on all bills that the government and parliament consider on 
the media sector.
• Set the legal obligations of broadcast stakeholders in terms of gender equality in 
their bill of specifications. The bill of specifications is the contractual base between 
the regulator and the stakeholders, such as in licence conditions.
• Monitor gender mainstreaming  in the adoption of norms in different fields 
authorized by law, such as happens with the norms that are specific to the 
treatment of political pluralism.
• Monitor the progress of implementation of the bill of specifications by stakeholders 
in line with the law, including the monitoring of sexist stereotypes and efforts to 
promote gender equality. The shortcomings observed during the monitoring can 
be sanctioned.
• Assist stakeholders and media professionals by setting up a methodological 
framework, such as a grid of gender indicators to be applied to different types of 
programmes (information, fiction, entertainment, advertisements), as well as tools 
of sensitization, training, monitoring, etc.
• Produce gender sensitive data in relation to the representation of men and women 
and their relationship across the overall programmes and audiovisual services in 
terms of a mechanism for monitoring reception, storage, archiving, follow-up and 
treatment of the overall programmes broadcast by stakeholders.
• Establish partnerships targeting the promotion of gender equality:
 - At national level (beyond the broadcaster stakeholders) with other actors such 
as advertisers, producers, journalists training institutes, academic institutions, 
civil society, etc. 
136
 - At international level: intra and inter-network relationships, as well as with 
actors of the media sector. 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 The objective of promoting gender equality in and through the audiovisual 
media is generally shared by all regulators. In order for the role of regulators to be 
meaningful, three types of recommendations can be considered: 
1. General recommendation:
Explicitly acknowledge regulators as stakeholders able to have an added value in MOROCCAN AUDIOVISUAL COMMUNICATION HIGH AUTHORITY  
The Regulator has been instrumental in the integration of the question of 
gender equality through adopting a conceptual framework based on a Gender/
Rights approach.
1 - AUDIOVISUAL ACT (2015- 2016): 
The law obliges the stakeholders to: 
• ‘Promote the culture of equality among women and men, as well as fighting 
gender-based discrimination, including stereotypes that affect the dignity  
of women’ (Art. 8); 
• ‘Uphold the principle of parity in all political, economic, social and cultural 
programmes’ (Art. 8).  
Additionally, the law forbids: 
• ‘Any programme inciting, directly or indirectly, violence, exploitation or 
harassment of women, or likely to affect their dignity’ (Art.9); 
• ‘Any advertisement that is likely to affect women, that contains a negatively 
stereotyped message to them, that suggests their inferiority or calls for their 
discrimination based on sex’ (Art. 2).
2 - REORGANIZING THE HIGH AUTHORITY OF AUDIOVISUAL 
COMMUNICATION ACT (2016): 
Among the missions of the HACA, 
‘Contribute to the promotion of the culture of equality and parity between 
women and men, as well as fighting discrimination and stereotypes affecting the 
dignity of women’ (Art 3, Paragraph 7).
137
advancing gender equality in and through the media (such as advocacy for a new 
paragraph in existing legislation).
2. Recommendations for states to strengthen the role of regulators: 
• Integrate explicitly and transversally the principle of ‘men/women equality’ in the 
laws that organize regulation bodies and other laws in relation to the sector.
• Integrate gender equality information into the principle of parity for conditions of 
election/nomination into the deliberating organs of the regulatory body.
• Endow the regulatory bodies with the explicit prerogative of combatting sexist 
stereotypes and promoting parity and equality in and through audiovisual media.
• Entrust the regulators with the elaboration of annual reports addressed to 
parliaments on the state of gender equality in and through the media, with 
the objective of evaluating and analysing the progress, constraints and making 
recommendations.
• For actions of regulators of broadcasters and other media actors to be efficient 
and meaningful, the conceptual framework of that action should be reviewed. In 
terms of objectives to achieve, it is a question of the basis of the imperatives of 
a legal approach and gender tools to move from the ‘improvement of the image 
of women in the media’ to the ‘fight against sexist stereotypes and the promotion 
of a culture of equality between men and women’. Behind simple terminologies 
lies a worldview of gendered social relationships that media have the power to 
reproduce or deconstruct. 
138
Case 2. African Union of Broadcasting: 
Gender Integration in African media
Evelyne Faye 135
INTRODUCTION 
 The United Nations Conference on women, held in 1995, underscored the essential 
role of media in the promotion of gender equality in all domains. The stakeholders 
agreed on the necessity of pooling their efforts to fight the stereotyped images of 
women and their unequal access and participation in all systems of communication.
 In 2003, during the second African Union summit in Maputo (Mozambique), the 
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa136 
commonly known as the ‘Maputo Protocol’ was adopted. 
  With the Maputo Protocol, the African Union had adopted an instrument aimed 
at correcting the precarious legal situation of women by engaging the countries that 
ratified it to take concrete measures to ensure equality of men and women. Thus, 
it was the first time that there existed a contractual document that responded to 
all arguments and critics pretending that equality of the sexes was only a western 
preoccupation, and that any effort in that sense would constitute an ‘interference in 
the culture and traditions’ of the peoples in the South. 
 The UN Conference on Women in 1995 denounced stereotypes in the media and 
called on media professionals to define and adopt codes and/or editorial guidelines 
that are gender sensitive to give an impartial and accurate image of women.
135 African Union of Broadcasting 
136 An additional protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights of 1986
139
 African governments indicated commitment to promote the equality of the 
sexes and the self-reliance of women by ratifying the Convention on the Elimination 
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.137 Recently, the African Union 
declared 2010-2020 the decade of African women. This commitment put the African 
audiovisual media at the forefront of translating that responsibility into action. There 
is a huge gap to bridge in the media and journalistic works in order for women to 
enjoy the same rights as men. The media should truly reflect the image of a society 
where gender equality is a fundamental human right.
 Over the past decade, the question of ‘women and the media’ has been the topic 
of many works and seminars in most of sub-Saharan African countries. International 
organizations such as UNESCO, researchers, national authorities, academic bodies, 
media organizations and women’s’ organizations have, at different levels, raised the 
question of the presence of women in the media.
  While the number of women employed in the media has considerably increased, 
that increase has not translated into their presence in leadership positions in the 
media and has not impacted on the representation of women within content. They 
are confined within the roles of news bulletin anchors and are less present as 
reporters where men are mainly assigned. The so-called ‘soft’ thematic reportages 
are usually reserved for women. 
 Women’s level of representation in leadership positions is very low in relation to 
men (see Table below). 
137 UN General Assembly, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against 
Women, 18 December 1979. http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/text/econvention.htm . 
140
 Within the context of modernization and democratization of society in general, it is 
necessary that governments bring about the necessary reforms to legal instruments 
for equal chances between men and women with the same qualifications, but also 
the freedom of thought and of opinion, and to ensure visibility and equal access to 
media.
 Women have long since organized into associations and NGOs, not only to defend 
and to uphold their rights as professionals, but also as drivers of development 
within their respective countries. The integration of gender equality in the media 
is a reality in Africa. Women are well represented in media outfits and newsrooms. 
They are usually even more numerous than men.Broadcast 
media in:% Men % Women N
ALGERIA 61% 39 % 1847
BENIN 88 % 12 % 103
CAMEROON 73 % 27 % 379
KENYA 66 % 34 % 171
SENEGAL 70 % 30 % 452GENDER BALANCE IN DECISION-MAKING POSITIONS 
IN THE MEDIA: NUMBER OF CADRES
Source: Survey of member organizations of African Union of Broadcasting
141
 However, they do not occupy the same place as their male colleagues in the 
newsrooms and in leadership positions. Notwithstanding important progress 
in terms of conditions of service, equal salary treatment and within the work 
environment. 
 The in-service training of professional journalists on the integration of the 
gender dimension in policy is essential to the definition of editorial guidelines. That 
approach would contribute to seriously reduce the stereotypes that are still ever-
present in the practices of the media. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
GOVERNMENTS SHOULD:
• Define policies and processes of the institutionalization of gender equality.
• Guarantee freedom of expression of the media and their protection within the 
framework of institutional instruments.
• Request governments to take into account the gender dimension in sectoral 
policies by adopting legal instruments with the objective of achieving gender 
equality.
• Strengthen the institutional powers of regulatory bodies in regard to gender 
equality.
UNITED NATIONS AGENCIES SHOULD:
• Note that it is 23 years after the Beijing conference, and time to update the declaration.
• Encourage audiovisual media organizations to build capacities of their human 
resources on a gender-equality basis in order to achieve SDGs in 2030.
142
• Systematically disseminate and share reports of gender-relevant surveys with the 
media. 
• Support initiatives to implement gender-equality orientation documents of the au -
diovisual media through financial grants. 
• Elaborate tools for sharing good practice in gender equality in and through the 
media.
• Involve the media at the forefront of the advocacy on the integration of gender 
dimensions in the contents they provide to populations.
MEDIA SHOULD:
• Obtain the support of the authorities (the board, ministries) for gender equality 
progress.
• Encourage media organizations to integrate a gender dimension in their general 
strategy and in their budget activities.
• Monitor effective integration of gender equality in media content.
• Elaborate a strategic orientation document that responds to the implementation 
of legislation on gender equality within the work environment.
• Define guidelines and codes of ethics that integrate a gender dimension in 
audiovisual media.
• Consider capacity building as a key factor for the success of the integration of 
gender equality and encourage all initiatives that contribute to achieve that 
objective.
143
• Participate actively in the advocacy for the importance of a gender dimension in 
the audiovisual media, as mirror of society and gender equality rights.
• Strengthen partnerships with NGOs, regulators and United Nations agencies in 
order to implement the action plans defined in the framework of strategies for 
eradication of stereotypes and sexist images in audiovisual content.
CIVIL SOCIETY SHOULD:
• Create national gender observatories to monitor the effectiveness of integration 
of a gender dimension in policies at a national level.
• Spread good practices in this area.
• Assist the media in their policies of integration and promotion of a gender equality 
dimension.
• Monitor the implementation of laws and regulations applicable in the media sector.
• Put into place a system of evaluation and motivation of the media on the 
implementation of gender equality at all levels of media organizations.
 The media have a central position and a fundamental role in the promotion and 
instigation of new dynamics aimed at achieving gender equality in African societies. 
As the SDG progress report of UN Women testified, though it is well entrenched 
in the political agenda of the states, in reality, equality between men and women 
remains an important gap to bridge.
144
Case 3. Sustaining Women-Led 
Community Media in the Pacific region; 
the femLINKpacific Experience
Sian Rolls 138
INTRODUCTION 
 The media is a prime conduit for accountability. Given that ‘communication is 
the primary process of any social system or architecture’ (Singh, 2008, p.78), the 
media industry must also keep abreast of shifts within the development paradigm; 
it must enable a discourse for public consumption that is accessible and relevant ‘for 
encouraging the accountability of public authorities by offering spaces for citizens 
to express grievances and make demands on those in positions of power’ (Fantini, 
Gagliardone and Stremlau, 2015).
 With a facilitated two-way discourse, it is expected that decision makers ‘can be held 
accountable for their actions (thus will be) responsive to their stakeholders’ (Ahrens 
and Rudolph, 2006). The stakeholders are the public, including the most vulnerable.
138 Co-Programme Director, femLINKpacific, Fiji. ‘‘Whether it is the women who have taken to the airwaves or the development 
partners who have journeyed with femLINKpacific, they have recognized and 
supported the role of community radio to enable women and young women in all 
their diversities to claim their communication rights in our region. Without a media 
platform of their own women’s rights, peace and human security will remain 
invisible.’ (femLINK, 2016, pp1).
145
especially with regard to the context of a post-disaster situation where community 
media are vital. Yet, living up to this endowed role of the media as the fourth pillar of 
democracy, it not always in the interest of media outlets, including their management. 
 It is within this discourse that models, particularly the People’s Communication 
for Development (PC4D) model, emerged to examine this relationship. PC4D 
emerged as a ‘results oriented communication process(es) based on dialogue and 
participation’ (FAO). This is something critical as ‘communication is the primary 
process of any social system or architecture’ (Singh 2008). PC4D was also a response 
to the leanings of Communication for Development models that ‘became the tool 
for state propaganda… to ‘inculcate and defend the economic, social and political 
agenda of privileged groups that dominate’’ (Herman and Chomsky, in Aslam, 2014).
 It is fundamental within a democratic society to have information that is 
‘shared equitably and managed to the best advantage of all members of society’ 
(Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative in Bhim, 2010). The path to such goals 
requires an empowered, wide-reaching media landscape ‘to offer a platform where 
marginalized people can contest both political and economic power in order to 
enable them to transform specific development systems to their benefit’ (Manyozo 
2016). However, realizing models like PC4D is not without challenges.
 With any organization, there is a need to financially sustain its operations. While 
the media is a vehicle of information dissemination (Dave, 2006), the ownership of 
media outlets through direct investment or through advertising is likely to influence 
the focus of any media coverage. In addition, the design of the media formats – 
such as the length of a news bulletin, the amount of page space or when television 
programmes are aired – are also likely to influence how information is relayed 
(Ashlin & Ladle, 2007). All of these factors play into just how the media plays its role 
as ‘the ‘watchdog of democracy’ in society, guarding the interests of the people, 
fulfilling their socially responsible role’ (Robie, in Aslam, 2014). In the Pacific context, 
this reality is particularly pressing due to the infrastructural limits of both the reach 
of journalists, impacting the collection of information, and broadcast or circulation, 
146
impacting the viability of the media outlet as a commercial entity. This is where 
women-led models of communications and use of technology play a role. 
 The legacy of women’s media networks who negotiated for the broadening of 
the Women and the Media section of the Beijing Platform for Action, to reflect the 
opportunity for women to be recognized as producers of their own media forms, 
resulted in the inclusion of the Strategic Objective in Section J. This recognizes the 
need to increase the participation and access of women to expression and decision-
making in and through the media and new technologies of communication.
 While there have been advances in certain areas of media across the Pacific 
region, large gaps continue to exist in both traditional and digital media outlets 
(Macharia, 2015). Pacific women are challenging the status quo as the producers of 
our own print and electronic media. This is – both in the production of content but 
so too with regards to the political landscape that surrounds the media. For example, 
the Pacific Community notes that “The gender gap in employment rates, as well as the 
fact that women’s political representation in the Pacific Islands region is the lowest of 
any global region, are also important concerns for gender equality”.(SPC, 2015).
 Attention is needed in media environments that have experienced outright 
conflicts. Robie (2011) reported that Fijian journalists do strongly support 
investigative journalism as a measure of commitment to being a watchdog on 
democracy but there is still “the restricted access of information (that has) stopped 
analysis and opinions in all sections of the community” (Bhagwan Rolls, 2011). 
This impacts on gender in media. Lisa Horiwapu, a journalist that leads the Rural 
Women’s Media Network in the Solomon Islands supports this analysis, saying “We 
have lots of women working in the media now, although we still have issues around 
women managing media houses. Apart from that, at the moment, one of our issues 
is trying to make the media cover lots of women’s stories. We are also doing training 
for the mainstream media, especially in trying to encourage them to write women’s 
stories. Not only that but be gender sensitive.”(cited in Sian Rolls, 2017).
147
 Women also operate community radio stations, are media correspondents, 
producers of video documentaries, information providers, communicators and 
media activists. This includes femLINKpacific’s regional media network that started 
with the ‘suitcase’ radio station in 2004.
femLINKpacific 
 femLINKpacific (Media Initiatives for Women) in Fiji launched its ‘suitcase’ radio 
femTALK 89.2 in 2004. A suitcase radio is a mobile radio station comprised of a CD, 
cassette tape players, microphones, controls and the transmitter. Much of the work 
of femTALK 89.2 radio has been to bridge the inter-generational gap – with young 
women learning the technology and older women finding their voice, often after 
years of being told to be silent. 
 Establishing the community radio platform was ‘a bold move because it 
challenged the status quo of existing decision-making structures in Fiji by enabling 
women to speak openly on common matters and, crucially, it also involved young 
women. The suitcase radio has also been used as a training tool to empower women 
to speak to each other and with their communities’ (Bhagwan Rolls & Narayan, 
2008). It enables dialogue about issues that people faced on a day-to-day basis, 
within a context where the political developments in Fiji had resulted in a significant 
impact on the media environment, including the legislative environment. political 
developments in Fiji had resulted
 femLINKpacific’s Generation Next Project supports young women throughout 
the Pacific region to become community radio producers and broadcasters. Initiated 
in Fiji in 2005, the project has since enabled a cadre of more than 100 young women 
to take to the airwaves and use information and communication to bridge the divide 
between urban and rural women, and their communities and national and local 
governance structures (femLINKpacific, 2012). 
 
148
 ‘‘Outside of femLINKpacific, there aren’t as many young women engaged in the 
technical aspect of media production. I know just how critical it is to continue to 
resource women’s media. We need to be setting the agenda, telling our stories and 
creating the narratives. It’s not as simple as just trying to get a woman to talk to 
a camera – it’s about investing effort, time and passion to enable someone who’s 
never been asked her opinion to tell her story.’  – Sian Rolls (Evans, 2017).
 ‘Through listening to women, communicating their stories, reading and 
researching policy documents and policy briefs of women, producing and 
documenting stories with women, for women, peace and security to enhance 
conflict prevention and peacebuilding (I am learning from them as women leaders). 
Another (thing I enjoy) is the radio. Women are able to speak wherever they are, 
from the comfort of their homes, on the mat or the community hall and with the 
availability of ICT their voices are reaching out wide and far across the globe.’  – 
Lucille Chute (Waqa, 2017).
RECOMMENDATIONS 
• Governments must ensure that broadcast policy and regulations support 
women’s media networks, in particular community media and community radio, 
and feminist networks who have a demonstrated role to enable women of all 
diversities, including young women, to use accessible and appropriate media and 
ICTs bridge the gap in media content in particular via the public airwaves.
• Donors and development partners should earmark specific funding towards the 
resourcing of women’s media networks, in particular community media networks 
and feminist media initiatives, which are addressing the persistent societal gender 
inequalities through the use of qualitative and quantitative research including 
media monitoring linked to the Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP).
• Donors and development partners should re-define sustainability of women’s 
media networks, in particular community media networks and feminist media 
149
initiatives, by ensuring that at least 30% of all media capacity development funds 
are ear-marked for young women’s development and content creation.
STAKEHOLDERS SHOULD:
• Bring the opinions of women including rural women, women with disabilities as 
well as young women, into the public media arena. 
• Support capacity development of young women community media producers 
to apply their knowledge of gender, media and human rights commitments to 
support their role as community media correspondents, including their ability to 
confidently engage with media and political party structures and leadership.139
• Support the capacity of young women to produce content that responds to the 
gender gaps in media content using the Global Media Monitoring Project to guide 
content production, as well as engagement with public and commercial media 
newsrooms.140
REFERENCES 
Aslam, R. 2014. The role of media in conflict: Integrating peace journalism 
in the journalism curriculum  (November 4). Pacific Media Centre, School of 
Communication Studies, AUT, New Zealand. 
139 http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/index.php/en/actions/policy-documents/590-section-j-in-action-pa -
cific-women-and-the-media-sept-2017
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/index.php/en/actions/policy-documents/600-section-j-in-action-paci -
fic-women-and-the-media-recommendations-for-action
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/images/PDF/Policy/CommunityRadioSoundbytes_Regional_3_2017.pdf 
140 http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/images/PDF/Policy/CommunityRadioSoundbytes_Regional_1_2017.pdf
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/index.php/en/news-and-events/227-the-section-j-spot-gmmp-pacific-
learning-exchange-in-suva 
150
Bhagwan Rolls, S. 2011. Women, security and peace journalism in Fiji. Media 
Development , Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 25-29. 
Bhagwan Rolls, S. and Narayan, D. 2008. Empowering Communities, Informing 
Policy: The Potential of Community Radio.  
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/images/PDF/Policy/FemLINKPACIFIC%20CR%20
Handbook%201.pdf  (Accessed 6 April 2018).
Bhim, M. 2010. A Case for Fiji’s grassroots citizenry and media to be better 
informed, engaged for democracy. Pacific Journalism Review, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 
127-146. 
Evans, A. 2017. Here Are the Women (2017): Sian Rolls. 
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/index.php/en/actions/here-are-the-women/589-
here-are-the-women-2017-sian-rolls  (Accessed 6 April 2018).
Fantini, E., Gagliardone, I. and Stremlau, E. 2015. Patronage, politics and 
performance: radio call-in programmes and the myth of accountability 
Third World Quarterly , Vol. 36, No 8, pp.1510-1526. 
femLINKpacific. 2012. ‘A Young Women’s Guide to Community Radio’. 
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/images/PDF/Policy/FemLINKPACIFIC%20Young%20
Womens%20Guide%20to%20Community%20Radio_UNESCO.pdf  (Accessed 8 April 
2018).
femLINKpacific. 2015. Pacific regional report Global Media Monitoring Project 
2015. http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-the news/Imported/reports_2015/
regional/Pacific_Islands.pdf  (Accessed 10 April 2018).
femLINKpacific. 2016 (a). Community Radio Soundbytes . 
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/images/PDF/Policy/CRSoundbytes_12016.pdf  
(Accessed 10 April 2018).
151
femLINKpacific. 2016 (b). Young Women Key to Gender Inclusive Conflict 
Prevention and Human Security.  http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/images/PDF/
Policy/femLINKpacific_GPPAC_PolicyBrief_22016.pdf  
(Accessed 10 April 2018).
femLINKpacific. 2017. Section J in Action.  http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/images/
PDF/Policy/SectionJInAction_PacificWomenandtheMedia_Sept2017.pdf  
(Accessed 10 April 2018).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). (n.d.) 
Communication for Development. http://www.fao.org/communication-for-
development/en/  (Accessed 12 April 2018).
Macharia, S. 2015. Who makes the news? Global Media Monitoring Project 2015.  
World Association of Christian Communication (WACC). 
http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-thenews/Imported/reports_2015/global/
gmmp_global_report_en.pdf  (Accessed 12 April 2018).
Manyozo, L. 2016. Critical reflections on the theory versus practice debate in 
communication for development. Mediekultur: Journal of Media & Communication 
Research , Vol. 32, No. 61, pp. 116-134. 
Pacific Community (SPC). 2015. Generating Pacific ideas to promote gender 
equality through media. http://www.spc.int/blog/generating-pacific-ideas-to-
promote-gender-equality-through-media/  (Accessed 10 April 2018).
Robie, D. 2011. Conflict Reporting in the South Pacific: Why peace journalism has 
a chance. The Journal of Pacific Studies , Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 221-240. https://www.
academia.edu/1374720/Conflict_reporting_in_the_South_Pacific_Why_peace_
journalism_has_a_chance?auto=download  (Accessed 15 April 2018).
152
Robie, D. 2016. Unfree and unfair?: Media intimidation in Fiji’s 2014 elections. S. 
Ratuva and S. Lawson (eds). The People Have Spoken: The 2014 Elections in Fiji.  
ANU Press, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia. 
Rolls, S. 2017. Here Are the Women - Pacific (2017): Lisa Horiwapu. 
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/index.php/en/actions/here-are-the-women/527-
here-are-the-women-pacific-2017-lisa-horiwapu  
(Accessed 8 April 2018).
Singh, P. J. 2008. Examining the PC4D Approach – Redeeming ICTs in Development. 
Women in Action,  Vol. 2, pp.78-82, Isis International, Manila. 
https://www.itforchange.net/sites/default/files/ITfC/PC4D.pdf  
(Accessed 8 April 2018).
Waqa, S. 2017. Here Are The Women (2017): Lucille Chute. 
http://www.femlinkpacific.org.fj/index.php/en/actions/here-are-the-women/525-
here-are-the-women-2017-lucille-chute  
(Accessed 6 April 2018).
153
APPENDIX: UNESCO’s contributions 
to Gender Equality in Media
 UNESCO exists as a specialized agency within the UN system, and is the sole 
entity therein with a mandate on media development. In addition, UNESCO’s 
Member States have identified Gender Equality as a cross-cutting priority for the 
work of the organization. In fulfillment of these points, UNESCO persistently works 
in forwarding the promotion and realization of gender equality in media on global, 
regional, national and local levels.
 Below follows a compilation of the most recent efforts undertaken by UNESCO in 
this domain, with relevance to the various themes related in the present publication.
UNESCO AND THE GLOBAL ALLIANCE FOR MEDIA 
AND GENDER (GAMAG)
 GAMAG was an initiative initially spearheaded by UNESCO, and has grown 
to become an independent network. In the process, the two organisations have 
had a number of partnerships. These include technical advice and financial 
support, notably through the International Programme for the Development of 
Communication (IPDC). UNESCO also helped GAMAG draft its Constitution and 
Code of Ethics. 
 UNESCO and GAMAG has also co-hosted several events and activities, such as 
at the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) in NY in 2017 and 2018. In 2017, 
the question of gender equality in and through the media was highlighted in relation 
to the overarching theme of “Women’s economic empowerment in the changing 
world of work”. An event held in UNESCO offices in New York examined the extent to 
which the media-related recommendations on women and the media contained in 
global agreements such as the 1995 Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action been 
achieved. In 2018, the participants in a packed side-event in the UN General Assembly 
building presented the draft policy papers that constituted the basis of this publication. 
155
 UNESCO and the IPDC have continued supporting GAMAG in promoting gender-
transformative media development. 
UNITWIN NETWORK ON GENDER, MEDIA AND ICTS
 UNESCO has worked closely with the UNITWIN Network, in developing a Global 
Survey on Government Actions. Further, a meeting was held with eight UNITWIN 
members in April 2017 in Barcelona, Spain, which established priorities for the 
network and a plan to grow the network with more member universities. Ten 
universities141 were then members. A further eleven universities142 also strengthened 
regional cooperation during meeting on gender sensitivity in Honduras in June 2017. 
The UNITWIN Network on Gender, Media and ICTs, code of ethics and constitution 
was established and accepted by members. A website has been created.
http://www.unitwin.net/ .
 In the area of research and in connection with capacity building, in 2018, the 
UNESCO UNITWIN Network on Gender, Media and ICTs carried out a mapping 
exercise of related existing educational programmes (educational and training 
activities) in 10 countries (2 in Africa), in 5 world regions. This was done thanks to 
a partnership with the Netherlands via an earmarked grant made by the IPDC. The 
survey resulted in the collation of pedagogical approaches, disciplinary areas, gaps 
in educational offers, existing good practices, and future challenges. As a result, 
a new model curriculum has been drafted, called “ Gender, Media and ICTs: New 
syllabi for media, communication and journalism ” as part of UNESCO’s series on 
141 RMIT in Melbourne, Australia, the National Autonomous University of Mexico, the University of 
Padova, Italy, Howard University in the USA, S.N.D.T. Women’s University, Autonomous University of 
Barcelona, Hawassa University, Ethiopia, Complutense University Spain, UNIBE Dominican Republic, 
and the Namibia University of Science and Technology.
142 Including the Universidad de Valle, Univalle, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Chiriquí, Universi -
dad de El Salvador, Universidad Don Bosco, Universidad Centroamérica José Simeón Cañas, Univer -
sidad Tecnológica Centroamericana, Centro Universitario Tecnológico, Universidad Metropolitana de 
Honduras and Universidad José Cecilio de Valle.
156
journalism education. This was previewed at the annual congress of the International 
Association for Media and Communications Research in 2018. 
THE GLOBAL REPORT ON THE STATUS 
OF WOMEN IN THE NEWS MEDIA (2011)
 Together with International Women’s Media Foundation (IWMF) UNESCO helped 
pioneer the most ambitious undertaking to date in promoting women’s voices in 
news media. Through a global and international research partnership, this resulted 
in a groundbreaking report published in 2011. The report offered comprehensive 
data on the status of women in news production as well as in decision-making and 
ownership structures within media management. It targeted professional facets 
such as governance, publishing, editing, reporting, photojournalism, broadcasting 
etc. Executives at more than 500 companies in 59 countries were interviewed by 
more than 150 researchers. The final report revealed gender-specific glass ceilings 
in 20 out of 59 countries, especially for middle and senior management positions. 
Just above half of the included companies had gender equity policies. By region, 
Western and Sub-Saharan Africa companies came in at 69% having such policies. 
For companies in Eastern Europe, 16% had these policies. 
THE GLOBAL MEDIA MONITORING REPORT (2015-)
 The Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP) saw its inception at the Women 
Empowering Communication international conference in Bangkok, 1994. The World 
Association for Christian Communication (WACC) and MediaWatch headed this 
global effort to enhance gender equality in news media. The project has several 
objectives with international scope: to map representation and portrayal of women 
in mainstream news media; to develop grassroots research; to strengthen networks 
among gender and communication groups; to create awareness and to develop 
monitoring skills in the media. The report is published every 5th year and is based on 
data collected by volunteer researchers. UNESCO was a partner in the latest report from 2015, which covered over 100 countries and focused on media performance 
particularly as regards coverage of women worldwide. Results showed stagnating 
progress since 2010, and identified glass ceilings for women reporters in especially 
visual media. While news content concerning dimensions of gender equality has 
faintly improved, it remain at a poor 9% of all content. Even less content was found 
to challenge gender stereotypes. Thus the research revealed entrenched patterns 
and norms detrimental to the representation of women in mainstream news media 
and on all platforms. This pattern also concerns women’s participation in top levels 
of management. 
WOMEN MAKE THE NEWS CAMPAIGNS
 Women Make the News (WMN) is a global campaign timed to kick off on 8 March, 
International Women’s Day. In 2017, the UNESCO-led initiative used key results from 
the 2015 Global Media Monitoring Project to highlight gender inequality by creating 
social media posts and focusing the campaign the Gender Equality Check. This in 
turn is based on the UNESCO developed Gender Sensitive Indicators for Media  
(GSIM). Sixty-two partners, including 18 media organizations took part.143 
 In 2018, the Women Make the News campaign was titled “Gender Equality 
and Sports Media” ( https://en.unesco.org/womenmakenews ), during which three 
initiatives were launched to forward the conversation on gender inequality and 
stereotypical portrayals of female athletes within sports coverage. These included:
• A Google Chrome extension labelled “HerHeadline”, the first–ever gender equality 
plugin which enabled an automatic highlighting of gender unequal sports coverage, 
including qualitative and quantitative gaps in media coverage of women athletes.144 
143 Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Benin, Canada, China, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Fiji, 
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan. Kazakhstan, Liberia, Mauritania, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam and Zambia.
158
• Under the hashtag #HerMomentsMatter, UNESCO revisited sexist headlines with 
regard to female athletes published by news outlets during the previous Olympic 
Games. This social media campaign was a follow up to the theme of World Radio 
Day 2018 (see below) in relation to which several videos and audio clips were also 
produced regarding the topic. 
• An interactive quiz “Guess who” was designed to reveal unequal coverage of 
women’s sports. 
GENDER SENSITIVE INDICATORS FOR THE MEDIA (GSIM) 
AND GENDER AWARE POLICYMAKING
 Since the launch of the groundbreaking GSIM in 2012, and following their 
translation into six language, more than 50 media institutions/organizations and 16 
educational institutions and/or universities have been implementing policies and 
strategies based on application of the GSIM. 
 These include 15 in South East Asia145, 11 in South Asia146, 15 universities in 
Central Asia147, 6 institutions in the LAC region148 and 17 institutions in the Middle 
144 This extension is now to be reviewed.
145 The Alliance of Independent Journalists of Indonesia in Indonesia, the Radio Republik Indonesia 
in Indonesia and the Philippines Social Science Council in South Asia in the Philippines. In Thailand, 
UNESCO supported 12 media houses to develop and implement a gender mainstreaming strategy 
based on UNESCO’s GSIM. In addition, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, UNESCO in collaboration with 
the Asia Pacific Institute for Broadcasting Development (AIBD) organized a regional gender sensitive 
reporting workshop in March 2019, where participating editors and journalists from Nepal, Singapore, 
Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Maldives, Laos, Bhutan, as well as Malaysia, learnt about implicit gender bias in 
the media and its influence in newsrooms and programming.
146 South Asia Women’s Network (SWAN), Indian Institute of Mass Communication in India, Institute for 
Studies in Industrial Development in India, Development and Humanitarian Services for Afghanistan 
(DHSA) in Afghanistan, Manusher Jonno Foundation in Bangladesh, Dhensel Research and Consulting 
in Bhutan, Addu Women’s Association in the Maldives, Mizzima in Myanmar, Initiatives of Media 
Women in Nepal, Uks in Pakistan, and Women and Media Collective in Sri Lanka
147 In Kazakhstan, the Suleiman Demirel University and KazNU have implemented the GSIM in their 
research and presentations, while 13 other universities are currently using the GSIM.
148 The School of Communication of the University of Matanzas in Cuba, along with Radio Libertad, 
Radio Chaparra, Radio Manatí, Radio Cabaniguán and Radio Maboas in Cuba, are following an 
assessment implemented by the Cuban Union of Journalists, with support from IPDC in 2016.
159
East149. In Africa, the GSIM have been implemented to conduct self-assessment 
studies by the Malawi Institute of Journalism (MIJ) in Malawi, and in Zimbabwe by 
the Harare Polytechnic’s School of Journalism and Media Studies and by 4 radio 
stations in Rwanda.150
 Coherent with UNESCO’s strategy to empower women and girls through policy 
implementation, more than 30 institutions, community radio stations and national 
broadcasters around the world have adopted policies and/or developed strategical 
frameworks on youth or gender equality in media.
 In this vein, in Rwanda, UNESCO’s efforts helped to lead to almost 30 media 
houses signing an agreement with the AWMP (Association of Women in Media 
Platform) to develop and implement gender sensitive guidelines. Contributing to 
the implementation of the Rwanda Strategy for Gender Mainstreaming in Media, 
key recommendations were realized: the creation of a media platform to inform and 
educate against Gender Based Violence, and a gender audit assessing whether the 
30% minimum representation provided for by the Constitution is being respected.
 In Morocco, a memorandum was signed between UNESCO, UN Women and the 
constitutional regulatory body for communication called HACA (High Authority of 
Audiovisual Communication). A joint initiative was launched to develop an in-house 
monitoring tool designed to raise awareness among media operators on the image 
of women in the media landscape. The tool was based on UNESCO’s GSIM and the 
Global Media Monitoring Project indicators, and its success engendered requests 
from other countries (Niger and Belgium). 
149 16 different media institutions (print, audio-visual and online) were sensitized on gender sensitive 
matters within the workforce based on UNESCO’s GSIM in Lebanon; in Jordan, with support from 
IPDC, the organization 7iber conducted a monitoring study on diversity and gender representation 
in Jordanian media content based on the GSIM. Findings were disseminated online through various 
channels to all media outlets and have been used as a reference guide for media professionals.
150 Radio Izuba FM, Radio Huguka FM, Radio Ishingiro FM, and Radio Isangano FM in Rwanda.
160
 As the results of its application in Morocco showed mis- and underrepresentation 
of women in media content, UNESCO later piloted a gender focused programme with 
the national broadcaster SNRT (Société nationale de radiodiffusion de television), 
supporting their creation of a parity committee that consequently prepared a 
Charter and an Action Plan based on UNESCO’s GSIM. Furthermore, two online data 
bases aiming at enhancing women experts participation in news programming were 
launched (KHABIRAT and expertes.ma). UNESCO has supported the creation of a 
special gender sensitive ‘training of trainers’ for SNRT operators (journalists and 
content producers, managers, broadcasters and regulators). 
 In Tunisia, UNESCO supported the elaboration of a multi-stakeholder Media and 
Gender Charter, by the independent national regulatory authority for audio-visual 
communication (HAICA) and the National Journalists’ Union (SNJT). The Charter, 
based on the GSIM, aims at promoting equal representation of women in the media 
and fighting stereotypes.
GENDER EQUALITY IN JOURNALISM EDUCATION 
AND TRAININGS FOR MEDIA PROFESSIONALS 
 Between 2014-2018, UNESCO also implemented the project “Support to Media 
in Jordan” funded by the European Union. A series of workshops on professional 
reporting on issues related to human rights and gender issues resulted in the 
production of radio reports on gender issues and women’s rights.
 Following a regional training workshop in Jordan on UNESCO’s Gender Sensitive 
Indicators for Media for Arab States Public Broadcasters late 2017, and discussions 
with Lebanese partners on Gender in Media, UNESCO initiated a project on “Balanced 
Media in Policies and Language” addressing a pressing need within the Lebanese 
context. The training was based on the GSIM, and aimed to engage decision makers 
in Lebanese media to influence HR managers to adopt modifications to internal 
policies and procedures based on the GSIM; and to build the capacity of middle 
161
management of media in Lebanon to reflect gender sensitive balanced language in 
media production. 
 The UNESCO Office in Rabat, Morocco reported that work with the Women 
Journalists Network in Mauritania led to strengthened capacities and facilitation 
of the internal structuring and expansion of the network, adding a mentoring 
component to help young female professionals. It also led to the designation of the 
first female Editor in Chief of the main national channel.
 UNESCO gave technical support to implementing organizations of IPDC-
supported projects, promoting gender awareness in journalism education and/
or focusing on capacity building for women journalists. In Jordan, the project 
“Fostering gender equality within media organizations in Jordan” allowed 7iber to 
conduct an assessment study of diversity and gender representation in Jordanian 
media content based on UNESCO’s GSIM. Recommendations were developed and 
propagated in Jordanian media organizations.
 In Cuba, the Cuban Union of Journalists (CUJ) invited 30 female journalists 
from Cuba, Colombia and Argentina for a capacity-building activity focusing on 
management of media institutions entitled “Women lead the media: Developing 
managerial and leadership skills in women journalists from LAC”.
 In Kazakhstan, the bilingual project “Strengthening Curriculum on Gender 
Journalism” for journalism educators from 15 universities151 in Kazakhstan looked 
at gender inequalities, stereotypes and discrimination in the media content, and 
151 Pavlodar State University named after S. Toraigyrov, Karaganda State University named after E. 
Buketova, Atyrau State University named after H. Dosmukhamedova, Eurasian National University 
named after L. Gumilyov (Astana), Taraz State University named after H. Dulati, International University 
of Turkestan named after A. Yassavi, Al-Farabi Kazakh National University (Almaty), University of Korkyt-
Ata (Kyzyl-Orda), Turan University (Almaty), State University Shakarim (Semipalatinsk), KIMEP University, 
(Almaty), Zhetysu State University named after I. Zhansugurova (Taldykorgan), Kazakh University of 
International Relations and World Languages named after Abylai Khan (Almaty), and University of 
Suleiman Demirel (Almaty).
162
led to specific classes and modules on gender journalism and mainstreaming of 
gender aspects in the curriculum. The training was bilingual in Russian/Kazakh, 
and sessions included UNESCO’s GSIM and Gender Journalism’s Russian/Kazakh 
translation as well as exchange of best practices among the universities. 
 In the Dominican Republic in September 2018, 70 male and female supervisors 
from the network of Radio Stations of the Community Technology Centres 
participated in the capacity building workshop “Promotion of the gender approach 
on and through the radio”. Technical support from UNESCO included the webinar 
“Gender Approach and the Media” with the participation of over 1,000 connected 
users.
 In 2018, a project on the training of members of community radios and 
Community Multimedia Centres (CMCs) in Senegal in conflict-sensitive reporting 
gave special attention to reporting violence against women and to gender equality. 
It included the exchange of good practice from community radio stations in other 
countries such as Congo, Mali, and Rwanda. 
WORLD RADIO DAY (WRD)
 In 2018, stakeholders around the world celebrated World Radio Day (13 
February) under the theme “Radio and Sports” with a focus on gender equality in 
sports and deconstructing gender stereotypes through sports reporting. 490 events 
were organized in 102 countries. Young people in Jordan, Morocco, Palestine and 
Tunisia organized related campaigns through the EU-funded NET-MED Youth project 
by doing programmes, trainings, discussions and other activities that challenged 
gender stereotypes and promoted gender equality through sports coverage.
 Also marking WRD 2018, UNESCO partnered with the International Association 
of Women in Radio and Television (IAWRT) to organize India’s first ever Radio 
Festival, with at least 40% women in the audience, and with the participation of 
163
leading Indian women athletes, national awardees, and women officials heading 
India’s public service broadcaster and sports authority. Subsequent sessions at the 
event included at least 40% women. Specific presentations by community radio 
professionals focused on how radio has helped empower women and promote 
gender equality at the community level.
OTHER PROJECTS IN BROADCASTING 
AND VISUAL MEDIA
 Gender equality and women’s empowerment was a key aspect to a SIDA-funded 
project implemented by UNESCO, titled “Promoting Freedom of Expression, media 
development, and access to information and knowledge”152 and which included 
UNESCO’s “Empowering Local Radio with ICTs” project (2015 – 2018). This built the 
capacities of 27 local radio stations, located in 6 African countries, by strengthening 
long-term skills of local radio journalists, technicians, volunteers, correspondents 
and station managers. Emphasis was on the integration of ICTs allowed to modernize 
the radio stations’ operations, including programming and programme content; 
interviewing, researching, reporting and conducting investigations; broadcasting; 
guest interventions and other public interaction. 
 Throughout, the project encouraged the participation of female presenters 
and journalists/correspondents in training workshops – gender parity was always a 
target since constituting the most efficient way to ensure women’s representation 
of in radio stations’ staff. The project improved the quality of programmes and the 
interaction with listeners – poor people in rural areas – and extended the geographical 
coverage of news through the creation of networks of local correspondents from 
152 This SIDA-funded multiyear project had a clear gender component and connects to various 
activities reported in this document, such as the WMN campaign, the toolkit to train judiciary 
members in Africa, work with broadcasters and regulatory authorities in Morocco (HACA) and Tunisia 
(HAICA) etc. The SIDA-funded project also created synergies with other sectors and projects of 
UNESCO where gender equality is an explicit focus or embedded component. 
164
among communities’ members. Specific outcomes were designed to achieve 
quantifiable goals regarding gender balance and gender equality in the stations 
themselves, as well as in broadcasting. The implementation of ICTs made it easier 
for women to intervene in the debate by utilizing text messages (SMS), calls and 
posting on social media. Some programmes were dedicated to gender-specific 
concerns such as women’s rights, teen pregnancy, female genital mutilation, gender 
violence, sexual violence, etc. Other programmes were utilized as platforms for 
women’s expressions, with the promotion of local female artists and talents.
 The photo exhibition “On Air with Rural Women”, demonstrating the gender 
transformative impact of the project, has been presented at several venues, 
including UNESCO Headquarters on International Women’s Day 2018. It was further 
chosen by the European Commission to be displayed at the European Development 
Days in Brussels on 3-4 June 2018, and was presented at the 2019 Commission 
on the status of Women in New York City in March. The exhibition gathered audio 
testimonies of women journalists involved in community radio stations.153 From 
May to mid-July 2018, another photo exhibition of the “Empowering Local Radio 
with ICTs” project was featured on the fence lines of UNESCO HQ and was also made 
available online. The exhibition demonstrated the gender transformative impact of 
the project. 
 Both exhibitions combined creative audio and/or visual installations to display 
how the inclusion of rural women – one of the most marginalized groups in the 
world – in local radio can contribute to progress on gender issues in some of the 
hardest-to-reach communities of Africa.
 UNESCO participated in the Arab States Broadcasting Union (ASBU) festival in 
Tunis in April 2018. On that occasion, several meetings were held, including several 
153 More information on the exhibition can be found at: https://en.unesco.org/onairwithruralwomen.
165
exchanges around the pilot experiences on gender. This led to the realization that 
there is a need of a regional conference to further a unified gender approach in the 
broadcasting industry. 
 It was also the occasion to create synergies with the UNESCO-led project “Enhancing 
a gender responsive film sector in the Maghreb-Mashreq region”. This SIDA and EU 
supported project was implemented by UNESCO in partnership with UN Women, 
Mena Media Monitoring and the International Women’s Film Festival of Salé. It had 
the overall objective to enhance the image of women in the film sector in seven target 
countries: Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, and Tunisia. It directly 
benefits female film professionals by creating an enabling environment to formulate 
and express their concerns, and promotes freedom of expression by encouraging 
regional film makers to address gender inequality and tackle gender stereotypes.
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE (GBV) AND THE MEDIA
 UNESCO observed the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against 
Women in New Delhi, India, by organizing the event ‘Media reporting of sexual 
violence: Why, what and how much?’ on 26 November 2018. The initiative was 
part of a larger ongoing UNESCO – Bournemouth University project titled Media 
Action Against Rape (MAAR). The event in brought together over 100 leading 
women journalists, editors and media stakeholders. The core objective was to 
promote gender-sensitive reporting of GBV and promote gender equality at media 
organizations.
 The project “Preventing Violence and Promoting Gender Equality through media 
in Morocco and Senegal”, supported by Spain, saw the launch of “Mig Radio” in 
December 2018 Marrakech as part of the United Nation’s High-Level Conference 
to formally adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. The 
temporary radio station was operated by young community journalists from the 
southern Mediterranean region and sub-Saharan Africa. A workshop was held in 
to August 2018 in Thiès, Senegal where 40 media professionals were trained on 
166
the concepts of human rights, gender and the Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and ethical journalism. The 
participants produced radio programmes that be disseminated to local communities 
for rebroadcasting.
GENDER, MEDIA AND ICTS
 In Cuba, the project “Promoting gender equality through ICTs” in September and 
October of 2017 allowed 35 men and women from the ICT sector in Cuba sensitized 
to develop information products and mobile apps to promote women and girls 
empowerment through ICTs in the framework a workshop organized in partnership 
with the Cuban Union of Informatics Professionals (UIC). Awareness raised on the 
integration of Gender Equality perspectives into the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. 
SAFETY OF WOMEN JOURNALISTS 
AND FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
 In 2018, a range of institutions, as well as women and men, improved their capacity 
in the areas of freedom of expression and diversity. In Africa, UNESCO launched the 
first ever African MOOC on freedom of expression and the safety of journalists. More 
than 900 people from 42 African countries participated, of which 40% were women 
belonging to the judiciary and civil society. Participants included high-ranking judges 
such as Justice Lillian Tibatemwa Ekirikubinza from the Supreme Court of Uganda . 
 Since 2018, and by decision of its Executive Board, UNESCO includes gender 
issues in its annual inquiries to Member States on the status of judicial follow-up 
of killings of journalists. This takes the form of a request to include information on 
“actions taken to monitor and tackle gender-specific risks as a way to share good 
practices”. This is a measure to inspire Member States to undertake such actions 
and allows for sharing of good practices between Member States.
167
 UNESCO has included specialized sections on safety of women journalists in 
its annual reports such as the report on “World Trends in Freedom of Expression 
and Media Development” (published in the second half of 2017) and the UNESCO 
Director-General’s Report on the Safety of Journalists and the Danger of Impunity 
(published in November 2018). These reports mainstream gender equality 
considerations throughout their content. 
 Further support in the area of safety includes UNESCO helping to ensure the 
publication of a handbook by the International Association of Women in Radio and 
Television (IAWRT) in 2017 titled “What if…Safety Handbook for Women journalists” 
featuring practical advice for women journalists.
 To increase its efforts in raising awareness on the specific risks and threats faced 
by women journalists worldwide, UNESCO has collected personal testimonies by 
women journalists for a publication on threats and harassment against women 
journalists. This publication will be launched in 2019 and this will kick-off a larger 
project on the safety of women journalists, to be rolled out subsequently.
 In February 2018, the UNESCO Office in Mexico participated in the discussion 
panel “national and international challenges to eradicate violence against women 
journalists” organized by the National Women Institute (Inmujeres) and the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. The Office also discussed media development and the role of 
IPDC and UNESCO’s MDI and GSIM, emphasizing capacity building and protection of 
women journalists. 
 Alongside the Commission on the Status of Women at the General Assembly, 
UNESCO held a panel on Safety of Women Journalists on 22 March 2018 with 5 
participants, including Alison Smale, UN Under-Secretary-General for Global 
Communications. UNESCO participated in a panel on online harassment of women 
journalists in London on 8 November 2018 at the 23rd Congress of the Worldwide 
Association of Women Journalists and Writers.
168
 From May to mid-July 2018, a regional training course for women journalists 
on election reporting took place in Islamabad, Pakistan. Reflecting the challenges 
of the reporting industry, the 70 women journalists comprised 20% of the total 
beneficiaries, although they were given priority in the selection of participants. 
Gender sensitive reporting was a crosscutting theme across all modules. Gender 
emerged as the fourth most recurring theme taken up by the trainees on issues of 
gender bias, profiling of women political candidates, misogynistic slander campaigns 
as well as issues of transgender persons etc. Eminent transgender activists had 
been invited to observe and give feedback on the gender responsiveness module.
 In November 2018, UNESCO, together with OHCHR, the Netherlands and IREX, co-
organized a regional conference in Central America on the Digital Safety of Women 
Journalists. The conference which was hosted by the government of El Salvador, 
generated recommendations for a regional Plan of Action on psychological support 
for women journalists. During the conference, the UNESCO Office in San José 
launched the Central American Council on the Safety of Journalists, a platform to 
promote cooperation and dialogue among key stakeholders including governments, 
associations of journalists and other members of civil society.
WORLD PRESS FREEDOM DAY (WPFD)
 At the global celebration of World Press Freedom Day (WPFD) on 2-3 May in 
Accra, UNESCO hosted a discussion organized by the International Women’s Media 
Foundation (IWMF) on sexual and gender-based harassment in the media industry. 
Women journalists from different countries shared their experience and discussed 
possible mechanisms to address harassment. The “Academic Conference on the 
Safety of Journalists”, organized by UNESCO as a component of WPFD, featured a 
panel on “Sexuality, Religion and Other Sensitive Issues”. During this, recent research 
on safety of journalists and gender issues was presented.
 UNESCO’s observance of WPFD 2018 (3 May) in India was conducted keeping the 
principles of gender equality firmly in mind. At least 40% of the 120 or so participants 
169
in the event were women, with the presence of senior women journalists and editors. 
The annual South Asia Press Freedom Report for 2017-18 (produced by IFJ and 
supported by UNESCO), launched on the occasion, contained a special chapter on 
trends relating to gender in the media across South Asia, advocating gender equality 
at media organizations, and analysing the #MeToo movement in the sub-region.
IPDC
 During the 31st Council Session of the Intergovernmental Programme for the 
Development of Communication (IPDC), Member States adopted a Decision on the 
safety of journalists. The Decision encourages Member States to continue to employ 
a gender-sensitive lens in their reporting for the Director General’s Report on the 
Safety of Journalists and the Danger of Impunity and to report on “action[s] taken 
to monitor and tackle gender specific risks”. Additionally, it invites Member States to 
reinforce reporting by “continuing to strengthen a gender-sensitive analysis in order 
to highlight the specific risks faced by women journalists in the exercise of their work”. 
 Between 2017 and 2019, UNESCO supported several activities with an explicit 
focus on gender equality. These activities included awareness raising and capacity 
building as well as journalism education and trainings for media professionals. They 
also included trainings on gender aware strategy and policy formulation for media 
organizations and associations. Such projects were carried out in Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Botswana, Cuba, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Malawi, the Maldives Mauritius, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe and 
(including participants from Cuba, Argentina and Colombia). At least six of the projects 
utilized UNESCO’s Gender Sensitive Indicator’s for Media (GSIM) and some were also 
implemented with technical support from respective UNESCO Field Offices.
PUBLICATIONS
 In addition, UNESCO developed and disseminated a number of tools/resources 
with bearing on gender equality to ensure more sustainable approaches to capacity 
170
building in its respective areas of competence. These include:
The publication “UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators - A framework for Assessing 
Internet Development” , published in 2019. This has gender issues mainstreamed in 
each section, and also given particular attention in a section on cross-cutting indicators. 
It is available on French, English and Spanish. It is being translated to Russian, Chinese, 
Arabic and Portuguese: https://en.unesco.org/internetuniversality
A “Toolkit for the Judiciary in Africa on Freedom of Expression Standards”  has been 
published. It includes a specific module that focuses on the “Gendered perspective 
to freedom of expression” in Africa. A key objective of this module is to identify 
the particular challenges faced by women in exercising this right of freedom of 
expression. https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco-launches-toolkit-judiciary-africa-
freedom-expresssion  
The “Survey on Privacy in Media and Information Literacy with Youth Perspectives” , 
published in November 2017, including a gender equality perspective in the framing 
of MIL as a defence for privacy within the development context. 
“Gender Portrayal in the Jordanian Media Content” - Read the full study EN, AR
The new curriculum on Gender, Media and ICTs is cited above under the UNITWIN section. 
WORKING GROUPS IN THE BROADBAND 
COMMISSION (2010-)
 The Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development was launched 
by UNESCO and ITU in 2010, and it emphasises the importance of broadband in 
international policy development and to achieve the Sustainable Development 
Goals. To this end, it gathers high-level leaders across relevant fields and sectors 
to foster cooperation regarding ICTs and broadband-based technologies for 
sustainable development. UNESCO is co-vice chair of the Commission, and has 
171
co-chaired various Working Groups (WG), including on the Digital Gender Divide 
in 2016-2017, which produced a report including policy recommendations titled 
“Bridging the gender gap in internet and broadband access and use”. The other 
working group with explicit focus on gender was the WG on Broadband and Gender, 
2012-2015 where UNESCO was included among commissioners.
 UNESCO continuously strives to integrate a gender perspective in the active 
Working Groups, including by emphasizing SDG 5 for Gender Equality. The three 
current groups focus on Child Safety On-line, Digital Infrastructure in Africa, and the 
recently established Freedom of Expression and Tackling Disinformation. The latter 
was formed on the initiative of UNESCO, which co-chairs the group, and furthermore 
specifically included SDG 5 in its terms of reference. 
THE EQUALS SKILLS COALITION
 UNESCO co-leads with the Government of Germany, the Skills Coalition of the 
EQUALS partnership. The Coalition gathers around 40 partners from government, 
NGOs and INGOs, and the private sector. The Skills Coalition, among other activities, 
develops guidance and tools to reverse the digital skills gender gap.
 Within this framework, the Gender Equality Division at UNESCO heads a project 
for developing digital skills for girls and women. It aims to reduce digital inequality 
between women and men by developing knowledge products advancing gender-
transformative skills training, and thereby ultimately empower women and girls to 
fully participate in the digital world. In May 2019, UNESCO co-published the report 
“I’d Blush if I could: Closing gender divides in digital skills through education”  together 
with the EQUALS Skills Coalition with support from Gemany. The report exposes 
the proliferation and cementation of gender biases in ICTs, particularly in digital 
assistants like Siri and Alexa. It further addresses the issue of widening gender gaps 
in digital skills. The publication also explores the importance of gender-responsive 
education to promote gender equality in technology sectors. Recommendations focus 
on strengthening digital skills among women and girls, improving gender equality in 
172
digital professions, and eliminating stereotypes in AI applications. The report received 
extensive international attention, testifying to its relevance and urgency. 
ONGOING PROJECTS:
 Through partnerships with experts, UNESCO has prepared a publication on the media 
coverage of gender-specific issues such as “honour” killing, teenage pregnancy, child 
marriage, paternity, gender-free identities etc. This publication will be a practical manual 
to serve as editorial guidelines to provide assistance to media by outlining ways in which 
broadcasters and journalists in general should improve coverage of these issues. The 
launch of this publication is planned for 2019. It is foreseen that this publication will be 
translated into training modules for journalism schools or journalists in the newsrooms.
 Also foreseen is a Handbook on gender equality in the media intended for 
journalists and media professionals, related to improving the gender-sensitivity of 
sports broadcasts and tackling the impact of gender roles within sports media.  
 UNESCO is also currently working on a Handbook that aims to explore how 
the propagation of “narrow” masculinity in the media can potentially be linked to 
the exclusion of other masculine identities, as well as to violence against women, 
children and other men. 
The project “Promoting the Safety of Women Journalists” foresees two publications:
“#Journaliststoo – Women Journalists Speak Out”: collection of essays by 12 women 
journalists from all over the world featuring their personal experiences with 
harassment.
• An academic study that will identify effective mechanisms to counter harassment 
of women journalists.
 Another upcoming UNESCO publication is titled “Towards contemporary policy 
and practice for gender equality in and through the media and ICT”.
173
 The position papers in this publication respond to the need for 
contemporary policy on gender and media. They provide the reader a basis 
to interrogate existing norms of inequality and to reinforce mechanisms 
to strengthen gender equality within the media landscape. The papers, 
written by members of the Global Alliance for Media and Gender, assess 
contemporary issues often such as the persistent gaps in gender equality 
in and through the media. They explore how these hinder work towards 
the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals. The chapters 
include author's policy options for how to achieve advances at the interface 
of gender and information. 
In partnership with:
9789231 003219UNESCO - Communication and Information Sector
7, place de Fontenoy, F-75352 Paris 07 SP, France
For further information, contact ipdc.secretariat@unesco.org