https://doi.org/10.1177/1077801219862633Violence Against Women
 1 –22
© The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions 
DOI: 10.1177/1077801219862633
journals.sagepub.com/home/vawResearch Article
Sites of Exception: Gender 
Violence, Digital Activism, and Nirbhaya’s Zone of Anomie in India
Adrija Dey1 
Abstract
Gender violence in India exists as a state of exception for the ways in which it occupies a nonlegal, liminal space of existence as “bare life” or “life itself.” The rape and murder of Jyoti Singh Pandey unprecedentedly brought this to the surface. This article aims to highlight the ways in which the movement that emerged out of this case engaged with gender violence as a state of exception while the use of new digital technologies by “digital subjects”/“digital parasites” has constituted “sites of exception,” leading to new forms of organizing and creating an emerging politics of gender justice in India.
Keywords
state of exception, gender violence, digital feminism, online feminism, rape, patriarchy, intersectionality, India
Introduction
Gender violence in India has both a normative and exceptional status. The normative status of gender violence—which has been problematically either written into (Criminal Amendment Act), presented through reified patriarchal interpretations, or ignored within legal statute in India—highlights how gender-based violence (GBV) has failed to be effectively recognized by the Indian state. The December 2012 rape and murder of Jyoti Singh Pandey brought this issue to the surface and highlighted the 
1SOAS University of London, UK
Corresponding Author:
Adrija Dey, British Academy Post-Doctoral Research Fellow, SOAS University of London, Bloomsbury, London WC1H 0XG, UK. Email: ad84@soas.ac.uk862633 VAWXXX10.1177/1077801219862633Violence Against Women Dey
research-article 2019
2 Violence Against Women 00(0)
ways in which gender violence is, in fact, embedded within, rather than an exception 
to, the Indian state’s laws that govern sexual and GBV .
On December 16, 2012, Jyoti Singh, a female physiotherapy student from New 
Delhi, was repeatedly raped by six men in a moving bus while making her way home with a male friend after watching a movie. Her male companion, who tried to protest, was also gagged and beaten. After they lost consciousness, the beaten and half-naked bodies of both victims were thrown from the bus into the street. They were discovered by a passerby and were immediately taken to hospital. After 13 days spent fighting for her life, Jyoti Singh passed away. Under the Indian Penal Code Section 228-A, the name of a rape victim cannot be revealed and is a punishable offense, other than in the circumstances noted therein (“What the Law Says on a Rape Victim’s Identity,” 2013). Abiding by Indian law, the actual name of the victim was never used by the media, and pseudonyms such as Damini (translated as lightning), Jagruti (translated as aware-ness), Amanat (translated as treasure), or, most commonly, Nirbhaya (translated as 
fearless), were used (“What the Law Says on a Rape Victim’s Identity,” 2013).
1
Foucault defined government as “the conduct of conduct” and, thus, as a term that 
ranges from “governing the self” to “governing others.” Overall, in his history of gov-ernmentality, Foucault endeavors to show how the modern sovereign state and the modern autonomous individual co-determine each other’s emergence and existence (Foucault 1982 in Lemke, 2002). Hence, the concept of governmentality plays a deci-sive role in his analytics of power and governance. According to Lemke (2002),
it offers a view on power beyond a perspective that centers either on consensus or on 
violence; it links technologies of the self with technologies of domination, the constitution of the subject to the formation of the state; finally, it helps to differentiate between power 
and domination. (p. 3)
In India, colonial laws of governmentality, which have subsequently evolved into 
postcolonial laws of governance and governmentality, highlight the functions and 
aims of the state in relation to its citizenry. This can be specifically identified within the realm of gender and the law, where the governmentality of gendered relations and what is legally deemed “violence,” and what is not, appear.
Following Agamben’s (2005) theory, the first section of the article addresses the 
idea of the “state of exception,” a space in a constant state of emergency and legal control, arguing that, in India, GBV exists in a continual state of exception because of the patriarchal nature of Indian society, embedded in societal practices and legal loop-holes. However, this article subsequently highlights how the use of new digital tech-nologies by the “digital subjects” can create a mode through which critique and protest against governmental control and societal practices can lead to the creation of “sites of exception” in cyberspace, an alternate space for resistance and dissent, where contes-tations are simultaneously and interconnectedly taking place. The Indian state has a fraught position in relation to upholding principles of democracy, which simultane-ously appear to defend rights through the Constitution while taking them away through measures such as the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) and Unlawful Dey 3
Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) that suspend all “rights” and law. While these 
“exceptions” conceptually highlight how, in India, violence has been built into the state’s functioning, laws pertaining specifically to GBV and the movements aimed at protesting against or amending them have shown new forms of engagement that utilize the cyberspace. Finally, using the December 16, 2012, Delhi Nirbhaya rape case in India as a primary case study, this article highlights the ways in which the movement that emerged out of the Nirbhaya case engaged with gender violence as a state of exception, at the same time constituting “sites of exception” through digital activist spaces and new forms of mobilizations, political organizing, media, and protests, and creating an emerging politics of gender justice in India.
GBV as a State of Exception
In defining the state of exception, Agamben drew from Carl Schmidt’s definition of sovereignty, which states that sovereignty is the power to determine the state of exception, to decide to whom the law applies and to whom it does not, and, finally, to declare a state of emergency (Burchard, 2006). The state of exception, as Agamben argues, has gradually been emancipated from the context of war to be applied during times of peace to cope with social disorder or economic crisis (Humphreys, 2006). Over time, the state of exception, which was meant to be a provisional measure, has become a normal paradigm of government in which “that modern construction of located exceptionality, is no anomaly or anachronism” (Chappell 2006,  
p. 316) but, rather, is the materialization of “the hidden matrix and nomos of the political space in which we still live” (Agamben, 2000, p. 37). According to Agamben (2000), it is not the case that only some subjects are abandoned by the law; rather, in modern times, “we are all virtually homines sacri” (p. 115) or potentially homo sacer, “a person outside the law.”
Agamben identified two main schools of thought on the legality of the state of 
exception. The first views it as an integral part of positive law and directly linked to the idea of sovereignty. This approach is codified in many national constitutions through the notion of derogation and emergency. On the face of a public emergency that threatens the sanctity of a national entity, international human rights treaties and many constitutions allow states to suspend the protection of certain basic rights. According to Humphreys (2006), “the existence of derogation like clauses is gener -
ally represented as a ‘concession’ to the ‘inevitability’ of exceptional state measures in times of emergency, and also as a means to somehow control these” (p. 678). Derogation clauses have been viewed as the “greatest achievements of contempo-rary international law” (Oraa, 1992, p. 134), for their ability to limit and control the exercise of power by the various national legal systems in times of emergency. However, in reality, the derogation model creates a space between fundamental rights and the rule of law in which states can remain lawful even while infringing individual rights, thus effectively giving rise to a double-layered constitutional sys-tem (Humphreys, 2006).4 Violence Against Women 00(0)
According to the second school of thought, the state of exception is “essentially 
extrajuridical,” something that is “prior to or other than law” (Swarup, 2008, p. 10). 
For scholars subscribing to this school of thought, the constitutional validation of a state of exception is a rational acknowledgment of a limitation of constitutional power. They, furthermore, argue that control of executive action in times of emergency by means of standard judicial liability practices is neither possible nor desirable. This specific perspective endorses an opening of a state of exception to accommodate the issue via this power only for the time it takes to restore the constitutional order (Humphreys, 2006). Agamben (2000), however, discarded both these views and argued that
the state of exception is neither internal nor external to the juridical order, and the problem 
of defining it concerns precisely a threshold, or a zone of indifference, where inside and outside do not exclude each other but rather blur with one another.
At the heart of his argument, he asked, “How can an anomie be inscribed within the 
juridical order?” (Agamben, 2000, p. 27).
It can be argued that, in India, GBV exists in a continual state of exception because 
it is relegated to a space in which the lines between the states of legality and illegality are perpetually blurred either by legal practices or through patriarchal interpretations and social pressures, forcing its existence as “bare life” or “life itself.” Reports released by the National Crime Records Bureau in India on August 30, 2016, showed that at least 34,651 cases of rape were reported across India in 2015. The reports further revealed that victims ranged from female children younger than 6 years to women over 60 years, with women aged between 18 and 30 reporting the largest number of rape cases, totaling almost 17,000. In 33,098 of the 34,651 reported cases, the victims knew their alleged rapists (Al Jazeera, 2016). However, these figures must be approached with caution as rape is highly underreported in India as social structures of Indian society continue to restrict women’s autonomy, especially sexual autonomy, which is often justified in the name of culture (Sirnate & Nagarathinam, 2015). This is especially common in cases of incestuous rapes or sexual assaults that take place within the family (Talwar, 2013).
The protests after the Nirbhaya case resulted in a change in law through the Criminal 
Law (Amendment) Act of 2013, which altered various sections of the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, and the Indian Evidence Act, dating back to the 19th century. However, irrespective of the change in law, the two issues that remained untouched were marital rape and rape by armed forces. Marital rape was not included in the new amendments as the lawmakers decided that it would potentially disrupt the institution of marriage and the entire patriarchal family structure in India, thus denying that rape can occur within the sacred bonds of marriage (Rana, 2013). The armed forces, especially in areas of instability (such as Kashmir and the North-East Indian states) are still effectively immune from prosecution for rape and sexual assault as they are protected by special laws such as the AFSPA. These laws legitimize impunity for systematic or isolated sexual violence by making government permission necessary Dey 5
before security forces can be prosecuted for any criminal offences. Because such per -
missions are rarely granted, these provisions effectively place security forces above 
the law, violating their victims’ rights to remedy. Thus, the armed forces “benefit from the boys’ club protections that are enhanced in situations of sanctioned violence, com-mitted against communities they are seriously alienated from” (“India Rape,” 2013). In these cases, the patriarchal Indian state moves in to control the state of exception; that is why its control (through legal practices or their nonaction in cases such as mari-tal rape) is also a manifestation of patriarchal values.
Method
I have conducted the data collection and analysis for this research using the Netnographic approach, which combines online ethnography and participant obser -
vation with face-to-face, qualitative, semistructured interviews. Netnography pro-vides the methodological guidelines and is a disciplined approach to the culturally oriented study of the technologically mediated social interaction that occurs through the Internet and other forms of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs; Kozinets, 2010). To adequately understand social life in contemporary society, it is becoming increasingly important to incorporate the study of the Internet into the realm of research. Online, I have collected data from social media sites such as Facebook groups and Twitter accounts of the most prominent individuals and orga-nizations who were participating in the conversation using hashtags such as #Nirbhaya, #DelhiGangRape, #DelhiProtests, #braveheart, #JyotiSingh, and #IndiasDaughter. I have further considered independent English online publishing/blogging platforms such as Youth Ki Awaz, Got Stared At, and Kafila. I chose these blogs for their constant and critical engagement in the conversation around GBV after the case.
Following this, I conducted 30 semistructured interviews with activists, organiza-
tions, journalists, and civil society actors who participated in the Nirbhaya protests, both online and offline in cities such as Delhi, Mumbai, Pune, and Kolkata. Most of the interviews were conducted face-to-face. However, some interviews were also con-ducted on Skype because of availability and logistical issues. Finally, I conducted some interviews in the United Kingdom, when activists who had attended many of these protests in India were visiting London. I conducted all aspects of data collection and analysis following a feminist approach. Further aligning with Clisby (2001), I have used the term “participant” in this research instead of “interviewee,” “the researched,” or “respondent” to establish a more egalitarian relationship between myself and the people with whom the research was conducted.
“Sites of Exception” and the “Digital Parasite”
Agamben (2000) elaborated on a theory of law suited to account for the existence of a realm of human activity not subject to law. The legal production of the state of excep-tion appears in his work as an ongoing imperative to colonize “life itself.” The stakes 6 Violence Against Women 00(0)
of this encroaching process could not be higher for they signal the slow disappearance 
of meaningful political action (Humphreys 2006, p. 678). This has been made evident in modern politics with the rise of autocratic governments, right-wing fundamental-ism, post-truth politics, and the loss of trust in democracy and freedom, all of which bring to life both Agamben’s hypothesis on the state of exception becoming the law and the image of the homo sacer. Against this backdrop, new digital media technolo-gies are providing a parallel space for activism. I call these digital spaces “sites of exception,” as they have opened up enormous opportunities for people to connect, collaborate, make demands for justice, and reclaim power.
To fully understand the “sites of exception,” we first need to understand the “digital 
subject” who, in their interactions and communication with others, often mediated by digital technologies, have created these sites of exception. In doing so, I draw from Bolton’s theory of “digital autopsies.” His theory offers a composite of the concepts offered by Michel Serres’s work The Parasite and N. Katherine Hayles’s My Mother Was a Computer. According to Serres, all humans are parasites and all human interac-tions create systems in which participants parasite one another. Furthermore, as humans live among the parasites, the parasites not only consist of other humans with whom they interact, but they also form the environment in which they live. Serres describes the environment of parasites as a system constructed of “the flow of mes-sages passing through the lines” (Serres, 2007 in Bolton, 2014, p. 17). This environ-ment is also highly technologized and includes any pathway by which information can be transmitted and received. Hence, Serres’s parasitism replicates a model in which the host transmits and the guest/parasite receives, and he calls them “biological para-sites.” However, Serres redefines the roles of the host and the guest by introducing a second definition of parasite, which he calls “social parasite,” where the relationship between two parasites can be biological and social. The host and the guest can take on both roles and they parasite one another in a recursive loop. Hence, this information loop creates a system, a feedback loop between the guest and host, where they are both “simultaneously consuming and nourishing one another” (Bolton, 2014, p. 18).
However, this parasitic relationship between two digital subjects will remain in a 
state of deathlike harmony unless a third definition of parasite is introduced—the noise, the interrupter, the disruptor—which facilitates dissent to challenge the status quo and, consequently, for new thinking to emerge. According to Serres, the relation-ship between two subjects is always initiated and facilitated by a third party. Hence, a parasitical noise is used to simultaneously interrupt and reorder the communication between parasites. Serres further writes, “Noise destroys and horrifies. But order and flat repetition are in the vicinity of death. Noise nourishes a new order” (Serres, 2007 in Bolton, 2014, p. 18). Through this, we see the emergence of the possibility of agency as the subjects continually interrupt the flow of information while working within and transforming the environment and its structures. Furthermore, in this system, the autonomy of the subject is always dependent on its relations with other subjects and their ability to constantly reimagine their function within the system. Hence, according to Bolton (2014), “agency and autonomy, therefore, become inextricably bound together, as agency is a necessary feature of self-making and thus autonomy” (p. 19).Dey 7
Bolton (2014), in theorizing the process of digital autopoiesis, draws an analogy 
between Serres’s cybernetic parasites and the analog/digital subjects theorized by 
Hayles. According to Hayles, human subjects have always been mechanical and shaped through their interactions with technology. Hence, the emergence of digital technologies, with which most people now interact in some way or another, has given rise to the “digital subject.” Hayles defines the digital subject as one that “instantiates hierarchical coding levels that operate through a dynamic of fragmen-tation and recombination” (Hayles, 2005 in Bolton 2014, p. 20). Such codes are free to engage in radical fragmentation, giving rise to more substantial changes. Thus, the aim of the digital subject is to restructure and create a unique system and not return to its previous state of equilibrium. Because the digital subject is capable of drastic fragmentations, more possible ways to reorder the system can be achieved, resulting in developing a further dimension to the potential for achieving agency within the technologized environment.
Serres’s concept of parasitism talks about a form of communication, a reciprocal 
exchange of information between subjects or between a subject and its environment. This is completely true with the digital subject, where the digital technologies are widespread in their lives, but communications between two digital subjects are increas-ingly mediated through digital technologies. According to Bolton (2014),
The human subject can be re-imagined in terms of the digital parasite. Not a self-contained 
entity merely exploiting or being exploited by other parasites and by its environment, but a decentred and hybrid being capable of embracing and even influencing its own 
transformations. (p. 22)
I argue, therefore, that through the creation of the “sites of exceptions,” the “digital 
subjects” have found a platform to fight oppression, challenge authority, and shape 
their own transformation. Digital platforms offer great potential for disseminating ideas, shaping new modes of discourse, and connecting to different constituencies and stakeholders, allowing creative modes of protest to emerge. Within feminist scholar -
ship, there is a wide range of literature on the use of social media to challenge rape culture and combat violence against women (Horeck, 2014; Mendes, Ringrose, & Keller, 2018; Phipps, Ringrose, Renold, & Jackson, 2018; Rentschler, 2014; Thrift, 2014), giving rise to a renewed feminist thinking and politics in the digital environ-ment (Baer, 2016; Clark, 2016; Fotopoulou, 2016; Hill, 2018; Jackson & Banaszczyk, 2016; Losh, 2014; Shaw, 2012).
However, while digital subjects have created radical spaces of dissent within the 
digital environment, the large-scale use of digital technologies has also given rise to concerns about privacy and surveillance. On one hand, digital technologies have given activists the opportunity to observe elites and government bodies, making them more aware of their actions, leading to self-regulation. On the other hand, the technologies also placed power in the hands of the authorities to monitor dissent activities and lead to the curbing of social action (Garrett, 2006). The Edward Snowden leaks have shown us the pervasiveness of surveillance techniques used by governments across the world, 8 Violence Against Women 00(0)
transforming democracies into totalitarian regimes in the name of protection. The con-
junction of transnationalization, digitization, and privatization has led to blurring the boundaries within which national security functions (Bauman et al., 2014). Among others, countries such as Sudan, China, Azerbaijan, Egypt, Turkey, and India are all examples where the state has censored the uses of mobile networks and social media sites under circumstances it deemed politically necessary to curb dissent.
Nirbhaya: Online Narrative and Digital Activism in India
Over the last few decades, while ICTs and social media have become increasingly popular and widely used tools for activism around the world, it is only in the recent past that they have started being used as an alternative platform for activism in India. One of the most extensive uses of digital technologies was witnessed in the nationwide protests staged in India in the wake of the Delhi Nirbhaya rape case of December 16, 2012, making it one of the biggest gender movements that the country has ever wit-nessed. This case triggered an intense introspection into the nature of Indian society, its ideas of patriarchy, and the current structures of the government, which had clearly failed to provide justice to the women of the country.
A large number of participants, in their interviews, pointed out that, when the 
Nirbhaya case was first reported, a vast section of the conversation on social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter was being generated by individual men and women, many of whom had no aspirations of being associated with any organizations. This participation of individuals resulted in a big shift in activism in India. It resulted in a shift in the tone of conversation and also a shift in the style of content. For example, during the Nirbhaya case, on many occasions, the defining voice online was not any organization or nongovernmental organization (NGO) but some previously unknown individual sharing his or her experience and understanding related to the case, which resulted in galvanizing public opinion. According to one participant,
Previously the only people who would discuss such issues would be activists in court, 
people associated with the women’s rights movement, people affiliated to certain non-profit organisations or academics and researchers working on the issue. But, the Internet 
has opened up the conversation to all people leading to not only consciousness raising but 
also building solidarity and commitment. (Participant 8, interview with author, October 22, 2014, New Delhi)
Before the current technological revolution, protests in India largely depended on the 
mainstream media for setting the agenda and promoting their views. However, ICTs have provided an opportunity for individuals, civil society actors, and activists to con-struct, shape, and export the objectives of a movement, including farming of ideolo-gies, setting the agenda, and constructing the flow of the narrative (Martin & Valenti, 2012). Whereas previously, movement actors depended heavily on mainstream media, during the Nirbhaya protests, many 24-hr news channels depended on social media, including stories from Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube, to develop their narratives Dey 9
around the case. The voices on social media, on many occasions, determined main-
stream media’s stand on the issue. An example of this is 19-year-old Shambhavi Saxena, who was at the protests at Jantar Mantar
2 on December 25, 2012, which were 
broken up by the police. Saxena, along with some other agitators, were taken into police custody (Anwer & Shrinivasan, 2012). On her way to the police station and during her detention, she shared with the world what was happening through her tweets: “Illegally being held here at Parliament St Police Station Delhi w/15 other women. Terrified, pls RT” (Barn, 2013). There was no denying that her voice was heard, and more than 1,700 people retweeted her message. According to Favstar, a social media analytics site, her tweets reached more than 2 million people all over the 
world (Barn, 2013). This resulted in galvanizing civil society as activists and lawyers arrived at the police station where she was detained to challenge the unjustified arrests of the protestors and to provide them with help and advice. Celebrities and individuals from across the world also joined in to condemn the police on different social media sites. Following this incident, New Delhi Television (NDTV), a very popular all-news cable channel, ran an hour-long special program on mainstream media titled, “Young India Rising,” about Saxena’s arrest and the ensuing public reaction (Rao, 2013).
Agamben (2000) argued that as the state of exception becomes the rule, it leads to 
a steady decline of meaningful political action. This has especially been made evident in the context of gender violence in India. Being a woman in India can be difficult because of the countless discriminations women experience, in various forms, every single day; yet, this was the first time in more than a decade that India witnessed an internal gender movement of this nature and scale. The year 2012 saw social media creating a new phenomenon. According to Anwer and Shrinivasan (2012), “it saw the rise of the virtually connected Indian youth, which is likely to redraw the terms of engagement between the state and its urban population.” In December 2012, a Pew research study established that nearly 45% of Indian web users, most of them from urban areas, connect on social media to discuss politics. Only Arab countries scored higher than India on this account. The numbers were backed by GlobalWebIndex, which noted in their September 2012 report that India was the third most socially active country, with around 78 points (Anwer & Shrinivasan, 2012).
Following Agamben’s (2000) thesis, the sovereign system (in this case, the govern-
ment, the legal system, and the people in authority—such as the police and doctors, or even families) denies thousands of women across the country their basic human rights such as equality, safety, freedom of expression, and, most importantly, justice for crimes committed against them. Previously, it was mainly women’s organizations and nonprofits that were responsible for spreading awareness on such issues and creating solidarity. However, in the digital sphere, women in India started fighting to take the power back into their own hands by telling their stories, inspiring other women to do the same, and demanding justice for the crimes committed against them. Women started addressing issues such as perceptions of safety and patriarchal notions about gender violence on social media, as such issues seldom received attention on main-stream media (Participant 2, interview with author, March 7, 2014, London).10 Violence Against Women 00(0)
Having been subjected to severe abuse at the hands of their perpetrators, victims 
and survivors of gender violence are often forced to relive the whole experience in 
the form of psychological abuse at the hands of the authorities (Campbell & Raja, 2005). These experiences of abuse have been called “the second assault” (Martin & Powell, 1994), “the second rape” (Campbell, Wasco, Ahrens, Sefl, & Barnes 2001; Madigan & Gamble, 1991), or “secondary victimization” (Williams, 1984). Consequently, due to hostility, victim blaming, and trivialization, large numbers of women are unwilling to report crimes—such as rape or sexual harassment—com-mitted against them (Purkayastha, Subramaniam, Desai, & Bose, 2003). Frequently, women also find it increasingly difficult to speak to their families about their experiences and to get support from them. This is largely due to the concepts of “honor” and “dignity” that exist to this day, and the shame and stigma attached to sexual violence (Kabeer, 1988). Thus, women and girls are largely told to keep quiet and, even within the premises of the law, they receive little to no legal sup-port. They are stripped of their basic biological and political rights, which leaves them exposed and unprotected.
Many participants I spoke with said how stories posted by other women on blogs 
and social media inspired them to talk, many for the first time, about their personal experiences of abuse and harassment. One participant, who is a Supreme Court law-yer, said that she was repeatedly harassed by a senior lawyer for whom she worked. On relating her story, she said that she never had the courage to speak about this and bat-tled doubts for several years until she read a blog post by a young lawyer who said that she was sexually harassed by a Supreme Court judge. The participant further stated that she broke her silence not because she wanted to press charges, but because, with her story, she wanted to support others who had suffered similar harassment (Participant 5, interview with author, October 20, 2014, New Delhi). Following this blog post, many women lawyers across the country came out online with similar allegations. Another participant, an academic in a prominent university in New Delhi, said that even after teaching and writing about gender for several years, she never had the cour -
age to speak about her personal experience of violence until she read other women talking about similar experiences online after the Nirbhaya case. She said she spoke about her experience because it was time to demand a “social and legal system where people could freely discuss sexual violence without being blamed or belittled” (Participant 6, interview with author, October 22, 2014, New Delhi).
Both the state and the family as patriarchal institutions also work to silence 
women or regulate their narrative through framing the ideal victim-survivor and the ideal rape (Dey & Orton, 2016; Patil & Purkayastha, 2015). In that case, the law, or the patriarchal interpretation of it, is used as a yardstick, even outside the courtroom, to measure and judge one’s experience of rape. In 1988, feminist scholar Liz Kelly (1988) proposed her thesis on the “continuum of sexual violence,” suggesting that women’s experiences of sexual violence and harm are interrelated and could not be contained within legal parameters that defined sexual offenses. Hence, according to Loney-Howes (2018), “by coming out and claiming an experience that may not fit within the parameters of legal definitions of rape, victim-survivors also challenge Dey 11
the permissibility of labelling one’s experience without calling on ‘expert’ knowl-
edge to validate their claims” (p. 38), also giving rise to alternate forms of justice and healing. Powell (2015) supports this view and states that some online spaces have the potential to foster informal justice for victim-survivors of rape who have been denied recognition, support, and justice by formal mechanisms, including criminal justice processes and restorative justice initiatives. These sites of exception have allowed women to establish a counternarrative to the mainstream silencing mechanisms experienced by them and, in doing so, challenge dominant understand-ings of GBV (Alcoff & Gray, 1993; Fileborn, 2014).
Platforms such as Youth Ki Awaz (the voice of the youth) and Got Stared At have 
also given women an outlet to share their personal experiences of harassment and violence, not only to raise awareness, but also to create potential solidarity. The plat-form was launched so that women could share the pictures of what they were wearing when they were harassed along with their story. The platform received overwhelming response, and people shared pictures of themselves in a wide range of outfits, includ-ing traditional Indian clothes, Western wear, and even burka (Participant 8, interview with author, October 30, 2014, New Delhi). This campaign was specifically launched to create awareness about street harassment in India. Women in India who wear Western clothes are often blamed for their own harassment, saying that they were “asking for it” when they decided to wear that kind of clothing (Kearl, 2010). Through its campaign, Got Stared At also wanted to raise awareness about the fact that clothes are not the real reason behind street harassment as women; irrespective of what they wear or do, women can be subjected to violence. Therefore, to fight street harassment, deep-rooted issues of patriarchy and misogyny need to be addressed (Participant 8, interview with author, October 30, 2014, New Delhi).
ICTs and mobile phones have led to the blurring of lines between the private and the 
public. Plummer (2002) noted that the wall between the private and the public has crumpled, resulting in our most private and personal narratives having the freedom to become public in ways that were not possible before the advent of ICTs. We have moved from a very “private personal story” to a much more “public personal tale” (Plummer, 2002, p. 8). Following a study exploring the discussion of sexism on Twitter, Foster (2015) concluded that, when women were asked to tweet about sexism, they did so in a collective fashion, resulting in the creation of collective action, solidarity, and an increased sense of general well-being for women. Similar trends were noticed in India after the Nirbhaya case. Many personal stories of violence and injustice had been lost in the real world. However, in the digital space, in the “site of exception,” women across the country used these same stories as a weapon to challenge the system, demand social change, and create a sense of community that would inspire other women to join the cause (Participant 2, interview with author, March 7, 2014, London).
Women have also become more aware and found several innovative approaches to 
fight against abuse. Many women, who have failed to get support from the authorities in the first instance, have turned to social media for support. For example, some women have used mobile phones in India to shame the offenders by either filming what happened or taking pictures of the perpetrator. These pictures or videos are then 12 Violence Against Women 00(0)
uploaded on social media sites. Although such “naming and shaming” techniques have 
been criticized as problematic, the reaction received by such posts on social media, in many cases, has compelled the authorities to take action against the perpetrators (Participant 10, interview with author, February 20, 2015, Skype). In a country where the system of law and “due process” does not function the way it should, such digital techniques have provided many women with an avenue to fight for justice and change.
According to Powell (2015), it is perhaps the routine failure of the criminal justice 
system to return convictions in rape cases that has driven women to document crimes by themselves. After Nirbhaya, the number of reported rape cases also increased con-siderably across the country. To a large extent, this was the outcome of the attention received by the Nirbhaya case, encouraging women to believe that they would get support, and, if they did not get it from their families or the authorities, they could find it on an alternative platform. In this regard, a participant commented that “women had always been told to keep quiet about assaults, but that, post-Nirbhaya, a lot more women had been reporting rapes because, for the first time, they had felt that they had social sanction” (Participant 3, interview with author, July 11, 2014, Skype). However, the conviction rate of rape continues to be abysmally low. Data from the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) show that, in 2016, only 1 in every 4 cases of rape ended with conviction. The already-low conviction rate of 29% in 2015 fell further to 25.5% in 2016. The data for the years 2017-2018 are not yet available (Newsclick Report, 2018).
However, at this stage, it is important to consider the extent to which online activ-
ism post-Nirbhaya has become material action that resulted in sustainable change. Right after the case was reported, a commission, headed by Supreme Court Judge J. S. Verma, was set up on December 23, 2012, to identify what changes should be implemented to the Criminal Law to provide more severe punishments for those convicted of sexual assault. The first few words of the report submitted on January 23, 2013, stated,
The constitution of this Committee is in response to the country-wide peaceful public 
outcry of civil society, led by the youth, against the failure of governance to provide a safe and dignified environment for the women of India, who are constantly exposed to 
sexual violence. (Verma, Seth, & Subramanium, 2013)
Following the Verma Commission’s report, the quickest and most substantive over -
haul of Criminal Law was implemented in India, resulting in far-reaching changes.
Another important aspect of the Nirbhaya case was that the activism post-Nirbhaya 
did not remain stagnant. It resulted in the creation of online communities of actors 
regularly engaging in debates and discussion around gender and actively using the Internet as a resource to spread awareness. The Nirbhaya movement also inspired several other gender movements across the country, creating a gender-dominated agenda through public discourse in India. Nirbhaya not only paved the way for future movements but became a symbol of gender activism and social change, both among the domestic and the diaspora Indian community. Post-Nirbhaya, groups on Twitter Dey 13
such as “I Am Nirbhaya,” have helped to document reports of violence against women 
and children in India, and to raise awareness. Editors of both Youth Ki Awaz and Got Stared At confirmed that since Nirbhaya, they have witnessed a substantial rise in interest in articles related to gender and women’s rights.
Domestic gender campaigns such as Hokkolorob (Let There Be V oices), Happy to 
Bleed,
3 Ain’t No Cinderella,4 Pinjra Tod (Break the Cage),5 and protests on sexual 
harassment on campus by students of Jawaharlal Nehru University have all received global attention. Baer (2016) emphasizes the interesting interrelationship between body politics experienced in a local context and feminist actions whose efficacy relies on their translocal and transnational articulation, linking local experiences of sexual harassment to transnational narratives of inequality. She further states that central to digital feminist activism is its ability to highlight the global scale of gen-der oppression and bring together feminist protest movements across national bor -
ders. Supporting the domestic movements in India, other transnational campaigns organized by the Indian diaspora, including the emBODYindia photo campaign orga-nized at Harvard University and Cornell University, No Country for Women, and Make Love Not Scars, have helped spread awareness and encouraged more women to reclaim spaces. Furthermore, ICTs have allowed both individuals and institutions to connect with one another to share both experiences and expertise. Thus, the voices that once existed in silos now have the opportunity to connect, unite, share intelli-gence and tactics, fight against patriarchy, build international solidarity, and create a global gender movement (Martin & Valenti, 2012).
The state of exception has a long history in India, which throws notions of democ-
racy, “rights,” and citizenship into question. However, the emerging politics of gender justice in the “sites of exception” can no longer be ignored as it has augmented the space for gender activism in India, bringing in not only new players but also broaden-ing their scope and giving rise to new counterpublics and contestations.
The idea of digital counterpublics is rooted in Nancy Fraser’s (1990) conception 
of the subaltern counterpublic, which emerged as a critique of Haberman’s idea of the public sphere that imagined it to be a space where citizens could democratically engage in debate and enact political participation through the medium of talk. She argues that, historically, members of subordinated social groups including women, workers, people of color, and queer people have been systematically excluded from the public sphere, and minority communities across the world have repeatedly found it advantageous to constitute their alternative publics. Fraser (1990) calls these sub-altern counterpublics, suggesting that they are “parallel discursive arenas where members of subordinated social groups invent and circulate counter discourses, which in turn permit them to formulate oppositional interpretations of their identi-ties, interests, and need” (p. 67). In the current context, as we see digital technolo-gies becoming a natural extension of our everyday lives, many of these subaltern counterpublics have also migrated and extended to virtual and digitally networked spaces, resulting in the formation of digital counterpublics (Hill, 2018; Jackson & Banaszczyk, 2016; Shaw, 2012).14 Violence Against Women 00(0)
However, Fraser (1990) warns that the subaltern counterpublics are not always 
democratic, egalitarian, and virtuous spaces, and even if they are, they are not always 
above practicing their own exclusions and marginalization. Due to low cost and easy accessibility, a large section of feminist discussions has moved online (Khalil, 2014; Loney-Howes, 2015; Zlitni & Touati, 2012); however, to say that all women’s voices are equally represented in the virtual environment would also be incorrect. As Internet and digital technologies become a natural extension of our daily lives, the social exclu-sions and inequalities in the real world also start manifesting in the virtual. According to Shaw (2012), “the study of politics online must take exclusion, affect, identity, power and inequality into consideration, and therefore cannot require an ideal public in which these things do not exist” (p. 43). Intersectional conversations around privi-lege, power dynamics, and hierarchies have been largely absent from the feminist discourse, both online and offline, in India (Ayyar, 2017; Bargi, 2017). We have seen very similar patterns within Dalit activism where the question of patriarchy is ignored in favor of the caste question (Chadha, 2018), or even within the Left or Radical Left political groups where the ideology of class struggle often trumps questions of caste and patriarchy (Ghosh, 2017). Even though Dalit, Bahujan, and Adivasi (DBA) women in India have often historically been deprived of even the most basic of human rights, the feminist movement has been largely led by privileged, upper-class, upper-caste women. This then extends to the kind of issues that are championed by the feminist community (Dhanaraj, 2018).
However, with the embedding of digital technology within the social and cul-
tural narrative of society, we see the emergence of a new kind of radical politics. Dalit groups in India have turned to alternative spaces online, not only to challenge dominant discourse through discursive practices but also to build solidarities nationally and transnationally (Kumar, 2015; Kumar & Subramani, 2014; Mishra, 2017; Nayar, 2011). New media have also had significant impact on queer com-munities in India, providing them avenues to not only establish their own political narratives but carve a social space for interaction and dialogue (Dasgupta, 2014, 2017; Mitra & Gajjala, 2008). Within the feminist movement, most recently, fol-lowing the #MeToo movement in India, hundreds of women came out online with their own narratives of sexual harassment and abuse (Chadha, 2018; Datta, 2017; Gajjala, 2018; Pujari, 2017; Sen, 2017). It was, perhaps, one of the first times when voices of minority feminists were at the forefront, decentering the savarna (high-caste) feminists and disrupting the “nationalist framings of Indian feminism by revealing a vast terrain of multiple contestations and power relations” (Roy, 2019). So, while the feminist counterpublic discourse in India is still rife with exclusions, it is in these “sites of exception” that we see the emergence of a new kind of femi-nist politics that is intersectional and inclusive. According to Mouffe (2005), “no radical politics can exist without challenging existing power relations” (p. 51). The sites of exception not only challenge the discourse in the public sphere but also in the counterpublic sphere, constantly raising questions about power dynamics and hierarchies. They allow for the noise, the interrupter, the disruptor that Serres (2007) speaks about. They have made the gender movement in India far-reaching Dey 15
and, in other ways, more contested, making it a more dynamic, internally debated 
movement than before.
However, on one hand, as digital technologies have given power to people, on the 
other hand, they have also given rise to further exclusions and discrimination. Following the Nirbhaya protests, a lot of conversations online have been problematic and severely critiqued by the feminist community. For example, there were extensive conversations concerning protection, security, and how men need to “man-up” and protect their women, which is inherently patriarchal (Participant 19, interview with author, October 30, 2014, New Delhi). Conversations such as these can potentially lead to the diluting of the important conversations around gender. There has also been a steep rise in online harassment against people talking about gender and sharing their experiences, silencing many who fear a severe backlash. This leads us to question to what extent the “sites of exception” are spaces of equality, free speech, and dissent, or are they extensions of the “state of exception”?
This concern is further amplified due to laws such as the Information and Technology 
Act (IT Act) that was originally enacted in 2000 and amended in 2008. This law mir -
rors a law passed during the colonial era giving the government rights to intercept communication in the “occurrence of public emergency or in the interest of public safety” (Litton, 2015). India’s formal surveillance program called Central Monitoring System (CMS) also poses a serious threat to privacy and free speech. Following the implementation of CMS, according to Litton (2015),
India is poised to see a marked shift in the way speech is regulated. The former system of 
“private censorship” will give way to arbitrary monitoring through CMS and the subsequent prosecution of citizens. This will have a chilling effect on the Indian populace. 
Ultimately, the implementation of CMS will lead to widespread self-censorship and the 
suppression of ideas in the marketplace. (p. 108)
Conclusion
The governmental state in India relies upon a perpetual state of exception so that citi-
zens can be given “rights,” on one hand, while simultaneously be denied them on the other. The history of gender violence in India shows disregard for the victims, not only by the legal system but by all other aspects of a staunchly patriarchal system, including the family, community, and the state itself. As I have argued, gender violence in India exists in a constant state of exception due to its position in a nonlegal, marginalized space in which victims receive little or no support for either self-recovery or getting justice. Gender violence continues to be trivialized, and its victims are blamed for the crimes committed against them, thus, pushing them into a space devoid of any legal obligations.
The patriarchal system sustains itself within and alongside the machinations of the 
Indian state. However, while the state of exception in India exists in the colluding spaces across the state’s functioning and the hegemonies of patriarchy, the digital world has brought into existence an alternate space for activism, a “site of exception” 16 Violence Against Women 00(0)
in which the digital subjects are not powerless. Armed with the power of information, 
the power to communicate, connect, and collaborate, activists across the globe have started using the digital space to mobilize as well as generate collective action and solidarity. New layerings of “exceptions” can be identified as responses to the states of exception that continue to evolve and develop new methods, tools, and platforms of organizing. In India, this was made evident in the protests that followed the Nirbhaya case when protests against the state of exception of GBV were met by sites of excep-tion that supplanted the policing of the antirape movement by augmenting and bolster -
ing on-the-street protests with online activism.
The findings of this article specifically demonstrate three important aspects of these 
“sites of exception” within the context of feminist activism: their ability to generate online solidarity, transnationalization of the feminist movement, and development of more intersectional and inclusive approaches.
A participant, in her interview, spoke about her experience of sexual violence and 
said that she was never able to articulate it previously. Even though she worked in an NGO, she went to the Nirbhaya protest for herself because she wanted change. This is not an isolated story. A large number of individuals who went to the protests with their personal stories suddenly found others, both on the ground and on social media, who shared almost the exact same experiences. They were not alone and, soon, support structures, solidarities, and communities started emerging. So, even though some peo-ple joined the movement as individuals, very soon, they became part of a collective because of shared experiences leading to the development of social and political con-sciousness (Mendes et al., 2018). Hashtag feminism highlights this interplay of indi-vidual and collective behavior. Individual stories of oppression, when compiled under one hashtag, demonstrate collective experiences of structural inequality (Baer, 2016, p. 15). Furthermore, survivors who often have been silenced by fear of retaliation and humiliation, or because their experiences were not believed, have been carrying around the burden of this agony for months, years, and even decades. In their case, the experi-ence of speaking out is not only transformative and empowering but also cathartic (Alcoff & Gray, 1993).
Digital gender activism has also demonstrated the power to mobilize thousands of 
people across the world, encouraging them to take political actions at an unprece-dented scale and speed and producing remarkable effects and changing the ways in which advocacy and action are conducted within the feminist community in India. Over the past few years, valuable global collaborations have not only allowed the feminist movement to expand but also for local and national movements in India to get transnational support. As an engagement with India’s state of exception, a crucial aspect of online activism has been its ability to raise consciousness, spread awareness, and hold the government and people in authority accountable for their actions. In this context, one participant states, “the Indian government and people in authority now know that they are being watched, not only by the Indian population but also by people across the globe. More support means that our movement shall grow stronger” (Participant 4, interview with author, September 23, 2014, Skype).Dey 17
Finally, bringing together diverse feminist constituencies, these sites of exception 
have enabled new kinds of intersectional conversations (Baer, 2016). These sites are 
becoming important spaces to challenge the internal exclusions within the feminist movement, looking at GBV through the lens of caste, class, religion, citizenship, and sexuality. In this context, these sites of exception challenge not only the dominant public sphere but also the counterpublic feminist discourse to advocate for a radical feminist politics that is more intersectional and inclusive than ever before.
The examples highlighted here have shown how social media have not only cre-
ated an alternative space in which women can share their experiences, but they have also created a space in which women can maneuver the legal and state limitations to their protests. Digital technologies have provided individuals and groups with an extraordinary medium to build movements, generate interest, and enhance participa-tion both locally and globally, without the help of mainstream media sources. However, these sites of exception are neither entirely autonomous from states of exception, nor are they able to singlehandedly overthrow the state’s hold on its tools of control to guard its authoritative decision-making powers of where the law applies and where it ceases to exist. The co-option of online platforms by the state and its discourse on inclusion and response is one limitation to maintaining the critical edge of these sites. To maintain their exceptionality, sites of exception must maintain their autonomy while also continuing to track the state’s shifting invocation of homo sacer as and when it deems necessary.
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Dr. Navtej Purewal for her unconditional support and valuable inputs. This 
article would not have been possible without her guidance.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests 
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD 
Adrija Dey  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3351-5727
Notes
1. There have been considerable debates about using Jyoti’s actual name, including her par -
ents using her name publicly on several occasions (“India Rape,” 2013; “India Victim in 2012,” 2015). In this article, however, I have used the name Nirbhaya and not Jyoti 
Singh because the case popularly came to be known as the “Nirbhaya case.” Furthermore, 
the name “Nirbhaya” bears significance as it has become a symbol for social change and 18 Violence Against Women 00(0)
large-scale gender activism in India.
2. An 18th-century astronomical building that is a site of various protests in New Delhi.
3. #HappyToBleed is a Facebook campaign to protest against a sexist statement made by an 
Indian temple chief. He said that he would allow women to enter the temple shrine only 
after a machine was invented to detect if they were “pure”—meaning that they were not menstruating.
4. In August 2017, a 29-year-old woman was chased and harassed by two men in a white 
sport utility vehicle (SUV) in Chandigarh. One of the perpetrators was allegedly Haryana 
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Chief Subhash Barala’s son, Vikas Barala. In talking about the incident, Haryana BJP Vice-President Ramveer Bhatti said, “The girl should not have gone out at 12 in the night. Why was she driving so late in the night? The atmosphere is not right. We need to take care of ourselves.” Protesting against these comments of victim 
blaming, women posted photos of themselves on nights out in cities across India with the 
hashtag #Ain’t No Cinderella.
5. With the idea of reclaiming public places, in 2015, an autonomous women’s col-lective of students and alumni of colleges from across Delhi called Pinjra Tod was 
formed to make hostel and paying guest accommodation regulations less regressive 
and restrictive for women students. Pinjra Tod works toward countering the “security narrative” that is structured around securitization of the bodies of women and patri-archal protectionism.
References
Agamben, G. (2000). Means without end: Notes on politics (C. Casarino & V. Binetti, Trans.). 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Alcoff, L., & Gray, L. (1993). Survivor discourse: Transgression or recuperation? Signs, 18, 
260-290.
Al Jazeera. (2016). India: More than 34,000 cases of rape reported in 2015. Retrieved from  
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/08/india-34000-cases-rape-reported-2015  
-160831140518208.html
Anwer, J., & Shrinivasan, R. (2012). The year social media came of age in India. Retrieved 
from http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2012-12-31/social-media/36078534_1_social-media-tweet-flash-mob
Ayyar, V. (2017). Caste-gender matrix and the promise and practice of academia. Economic & 
Political Weekly, 53(50). Retrieved from https://www.epw.in/engage/article/caste-gender-
matrix-and-promise-and-practice-academia
Baer, H. (2016). Redoing feminism: Digital activism, body politics, and neoliberalism. Feminist 
Media Studies, 16, 17-34.
Bargi, D. (2017). On misreading the Dalit critique of university spaces. Economic & Political 
Weekly, 52(50). Retrieved from https://www.epw.in/engage/article/misreading-dalit-cri-
tique-university-space
Barn, R. (2013). Social media and protest—The Indian spring? Retrieved from http://www.
huffingtonpost.co.uk/professor-ravinder-barn/india-social-media-and-protest_b_2430194.html?utm_hp_ref=uk
Bauman, Z., Bigo, D., Esteves, P., Guild, E., Jabri, V., Lyon, D., & Walker, R. B. J. (2014). 
After Snowden: Rethinking the impact of surveillance. International Political Sociology, 8, 121-144.Dey 19
Bolton, M. S. (2014). Digital parasites: Reassessing notions of autonomy and agency in posthu-
man subjectivity. Theoria and Praxis: International Journal of Interdisciplinary Thought, 
1, 14-26.
Burchard, C. (2006). Interlinking the domestic with the international: Carl Schmitt on democ-
racy and international relations. Leiden Journal of International Law, 19, 9-40.
Campbell, R., & Raja, S. (2005). The sexual assault and secondary victimization of female 
veterans: Help-seeking experiences with military and civilian social systems. Psychology 
of Women Quarterly, 29(1), 97-106.
Campbell, R., Wasco, S. M., Ahrens, C. E., Sefl, T., & Barnes, H. E. (2001). Preventing the 
“second rape”: Rape survivors’ experiences with community service providers. Journal of 
Interpersonal Violence, 16(12), 1239-1259.
Chadha, G. (2018). Towards complex feminist solidarities after the list-statement. Economic 
& Political Weekly, 52(50). Retrieved from https://www.epw.in/engage/article/towards-
complex-feminist-solidarities-list-statement
Chappell, B. (2006). Rehearsals of the sovereign: States of exception and threat governmental-
ity. Cultural Dynamics, 18, 313-334.
Clark, R. (2016). “Hope in a hashtag”: The discursive activism of #WhyIStayed. Feminist 
Media Studies, 16, 788-804.
Clisby, S. (2001). Gender issues, Indigenous people & popular participation in Bolivia. Hull: 
University of Hull.
Dasgupta, R. K. (2014). Parties, advocacy and activism: Interrogating community and class 
in digital queer India. In C. Pullen (Ed.), Queer youth and media cultures (pp. 265–277). London: Springer.
Dasgupta, R. K. (2017). Digital queer cultures in India: Politics, intimacies and belonging. 
London: Routledge India.
Datta, S. (2017). (Re)imagining feminist solidarities in academic spaces. Economic & Political 
Weekly, 53(1). Retrieved from https://www.epw.in/engage/article/reimagining-feminist-
solidarities-academic-spaces
Dey, A., & Orton, B. (2016). Gender and class intersectionality in India: An analysis of the 
Nirbhaya case December 16th, 2012. In S. Takhar (Ed.), Gender and race matter: Global 
perspectives on being a woman (pp. 87–105). London: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Dhanaraj, C. T. (2018). MeToo and savarna feminism: Revolutions cannot start with the priv-
ileged, feminist future must be equal for all. Retrieved from https://www.firstpost.com/
india/metoo-and-savarna-feminism-revolutions-cannot-start-with-the-privileged-feminist-
future-must-be-equal-for-all-5534711.html
Fileborn, B. (2014). Online activism and street harassment: Digital justice or shouting into the 
ether? Griffith Journal of Law & Human Dignity, 2, 32-51.
Foster, M. D. (2015). Tweeting about sexism: The well-being benefits of a social media collec-
tive action. British Journal of Social Psychology, 54, 629-647.
Fotopoulou, A. (2016). Digital and networked by default? Women’s organisations and the 
social imaginary of networked feminism. New Media & Society, 18, 989-1005.
Fraser, N. (1990). Rethinking the public sphere: A contribution to the critique of actually exist-
ing democracy. Social Text, 25/26, 56-80.
Gajjala, R. (2018). When an Indian whisper network went digital. Communication, 
Culture & Critique, 11, 489-493. Retrieved from https://academic.oup.com/ccc/arti-
cle/11/3/489/5086508
Garrett, K. R. (2006). Protest in an information society: A review of literature on social move-
ments and new ICTs. Information, Communication & Society, 9, 202-224.20 Violence Against Women 00(0)
Ghosh, A. (2017). The civil war in Indian feminism—A critical glance. Retrieved from https://
sabrangindia.in/article/civil-war-indian-feminism-%E2%80%93-critical-glance
Hill, M. L. (2018). “Thank you, black Twitter”: State violence, digital counterpublics, and peda-
gogies of resistance. Urban Education, 53, 286-302.
Horeck, T. (2014). #AskThicke:”Blurred Lines,” rape culture, and the feminist hashtag take-
over. Feminist Media Studies, 14, 1105-1107.
Humphreys, S. (2006). Legalizing lawlessness: On Giorgio Agamben’s state of exception. 
European Journal of International Law, 17, 677-687.
India rape: Father “wants victim named”. (2013, January). BBC. Retrieved from http://www.
bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-20925164
India victim in 2012 Delhi gang rape named by mother. (2015, December). BBC. Retrieved 
from http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-35115974
Jackson, S. J., & Banaszczyk, S. (2016). Digital standpoints: Debating gendered violence and 
racial exclusions in the feminist counterpublic. Journal of Communication Inquiry, 40, 
391-407.
Kabeer, N. (1988). Subordination and struggle: Women in Bangladesh. New Left Review, 
168(1), 95.
Kearl, H. (2010). Stop street harassment: Making public places safe and welcoming for women. 
Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Publishing Group.
Kelly, L. (1988). Surviving sexual violence. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Khalil, A. (2014). Tunisia’s women: Partners in revolution. Journal of North African Studies, 
19, 186-199.
Kozinets, R. V. (2010). Netnography: Doing ethnographic research online (1st ed.). London, 
England: Sage.
Kumar, C. S. (2015). Blogosphere—An emerging platform for Dalits’ voices in India. 
International Journal of Social Science and Interdisciplinary Research, 4(11), 48-67.
Kumar, C. S., & Subramani, R. (2014). Internet as an alternative media for Dalits in India: 
Prospects and challenges. Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences, 19, 125-129.
Lemke, T. (2002). Foucault, governmentality, and critique. Rethinking Marxism, 14(3), 
49-64.
Litton, A. (2015). The state of surveillance in India: The central monitoring system’s chill-
ing effect on self-expression. Washington University Global Studies Law Review, 14, 
799-822.
Loney-Howes, R. (2015). Beyond the spectacle of suffering: Representations of rape in online 
anti-rape activism. Outskirts, 33, 1-17
Loney-Howes, R. (2018). Shifting the rape script: “Coming out” online as a rape victim. 
Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies, 39, 26-57.
Losh, E. (2014). Hashtag feminism and Twitter activism in India. Social Epistemology Review 
and Reply Collective, 3(3), 11-22.
Madigan, L., & Gamble, N. C. (1991). The second rape: Society’s continued betrayal of the 
victim. New York: Macmillan Pub Co.
Martin, P. Y., & Powell, R. M. (1994). Accounting for the “second assault”: Legal organiza-
tions’ framing of rape victims. Law & Social Inquiry, 19(4), 853-890.
Martin, C. E., & Valenti, V. (2012). #FemFuture: Online revolution. Retrieved from http://
bcrw.barnard.edu/wp-content/nfs/reports/NFS8-FemFuture-Online-Revolution-Report-April-15-2013.pdf
Mendes, K., Ringrose, J., & Keller, J. (2018). #MeToo and the promise and pitfalls of challeng-
ing rape culture through digital feminist activism. European Journal of Women’s Studies, 
25, 236-246.Dey 21
Mishra, B. K. (2017). Digital media in resisting social inequality: The Indian experience. In B. 
Heidkamp & D. Kergel (Eds.), Precarity within the digital age (pp. 123–133). Wiesbaden: 
Springer.
Mitra, R., & Gajjala, R. (2008). Queer blogging in Indian digital diasporas: A dialogic encoun-
ter. Journal of Communication Inquiry, 32, 400-423.
Mouffe, C. (2005). On the political. London, England: Routledge.Nayar, P. K. (2011). The digital Dalit: Subalternity and cyberspace. Subalternity and Cyberspace, 
37(1-2), 69-74.
Newsclick Report. (2018, June). Rise in reported rape cases in 2018, police data reveals. 
Retrieved from https://www.newsclick.in/rise-reported-rape-cases-2018-police-data-reveals
Oraa, J. (1992). Human rights in states of emergency in international law. Oxford, UK: 
Clarendon Press.
Patil, V., & Purkayastha, B. (2015). Sexual violence, race and media (in) visibility: Intersectional 
complexities in a transnational frame. Societies, 5, 598-617.
Phipps, A., Ringrose, J., Renold, E., & Jackson, C. (2018). Rape culture, lad culture and every-
day sexism: Researching, conceptualizing and politicizing new mediations of gender and sexual violence. Journal of Gender Studies, 27, 1-8.
Plummer, K. (2002). Telling sexual stories: Power, change and social worlds. London, England: 
Routledge.
Powell, A. (2015). Seeking rape justice: Formal and informal responses to sexual violence 
through technosocial counter-publics. Theoretical Criminology, 19, 571-588.
Pujari, L. (2017). Sexual harassment is endemic in academic spaces: An insider’s perspective. 
Economic & Political Weekly, 52(50). Retrieved from https://www.epw.in/engage/article/
sexual-harassment-endemic-academic-spaces-insider-perspective
Purkayastha, B., Subramaniam, M., Desai, M., & Bose, S. (2003). The study of gender in India: 
A partial review. Gender & Society, 17(4), 503–524.
Rana, P. (2013). Why India still allows marital rape. Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/india-
realtime/2013/03/26/why-india-allows-men-to-rape-their-wives/
Rao, S. (2013). Covering rape: The changing nature of society and Indian journalism. Retrieved 
from https://ethics.journalism.wisc.edu/2013/03/19/covering-rape-the-changing-nature-of-society-and-indian-journalism/
Rentschler, C. A. (2014). Rape culture and the feminist politics of social media. Girlhood 
Studies, 7, 65-82.
Roy, S. (2019). #MeToo is a crucial moment to revisit the history of Indian feminism. Economic 
& Political Weekly, 53(42). Retrieved from https://www.epw.in/engage/article/metoo-cru-
cial-moment-revisit-history-indian-feminism?0=ip_login_no_cache%3D04232db58d9fd7cf24f5b7f95b039d3b
Sen, R. (2017). Sexual harassment and the limits of speech. Economic & Political Weekly, 
52(50). Retrieved from https://www.epw.in/engage/article/sexual-harassment-limits-speech
Serres, M. (2007). The Parasite (Lawrence R. Schehr, Trans.). Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. (First published as Le Parasite by Grasset & Fasquelle, 1980) as cited in 
Bolton, M. S. (2014).
Shaw, F. (2012). The politics of blogs: Theories of discursive activism online. Media 
International Australia, 142, 41-49.
Sirnate, V., & Nagarathinam, N. (2015). What enables rape reporting? Retrieved from http://
www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/what-enables-rape-reporting/article7138579.ece22 Violence Against Women 00(0)
Swarup, A. (2008). Sovereignty, law and the state of exception: Analysing Agamben in the 
Indian context. NALSAR Student Law Review. Retrieved from https://works.bepress.com/
adityaswarup/6/
Talwar, R. (2013). Courting injustice: The Nirbhaya case and its aftermath. New Delhi: Hay 
House India.
Thrift, S. C. (2014). #YesAllWomen as feminist meme event. Feminist Media Studies, 14, 
1090-1092.
Verma, J. S., Seth, J. L., & Subramanium, G. (2013). Reports of the committee on amendments 
to criminal law. New Delhi, India: Government of India.
What the law says on a rape victim’s identity. (2013, January). CNN-IBN. Retrieved from http://
www.ibnlive.com/news/india/what-the-law-says-on-a-rape-victims-identity-529485.html
Williams, J. E. (1984). Secondary victimization: Confronting public attitudes about rape. 
Victimology, 9(1), 66-81.
Zlitni, S., & Touati, Z. (2012). Social networks and women’s mobilization in Tunisia. Journal 
of International Women’s Studies, 13(5), 46-58.
Author Biography
Adrija Dey is currently a British Academy postdoctoral research fellow at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS). Her research is titled Gender Based Violence in Indian Universities: A Study of Campus Life, Student Activism, and Institutional Responses. Previously, 
she worked as a lecturer in new media at Birmingham City University and a research associate 
in the Chevening South Asia Journalism Programme at the University of Westminster. She completed her PhD in Media, Culture, and Society at the University of Hull, and her thesis was titled “Silence No More”: An In-Depth Cyberconflict Analysis of the Nirbhaya Rape Case and 
Digital Gender Activism in India.