The	Internacional	 Social	Sciences	Review, 	1(1),	2019	
©	Global	Knowledge	Academics,	authors.	 	
All	rights	 reserved .	http://journals.epistemopolis.org/index.php/socialsciences/ 	
 
 
 
	
THE	DEVELOPMENT	OF	 MOBILE	 MONEY	AND	THE	 POLITICS	 	
OF	FINANCIAL	 INCLUSION 	
	
	
DEOGRATIUS	 JOSEPH	 MHELLA 	
University	of	Bristol	UK,	USA 	
	
	
KEY	WORDS	
Financial	Inclusion 	
Mobile	Money 	
Development 	
Financial	Exclusion 	
Politics 	
Tanzania	
Digital	Finance 	
	ABSTRACT 	
This	paper	analyses	the	development	of	mobile	money	in	Tanzania	and	
the	 politics	 of	 financial	 inclusion	 that	 enhanced	 it.	 Mobile	 money	 has	
played	 a	 significant	 part	 in	 reaching	 the	 financially	 unreached	 and	
excluded	 people	 overtaking	 banking	 and	 other	 financial	 services	 in	
Tanzania.	There	is	no	doubt	that	mobile	money	emerged	at	a	time	when	
financial	 exclusion	 was	 a	 major	 issue,	 and	 that	 the	 advent	 of	 mobile	money	was	opposed	by	the	banks	who	thought	that	it	was	entering	the 	
money	business,	and	that	the	banks	were	in	a	better	position	to	do	money	business	better	than	any	other	institutions.	For	this	reason,	it	is	crucial	to	understand	the	development	of	mobile	money	and	the	politics	of	financial	inclusion	 that	 allowed	 it	 to	 s ucceed.	 I	 have	 chosen	 the	 case	 study	 of	
Tanzania	because	not	only	that	mobile	money	has	thrived	there,	but	also	mobile	money	as	we	perceive	it	today	was	firstly	invented	by	the	e -Fulusi,	
a	Tanzanian	company,	and	failed	before	it	was	relaunched	in	Kenya	by	
MPesa	and	succeeded.	Moreover,	the	development	of	mobile	money	and	
the	 politics	 of	 financial	 inclusion	 have	 proven	 their	 importance	 in	fighting	financial	exclusion	and	in	increasing	access	to	formal	financial	services	 for	 the	 poor,	 which	 is	 key	 to	 economic 	growth	 and	 poverty	
alleviation. 	
 
	
	
		
	 	The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
1.Background
n 2008, Tanzania allowed the advent of mobile
money. According to UNCTAD (2012), mobile
money is “money stored using a ‘Subscriber
Identity Model’ (SIM) card in a mobile phone as an 
identifier as opposed to an account in conventional banking”. The Alliance f or Financial Inclusion (AFI) 
also defines mobile money as “a mobile -based 
transactional service that can be transferred electronically using mobile networks.  A mobile 
money issuer may, depending on local law and the business model, be an MNO which is a Mob ile 
Money Operator, or a third party such as a bank. Mobile money is often used synonymously with ‘mobile financial services’”  (AFI, 2012:3).  Hence, 
mobile money should not be confused with ‘mobile banking’ which is the “use of a mobile phone to access ban king services and execute financial 
transactions. Mobile banking covers both transactional and non -transactional services, such 
as viewing financial information on a bank 
customer’s mobile phone” (AFI, 2012:3).  
Mobile money is, therefore, a technology that 
links people to access formal financial services 
(Pope et al. 2011; Kizza, 2013; Chauhan, 2015; Gichuku and Mulu -Mutuku, 2018). It is also an 
innovation that has been used to transform the delivery of financial  services not only in Tanzania, 
but also in the world in general. Graph 1 below tracks the history of active mobile money services across the world.  
Graph 1: Number of Live Mobile Money Services for 
the Unbanked by Region (2001 -2013 Year End)  
Source: GSMA (2013:9)  
Graph 1 illustrates that mobile money has 
proliferated rapidly from 1 service in 2001 to about 
219 services in 2013 worldwide. There is a significant increase in every region as Graph 1 shows. Sub-Saharan Africa leads in terms of having more 
mobile money services. South Asia and Latin America 
follow. The Middle East and North Africa as a region 
lags behind, while Europe and Central Asia have stunted growth of mobile money services.  In the case 
of Tanzania, the first mobile money service was MPesa in 2008. EzyPesa entered the market in 2009. 
Tigo Pesa followed in 2010. Airtel Money launched in 
2011. TTCL and Halopesa inaugurated in 2017 and 
smartphone was inaugurated in 2018. In total there are currently seven Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) of fering mobile money services in Tanzania. Hence, Tanzania’s mobile money industry has developed over time. In 2015 there were 4 mobile money service providers as shown in Diagram 1 below. Vodacom Mpesa had the most significant market share of 37%. Airtel M oney and Tigo had 
almost the same market shares, with EzyPesa owning only 5% of the market share. As this is a changing, 
vibrant and competent industry, in 2018 the market 
shares changed significantly with Vodacom Mpesa owning 43% of the market share, TigoPesa approaching Vodacom Mpesa with 36% and Airtel Money falling to 17%. HaloPesa, a new entrant, overtaking EzyPesa, and the TTCL (also a new 
entrant) gaining shares in the market. This trend 
shows that this is a highly competitive market.   
Diagram 1: Tan zania’s Mobile Money Market 
Structure  
There are about three main mobile money 
models across the known as: ‘bank -led’, ‘Telco -led’ 
and ‘Partnership’ models (Toma, 2012; Bossuyt and Hove, 2016; and AFI, 2012:3 -4). If it is a bank -led 
model, then mobile mo ney is managed by banks and 
regulated by the central bank, and the MNOs are the 
pipes. If it is an MNO -led, the MNOs are in charge 
and they should open a trust account managed by a 
bank. Hence, the money stays with the bank and not with the MNOs. There is the third model which 
involves a partnership with a third -party mobile 
money operator who leads mobile money 
deployments. Both the banks and MNOs play a 
secondary role in this case. According to Bindo and Hasnian (2015:9), Tanzania adopted the MNO -, also 
known as, the ‘Telco -led’ model.  
The development of mobile money in Tanzania 
has therefore gone through the following three phases known as: the services and money transfer, 
the commerce and payments, and mobile finance. 
Graph 2 shows these three phases.  
Graph 2: The Journey to Fully Digital Financial Service  
Source: Ho (2018).  
I 
26The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
The first stage of service provision and money 
transfer allowed the MNOs to provide telecom 
services such as ‘ cash -in’, ‘buy	 airtime’, and ‘pay	
bills’. They also provide money transfer services 
such as ‘domestic P2P transfers’, ‘bulk payments’, ‘international remittances’, and ‘cash -in services.’ 
The second stage of ‘commerce and payments’ was 
hard for the MNOs to arrive at as the banks objected 
the operations of the MNOs. The g reat MFS barrier 
was what they were referring to, in terms of the MNOs interfering with the money business which the banks thought they could do it alone. It was not only in Tanzania that this had occurred, but it also 
happened in other countries. Through the 
understanding of what mobile money could bring to 
the poor, the MNOs were allowed to cross the barrier by the central banks and governments. As they entered the ‘commerce and payments stage’, they started to provide the ‘merchant payments’ such as ‘bil l payments’, remote payments, retail 
payments, etc. Today mobile money has entered the ‘mobile	finance	stage ’ where it allows the customers 
to save or what I could refer to as ‘micro savings’. It also provides microcredits. But what has allowed this to hap pen? In this paper, I argue that there 
were four things that enabled the development of 
mobile money through these three stages, namely: 
the Liberalization of the Tanzanian economy through reforms, the Converged Licensing Framework (CLF), The Test, Monitor  and Regulate 
Approach, Interoperability, the National Financial Inclusion politics and the 2015 National Payment Systems Act (Please see section 4 for further 
details). Hence, by the end of the article, I will have 
answered the following research question s: How 
did mobile money develop in Tanzania?  What has 
the politics of financial inclusion done to enhance it?  
2. Literature	 Review	 and
Theoretical	Assumptions	
2.1.	Literature	Review	
In developing countries, poor infrastructure and low-income levels trigger  expensive financial 
services which are unprofitable as well (Mothobi, and Gryzybowski, 2017; Rocha et al., 2011). The traditional financial services face these challenges. 
Mobile money, on the other hand, ignited a financial 
inclusion transformation for millions of the unbanked poor by using mobile networks (Jack and Suri, 2011; Demirguc -Kunt et al., 2015). Many rural 
poor households have been transformed by the mobile money revolution which not only allowed them to get access to basic financial services 
through mobile money transfers and savings, but 
also enjoyed the communication aspect of the 
mobile device (Bongomin et al., 2018:363).  The 
main purpose of mobile money is fostering financial inclusion for the financially excluded people (Peruta, 2018:155).  These are the benefits that 
make developing nations to allow the development of mobile money services.  
As far as financial inclusion is concerned, there is 
no universally agreed definition (TNCFI, 2014:13; Aduda and Kalunda, 2012:100; Tabaro, 2011:6).  
Countries define financial inclusion according to their realities, but all definitions focus on the provision of formal financial services to all at a reasonable price (AFI, 2017, World Bank, 2014). The Bank of Tanzania defines financial inclusion as  
the “regular	 use	 of	 financial	 services,	 through	
payment	 infrastructures	 to	 manage	 cash	 flows	 and	
mitigate	 shocks,	 which	 are	 delivered	 by	 formal	providers	 through	 a	 range	 of	 appropriate	 services	with	dignity	and	fairness ” (TNCFI, 2018). About 2.5 
billion people worldwide do not have access to 
formal financial services (World Bank, 2014:1). In 2009, 56 percent of the Tanzanian population was 
financially excluded (FinScope, 2009). Thanks to 
Mobile Money and other innovations in 2017 the number of financially exclud ed people reduced to 
26.8% (FinScope, 2018b). Mobile money has been highly regarded for its role in fighting banking exclusion (Maurer, 2011) and for its role in offering 
a solution to at least two main problems, namely: 
the price of banking (McKay and Pic kens, 2010; 
Mbiti and Weil, 2016; Donavan, 2012 and Arestoff and Venet, 2013) and the proximity to banking infrastructures (Morawczynski and Pickens, 2009; Jack and Suri, 2011).  
2.2.	Theoretical	Assumptions	
The theoretical underpinnings of this study are 
founded on the three assumptions as illustrated in 
Diagram 1 below.  
Diagram 1: Key Theoretical Assumptions for Mobile Money Growth in Tanzania  
The first assumption is that the ‘test, monitor 
and 
regulate’ approach aided the development of 
mobile money (Haider, 2013; Di Castri and Gidvani, 2014). At the time of mobile money incep tion in 
2008, the BOT did not know how to regulate mobile money innovation. It, therefore, allowed mobile money services without placing strict regulations on it. By doing so, it allowed regulations to follow innovations. And at all times, innovations move faster than regulations. The BOT was of the view that it would be a mistake to place regulations first 
and after that allow mobile money innovations. This 
way of regulating innovations could stifle the 
‘Test, Monitor 
and Regulate’  
Good Legal and 
Regulatory 
Framework  Conducive
Environmentand
PoliticsofFinancial
Inclusion
27The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
development of mobile money, which would also 
create undesired effects. According to Di Castri and 
Gidvani (2014) and Haider (2013), the BOT learned how mobile money operated. It tested mobile money operations and guidelines before it placed the strict regulations. The results were promising as mobile money services took off and succeeded in 
Tanzania. Elsewhere, where innovations followed regulations, meaning where regulations were first put in place before mobile money services were allowed, mobile money growth struggled in those countries. Hence, the ‘test,  monitor and regulate’ 
approach was behind the successful growth of 
mobile money in Tanzania as it will be illustrated in 
Section 4.3.  
The second assumption is that proper legal and 
regulatory frameworks facilitated the development of mobile money in Tanz ania and elsewhere 
(USAID, 2013:12; Di Castri and Gidvani, 2014; Ondiege, 2015; Maina, 2018: 15 -16). The different 
Acts as they will be described throughout this article provided the legal space and framework for mobile money operations in Tanzania. The Ac ts 
came with regulatory frameworks or provisions and provided all -encompassing laws and rules for 
licensing, compliance, enforcement, and matters of 
liability and breach of the law. The BOT and the 
TCRA could use the regulatory framework(s) which granted t hem the power to permit or refuse the 
prescribed licenses and approvals. They also had the mandate to regulate, supervise, investigate and oversee operations of mobile money services in Tanzania. A useful legal and regulatory framework 
was a necessity for the development of mobile 
money in Tanzania as it will be discussed later in 
the article.  
The third assumption is that conducive 
environment and the politics of financial inclusion helped to create partnerships between the MNOs and other stakeholders in achieving the desired 
financial inclusion goals (TNCFI, 2014; Ondiege, 
2015; TNCFI, 2017; TNCFI, 2018; Komba 2016). Tanzania’s National Financial Inclusion Framework recognized the role of mobile money in transforming the landscape of financial services over the past 10 years. The BOT, for example, 
embraced financial inclusion as a public policy objective. Moreover, the National Financial Inclusion Framework also reckoned four enablers of financial inclusion through which policy priority areas could be set to  enhance financial inclusion. 
The priority policy areas included: (i) increasing the proximity of financial access points to where people 
live and transact; (ii) enabling robust payment 
platforms; (iii) supporting robust electronic information infrastructu re for individual and 
business profiles, credit history and collateral be established for effective know -Your-Customer 
(KYC) process; (iv) ensuring that customers are 
informed and protected. All these policy priority areas not only supported financial incl usion, but 
also created a conducive environment for mobile 
money and for the politics of financial inclusion which were key to supporting mobile money operations as it will be discussed later in the article.  
3.Methodology
3.1.	Methods	
The study uses qualitative research methods. I used 
the unstructured interviews for data collection. 80 
respondents who knew about mobile money and 
banking services were interviewed. They ranged from senior government & MNOs officials to mobile users. Their involvement w ith mobile money and 
banking sector was the key criteria for their selection. The interviews were recorded and then 
transcribed. The Analysis of data was done through 
both Nvivo and on the table method, where the key thematic areas on the researched issue were 
identified and analysed. The identified thematic issues were analysed. Credible statistics were also sought from key publications to compare those findings and my findings. This way of conducting an 
analysis helped me to understand how my findings 
were different from or similar to their results. I 
discovered that there was a greater similarity in terms of the findings that explained the growth of mobile money services. Their statistics helped me to illustrate the growth through numbers, and the 
findings of my interviews enabled me to explain the 
causes of this growth which at times missed in their 
explanations.  
3.2.	 Conceptualization	 of	 Mobile	 Money	
Development	 –	 Key	 Statistics	 and	
Findings 	
I will start by revisiting the various statistics from 
credible institutions and documents. This helps me 
to establish and explain the mobile money development trends in Tanzania over time.  
Graph 3 Evolution of Mobile Money in Tanzania – 
Mobile Payment Growth 2008 -2015 
Source: BOT (2017).  
28The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
Graph 3 shows how mobile payments grew over 
time. These statistics do not include mobile banking 
payments because mobile banking payments are not mobile money payments (also known as mobile money). Trillions of shillings or billions of US dollars pass through mobile money every year. According to GSMA (2017:6), about 52% of the GDP 
pass through mobile money services in Tanzania as 
quoted in the Bank of Tanzania sources.  
Table 1: Mobile Services Statistics  
Source: BOT (2017).  
From Table 1,	 the number of registered accounts 
reached 71million in 2016. Active users were 17 million, and the registered mobile money agents reached 371,132. The trust account balance also 
grew, reaching 665.7 billion shillings. Again, this 
shows how mobile money services kept on expanding. From Graph 4 below, if the penetration of bank and mobile money accounts between 2008 and 2015 were compared, you would notice that the penetration of mobile money accounts was higher than that of the bank accounts.  
Graph 4: Account Penetration , 2008-2015 (Millions 
of Accounts)  
To improve mobile money services the MNOs 
agree
d to have interoperable systems through 
which customers of any MNOs could receive services from a different MNO. TIGO Pesa customers could obtain services from Vodacom MPe sa and so 
forth (Gilman, 2016; IFC, 2015; Musa et al., 2014). Interoperability not only created non -exclusivity of 
services at the provider level, but also at the agent level (Komba, 2016; Masamila, 2014:56). The benefits were clear that the volumes of tra nsactions 
increased as depicted in Graph 5. The first mobile money interoperable services in Tanzania started in 2014. 
Graph 5: Interoperable Trends of the MNOs 
Source: BOT (2017).  
It is unthinkable to analyze the development of 
mobile money services without mentioning the MNOs agents. The interoperability at the MNO agents’ level facilitated the delivery of financial services through mobile money. Graph 6 below 
shows how the MNOs’ a gents increased significantly 
as compared to other channels of financial service 
delivery between 2013 and 2017.  
Graph 6: Mobile Money Agents and Other Access 
Channels  
Source: Bank of Tanzania and TNCFI (2017:27).  
The Uptake Strand 1 below shows that  the 
uptake of mobile money services between 2013 and 
2017 was far higher than the uptake of any other financial services which consolidated the survival of 
mobile money in the financial sector.  
29The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
Strand 1: Uptake of Formal Financial Services  
Source: FinScope (2018b).  
The Uptake Strand 2 adds the share of the 
financial products in the market. It is fascinating 
that the banks have 64% of the financial products and ONLY 17% of the uptake of formal financial services. Mobile money has ONLY 1% of the financial products share in the market and 60% of 
the uptake of formal financial services. This trend means that the adult population uses more mobile 
than banking financial services in Tanzania.  
Strand 2: Uptake of Formal Financial Services  
Source: FinScope (2018). 
Strand 3 shows the saving channels. About 22% 
of the Tanzanian adult population saved through 
mobile money services in 2015, and only about 8% did the same with banks.  
Strand 3: Saving Channel (% of Adults)  
Graph 7 below shows that mobile money trust 
accounts have grown continuously over time. Trust accounts are the accounts that mobile money providers are required to open with a bank as a requirement for them to operate mobile money services. The money depos ited in trust accounts 
acts as collateral or an advance for mobile money services. With money in the trust accounts, the banks release money when a mobile account owner requests it. Likewise, when a mobile money account holder deposits money in his m -wallet, that money 
does not stay with the banks but goes straight to the trust account. One needs to remember that while the banks are the deposit- taking institutions, the 
MNOs are not. Hence, any deposits and savings go to their trust accounts in banks.  
Graph 7: Bank Deposits and Mobile Money Trust 
Account Balances (TZS Billion and % GDP)  
I have included all these statistics in this analysis 
to show the growth of mobile money not only with words but also with concrete statistics. The next sections will provide the narrative part of what caused the development of mobile money in 
Tanzania and what politics of financial inclusions 
enhanced this development.  
4.Qualitative	 Findings	 and	 Their
Explanations	
4.1.	Liberalization	
From the findings, one needs to unders tand what 
happened with the telecommunications and banking sector before and after the liberalization policies. One also needs to know how the liberalized policies shaped the ‘National Payments System’ and the politics of financial inclusion. All this invo lves 
the role of the government and non -governmental 
actors. Let me start to clarify the role of the government. One needs to understand that the financial system serves the state and the people. It is not separated from the government. And therefore, it i s not separated from politics. 
According to Stiglitz (2000:27- 39), the primary role 
of the government is to provide the legal framework 
within which all economic transactions occur. 
Payments that transfer money from one individual to another - but not in r eturn for the provision of 
goods and services are called transfer payments. I argue that a significant percentage of mobile money transactions fall under transfer payments. You will 
30The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
see later how the government has provided the 
legal and conducive environm ents for facilitating 
mobile money growth. According to Di Castri (2013) and Di Castri and Gidvani (2014), the government also regulates the sector and make policy decisions. It also sets: the licensing requirements, transparency and disclosure rules, 
market conduct rules, rules on the privacy of data, 
national strategies, rules on credit registry, etc. The 
roles of the banking and non -banking institutions 
are to: establish their industry code of conduct, the provision of financial education or literacy, to  create 
their own internal recourse mechanisms, conduct 
self-assessments, train their staff as well as to set 
their own strategies for financial inclusion. 
Moreover, the liberalization of the financial sector was also key to allowing mobile money operation s. I 
come from a mixed economy country, the USA. According to Campbell and Stein (1991) and Mbowe (2010), Tanzania was not a mixed economy before 
the liberalization of its financial sector. This left the 
banking sector struggling and the economy to its knees. Moreover, the liberalization of the economy 
allowed the introduction of new and better products, increased customer choices, resulted in the growth in demand for financial and 
telecommunications services, increased 
investments and coverage for both fin ancial and 
non-financial institutions (also see: World Bank, 
2005; IMF, 2007; Goyal and Sarkar, 2014; and Beju and Giupac -Ulici, 2012). Liberalization also 
increased the number of services that the telecommunications sector could offer, this included 
short messaging services (SMS), multimedia 
messaging services (MMS), the possibility of the 
operators to upgrade their networks to enable the delivery of new and more modern services to customers. All this became possible because of the changing political econo my of the 
telecommunications and the banking sectors. It also 
allowed the adaptation of the ‘Converged Licensing 
Framework’ by the telecommunications sector.  
4.2.	The	Converged	Licensing	Framework	
These are some of the changes that occurred when Tanzania l iberalized its economy. This was what 
happened in the telecommunications sector, which later helped the advent of mobile money. The 
Tanzanian communications sector is governed by: 
the 1997 Telecommunications Policy, the 2003 Information and Communication T echnologies 
(ICT) Policy, the 2003 Information Broadcasting Policy and the 2003 Postal Policy. Telecommunications in Tanzania are regulated by 
the Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority 
(TCRA), which is a body set up by the 2003 Tanzania Communicatio ns Regulatory Authority Act 
(TCRAA).  In 2015, the Government of Tanzania 
enacted the cybercrimes Act and the Electronic Transactions Act. The TCRA expected the two Acts to improve the confidence of financial institutions in ICT since the law is addressing e-services and cyber 
defense. The TCRA cited banks as the prime beneficiaries of the Acts as their activities are highly dependent on ICT. Furthermore, various sector legislations have shaped the telecommunications 
services. These included: The Tanzania 
Communications Act No. 18/1993; The Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority Act No. 12/2003 which introduced Converged Licensing Framework (CLF), complemented by 14 regulations; The 2015 Electronic Transactions Act; 
The 2015 Cybercrimes Act; The Univers al 
Communications Service ACCESS Act No. 12/2006; 
The 2010 Electronic and Postal Communications Act. All these Acts were the results of the politics of the telecommunications sector in Tanzania. 	
The best thing that the TCRA did a while ago 
was creating wha t was referred to as the 
‘Converged Licensing Framework’ … That 
Framework I am talking about 2006 or 2007. The issuance of the license to every service, as technology has changed over time. We 
started and converged licenses since 2006. 
They said they provi ded a license that was 
technologically and service neutral. What did all this mean? … They are free to do any kind of innovation based on the licensing framework. As I said earlier, it is converged and that we do not regulate the technology. 
We do not regu late the service …. Hence, 
mobile money was like an addition to the 
services that the operators were offering . 
(Respondent Obama) 
The CLF was key to implementing the 
liberalization policy. The TCRA introduced it on February 23
rd, 2005. Likewise, it was 
technologically and service neutral, as well as it accommodated locals with minimum investments. The CLF ensures regulatory flexibility, addressing market and technology developments, as well as 
efficient utilization of network resources and 
encouraged the  market entry of small -scale 
operators. The CLF of Tanzania establishes 4 categories of licenses as follows: Network Facilities Providers (NF), Network Service Providers (NS), Application Service Providers (AS) and Content 
Service Providers (CS).  The licensing regime 
provides separate licenses for infrastructure and 
services. In the previous regime services, including internet provision were licensed individually. The CLF allows content service providers who do not own their own transmission facilities (net work 
facilities) to deliver broadcasting services using 
licensed network facility operators (Mfungahema, 
2014). According to Mfungahema (2014), the CLF has been a catalyst in the development of 
31The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
communication network infrastructure, network 
services, applic ations and content (radio and 
broadcasting). Thanks to the CLF that mobile money innovations were introduced in the telecommunications sector.  
The 4 authorization categories in the CLF are 
further divided into 4 geographic market segments: 
international, national, regional, and district market 
segment. Hence, the operator could choose where 
they wanted to operate. How the market was regulated was for considering these choices.  
4.3.	Test,	Monitor,	and	Regulate	
You know, the central bank is an authority. It has the authority over the National Payments 
System. The MNOs and the other non -
financial institutions get involved on the 
payment system side. They are not on the banking side. We were open on this. The banks objected in the very beginning. They said the MNOs were entering the money 
business. And that they were in the National Payments System. And that they did not have strict supervision and the requirements. They thought the requirements and supervision favored the MNOs and not the banks. In which case, the banks clearly 
thought this created the conditions for the 
unfair competition. And as they heard it from 
elsewhere that they could use the bank -led 
model to run mobile money, the big difference was whether one proceeded with innovation or not, and the willingness to take the risk to let innovation lead while you monitor and then appropriately manage the 
risks. The system was called ‘test, monitor, 
and regulate.’ This was the concept . 
(Respondent Ngosha) 
Tanzania did not have an ‘Electronic Commerce 
Act’ when it launched mobile money services. It 
adopted the ‘test, monitor, and regulate’ approach which allowed the MNOs to launch and scale services depending on the guidance of the Bank of Tanzania (BOT) ‘letters of no objection’(LNOs) (also see: Di Castri and Gidvani, 2014). In 2007, the BOT issued the ‘Electronic Payment Schemes Guidelines 
(EPSGs) which gave the MNOs the right to offer 
payment services through mobile transfer. Although the EPSG allowed the MNOs to offer payment services through mobile money , they covered risks 
for banks and other financial institutions, leaving out the role of MNOs. Hence, the MNOs were 
required to partner with banks to receive the 
‘LNOs’, which allowed the BOT to guarantee that the customer’s money is safe in the banking sy stem, 
backed with 100 percent liquidity prerequisite.  
Due to lack of mobile money regulatory 
framework and laws at its inception in 2008, the MNOs were forced to collaborate with the licensed banks and financial institutions for the BOT to release the LNOs which allowed the MNOs to deliver mobile money servic es (Di Castri and 
Gidvani, 2014). Due to the ‘test, monitor and regulate’ approach, Tanzania created and established the regulatory and mobile money 
policies which guided the development of the 
mobile money services. According to Respondent Nkema:  
I think the interesting part is that the actual 
MNO is not regulated by the central bank. What is regulated by the central bank is the e-money transfer. And that regulation is the 
same for the banks as it is for mobile money providers. What they differ is that th ey fall in 
the different tiers of providers. And in the way they meet the different requirements, 
which I consider to be fair because they take 
into consideration the risk also which it carries, because if you are a bank, you transfer large amounts of mone y. You give 
out larger credit, things like that. So, that is why by default, you will be in another tier 
than somebody who is just transferring small 
amounts of money. So, I don’t think they favor anyone in particular .  
The work of creating and establishin g the 
appropriate regulatory and mobile money policies 
is ongoing. There are still many gaps in regulatory 
frameworks and mobile money policies that still need to be bridged as the National Payments System transforms itself.  
4.4.	National	Payments	System	Act	
The mobile money sector emerged due to the establishment and enactment of relevant legislation 
and regulations. The MNOs are not financial 
institutions but use the national payments system. According to Respondent Obama:  
Any payment mechanism that is i n the 
country is grounded, it falls under the BOT mandate. Whether you pay through the bank, whether through the Western Union, through TigoPesa, MPesa, whether through the EMS, whether it is through the bus, anything involving the payments it is under the  BOT 
supervision. 
It is clear to envisage pieces of legislation if the 
non-financial institutions use the payment system 
supervised by the BOT.  There are four main pieces 
of legislation and 6 pieces of secondary legislation 
that have allowed the mobile mon ey to operate in 
the financial sector. The four essential legislations 
are: firstly, the 2006 Bank of Tanzania Act replaced 
32The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
the 1995 and 1965 Acts. It not only created the 
Bank of Tanzania, but also defined its principal functions. The Bank of Tanzania est ablished a few 
guidelines that helped the development of mobile money services such as: The National Payment Systems Guidelines for Retail Payments, and Rules and Regulations for Retail Payments, and the 
Guidelines Introducing Electronic Payments, e.g., 
Mobile Payments Regulations (MPR). According to 
Parkes (2014), the 2012 MPRs established a licensing regime for non -banks including the MNOs. 
It allowed them to provide services such as: account-to-account transfers, person -to-person 
fund transfers, business -to-business fund transfers, 
cash-in, and cash -out services. Secondly, the 2006 
Banking and Financial Institutions Act provided the legal framework for undertaking licensed banking operations within Tanzania. Thirdly, the 2007 Electronic Payment Schemes Gu idelines allowed the 
advent of mobile money. Fourthly, the 2015 
National Payments System Act defined who could 
use the national payments system. A payment system in Tanzania is a facility that ensures the circulation of money. The payment system includes payment instruments, banking and money transfer 
payments procedures, and interbank payment 
transfers. The payment system in Tanzania is 
regulated by: The 2015 Payment System (Electronic Money) Regulations; The 2015 Payment System Licensing and Approval Regulations (The Licensing Regulations). The 2015 National Payments System Act provided a legal framework for payment systems in Tanzania and included laws to oversee 
licensing, compliance, enforcement and matters of 
liability for breach of the law. It also pe rmitted 
institutions other than banks and financial institutions, such as the MNOs, to operate payment systems in Tanzania.  
The six pieces of secondary legislation are: 
Firstly, the 2006 Finance Act which empowered the 
government not only to make changes in the tax 
regime, but also to amend different financial and tax 
laws. Secondly, the 2002 Prevention of Terrorism Act created the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs responsible for this Unit’s functions. Moreo ver, 
UNCTAD (2012) mentions other regulations that have the potential to influence the functioning of the mobile money services, such as: firstly the 2006 Tanzania Evidence Act CAP 6, which specified the use of electronic documents as evidence in Tanzania’ s courts. Secondly, the 2003 Fair 
Competition Act fostered competition in different 
sectors and protected customers. To reinforce this 
Act the Fair Competition Commission (FCC) and the Fair Competition Tribunal (FCT) were made responsible for the administering of the laws and for the provision of a judicial forum to hear appeals respectively.  As the reforms were implemented, legislation 
and laws were introduced in the sector. They play a key role in making financial inclusion policy decisions and strategie s which affect the 
development of mobile money. For instance, each of these Acts creates an institution which participates in the National Financial Inclusion Framework 
where the Tanzania Telecommunications 
Regulatory Authority (TCRA) also engages in the policy discussions. As mobile money providers need 
to work with banks and other financial institutions, at first the Bank of Tanzania signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the TCRA to regulate 
the financial aspects of mobile money while the 
TCRA regulated the communications aspects of 
mobile money. The BOT did not have strict regulations for mobile money services as it did not know what would happen later with mobile money. It used the ‘Test, Monitor and Regulate’ model. The banks were the deposit takers while the MNOs 
remained the non -deposit takers providing financial 
services. Mobile money as such was defined as a platform or a tool that could be used to aid the provision of financial services. Mobile money providers were required to open trust a ccounts 
with banks. Their monies were deposited in those 
accounts. So, mobile money providers use the 
national payment systems to provide their services. With these new realities in 2015 the National Payment Systems Act was introduced, and with it, the electronic money regulations and the licensing 
regulations were introduced. In this way, mobile money providers were required to create a separate 
legal entity, separate from the mother company for 
regulatory purposes as required by the bank of Tanzania. To p rovide mobile money services, the 
MNOs were no longer required to obtain the ‘letter of no objection’ from the BOT to operate but were required to apply for a license to use the national payment systems. Hence, to operate mobile money 
services, the MNOs ar e required to comply with the 
following: The 2015 National Payment Systems Act, 
the 2015 Electronic Money Regulations, and the 2015 Licensing regulations.  
Diagram 2 below shows what I mean by the 
National Payment Systems. There are two payment 
systems in T anzania, one is the ‘Large Value 
Payment Systems’ (LVPSs), and the other one is the 
Retail Payment Systems (RPSs).  Mobile money 
services fall under Retail Payment Systems. And as you will see the new emerging services in the retail payment systems are mobi le banking, mobile 
money, and agent banking.   
33The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
Diagram 2: National Payments System  
Source: BOT (2017).  
Diagram 3 depicts the DFS ecosystem. This is a 
very complicated ecosystem as shown here. As of 
2016, 57 banks were operating in Tanzania, and 5 MNOs were in offering mobile money services, today they have 7 MNOs. So, this is still a growing sector. I have decided to show you this Diagram to 
illustrate how complicated is the digital financial 
ecosystem where mobile money services operate. 
As complicated as the DFS ecosystem is, there is a need for the interoperable systems.  
Diagram 3: DFS Ecosystem  
Source: BOT (2017). 
4.5.	Interoperability	
Since its inception, the ‘Converged Licensing 
Framework’ took care of a lot of issues. The BOT needed to change as they had reviewed the National Payments System. They issued another Act that recognized digital financial 
transaction services and mobile money issues. They enacted electronically associated regulations which identified electronic transactions, including the issues regarding interoperability . (Respondent Obama)  
Interoperability can be defined as ‘ mon ey	moving	
between	 mobile	 financial	 services	 accounts	 of	different	 MNOs,	 and	 between	 mobile	 accounts	 and	bank	accounts .’ Interoperability, therefore, provides 
greater benefits to the mobile money service markets. It also allows the operators to offer more flexible payment options which can increase the 
overall number of transactions and velocity of money in the ecosystem. It also provides the 
regulators with an opportunity to draw more cash 
into the formal financial system. It also provides more accessible a nd flexible services as well as it 
allows for an opportunity to advance further financial inclusion (also see: Musa et al., 2014).  
According to Di Castri (2013), interoperability 
also has the following benefits: first, it makes commercial sense for providers and it creates value for customers. Second, it helps to share the regulatory risks. Third, it lowers the cost of financial services, and by doing so, it increases customer choices. Fourth, it increases competition and breaks dominant positions which ma y help remove the 
need for individuals to own and manage multiple SIM cards. Interoperability also has its challenges. Its implementation can be technical and complex and can distract the operator from focusing on the basics of the service, such as buildin g the 
distribution network and educating customers. Its 
compliance may increase costs, making the 
businesses more challenging for providers (also see: Di Castri, 2013).  
From the above -mentioned benefits and 
challenges, MNOs, banks, and policymakers should work together to enhance interoperability. They should also agree on what type of interoperability 
suits them after assessing the benefits, costs, and 
risks. Moreover, putting regulations in place allows the markets to implement systems and solutions capable of being interoperable, which will deploy 
market-led interoperable solutions (Di Castri and 
Gidvani, 2014).  
Kulkarni (2015) asserts that the CGAP has 
defined three levels of interoperability that need to 
be addressed for a developing country like Tanzania: (i) ‘platform -level interconnection’:  this 
occurs when mobile money platforms are interconnected in such a way that one customer  
with an account with one MNO may be able to send 
and receive money to or from another customer 
owning an account with a dif ferent MNO; (ii) 
‘agency-level exclusivity’: this occurs  when a 
customer of one MNO is restricted from using an agent from another MNO to cash in  or cash out 
services related to that customer’s account. Hence, ‘agency interoperability’ can be achieved even  
though ‘agency exclusivity’ is an issue, as long as the platforms are interconnected. A good example is the ‘interoperable ATM networks’; (iii) ‘customer -level 
interoperability’: involves two interoperability scenarios for this end. While the first one has to do with the customer’s ability to access his/her 
account through any phone using a SIM card on the 
34The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
same network, the second scenario has to do with 
the customer’s ability to access multiple accounts on one SIM (also see: Masamila, 2014).  
Soon after th e Maya Declaration in 2011, which 
called for the achievement of financial inclusion, the TCRA and BOT began to draft mobile payments regulations. The BOT also collaborated with 
financial, telecommunications, as well as 
competition regulatory bodies to create a framework to enhance competition and to encourage interoperability in the mobile money sector. In 2014, the ‘Government of Tanzania’ launched the ‘National Financial Inclusion 
Framework’ committing the government to address 
the challenges facing strat egies to enhance financial 
inclusion. Interoperability of the networks was also a concern that was to be addressed while implementing the ‘National Financial Inclusion Framework’ (also see: URT, 2014). As the implementation of the ‘National Financial Inclu sion 
Framework’ progressed, the need for a full mobile money platform level interoperability became even more apparent if the ‘e -float liquidity management’ 
challenges were to be resolved. In Tanzania and in East Africa, ‘e -float’ is basically money kept i n an 
account, and a customer can use his/her mobile 
phone to have access to that money in order to 
make payments or transfer money, etc.; and that the customer may add to or exchange for cash by visiting an agent.  
In 2014, an interoperability agreement bet ween 
the BOT, two banks, and all four MNOs was reached as it laid the foundation for different levels of 
interoperability. Tigo led the remaining MNOs into 
an agreement as the MNOs became aware of the challenges facing the mobile money sector, which included: (i) the direct competition for market 
share in a stalling market; (ii) the slow -pace 
growing market; and (iii) latent demand from potential customers’ willingness to increase 
frequency and value of transactions. To overcome 
all these challenges, in 201 3 Airtel, Tigo and Zantel 
implemented their interoperability scheme, while Vodacom supported the structure, it did not sign up (see: Jones -evans, 2016; Musa et al. 2014; Di Castri 
and Gidvani, 2014 and Bourreau and Valletti, 2015). 
In 2015, Vodacom started  discussions to join the 
interoperability agreement (IFC, 2015) and in 2015 
it joined the interoperability agreement to make Tanzania the first African mobile money market with full interoperability for mobile money peer -to-
peer (P2P) transfers (Kabendera, 2015). 
Furthermore, in 2015 ‘The 2015 National Payment 
Systems Act’ and ‘The 2015 Electronic Money 
Regulations’ were reinforced to set up the rules of the game. The interoperability of mobile money markets became even more critical. Besides the interopera bility of mobile money, factors aiding the 
deployment of mobile money services are also 
worth-mentioning in section 4.6.  4.6.	 The	 Deployment	 of	 Mobile	 Money	
Services	
Apart from the findings mentioned above in the 
previous sections, it is worth mentioning that the mobile money deployment in Tanzania and East Africa in general, was also determined by the following factors (also see UNCTAD, 2012):  
Firstly, the access channels, which were used as 
different platforms, applied different methods to deliver mobile money services. According to Respondent Obama: 	
The issue is that we oversee the resources 
related to communications. For instance, the 
numbering, for example, for you to send a 
MPesa mess age, you need a USSD short 
code… Until today, when the operator emerges, he comes to us and we give him the numbering resources which is a short code. He has to declare what he wants to do with 
that code. So, h e needs to have a business 
plan. At the moment, there are few and we 
want to make sure that everyone getting the numbering resources has a business. Otherwise, he can receive those resources and do nothing. So, we ask everybody to tell us about their busin ess, and if we find it very 
impressive, we gi ve them the numbering 
resources . 
A number of access channels used might have 
included but were not limited to: (i) SMS commands 
using a short code; (ii) Unstructured Supplementary 
Service Data (USSD) which initiated sessions between the mobile phone and the server, and which performed a series of steps to accomplish transactions (M -Pesa and ZPesa used this platform 
as well); (iii) Subscriber Identity Model (SIM) (SIM Toolkit (STK) which was an approach supported by 
most platforms. The STK facilitated the breakdown of transactions into a series of logical steps which helped manage transactions. The presence of all these channels helped the deployment of mobile money and the smooth functioning of the different platforms of mobile money services.  
Secondly, security factors also facilitated the 
deployment of mobile money. From a security perspective, if the different platforms were used, for instance, if the data was sent via USSD and received via SMS without being enc rypted, that transaction 
risked being intercepted. Hence, well- stored data on 
the phone helped protect both the customer details 
and the account value. Mobile money was safe 
because the SIMs were registered. It was easy to track down where the payment started and where the payments ended. Theft incidents had been rarely reported.  
Thirdly, how an MNO was networked, in terms 
of agents, branches, people, and ATMs, made the 
35The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
deployment of its services easier. According to 
Respondent Nkema:  
…Mobile Money was th e key factor in
bringing services closer to the people. They 
were able to reach out to a massive amount 
of people because they were piggybacking on kiosks. They didn’t have to establish brick and mortar structures. So, without investing a single cent in in frastructure, the only 
infrastructure they had put was the ‘minara’/ ‘towers’. They didn’t have to build the 
infrastructure as the banks did. No, they 
didn’t. They just did it by making the agent their business. That was how they were able to roll out acro ss the country. They 
contribute significantly being within the 5 km or 1 km within a financial service point. It is driven by mobile money. Without mobile, 
money we wouldn’t be where we are now.  
The networks provided interfaces through cash -
in and cash -out functions.  There was a lot of 
changing technologies and business models as the MNOs and other stakeholders strived to manage 
mobile money services. This made service deployment an important aspect of supporting the smooth functioning of the mobile money s ector. The 
deployment alone was not enough. Policies and regulations were also needed. This had much to do with the politics of financial inclusion in Tanzania.  
4.7.	National	Financial	Inclusion	Politics	
“So,	 the	 financial	 system	 serves	 the	 basic,	 eh,	functionality	 of	 the	 system	 with	 the	 government	 at	
any	 point	 in	 time.	 It	 is	 never	 separate	 from	 it”  
(Respondent Ngosha). This claim explains the link between the financial system and the government, which brings in the politics of financial inclusion. 
Diagram 4 illustrates the different players in the 
‘National Financial Inclusion Framework’ and their 
roles. 
Diagram 4: Actors and Committees Implementing 
the National Financial Inclusion Framework  
Source: TNCFI (2008).  When mobile money started in 2008, the banks 
objected. They thought mobile money providers 
were interfering with the banking services, as they engage in the money business. According to Respondent Mzuri: 	
The reality was such that the banks did not 
directly agree that the MNOs start mobile 
money services. I could say that it was 
somehow the BOT agenda to support innovation. They wanted to promote innovation within the financial sector. That 
was the key agenda behind the establishment 
of mobile money. That was the reason why the BOT offered them t he operating licenses 
without ha ving their regulations in place . 
At that time such disputes could be settled by 
the Bank of Tanzania and the Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority. As Tanzania did not have a single financial inclusion policy, the National Financial Inclusion Framework was 
instead established. The framework defined financial inclusion and set the vision and targets to 
be met by financial and non -financial institutions. It 
also sets the different strategies to achieve financial 
inclusion nationwide. It is also a platform where 
disputes are settled, and new decisions are made through a ’consultative process’. It is a ‘public -
private partnership initiative’ (PPPI). I am mentioning the national financial inclusion 
framework because it helpe d to bring mobile money 
services closer to the key financial providers and it 
helped both the MNOs and the banks to forge partnerships to allow the survival of mobile money. Mobile Money Providers participate through TAMNOA which is the ‘Tanzania Mobile Mo ney 
Operators Association’. The banks participate through the TBA (Tanzania Bankers Association).  
Both TAMNOA and the TBA participate in every level of the national financial inclusion framework as shown in the Diagram TT above. By doing, so they both prot ect their interests. This is where the 
politics of financial inclusion occur, and the decision 
from the committees as illustrated in Diagram 4 
affect financial and non -financial institutions.  
When it comes to mobile money and the politics 
of financial inc lusion, one has to understand what 
mobile money does in relation to the poor people’s everyday lives:		
For me, one of the key things, why mobile money is key for driving financial inclusion is that mobile money has the best need of people. Within the Tanzanian society, we know that the family is a core source of 
credit. It is a core source of support. We have 
over a quarter of the women’s population who are the dependents. They receive money from somebody. If my uncle somewhere 
36The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
needs money, I am the one who  is going to 
send it to him. So, what mobile money did 
was it provided an easy and a quick, and somehow a cheap way of addressing the need for sending money. It was simple. It was using something that everybody has already: ‘a phone’. Today, 68 percent hav e a phone, 
and 93 percent have access to mobile phones. If I do not have a phone, I go to my friend 
who has a phone. (Respondent Nkema)  
The politics of financial inclusion become the 
issue about how to incorporate mobile money services into the ‘National F inancial Inclusion 
Framework.’ The ‘National Financial Inclusion Framework’ provides national strategies to achieve national financial inclusion goals and the MNOs play an important part in attaining the national financial inclusion goals. The National Fin ancial Inclusion 
Council (NC) is a policymaking body that sets the national financial strategies and policies. The process of policymaking has been always political. However, in the case of Tanzania, this process is a PPPI and it involves both the public a nd private 
sectors. The BOT, TCRA, Ministry of Finance are 
among a few institutions that represent the 
government, and the TAMNOA and the TBA are among the institutions that represent the MNOs, Banks and the private sector. Hence, the politics of financial inclusion are depicted in the ‘National 
Financial Inclusion Framework’ with the different committees playing their role as assigned to them. 
The process of policy -making and strategy 
formulation and implementation affect the financial 
sector (the mobile m oney services and strategies 
also included in the process). Policymakers design national strategies and policies such as the National Payments System Act and its regulations whereby 
the Parliament gets involved in the passing of the 
Acts. All the Acts as m entioned earlier in this article 
went through the National Assembly, which is a political body. The debates took place in the National Assembly before the Acts were confirmed and officialized by the members of the parliament. All the above -mentioned Acts c ould be regarded as 
the political tools that allowed the reforms in both the telecommunications and banking sectors and set the legal frameworks for the operations of the respective sectors. Those reforms and legal frameworks allowed the liberalization of the 
individual sectors which in turn allowed new financial and non -financial institutions to use the 
national payments system. Mobile money could use the national payments systems thanks to the Acts and legal frameworks that were in place.  
Moreover, the p olicymakers were the state 
bureaucrats in charge of the financial sectors, or any other officials acting on behalf of the state or 
financial institutions. The role of the NC was to 
facilitate the smooth running of the financial sector by assessing and unde rstanding the sectoral 
challenges. The politics of the NC involved knowing the right timing for the introduction of the appropriate policies. The NC was expected to be in a position to identify any regulatory risks associated with any policies and strategi es. By doing so, it 
helped to enhance a healthy and competitive 
environment for the whole sector.  
The National Financial Inclusion politics were 
friendly to mobile money. Mobile money had 
increased financial inclusion rates and helped to reach the financi ally excluded people. Hence, the 
politics of financial inclusion favored mobile money 
services as an innovation in the financial sector.  
The politics of financial inclusion allowed 
innovation. It has to be innovation in the market and innovation should be  driven by 
everyone. Not only by the financial service 
providers, but also the regulators. The 
regulators should encourage new movers and should try to assist with accommodating innovation, not to just try to guarantee financial stability. Last but not lea st, they 
should also be flexible, so there should be 
flexibility from the financial provider side, 
especially the big players to also accommodate innovation, but also there should be flexibility from the regulator side to allow products entering the market  may 
be in a controlled environment before they are launched to a wider environment. 
(Respondent Kong’honelli) 
The statistics could illustrate how mobile money 
boosted financial inclusion over time. Strand 4 illustrates that mobile money had a higher uptak e of 
formal financial services despite having one of the lowest numbers of financial products in the market.  
Strand 4: Demand for and Supply of Financial Services 
Source: FSDT (2017).  
From the ‘test, monitor and regulate’ approach I 
mentioned in Sectio n 4.3, Tanzania hesitated to 
charge taxes from mobile money users. According to Fuchs et al. (2016), mobile money taxation had 
37The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
been a policy issue.  Given the low use of bank 
products by the adult population in Tanzania, the 
mobile money and its use became of greater 
importance in providing access to formal financial services. Imposing higher taxes would harm the progress in the provision of inclusive financial policies. Mobile money was yet to be widely used to 
meet broader payment needs. Incorporated in th e 
fees that the MNOs charged for money transfers was 
the commission they paid their agents. While MNOs did not charge fees to their customers for cash going into their mobile money wallets, the fees did apply for mobile wallet transfers (paid by the sender ) and 
for cash-outs (paid by the receiver) (also see: Fuchs 
et al. 2016).  
The taxation specific to mobile transfers was 
introduced in Tanzania in the Finance Act of 2013. In 2013, the excise tax was introduced and was applied to the principal transferred – a ‘Tobin’ or 
‘turnover style tax’. The taxes were applied as a 
fixed percentage of the principal. In 2014, excise tax 
applied to the fees paid by customers to their mobile money operators from money transfers (Fuchs et al. 2016).  
Discussions with the Mini stry of Finance and the 
Bank of Tanzania resulted in the introduction of the 
‘turnover tax’, which was established to generate 
government revenues. As the tax was introduced, a wide range of the people affected by the new tax opposed it, even though very l ittle revenue was in 
fact collected from it. Furthermore, the TBA protested the imposition of the tax, which led the government to reconsider its position. So far three 
Finance Acts were introduced in the following year: 
2013; 2014 and 2015 (Also see: Fuch s et al., 2016).  
Following the opposition to taxes, in 2013, the 
2013 ‘Finance Act’ introduced a 0.15 percent turnover tax on the amount transferred. Once more, the strong objections from stakeholders in early 2014, forced the Tanzanian government not to 
enforce the turnover tax introduced by the 2013 
‘Finance Act’, and with Cabinet’s approval, no excise 
duty was levied in the 2013/14 tax year. Things changed in late 2014. In the 2014 ‘Finance Act’, the 10 percent excise duty was introduced on charges and fees payable for services provided by banks and 
MNOs. This was a significant amendment because initially, MNOs applied the excise tax to their transfer fees alone. They did not apply the tax to their larger cash -out fees. According to these 
amendments, exci se duty was introduced and was 
to be applied to both the MNOs’ transfer and cash -
out fees (also see: Fuchs et al., 2016).  
As you should be noting at this stage, taxation on 
mobile money was (and still remains) a very delicate policy. Its delicacy was (and still is) in 
terms of the proposition that taxation could impact negatively on the development of the mobile money sector. From this perspective, it is easier to 
understand why the banks complained as the MNOs operated without or with low taxes. The 
introduction of the excise tax on all MNO fee 
incomes related to mobile money transfers could be contributing toward a leveling of the playing field (also see: Fuchs et al., 2016; GSMA, 2015:16 -17; 
UNCTAD, 2012:32).   
Whether taxation introduced a fair playing fi eld 
is subject to debate.  It should be noted that MNOs 
also pay VAT on the fees they charge for their services, while banks are yet exempted from VAT. Tanzania faces strong pressures to increase tax revenue collection. This pressure to improve tax revenues , especially for a service for which demand 
is relatively inelastic, could explain why excise taxes on money transfers were introduced with a rather narrow focus on revenue generation (Fuchs, 2016). Furthermore, GSMA (2015) claims that “taxes	 on	operators	 reduce	 growth	 and	 investment	 in	 the	
mobile	sector ”.  
The government taxation policy on mobile 
money is one of the examples of policies that have emerged to support the advent of mobile money and the economic growth in general. However, mobile taxes in Tanz ania remain inefficient and 
inequitable. In 2017, President John Pombe Magufuli raised tax concerns and forced mobile 
companies to be registered in the Dar es Salaam 
Stock Exchange (DSE) market.  
The President’s move came after claims that the 
telecommunications companies were reluctant to be listed in the DSE. This directive, which may become part of the taxation policy, ordered the revocation of license for mobile phone companies 
which were reluctant to list on the DSE. The TRCA 
was given the mandate to ac t tough against the 
‘stubborn’ mobile companies. The directive was issued under premises that all mobile phone firms should float shares in the DSE market. The ‘Electronic Revenue Collection System’ (e -RCS) was 
launched in 2017 and will be operated by the 
‘Tanzania Revenue Authority’ (TRA) and the 
‘Zanzibar Revenue Board’ (ZRB). The new system was designed to track and directly collect excise duty and Value Added Tax (VAT) on all electronic transactions by MNOs, telecommunication companies, and financial in stitutions, which would 
enhance efficiency in the collection of government revenues (also see; Mwakyusa, 2017).  The directive 
sets up an environment for future new policies to emerge. 
5.Challenges
There are also challenges resulting from policy gaps 
between the use of mobile money technology and 
economic development in Tanzania (Hawaiju, 2013). For instance, though not severely impaired, a wider population of the Tanzanian adult users lacks financial capabilities. The ‘National Financial Education Fra mework’ (NFEF) was introduced in 
38The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
2016, and will run through 2020 with its main focus 
on improving the levels of financial capability of the Tanzanian population. To prevent them from lagging behind they must be familiarized with the benefits and opportunit ies of ‘mobile money’ and 
‘mobile banking’. Policies to address these issues are needed. And it may be right to suggest that what 
has been analyzed in this paper, was just the 
beginning of the mobile money sector. More policies, Acts, legal and regulatory frameworks will 
be introduced in the future. This paper has been written as a brief introduction to the mobile money sector development in Tanzania focusing on 
important selected legal and regulatory Acts and 
agreements, as well as policies.  
On the technic al side, Diagram 5 summarizes 
what would be desired growth of mobile money services. Mobile money has to increase the access, uptake, and usage of formal financial services. In Tanzania, mobile money has increased access to 
formal financial services on the  part of the 
financially excluded (See Strand 4 in Section 4.7). Its 
uptake of formal financial services is higher than that of the banks. Mobile money in Tanzania has 71,245,336 registered accounts as in 2016, however, only 17,025,685 registered users wer e 
active (see Table 1 in Section 3.2). 	The challenges 
facing the development of mobile money services include how to solicit customers to use their mobile money accounts. This is the challenge.  Is mobile 
money a diminishing returns service? When will it start to show the diminishing returns and therefore retrogression? This is another challenge. 	
Diagram 5: Mobile Money Access, Uptake and Usage  6.Limitations
These findings are valid for Tanzania. Some countries may resemble the Tanzanian situation; however, I advise that researchers should conduct 
similar studies for those countries in order to comment specifically on the situations of those countries.  
7.Conclusion
To conclude, mobile money development has been possible in Tanzania because there are tho se who 
see its financial inclusion benefits as a new delivery channel, its potential to reach the financially unreached and excluded people, its potential to reduce the costs of financial services. Moreover, 
mobile money services are safer than banking 
services. They can scale beyond any single financial institution’s footprint. The MNOs perceived the mobile money’s ability to increase customer loyalty, and they have used it to reach as many customers as possible. Supported by conducive legal frameworks 
and politics as illustrated in this article, mobile 
money services developed and grew in Tanzania. I 
have argued in this paper that the liberalization of the Tanzanian economy aided the development of mobile money through reforms, the CLF, the ‘test, monitor and regulate’ Approach, interoperability, 
the national financial inclusion politics and the 
‘2015 National Payment Systems Act’. This was how 
mobile money started and developed in Tanzania.  
39The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
References	
Aduda, J. and Kalunda, E. (2012). ‘Financial Inclusion and Financial Sector Stability with	 Reference to Kenya: 
Review of Literature’, Journal	 of	Applied	Finance	and	Banking ,	2(6):95-120.	
AFI. (2012). Guideline	Note:	Mobile	Financial	Services	 –	Basic	Terminology . Bangkok: Mobile Financial Services 
Working Group, AFI.  
AFI. (2017). Defining Financial Inclusion. Guideline Note No. 28. Kuala Lumpur: Alliance for Financial Inclusion.   
Arestoff, F. and Venet, B. (2013). ‘Learning to Walk Before You Run: Financial Behaviour and Mobile Banking in 
Madagascar’. Document	de	Travail	DT/2013- 09. Paris: UMR. 
Bank of Tanzania. (2016). Directorate	of	Banking	Supervision:	Annual	Report,	2015 . Dar es Salaam: Directorate of 
Banking Supervision.  
Beju, D. and Giupac -Ulici, M. (2012). ‘The Impact of Liberalization on Banking System’, Procedia	Economics	and	
Finance, 3:792-799. 
Bindo, R. and Hasnain, S. (2015). Mobile	Mon ey:	Choosing	a	Technical	Model	for	A2A	Interoperability:	Lessons	from	
Tanzania	 and	 Pakistan . GSMA. Also Available at: 
http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wpcontent/uploads/2016/01/2015_GSM A_Choosing-a-
technical- model-for-A2Ainteroperability_ Lessons- from-Tanzania-and-Pakistan.pdf  Accessed on May 
16th, 2017.  
Bongomin. G. et al. (2018). ‘Mobile Money and Financial Inclusion in Sub -Saharan Africa: The Moderating Role of 
Social Networks’, Journal	of	African	Business , 19(3):361 -384. 
BOT. (2016). Directorate of Banking Supervision: Annual Report, 2015. Dar es Salaam: Directorate of Banking 
Supervision.  
BOT. (2017). ‘The Evolution of Digital Financial Services Ecosystem and its Oversight’. A	Presentation	by	James	A.	
Masoy,	 Manager,	 Oversight	 and	 Policy	 Department	 –	Natio nal	 Payment	 System	 Directorate.	 Bank	 of	
Tanzania,	March	2017 . 
Bourreau, M. and Valletti, T. (2015). Enabling	Digital	Financial	Inclusion	through	Improvements	in	Competition	
and	Interoperability:	What	Works	and	What	Doesn’t?	CGD	Policy	Paper	065 . Washington, D.C.: Center for 
Global Development. Available online at: http://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/CGD -Policy-Paper-
65-Bourreau- Valletti-MobileBanking.pdf  Accessed August 1st , 2017.  
Bossuyt, M and Hove, L. (2016). ‘Mobile Payments Models and their Implications for NextGen MSPs, Info, 31-43. 
Campbell, H. and H. Stein. (1991). The	IMF	and	Tanzania:	The	Dynamics	of	Liberalisation . Harare: Natprint.  
Chauhan, S. (2015). ‘Acceptance of Mobile Money by Poor Citizens in India: Integrating Trust into the Technology 
Acceptance Model’, Info, 17(3): 58 -68. 
Demirguc -Kunt, A. et al. (2015). ‘The Global Findex Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusi on Around the 
World’. World	Bank	Policy	Research	Working	Paper	7255 . Washington DC: The World Bank.  
Di Castri, S. (2013). Mobile	Money:	Enabling	Regulatory	Solutions . London: GSMA. 
Di Castri, S. and Gidvani, L. (2014 ).	Enabling	Mobile	Money	Policies	in	Tan zania:	A	Test 	and	Learn”	Approach	to	
Enabling	 Market -Led	 Digital	 Financial	 Services . London: GSMA.	 Also Available at 
http://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wpcontent/uploads/2014/03/Tanzania -Enabling -
Mobile-Money-Policies.pdf Accessed on 	August 1st, 2017. 	
Donovan, K. (2012). ‘Mobile Money for Financial Inclusion’, Information	and	Communications	for	Development, 
61: 61-73. 
FinScope. (2009). FinScope	Survey:	The	Demand	for,	and	Barriers	to	Accessing	Financial	Services	in	Tanzania . Dare 
es Salaam: Financial Sector Deepening Trust (FSDT).  
FinScope. (2018). ‘Rethinking Financial Services: Taking Stock of Our Achievements and Forging the Way 
Forward’. Microfinance	Services:	A	Presentation	During	the	Launching	of	FinScope	2018	Results .  
FinScope. (2018b). FinScope	Tanzania:	Insights	that	Drive	Innovation . Dar es Salaam: Tanzania Deepening Trust 
Fund 
FSDT. (2017). ‘State of the Financial Sector: Are Financial Services Meeting the Needs of the Market’. Supply -Side	
Report	2017 . Dar es Sal aam: Financial Sector Development Trust.  
Fuchs, M. et al. (2016). Mobile Money Taxation: Policy Issues and Considerations for Pakistan and Tanzania. 
Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Gichuku, C. and Mulu -Mutuku, M. (2018). Determinants of Awareness and Adoption of Mobile Money 
Technologies: Evidence from Women Micro Entrepreneurs in Kenya’, Women’s	 Studies	 International	
Forum, 67: 18-22. 
Gilman, L. (2016). The	Impact	of	Mobile	Money	Interoperability	in	Tanzania:	Early	Data	and	Market	Perspectives	
on	Account -to-Account	Interoperability . London: GSMA. 
Goyal, A. and Sarkar, S. (2014). ‘The Benefits and Costs of Financial Market Liberalization’, Macroeconomic	and	
Finance	in	Emerging	Market	Economies , 7(2): 205 -207. 
40The	Development	of	Mobile	Money	and	the	Politics	of	Financial	Inclusion 	
GSMA. (2013 ).	Mobile	Money:	The	Opportun ity	for	India . London: GSMA. 
GSMA. (2015). Digital Inclusion and Mobile Sector Taxation in Tanzania. London: Deloitte. Also Available Online 
at: https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wpcontent/uploads/2015/01/Digital -inclusion -
mobile-sector-tax-Tanzania.pdf  Accessed on August 4th, 2017.  
GSMA. (2017). Taxation	and	Mobile	Money	in	Tanzania. London: GSMA. 
Haider, T. (2013). ‘ The Emergence of Mobile Banking and its Legal Implications in Tanzania’. A	Master’s	Degree	
Dissertation . Dar es Salaam: The Open University of Tanzania. 
Hawaiju, G. (2013). The	Impact	of	Mobile	Transfer	Technology	on	Economic	Development	in	Tanzania. Policy Brief 
No. 12, Tanzania Country Level Knowledge Network.  
Ho, J. (2018). The	 Future	 is	 Bright	 for	 Mobile	 Money	 and	 Agent	 Banking . Also Available at: 
https://www.slideshare.net/amdocsMFS/the -future-is-bright-for-mobile-money-and-agent-banking-
88034126 Accessed on January 17th, 2019.  
IFC. (2015). Achieving	 Interoperability	 in	 Mobile	 Financial	 Services:	 Tanzania	 Case	 Study . Washington, D.C.: 
International Finance Corporation.  Also Available Online at:  
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/8d518d004799ebf1bb8fff299 ede9589/IFC+Tanzania+Case+st
udy+10_03_2015.pdf?MOD=AJPERES  Accessed on August 1st, 2017.  
IMF. (2007). Reaping	the	Benefits	of	Financial	Globalization . Washington DC: International Monetary Fund.  
Jack, W. and Suri, T. (2011). ‘Mobile Money: The Economics of  MPesa.’ Working	 Paper	 No.	 W16721 . National 
Bureau of Economic Research.  
Jones-Evans, S. (2016). ‘The Tortoise and the Hare: Different Ways to Run the Race for Financial Inclusion: What 
has Driven the Growth of Mobile Money in Tanzania and Why is its Path So Different to That of Kenya’, 
Dissertation	for	the	Degree	of	MSc	International	Development. Bath: University of Bath.  
Kabendera, E. (2015). Vodacom Joins Tanzania Telcos in Cross -Network Mobile Money Transfer. Also Available 
at: http://www.theeastafrican.co.ke/business/Vodacom -to-allowcross -network- mobile-money-
transfer-/-/2560/2635342/ -/aafnfrz/ -/index.html  Accessed on August 1st, 2017.  
Kizza, J. (2013). Mobile Money Technology and the Fast Disappearing African Digital Divide’, African	Journal	of	
Science,	Technology	Innovation	and	Development , 5(5):373 -378. 
Komba, K. (2016). Interoperability	of	Digital	Financial	Services	in	Tanzania . Also Available at: https://www.afi -
global.org/blog/2016/08/interoperability -digital-financial-services- tanzania Downloaded  on January 
7th, 2019.  
Maina, J. (2018). Mobile	Money	Policy	and	Regulatory	Handbook . London: GSMA. 
Masamila, B. (2014). ‘State of Mobile Banking in Tanzania and Security Issues’ ,	International	Journal	of	Network	
Security	and	Its	Applications, 6(4): 53 -64. 
Maurer, B. (2011). ‘Afterword: Mobile Money, Money Magic, Purse Limits and Pins: Tracking Monetary 
Pragmatics’, Journal	of	Cultural	Economy , 4(3): 349 -359. 
Mbiti, I. and Weil, D. (2016). ‘Mobile Banking: The Impact of MPesa in Kenya’, NBER Working Paper 1 7129. 
Mbowe. W. (2010 ).	 Financial	 Sector	 Reforms	 and	 Development	 and	 their	 Microeconomic	 Implications . Dar es 
Salaam: The Print Factory.  
McKay, C. and Pickens, M. (2010). Branchless	 Banking	 2010:	 Who’s	 Served?	 At	 What	 Price?	 What’sNext?	 CGAP	
Focus	Note	66. Washington DC: World Bank Group. 
Mfungahema, R. (2014). ‘Telecommunications/ICT Cost and Tariff Policies: A Decade of Converged Regulation in 
Tanzania’ .	 Presentation	 to	 the	 ITU -T/BDT	 Regional	 Economic	 and	 Financial	 Forum	 of	
Telecommunications/ICT	for	Afr ica	Region	18 -19	February	2014	 –	Brazaville,	Republic	of	Congo . 
Morawczynski, O. and Pickens, M. (2009). ‘Poor People Using Mobile Money Services: Observation on Customer 
Usage and Impact from MPesa’. CGAP	Brief . Washington DC: World Bank Group. 
Mothobi, O and Gryzybowski, L. (2017). ‘Infrastructure Deficiencies and Adoption of Mobile Money in Sub -
Saharan Africa, Information	Economics	and	Policy , 40:71-79. 
Musa, O. et al. (2014). Is	 Tanzania	 Ready	 for	 Interoperability	 in	 Mobile	 Money ? Also Available at: 
http://www.cgap.org/blog/tanzania -ready-interoperability -mobile-money Accessed on August 1st, 
2017. 
Mwakyusa, A. (2017). List or Quit, JPM Tells Tele com Firms. Also Available Online at: 
http://allafrica.com/stories/201706020144.html  Accessed on August 4th, 2017.  
Ondiege, P. (2015). Regulatory	 Impact	 on	 Mobile	 Money	 and	 Financial	 Inclusion	 I N	 African	 Countries	 –	Kenya,	
Nigeria,	 Tanzania,	 and	 Uganda . Also Available at 
https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/Background -Paper-Financial -Inclusion-Ondiege.pdf  
Downloaded on January 17th, 2019.  
Parkes, T. (2014 ).	 Mobile	 Financial	 Services	 in	 Tanzania:	 The	 Current	 and	 Future	 Status	 of 	the	 Legal	 and	
Regulatory	 Framework . Also Available Online at:  
http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=99da90fe -780e-4238-b236-d61d038955de Accessed 
on August 1st, 2017.  
41The	Internati onal	 Social	 Sciences	 Review,	1( 1),	2019, 	pp.	25-42 	
Peruta, M. (2018). ‘Adoption of Mobile MONEY AND Financial Inclusion: A Microeconomic Approach through 
Cluster Analysis’, Economics	of	Innovation	and	New	Technology , 27(2): 154 -173. 
Pope, M. et al. (2011). ‘Mobile Payments: The Reality on the Ground in Sel ected Asian Countries and the United 
States’, International	Journal	of	Mobile	Marketing , 6(2): 88 -104. 
Rocha, R. et al. (2011). Financial	 Access	 and	 Stability:	 A	 Road	 Map	 for	 the	 Middle	 East	 and	 North	 Africa . 
Washington DC: World Bank.  
Stiglitz, J. (2000).  Economics	of	the	Public	Sector . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.  
Tabaro, G. (2011). ‘Establishing A National Financial Inclusion Networking Framework’.  In Policy	Memoranda	
2011:	The	Fletcher	School	Leadership	Program	for	Financial	Inclusion . Medford: Tuft s University.  
TanzaniaInvest. (2018). Tanzania	 Mobile	 Money	 Market	 Share	 (March	 2018) . Also Available at: 
https://www.tanzaniainvest.com/telecoms/mobile -money-transactions-2017-2018 Downloaded on 
January, 2nd 2019. 
TNCFI. (2014). Tanzania	 National	 Council	 for	 Financial	 Inclusion:	 National	 Financial	 Inclusion	 Framework	 –	A	
Public	 –	Private	Stakeholder’s	Initiative	(2014	 –	2016). Dar es Salaam: BOT. 
TNCFI. (2017). Tanz ania:	Self -	Evaluation	Report	of	the	National	Financial	Inclusion	Framework,	2014 -2016. Dar 
es Salaam: National Financial Inclusion Framework.  
TNCFI.	(2018).	National	Financial	Inclusion	Framework,	2018 -2022:	A	Public	 –	Private	Stakeholder’s	Initiative.	Da r	
es	Salaam:	National	Council	for	Financial	Inclusion. 	
Toma, C. (2012). ‘M -Payments Issues and Concepts’, Informatica	Economiča , 16(3): 117 -123. 
UNCTAD. (2012 ).	Mobile	Money:	For	Business	Development	in	the	East	African	Community:	A	Comparative	Study	of	
Existing	Platforms	and	Regulations . Geneva: United Nations.  
URT. (2014). National	Financial	Inclusion	Framework,	2014 -2016. Dar es Salaam: National Council for Financial 
Inclusion, Available online at: http://www.afiglobal.org/sites/default/files/publications/tanzania -
national-financial-inclusion -framework2014 -2016.pdf  Accessed on 2nd August, 2017.  
USAID. (2013). Tanzania	Mobile	Money	Assessment	and	Case	Study:	Examining	Cash	Payment	Streams	and	their	
Electronic	 Alternatives	 Among	 USAID	 Implementing	 Partners . Also Available at: 
https://solutionscenter.nethope.org/assets/collaterals/USAID_ -
_Tanzania_Mobile_Money_Market_Assessment_and_Case_Study_ -_Final.pdf   
World Bank. (2005). ‘Finan cial Liberalization: What Went Right? What Went Wrong?’. In Economic	Growth	in	the	
1990s:	Learning	from	a	Decade	of	Reform . Washington DC: World Bank. Pp. 207 -239. 
World Bank. (2014). Global	Financial	Development:	Financial	Inclusion . Washington DC: World Bank.  
42