International Journal of English Linguistics; Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
ISSN 1923-869X E-ISSN 1923-8703 
Published by Canadian Center  of Science and Education 
364 The Role of Digital Technology in English Language Teaching in 
Azerbaijan 
Milana Abbasova1 & Narmin Mammadova1 
1 English Language and Literature Departme nt, Khazar University, Baku, Azerbaijan 
Correspondence: Milana Abbasova, En glish Language and Literature Department, Khazar University, Baku, 
Mashati Ganjavi 41, Azerbaijan. E-mail: mabbasova@khazar.org 
 
Received: January 9, 2019   Accepted: January 30, 2019   Online Publis hed: March 2, 2019 
doi:10.5539/ijel.v9n2p364       URL: https://doi.org/10.5539/ijel.v9n2p364 
 
Abstract 
The current study uses qualitative methodology to explore the role that digital tec hnology plays in both second 
language acquisition and teaching. In-depth interviews were conducted with 6 teachers aged between 23 and 55 
who are currently employ ed by Khazar University, Azerbaijan. Teachers indicate that the use of technology has an 
important impact on student’s second  language learning. Although some of the teachers displayed negative effects 
of modern technologies on ge tting students’ attention, positive feedback is more available. Teachers demonstrated 
how the use of technology in teaching a nd learning supports students’ engagement  in education. Overall, this study 
provides a reader with a general understanding of both st udents and teachers’ involvemen t in digital media as well 
as the effectiveness of second language teaching with technologies at higher educational institutions of Azerbaijan. 
Future research in the same area of study is needed to compare both teachers’ and students’ perceptions separately 
in broader sample and identify the key factors that affect teacher’s decision to choose  rather traditional methods.  
Keywords:  digital technologies, second language learning, modern education 
1. Introduction 
Over the last decade technology has become an insepara ble part of teaching and learning environment. This 
technological evolution of humankind is an essential part of integration to the digital world with the help of 
teachers who can facilitate learners’ lear ning process. In the current period, a number of institutions in Azerbaijan 
still have some sort of difficulties in catching up with the globalizing world. Not all the educational organizations 
are supplied with the appropriate teach ing devices, such as overhead project ors, interactive wh iteboards, laptop 
computers and other relevant facilities.  The English language teachers face ch allenges in making ELT classes more 
effective and interesting by using digital technology. In many cases teachers are left to their own devices and the 
level of awareness of the usage of ICT among teachers is generally low. Majority of teachers in Azerbaijan use 
readily and easily available free onlin e worksheets and tools. They find out the ways of using some findings 
through social networking or websites. Alongside with the above mentioned, students can develop their own pace of language learning and use suppleme ntal teaching platforms which help th em to revise and consolidate their 
knowledge by browsing the Internet at home. 
Both teachers and students have an opportunity of being av ailable in outdoor environmen t thanks to a myriad of 
internet browsers or applications. For instance, Skype helps to improve oral skills and creates new opportunities to develop students’ communicative competences as the users have to pay active attention to what the interlocutor saying answer accordingly (Taillefer & Munoz-Luna, 2014). It means that mode rn technology allows us real time 
communication as well. Correspondingly, both students an d teachers should benefit from multimedia through 
different technology devices. 
1.1 Literature Review 
Digital technology is considered to be one of the most important drivers of linguistic change in a modern period. 
Over the last decade with its’ remark able entry as an educational device,  the tradition of English Language 
teaching has drastically ch anged. Graddol claims: 
“Technology lies at the heart of the globalization process; affecting education, work and culture. The use of 
English language has increased rapidly after 1960. At present th e role and status of English is that it is the language 
of social context, political, sociocultural, business, education, industries, media, library, communication across ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
365 borders, and key subject in curriculum and language of imparting education” (Gradol, 2000). 
“Technology has turned into one essential aspect of society that helps students to understand the bigger picture of 
the world and not just stay confined to what schools and teachers teach them within their classrooms” (Warschauer, 
2000). 
Certainly, advanced technology has pr oved to be successful in replacing traditional methods. But it is really 
interesting whether contemporary teachers agree or disagr ee with the replacement of traditional teaching method 
with the modern one.  
An overwhelming majority of teachers in Europe (90%) use ICT to prep are their lessons (Chhabra, 2012). Outside 
the EU, the story seems to be the same. In the US, the institute of Educational Technology has developed a “National Educational Technology Plan” for transforming education through the power of technology (Motteram, 
2013). It is evident that in most countries ICT is  playing a crucial role in teaching and learning the English 
language. Even in the US an educational reform is be ing realized towards the implementation of technology in 
EFL classes.  
Nowadays, many studies have been implemented to find out the answer to this key issue, and most of them have 
proved the importance of the usage of digital technology in EFL classes. Fo r example, according to the results of 
the research conducted by teachers in Iran, they had positive attitudes regarding the use of technology in their 
classrooms. (Mollaei & Riasa ti, 2013). Researchers from Saudi also reac hed the same conclusion that there is a 
positive correlation between a teacher’s presence during a computer use and a Com puter Assisted Language 
Learning (CALL) training and a positive attitude toward  the use of Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICT), methodologies in lear ning. (Alshumaimeri, 2008). Moreover, Ko rean EFL teachers fo und out computer 
technology as a useful teaching tool  that could easily support teaching me thods by providing students with a 
variety of language inputs and increasing students’ learni ng capabilities in real-life c ontexts (Park & Son, 2009). 
According to Chong the advantages of using the Internet in the EFL classroo m were listed as providing authentic 
materials for learners, making students meet native frie nds online, and assisting teacher-student communication 
(Chong, 2000). Teachers’ individu al interest in Internet use,  teachers’ skills at incorpor ating Internet resources in 
classroom tasks, and computer amenities and technical supp ort in schools were the three key factors influencing 
the Internet use in the foreign language classroom (Shin & Son, 2007).  
In Azerbaijan and in most of the non-native speaking countries, English is used as a second or third language and 
for some people as a first language. With the spread an d progress of English around the world, it has become an 
essential mean of communication among the people of different languages and cultures. At present, the role and status of English in Azerbaijan is higher than ever as it is a medium of instruction and curriculum in educational institutions. As the number of  English learners is increasing, different teaching methods have been experimented 
to see the effectiveness of English lang uage teaching. The use of technology in  the form of films, radio, TV and 
tape recording has been repetition for a long time as well.  
2. Method This small-scaled research is goin g to represent the role of modern technologies in the Second Language 
Teaching at Khazar University from the perspective of teachers of the same institution. We are living in the era 
of digital technologies, nevertheless there is still insufficie nt supply and application of useful technologies within 
classroom settings. Primarily, loads of investigations have been done in this field of knowledge, although there is almost no empirical evidence on how technology influences the ways of language teaching within the framework 
of Azerbaijan universities.  
2.1 Research Questions 
By considering all these challenges, the questions below lead the whole study focusing on the analysis of the 
case through real experiences of the teachers of diverse backgrounds: 
1) How does the use of digital t echnology by teachers support the t eachers in second language teaching? 
2) What are the advantages and disadvantages of  applying modern technologies during teaching? 
2.2 Data Collection The study is driven by th e qualitative paradigm of research as it endeavors to understand the phenomenon by 
dint of individual perceptions that are involved (Cohen & Manion, 1994). As researchers, we have taken a deep interest in how teachers perceive the impacts of technological innovations on teaching strategies and to what extent they apply new tools as mode rn methods of teaching during “ESL” classes. Accordingly, interpretive 
approach has been applied to und erpin this academic study by putting a huge reliance on the subjective ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
366 experiences of participants (Reeves & Hedberg, 2003). In respect with the interpretive paradigm, only 
interviewing as a meaning-oriented method of research is chosen to answer aforementioned research questions as it is considered to be the most relevant instrument in terms of “beliefs and meanings” (Arksey & Knight, 1999). Interviews have been conducted to pursue the particular issues of concern in semi-str uctured model with a set of 
pre-planned core questions being mostly open-ended, as well as a limited amount of close-ended follow-up questions that were asked spontaneously to encourage the participants to interpret their opinions in details at 
some points (Shneiderman & Plaisant, 2005). Only one semi-structured email interview has been taken from the oldest participant of the research by sending the questions  in one single email as she was not able to participate 
in a face-to face interview due to her health problems. Rest of the in-dep th interviews were held face-to-face 
within the university environment and recorded by means of cell phone’s audio-recording program. The whole 
process was conducted in English Language.  
2.3 Participant Characteristics 
In respect with the research topic that focuses on second language teach ing, the key participants of the 
small-scale study are teachers currently  operating at Khazar University. Sel ected teachers were separated into 
three age groups being “23–30”, “30–40” and “40 and over” based on the assumption that older people might be 
more reluctant to make an effective use of digital divides in classroom settings (Pew Report, 2013).  
2.4 Sampling Procedures A purposeful method of sampling is applied to find the most productive sample with broader knowledge of area 
that took part voluntarily to answer  the research questions mentioned ab ove (Marshall, 2006). Sample size is 
quite small depending on the aim of the study, as it does not intend to build representative generalizations out of 
the conclusions.  
2.4.1 Sampling Size, Power and Precision 
Six teachers of academic staff at Khazar University gave thei r consent to take part in this study. Five of them 
were interviewed within the classroom settings at univers ity and the other one chose to be interviewed via email. 
Although, the teachers are di fferent depending on their age and years of experience, most of them are females 
(only one male) and four of them have an experience of studying abroad which can probably make them inclined 
to the use of technologies. 
 
Table 1. Participants 
Teachers Gender Age Place of Study Experience Taught Subject 
P1 female 24 Azerbaijan/Korea 1 year ESL 
P2 female 23 Azerbaijan/UK half-semester ESL 
P3 female 32 Azerbaijan 5 years ESL; Translational Studies 
P4 male 39 Azerbaijan/UK 15 years ESL; ESP 
P5 female 54 Azerbaijan/USA 31 years ESL; ESP P6 female 55 Azerbaijan 26 years ESL; Translational Studies 
 
2.5 Data Analysis: Interviews In the first place, collected interview data through the audio recorder was tr anscribed and some direct notes taken 
during interviews added to the existing materials. Interv iew analysis has been done thoroughly by focusing on 
themes that describe meanings of self-evident subjects (Kvale, 1996).We took an hybrid approach of thematic scanning that connects a pre-set codi ng generated preliminarily from the theoretical framework to an open 
coding that emerged after carefully reading the written data (Gibbs, 2007). Themes that were identified both 
deductively prior to initial assay and inductively thr ough the analysis of transc ribed data are coded and 
categorized according to the interpretations of respondent s in order to describe key points in similarity-based 
order (Maxwell & Miller, 2008). Theme and codes aris en from first research question are indicated in 
hierarchical form as follows: 
  ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
367 Table 2. Interview analysis 
Themes Codes Sub-codes 
Technologies used in Second Language Teaching  Computer • Videos 
• Pictures 
• Listening (Speakers) 
• Speaking 
• Mini Research 
Mobile Phones • Online dictionary 
Projector  • PowerPoint presentations 
Tablet • Showing quick information 
 
3. Results 
After getting the interview data analyzed, we were able to infer some key points among the teachers of different 
age groups towards the use of technologies within classroom settings.  
3.1 Digital Technologies as a Tool to Facilitate Teaching ESL 
The research questions were posed to find out the supportive side of technologies in terms of second language 
teaching. The interviews have revealed that there is a real reasoning between the second language teaching and 
the use of digital technologies. All the teachers emphasized its huge advant ageous support to both teachers and 
students and called it as a demand of modern systems, however each of them owns individual attitude towards 
the use of them depending on variables such as thei r age group, experience an d the subjects they teach.  
P1: 24 years old 
P1 does not conceive the classes without relevant digital amenities; otherwise, she thinks that it would be very 
boring for students. She mainly focu ses on sound effects coming out of sp eakers and indispensable speed those 
devices provide us while search ing for some information.  
“We can use audio-recorder to record students’ voice and then make them listen to their own pronunciation and 
correct it by showing the right one ”. 
Computers and projectors are of common use in doing listening practices or showing presentations. “Smart 
Board” is an effective facility to teach any language, however she stresse s its huge shortage in classrooms. 
P2: 23 years old 
P2 as a majority of interviewed teachers uses digital t echnologies in her classes based on what topic she plans to 
represent. While P1 focuses on sou nd and speed aspects of digital devices that make teaching process more 
effective, she believes in the streng th of “visual teaching” and “visual memory”. In this regard, video 
presentations are being applied to make students memorize unknown topics more easily: 
“The main advantage is that it is good for applying knowledge you have learned into the practice ”. 
To her mind, there is nothing lacking in current classrooms in terms of technologies. 
P3: 32 years old  
P3 employs digital gadgets in each class as the subject sh e teaches requires technologi cal involvement.  Similar to 
P1, her focal usage also stands for listening activities an d sound practices done via computer and speakers which 
in turn is of great importance in “Oral Translation”.  
“When I was a student, there was a lack of modern technologies needed for practices, so that I was not able to 
practice oral translations. Now, students have more access to the internet, to other forms of technologies which 
means they can do more practices than prevoius generation did ”.  
She appreciates online dictionaries as well indicating their ability to save students’ time. The most lacking tool is 
booths with electronic devices needed for simultaneous inte rpreting practices.  
P4: 39 years old 
The only male participant of the study promotes two key purposes while using digital technologies within 
classes: 
“First, they help me teach the lessons, secondly, the students are modern and they are interested in cutting edge 
technology. So, when I use modern technology, they are more interested and more involved in our lessons ”. 
P4 places a significant reliance both on listening and presenting practices based upon “visual memory and ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
368 understanding”. Accessibility is one of the most advanteg eous sides for him as he can be aware of the latest 
materials or teaching methodology via the Internet sources.  
“I always explain my students that they should be very happy because whatever they watch and listen now, at the 
same time all people in the world, for example, in Amer ica, in France, in the UK students can find and use the 
same materials ”. 
However, he pointed out the deficiency of high-speed internet and personal laptops for students to do a mini 
research project during the classes.  
P5: 54 years old  
One of the oldest members of our rese arch demonstrated an unusual correla tion compared to the other teachers. 
P5 does not use any digital gadge t during the teaching process.  
“I only rely on myself, on my voice, on my notes and on direct communication with the students. I feel quite 
comfortable doing so ”.  
Notwithstanding, she is convinced that  making use of technological tool s provides teacher s with authentic 
materials and linguistic context they may want students to be exposed to.  
She also agrees that it is a “technology era” and teachers should build bridge to young students’ interests as they 
are good at acquiring lingual asp ects much better in this respect.  
“We can also use them as a part of lectures, you know, in a form of Powerpoint Presentations. I don’t use it, but it 
doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t do it, it probably should be done ”. 
Even as a non-user of technologies she shows more po sitive attitude and like previous participants, underlines 
the lack of “Smart Boards” as well.  
P6: 55 years old  
In comparison with P5, P6 is inclined to make use of technologies as an effective tool for teaching. As she 
teaches translational studies, she frequ ently utilizes computers a nd projectors to have students do listening and 
speaking activities by means of videos and audio CDs. PowerPoint presentations are used to explain new topics 
with visual charts and brief verbal explanations.  
“Young people nowadays are so keen on technologies, thus they enlarged interest in new methods of teaching by 
using technologies ”. 
Although there are sufficient tools for teaching technologically, she complains that special software needed to be 
set for students in all classrooms in order to teach a newly launched subject called “Computer Assisted Tools” 
effectively. 
3.2 Digital Technologies as a tool to Prevent Teaching ESL 
At the same time, while discussing the negative effects of  digital devices, all the teachers seem to indicate at 
least one drawback. Majority of participants stressed that despite th eir privilages on second language teaching 
and learning process, they can also  distract students from the main t opic. Since the technology became a 
fundamental temptation of youth, it might be misused dur ing the classes. According to P1 and P6, sometimes 
students are highly engaged in their port able devices, so that they do not pay any attention to teacher’s speech. 
Similarly, P4 in his turn told that when they are asked to do some research on given topics, they may go through 
other options and overuse it by not even focusing on main points.  
Meanwhile, P3 sets a different approach mainly consisting of plagiarism issues: 
“Internet can distract students from the main topic esp ecially in writing classes where they need to make their 
creativity work,or in research for preparing some presentations ”. 
Simultaneously, P5 touches the topic of generation gap while talking about the disadvantages. As many 
instructors of older generation experience difficulties with understanding of digital tools, she kindly thinks that these technologies need to be trained to make use of  it. Another drawback can be considered the matter of 
involvement and she explains her idea in following way: 
“All we know how people talk abou t these modern technologies, how it a lienates people, how it keeps everybody 
together but apart. We don’t want that in our classes. We want to see a group of people working together, who exhange their ideas, who partic ipate, are engaged naturally. Otherwise, they get involved in their computers, 
laptops, or cellphones and lose interest in traditional methods ”. 
 ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
369 4. Discussion 
It is evident from the results that la nguage teaching and the use of digital technologies are in terconnected and 
can be considered as an inseparable part of language learning process. All the participants of the current study stressed the importance of the digital facilities for supporting bo th teachers and students. Although, they called it 
as a requirement of the current educational system; each of them individually showed  their attitude towards the 
use of technological devices depending on variables such as their age group, experience and the subjects they 
teach. 
By analyzing the findings for the research question 1, the benefits of the digital technology in English language 
teaching are considered to be really determinative par ticularly by the younger gene ration teachers (P1 & P2) who 
understand and boost the idea of technology in ESL classes rather than the older generation teachers (P5 & P6), 
since teachers of the new generation ha ve grown up with digita l technology and it is w oven into their lives.  
While taking interviews the respondents stressed some digital devices and the importance of their usage in 
English Language classes (audio video recorder, video presentations, online dictionaries, speakers and boothes 
with electronic devices, high speed internet and personal laptops).  
4.1 Audio Video Recorder 
As one of the technological means audio recorder is said to be useful in improving language skills like listening 
and speaking. P1 claims that  while listening to their own speech in English language, students are able to 
determine their own pronunciation and sentence structure errors. Alongside with the above-mentioned issue by P1, audio recorder is a useful tool to compare students’ pronunciations. The results of the study conducted by Lord (2008), also suggested that both the attitude and pronunciation of students improved. He claims that 
students became more concerned about the accuracy of their pronuncia tion after the study implemented. 
The study settled by Brown (2012), revealed that the stude nts appreciated the extra opportunities of oral output 
outside the classroom and felt that their pronunciation improved. As well as in most of the countries all over the world, in Azerbaijan, people tend to regard those who speak English withou t a foreign accent to be fluent and 
proficient. Therefore, teachers of Kh azar University try to co rrect students’ pronunciation errors while speaking, 
and provide them with prompt feedback in class. Brown noted that the goal of English pronunciation has 
recently become to achieve pronuncia tion that is intelligible  in international comm unication (Bro wn, 2012). 
4.2 Video Presentations 
According to the findings P2 uses video presentations almost for each new material taken during the classes. In 
this way she stresses the ‘visual memory’ as a key factor . No doubt, if used correctly video presentations can 
bring educational opportunities that will help to understand and obtain new material easily. At the same time students are able to observe native sp eakers in authentic settings, speaking and using different accents, registers 
and paralinguistic rules like posture and gesture.  
This finding matches with the results of the two studies carried by Ortis (2012) and Wagener (2006) which 
showed the positive implications of using video technology in the language classroom. Both of them came to the conclusion that video materials significantly contributed to the development of all three observed aspects: 
listening, translating skills, and students’ vocabulary stock. 
4.3 Online Dictionaries, Speakers and  Boothes with Electronic Devices 
P3 cannot imagine English classes, especially “Oral translation” classes without digital gadgets. She underlines 
the maintenance of sound practices and listening activ ities for which computers, speakers and boothes with 
electronic devices are of great importance.  
4.4 High Speed Internet and Personal Laptops The internet is a powerful tool that provides the poten tial for purposeful and powerful use of on-line and writing 
classes (Warschauer, 2000). Teachers ca n not only access the Internet for fi nding resources for their classes but 
also supply their own materials, knowledge and idea for othe r teachers via the Internet (Warschauer et al., 2000). 
In addition, Shetzer and Warschauer (20 00) put forward that teachers need to learn how to use Internet tools with 
support and encouragement fr om their teaching situations. In other wo rds, teachers should gain knowledge and 
develop skills to use the Internet in order to get the benefit enough of it.  
Overall, the teachers that took part in our study ste ss the advantages of the dig ital technology. They named 
electronic devices as follows: audio video recorder, video presentations, online dictionaries, speakers and 
boothes with electronic devices, high speed internet and personal laptops. ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
370 Although P5 claims that she does not use electronic devi ces at all, while teaching English language, she still 
stresses positive impact on the learning process. On the other hand linguists of the modern period state its importance and being one of the requirements in teac hing any foreign language. “At present, eduactional 
institutions look for teachers who have a good command of  English and ability to use innovative technologies for 
teaching to satisfy the need of an e-society” (Pablo, 2017). 
4.5 Advantages 
According to the research question 2,  all the interviewed teachers emphasi zed the huge advantages of modern 
technologies applied during the teaching process for both  teachers and students. They believe that the use of 
technological facilities in ESL classes may provide a be tter learning atmosphere and performance. However, 
older and middle aged teachers emphasi ze that it can also minimize interactivity as the students are just looking 
on the screen. They mention that it shou ld be used only as a supplementary instrument for the language teachers. 
Young and Bush (2004) suggest that teachers should a void “the temptation to use technologies without 
understanding the pedagogical implications of using them”.  
The younger teachers who have taken part in our study cannot imagine language classes without relevant digital 
facilities. They find it interesting for students, as stude nts can be engaged, during the whole lesson mainly with 
listening and speaking tasks conducted with  the help of technological devices.  
P2 mentions “visual memory”, “visual teaching” as the main advantage. According to the findings, the other 
advantage is easy accessibility of the online dictionaries. P3  mentions that even a deca de before as a university 
student she could not get the use of digital technology. She says that, current generation and the upcoming one are lucky because they are and will be  able to practice language skills from various aspects using advanced 
technology. P4 even gives explanations of technological advantage to his students. He stresses that, in the modern time students are lucky because they can listen to native speakers even not going abroad and get 
information directly from the first hand.  
P4 mentions that students are fully involved into the lesson and they really have temptation towards advanced 
technology. However, P5 and P6 reminds that their engagement can bring to the overuse and mislead the students during the teaching process. However we shou ld not forget about the ad vantages which exceed the 
disadvantages. Min Pun (2004) gives some most important advantages of the use of digital technology: 
1) Motivates students to learn English. 
2) Develops students’ communicative competence. 
3) Widens students’ knowledge about the culture of English. 
4) Improves teaching efficiency. 
5) Enhances interaction among students and between teachers and students. 
6) Creates a conductive teaching en vironment in the classrooms. 
7) Provides opportunities for English teaching outside the classrooms. 
4.6 Disadvantages 
Alike younger and middle-aged generation, older ones put forward some disadvantages of using advanced 
technology: 
• It can distract from the main topic. 
• Students may misuse it. 
• It can bring to unconscious overuse by students. 
• It puts a gap between teaching methods—the traditional and modern ones. 
• It can take apart interactivity, exchange of ideas  and natural engagement during the ESL classes. 
According to Min Pun’s (2004) study results there are many disadvantages of using digital technology in the 
context of non-native speaking countries: 
1) Emphasis on the supplementary of effective teaching 
2) Lack of communication between teachers and students 
3) Lack of real-time teaching 
4) Loss of students’ logical thinking. ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
371 5) Expensive way of conducting language classes. 
5. Recommendations  
Advanced technology and language teach ing have gone hand to hand for a long time contributing to language 
classes as teaching facilities. However, many teachers all over the world have certain gaps and insecurity in 
benefiting from them. Deborah Healey says, “The pace an d extent of technology fo r teaching, however, have 
made it difficult for many teachers, teacher educators, an d administrators to know how best to employ computers, 
other forms of digital technology, an d the global interaction enabled by the internet in language teaching” 
(Healey, 2011). If digital technology is utilized properly in ESL classes, without being overused, the language 
learners can be able to make full use in developing their overall language skills. In this case, the solutions for the teachers of older generation and for t hose teachers who are still not aware of the benefits of digital technology 
are as follows: 
• Organizing panel meetings with teach ers of older generation, and sharing ideas about the usage and benefits 
of digital technologies in ESL teaching and learning.  
• Holding a demo lesson with the implication of advanced technology can also be demonstrated with the 
implication of advanced technology. 
• Organizing a training session for teachers who are really not aware of digital technology.  
Simultaneously, for broader understanding of the cases mentioned in this study, future researchers can choose a 
larger sample of teachers with mixed age and sex to scrutinize the real factors u nderlying their preference of 
traditional methods. Students can also be involved in further study of comparisons between the perceptions of 
students and teachers on the application of tech nologies in second la nguage acquisition.  
References 
Alejandro Quezada, P. (2017). Schools in the context of E-education and e-society . 12th Iberian Conference on 
Information systems and technologies. Lisbon, Portugal. 
Alshumaimeri, Y . A. (2008) . Perceptions and attitudes toward using CALL in English classrooms among Saudi 
secondary EFL teachers. The JALT Call Journal , 44(2), 29–66. 
Arksey, H., & Knight, P. (1999) Interviewing for Social Scientists . London: Sage. 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781849209335 
Brown, B. (2012). Raising student awareness of pronunciation and exploring out-of-class approaches to 
pronunciation practice. Research Notes , 48, 18–23. 
Chhabra, S. (2012). ICTs for advancing rural co mmunities and human development . Information Science 
Reference, Hershey, PA. 
Chong, D. (2000). The Practical Considerati ons of the Internet in the EFL Classroom. Multimedia-Assisted 
Language Learning , 3(2), 9–35. 
Cohen, L., & Manion, L. (1994). Research Methods in Education  (4th ed.). London: Routledge. 
Gibbs, G. (2007). Analyzing Qualitative Data . New York, USA:  SAGE Publications Ltd. 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781849208574 
Graddol, D. (2000). The future of English? A guide to forecasting the popularity of the English language in the 21st 
century . London: The British Council. 
Healey, D. (2011). TESOL technology standards . Alexandria, Va.: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other 
Languages. 
Kvale, S. (1996). Interview Views:  An Introduction to Qualitative Research Interviewing.  Thousand Oaks, CA:  
Sage Publications. 
Lord, G. (2008). Podcasting communities and second language pronunciation.  Foreign Language Annals , 41(2), 
364–379.  
Marshall, M. N. (1996). Sampling for qualitative research. Family Practice , 13(6), 522–526. 
Maxwell, J. A., & Miller, B. A. (2008). Categorizing and connecting strategies in qualitative data analysis. 
Handbook of Emergent Methods , 461–477. 
McNulty, A., & Lazarevic, B. (2012). Best practices in  using video technology to  promote second language 
acquisition. Teaching English with Technology , 3, 49–61. ijel.ccsenet.org International Journal of English Linguistics Vol. 9, No. 2; 2019 
372 Mollaei, F., & Riasati, M. (2013). Teachers’ Pe rceptions of Using Tech nology in Teaching EFL. International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics & English Literature , 2(1), 13–22. https://doi.org/10.7575/ijalel.v.2n.1p.13 
Motteram, G. (2013). Innovations in Learning Technologies for English Language Teaching . British Council. 
Park, C., & Son, J. (2009). Implementing Computer-Assisted Language Learning in the EFL Classroom: 
Teachers’ Perceptions and Perspectives . https://doi.org/10.5172/ijpl.5.2.80 
Pun, M. (2014). The use of multimed ia technology in English language  teaching: a global perspective. Crossing 
the Border: International Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies , 1(1), 29–38. 
Reeves, T. C., & Hedberg, J. G. (2003). Interactive learning systems evaluation . Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 
Educational Technology Publications. 
Shin, H. J., & Son, J. B. (2007). EFL teachers’ perceptions and perspectives on internet assisted language teaching. 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning Electronic Journal (CALL-EJ) , 8(2). Retrieved from 
http://callej.org/journal/8-2/h-js_j-bs.html 
Shneiderman, B., & Plaisant, C. (2005). Designing the user interface . Boston: Addison Wesley. 
Taillefer, L., & Munoz-Luna, R. (2014). Developing Oral Skills through Skype: A Language Project Analysis. 
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences , 141, 260–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.05.045 
Warschauer, M. (2000). The Changing Global Economy and the Future of English Teaching. TESOL Quarterly , 
34(3), 511. https://doi.org/10.2307/3587741 
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (2000). Network-based language teaching . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Young, C., & Bush, J. (2004). Teaching the English language arts with Technology: A critical Approach and 
Pedagogical Framework. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education , 4(1), 1–22. 
 Copyrights 
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s),  with first publication rights granted to the journal. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the te rms and conditions of the Cr eative Commons Attribution 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
 
 
 