A global coalition working  
to make broadband 
affordable for all
www.a4ai.orgAFFORDABILITY REPORT  2020ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report was written by and prepared under the direction of Teddy 
Woodhouse, with contributions from Ana María Rodríguez. It was edited by 
Lisa van Wyk. Additional comments and suggestions were provided by Carlos 
Iglesias, Sonia Jorge, Anju Mangal, and Eleanor Sarpong.
The Affordability Drivers Index research and calculations were carried out 
by Siaka Lougue (African Institute for Mathematical Sciences) and Ana María 
Rodríguez, with support from Carlos Iglesias.
A global team of 25 independent researchers assisted the Alliance in 
conducting the 72 comprehensive policy surveys that inform the report’s 
findings this year and provide the basis for the policy scores in the  
Affordability Drivers Index. We thank them for their contributions.
The authors also wish to thank the interviewees from around the world and 
from various backgrounds who contributed their time and insights to help 
inform the analysis and recommendations of this report.
Any errors remain the authors’ alone.
Finally, we are grateful for the support of A4AI’s global sponsors — Sida and 
Google — and that of the Alliance’s entire membership.
Suggested citation: Alliance for Affordable Internet (2020). The Affordability  
Report 2020 . Web Foundation.
This report is made available under a Creative Commons 4.0 International  
licence .  For media or other inquiries: press@webfoundation.org .CONTENTS
Welcome Letter from the Executive Director         4
Executive Summary            5
1 WHAT IS THE STATE OF INTERNET AFFORDABILITY AND POLICY?  10
 1.1  How prices have changed over the past five years    11
 1.2  How policy can lower the price of internet access    13
 1.3  How policies have changed over the past two years    15
  What’s at stake?        16
2 WHAT IS A NATIONAL BROADBAND PLAN?      17
 2.1 Why do national broadband plans matter?     17
 2.2  What does a national broadband plan look like?    21
 2.3  What should a national broadband plan do?     22
3 HOW DO NBPS MAKE THE INTERNET MORE AFFORDABLE?   24
 3.1  NBPs guide infrastructure and public investment    25
 3.2  NBPs catalyse private sector investments     29
 3.3  NBPs facilitate inclusive policymaking      31
 3.4  NBPs create new partnerships and sources of accountability   33
 3.5  NBPs can make the internet more affordable     35
4 WHAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN?        36
 4.1 Collect inputs from the private sector, public sector, and civil society  36
 4.2  Set clear targets within national broadband plans    39
 4.3  Commit funding and promise to review     39
5 CONCLUSION          4 0
 ANNEX           41
 Annex 1: Full ADI Results, 2020        41
 Annex 2: ADI Methodology        44
 Annex 3: Linear Models and Regression Details     49
 Annex 4: National Broadband Plan Catalogue      504  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Given the Covid-19 pandemic, which has ex-  
posed the shocking inequalities in internet 
access and affordability across the globe, the 
need to bridge the global digital divide has 
never been more important. 
This year, we focus on policy in the long term: 
national broadband plans. These plans, while 
not yet made explicit in the Alliance’s good 
policy and regulatory practices , have the capa-  
city to affect nearly all of the policies and prac-  
tices mentioned. As this report details, they can 
be deeply influential in driving progress towards 
greater affordability, while failures in effective 
planning can stall the best of intentions.
We have assembled a wide array of evidence 
and research, including an update to the 
Affordability Drivers Index, that reflects the 
state of broadband right up to the pandemic’s 
start. This year’s report is informed by expert 
policy surveys conducted in 72 countries, 
almost all low- or middle-income, across the 
regions of Africa, Asia, and Latin America and 
the Caribbean. In addition, this report features 
stakeholder interviews and case studies from 
across the globe to document the impact of 
national broadband plans and their potential 
going forward.
A4AI’s experience working with our national multi-stakeholder coalitions across regions has 
demonstrated one of the key findings in this 
report, in particular, that open consultations are 
critical to develop national visions of broadband 
development in the sector. 
These consultations ensure that diverse 
voices — including women, girls, rural popula -
tions, poor and marginalized groups — inform 
inclusive visions of digital development across 
all countries. 
We hope that lessons from the experiences 
shared in the report can influence and guide 
policymakers, funders, private sector, and civil 
society in their quest to design human-cen -
tered national broadband plans and strategies 
— supported by the belief that these plans are 
indeed for the public interest and have the 
capacity to improve peoples’ lives. 
We invite you to partner with A4AI on this ever 
more important journey towards affordable 
and meaningful access for everyone. Become a 
member of our global coalition to contribute to 
our collective effort towards digital equality.
 
Sonia Jorge   
Executive Director
Alliance for Affordable InternetWELCOME LETTER FROM  
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Welcome to the 2020 edition of the Affordability Report! This report series, now in 
its seventh year, studies the internet affordability barrier and how to overcome it. It 
brings together years of analysis based on systems thinking about the cost that people 
pay for internet access and how to bring that price down over time. This has meant that 
our Affordability Report policy recommendations focus on the policy and regulatory 
environment, because of their capacity to affect market dynamics, stakeholder 
relationships, and infrastructure availability. 
www.a4ai.org  |  5EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Covid-19 pandemic has laid bare the scale and consequences of 
the digital divide and underlined the urgent need to find solutions to 
digital inequality.
Governments are being forced to reassess priorities and step up with  
innovative solutions to address a range of challenges across health, 
employment, education, and economic resiliency. As the internet and digital 
technology will play an increasingly important role in our world, governments 
must develop policies to deliver affordable and meaningful connectivity  
to all.
The 2020 Affordability Report looks at the state of policy progress to bring  
down the cost of internet access and points to the importance of effective  
national broadband plans (NBPs) in providing the conditions for internet 
prices to decline.
It [the internet] is my life. I feel connected to my  
environment, informed by it and I also impact on it. 
It is our number one source of information... it’s the 
internet that has made me the person I am today.  “ 
Tina Appiah,   
Director of  Ghana Code Club“6  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020 6  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Progress on policy and falling prices
Data on policy and prices is trending in the 
right direction. In the past five years, mobile 
broadband has become more affordable, 
and Affordability Drivers Index (ADI) scores 
have risen in most countries across all three 
regions we study — Africa, Latin America 
and Caribbean, and the Asia-Pacific region — 
signalling improvement in broadband policies. 
Low income countries showed strong signs of 
improvement with 11.3% increases in overall 
ADI scores. 
Broadband policies continue to 
improve. The average ADI score 
across the countries we study has 
risen by 13.6 points, from 42 to 55.6 
since 2014, with improvements most 
notable in low-income countries. 
Africa sees the biggest policy 
advances. While Africa remains the 
region with the lowest average ADI 
score, this year it saw the fastest 
improvement (6.7% since 2019), 
with countries improving planning, 
better spectrum management and 
supporting programmes to  narrow 
the digital gender gap.
Mobile broadband prices have 
fallen consistently  among countries 
within the Affordability Drivers Index, 
with the average cost of 1GB data 
declining by more than half since 
2015, from 7.0% to 3.1% of average 
monthly income.While declining prices can be explained in part 
by general improvements in technology and 
other efficiencies, strong government policy 
is key to reducing costs and making sure that 
internet access is affordable to all. Furthermore, 
national differences persist and pose serious 
challenges to universal access.
Asia-Pacific is the regional leader 
for broadband strategy.  At a 
regional level Asia-Pacific countries 
have the highest average ADI policy 
scores for broadband strategy and 
public access. And consumers pay 
the lowest prices, at less than 1.5% 
of the average  monthly income for 
1GB of mobile broadband.
Rwanda,  which has effective national 
broadband planning, has seen 1GB 
data fall to less than a fifth of its 
2015 price, from 20.2% to 3.39%  of 
average monthly income, and made 
faster progress than its East  African 
neighbours which have less robust 
broadband planning.
Three countries topping this year’s 
Index – Malaysia, Colombia, and 
Costa Rica  – all stand out with the 
highest three scores for national 
broadband planning. All three meet  
the UN Broadband Commission’s ‘1 
for 2’ affordability threshold — 1GB 
data for no more than 2% of average 
monthly income.www.a4ai.org  |  7The challenge of getting to  
universal internet access
While the overall trend is encouraging, progress on reducing prices remains 
too slow, particularly as Covid-19 has shown beyond doubt that internet 
access is not a luxury but a lifeline.
Over a billion people live in the 57 countries in our survey that are  
yet to meet the UN Broadband Commission’s ‘1 for 2’ affordability  
threshold. 1GB is the minimum that allows someone to use the internet 
effectively; yet, the high cost to connect means billions of people are missing 
out on even this basic allowance. Almost half of the world’s population 
remains with no internet access, and many others lack the meaningful 
connectivity that would allow them to engage in activities like online learning, 
remote working, and telehealth services.
Governments must act to bring down the cost of access. This will take  
significant investment: A4AI analysis has found that US$428 billion 
additional funding is needed  over the next 10 years to connect  
everyone to quality broadband by 2030. But to be successful, this funding 
needs to be paired with effective policy, strong planning and effective 
implementation, which includes urgent investments in the digital skills, 
content and enabling policy frameworks that are critical to support access 
to meaningful connectivity. Governments need robust national broadband 
plans to achieve this.
If you look at the need to increase productivity, improve 
educational outcomes, create jobs, and drive the economy, 
access to technology is critical to that, and access to technology 
in the world today is broadband. You need that connection 
to be able to access whatever resources or information or to 
communicate or transact to have better economic outcomes, 
no matter what kind of industry you’re in. 
The reality is, if we are gonna have better economic out-comes 
or better livelihoods for our people, then making broadband 
available to them is critical, regardless of what part of a country 
they live in.  “ 
Funke Opeke,   
Chief Executive Officer of MainOne Cable Company“
8  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020They make  
public investments  
more effective  
Countries with strong  
national broadband plans 
tend to also have a higher 
score in the ADI for clearly 
defined and targeted  
public investment 
strategies, which supports 
inclusive digital growth  
and lowers costs. They encourage  
private sector investments  
National broadband plans 
give confidence for the  
private sector to plan on  
a longer-term basis and 
invest in better coverage  
and affordability. Open  
policy-making processes 
provide stability for  
dynamic and competitive 
markets to grow.They create new  
partnerships  and  
sources of accountability  
Inclusive practices for  
drafting national broadband  
plans have a positive  
influence on the effectiveness 
of these plans. This process 
brings stakeholders across 
sectors together to align 
interests and expectations 
and build trust.make the internet more affordableHow national broadband plansWhy national broadband plans? 
National broadband plans are a necessity to bring down prices and ensure 
inclusive growth. With clear targets, they provide an agreed roadmap for all 
stakeholders and create accountability for continued progress.
The ADI assesses whether countries have a national broadband plan and 
evaluates how well that plan sets clear and time-bound targets relating to 
internet affordability. 
Most countries (90% of those studied) have some kind of NBP; 
however, the quality of these plans vary widely.
Only two-thirds of the plans studied were drafted in open  
consultation. When they were, these plans were more likely to 
have targets and correlate with higher scores on the ADI and for 
overall broadband strategy.
52 countries (80% of plans) set at least one target around 4G 
coverage, fixed access, rural access, device costs, or internet prices.www.a4ai.org  |  91
2
3Governments can lower the cost  
to connect with better broadband planning
Based on evidence of broadband policy environments in 72 low- and middle-
income countries, this report recommends three top-level actions for better 
broadband planning:
Broad consultation: Broadband plans must include inputs from a 
diverse and representative set of players across the private sector, 
public sector, and civil society.
This is crucial to weigh all interests, identify market problems and 
solutions, and understand possible impacts on different groups 
and individuals. Over time, the collaboration involved builds trust 
and efficiency in the sector and encourages cooperation.
Clear targets: A plan must have targets that address a country’s 
most critical gaps and have clear, time-bound measurements. 
These should include at least one target for network coverage and 
for data affordability each.
These can provide stable objectives through the lifespan of the 
plan and allows for observers to flag shortcomings in the plan’s 
implementation. These targets are crucial for creating accounta -
bility that keeps all stakeholders vested in the plan’s success. 
Funding commitments:  A plan must come with funding  
commitments and a transparent assessment and review process 
at least every other year.
The implementation of national broadband plans requires public 
funding, as well as ongoing support for collecting and analysing 
data that can be used to measure progress and publish updates. 
Without financial support for implementation, national broad -
band plans fail to make a long-term impact on a country’s  
digital development. 
The track record of broadband policy and prices over the past few years has 
made the value of broadband plans clear. Countries that do not have a plan or 
that set an unambitious plan risk deferring opportunities for digital growth — 
in both economic and social terms. As countries look to reset their long-term 
goals for recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic, broadband planning must 
be a central part of that process. The experiences of the 72 countries studied 
in this report provide evidence of what governments can — and must — do.10  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020AFFORDABILITY AND POLICY?WHAT IS THE STATE OF INTERNET
The world was not ready for what came in 
2020.  The Covid-19 pandemic has transformed  
the ways we live. Over a few weeks, social 
distancing, face masks, and travel restrictions 
became everyday features for billions of people. 
Work and schooling moved to the home — for 
those able to make the transition, at least. The 
internet has become critical for family life, 
business, education, health, and more.
The digital divide — still a stubborn feature 
across the world — has meant that different 
communities have experienced the pandemic 
in vastly different ways. Massive disparities 
exist  across different regions, but the digital 
divide has caused problems for professionals 
in Latin America  and teachers in Southeast Asia , 
and learners from across Africa  to South Asia . 
This divide exists in high-income countries just 
as some low-income countries  are trying first 
pilots of moving parts of their economy online. The boundary between connected and  
unconnected translates into clear  
consequences for employment, education, 
family and social life, and access to 
information. This pandemic calls us to 
consider what role the internet will play 
in building resilience in our societies and  
our economy.
For millions, the cost of connectivity is the 
insurmountable obstacle that keeps them 
offline. The cost of handsets and internet tariffs 
remains one of the most-often cited reasons  for 
someone in a low- or middle-income country to 
remain unconnected. Over 1 billion people live 
in the 57 countries  across the world that do not 
provide access to a 1GB data plan that meets the 
international standard for affordable internet . 
Nearly 2.5 billion people live in countries  
where the most affordable smartphone costs 
more than a quarter of the average monthly 
income. To close the digital divide, we must 
make broadband and devices affordable for the 
billions who do not yet have access.Covid-19 exposed the digital divide between and within countries and, for nations 
lagging behind, now is −really− time to prioritize broadband deployment and connect 
the unconnected. There aren’t any conflicting priorities, as broadband’s contribution is 
transversal and will support the recovery of all sectors. We cannot afford not to leverage  
an instrument that can fast-track progress, especially in a context where Covid-19 
is expected to push millions of people into extreme poverty and put at risk a decade  
of progress in terms of human capital.  “ 
  
Boutheina Guermazi,   
Director of Digital Development, World Bank“1www.a4ai.org  |  111.1. How prices have changed  
over the past five years
The UN Broadband Commission defines internet affordability as ‘1 for 2’  — 
that is, 1GB of mobile broadband costing no more than 2% of the average 
monthly income. Several countries, however, still have a long way to go to 
reach this threshold, especially among low-income countries. In countries 
like Malawi, Honduras, and Nepal, 1GB can cost from 6% to as much as nearly 
16% of a person’s total income. The number sits even higher in places like the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
Figure 1. Affordability of 1GB mobile broadband  
across low- and middle-income countries, 2015–2019
Despite internet prices remaining unaffordable for many, there has 
been progress.  Over the past five years, mobile broadband has become 
more affordable, and scores on the Affordability Drivers Index (ADI) have 
increased in many countries across all three regions studied in the report. 
Higher ADI scores have been driven by steady improvements in countries’ 
internet infrastructure, broadband adoption, and equitable access policies. 
This is a positive trend signaling that countries are doing more to connect the 
unconnected and reduce the digital divide.9%
6%
3%AFFFORDABILITY OF 1GB MOBILE BROADBAND
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Africa Americas Asia-Pacific
Source: Alliance for Affordable InternetREGIONAL SIMPLE AVERAGES12  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020The ADI is a tool developed by the Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) 
to assess how well a country’s policy, regulatory, and overall supply-side 
environment is working to lower industry costs and ultimately create more 
affordable broadband. In particular, policymakers and relevant stakeholders 
can use this tool to identify where progress is needed most.
The ADI does not measure actual broadband prices, nor does it tell us how 
affordable broadband is in a given country. Instead, it scores countries across 
two main policy groups:
Infrastructure:  The extent to which internet infrastructure 
has been deployed, as well as the policy framework in place to 
encourage future infrastructure expansion; and
Access:  Current broadband adoption rates, as well as the policy 
framework in place to enable equitable access.
High ADI scores correlate with reduced broadband costs on both the  
industry side and for consumers. As Figure 1 shows, there is a positive 
and statistically significant correlation between a country’s ADI score and 
the affordability of a 1GB mobile prepaid broadband plan — reaffirming 
that improving policies and regulations to lower industry costs should be a  
priority for all, and particularly for low- and middle-income countries.What is the Affordability Drivers Index? 
On average, prices in low- and middle-income countries have become more 
affordable, moving from 7.0% of average monthly income in 2015 to 3.1% in 
2019.1 Countries like Rwanda, Ecuador, and India have seen the cost of 1GB 
mobile broadband come down by more than 60% during this time period. 
In the case of Rwanda, the price of 1GB as a fraction of the average monthly 
income in that country has decreased from 20.16% to 3.39% between 2015 
and 2019.
1. This is based on the 52 low- and middle-income countries where we have collected affordability data over these years.  
More information is available on the A4AI website.www.a4ai.org  |  13Figure 2. Average affordability and ADI scores over time
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
2014 2016 2018 2020
Average Score, Affordability Drivers Index Average Affordability (1GB Mobile Broadband)
This is based on the 52 low- and middle-income countries where we have collected affordability data over these years.  
More information is available on the  A4AI website .100
50
0
However, policy progress remains slow. The top ten countries on the  
Affordability Drivers Index remain the same except for India dropping down 
to 11th place and Morocco re-entering the table after four years just missing 
the cut-off. 44 countries of the 61 returning to this year’s index saw less than 
a 10% shift in their score on the ADI in either direction.AFFFORDABILITY OF 1GB MOBILE BROADBANDAVERAGE SCORE, AFFORDABILITY, DRIVERS INDEXUSING 2014 ADI COUNTRIES ONLY, SIMPLE AVERAGE1.2. How policy can lower  
the price of internet access
Policies related to internet infrastructure and access have played  
their role in making mobile broadband more affordable.  With the help 
of steady growth, since 2014, the 52 countries in the sample have increased 
their ADI average score by 37.5%. One standout – Ethiopia – has seen its ADI 
score rise from 2.31 in 2014 to 20.37 in 2020, spurred by the opening up of 
its telecommunications market  over the past two years.14  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020More must be done to connect the unconnected. An International  
Telecommunications Union (ITU) report this year estimates that  $428 
billion additional investment is required  over ten years to deliver 
high-quality broadband for the world’s remaining unconnected 
population.  The need is most acute in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, 
Southeast Asia, and the Pacific. This requires a blend of capital investment, 
policy support, digital skill-building, and operating expenses for internet 
infrastructure. Effective national broadband planning is essential to this 
pathway to universal access.
Figure 3. Comparing latest affordability of 1GB to ADI score
80
60
40
20
0% 10% 20%
Source: Alliance for Affordable Internet
SCORE ON THE AFFORDABILITY DRIVERS INDEX, 2020AFFORDABILITY OF 1GB MOBILE BROADBAND, 2019
Americas Africa Asia Oceania1 Malaysia   (=) 85.67
2 Colombia   (=) 85.26
3 Costa Rica   (=) 85.07
4 Argentina   (+3) 80.56
5 Peru    (-1) 80.49
6 Thailand   (+2) 76.92
7 Mexico   (-2) 76.57
8 Turkey    (-2) 74.50
9 Dominican Republic  (+1) 71.52
10 Morocco   (+5) 71.26TOP TEN, 2020
AFFORDABILITY DRIVERS INDEX
1 Senegal   25th  61.89
2 Benin    27th  60.02
3 Cambodia   29th  59.27
4 Uganda   31st  58.64
5 Rwanda   32nd  58.19
6 Nepal    33rd  58.17
7 Myanmar   38th 53.68
8 Tanzania   41st  52.88
9 Mali    42nd  52.42
10 Bangladesh   45th  50.19TOP TEN, AMONG LEAST  
DEVELOPED COUNTRIESwww.a4ai.org  |  15Across the Asia–Pacific region, countries continue 
to maintain some of the highest policy scores, 
driven by effective national broadband planning 
and buoyed with continued support for public 
access solutions. While the regional average ADI 
score stayed consistently around 56 points (out 
of 100), policy scores across the region improved.  
 
The regional average for broadband strategy 
remained the highest policy cluster score of any 
theme and any region. The regional average for 
policies around spectrum management, public 
access, and gender mainstreaming all rose more 
than 3%. Countries like Thailand and Nepal 
have both leveraged their Universal Service and 
Access Funds to extend connectivity into new 
areas. Read more about Nepal here ; Thailand 
is featured in a case study below, page 28 . 
 
Across themes and in the wake of consistently 
strong broadband planning across the region, 
countries in the Asia–Pacific region offer model 
policies for many other low- and middle-income 
countries looking to accelerate digital inclusion.
The opposite appears to be true in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, where policies are 
stalling or regressing and affordability remains 
a key challenge for many, especially those on 
low incomes and for women. Worryingly, the 
regional average on the ADI only grew 2%, even 
Of particular concern is an apparent regional trend in Latin America around the 
abandonment of gender-responsive broadband policymaking. Just as new research 
documents the gender gap in meaningful connectivity  and the predominant 
fears around security and safety  for would-be mobile internet users in Latin 
America,  particularly among women , more countries in the region saw decreases 
in their scores on gender-inclusive policymaking and targets than increases.1.3. How policies have changed over the past two years
when excluding the new entrants from the 
region who have lower average incomes than 
their peers. This is in part driven by negative 
policy environments growing in countries like 
Bolivia, Brazil, Mexico, and Guatemala.
Some of the greatest strides are occurring in 
low-income countries and across Africa — where 
policy reform and investment are needed most. 
The average ADI score for low income countries 
rose from 32.4 to 35.42 — more than double 
the pace (11.3%) of any other income group 
compared to 2019. Countries across Africa rose 
an average of 7% in the ADI this year. Malawi has 
one of the largest year-on-year score increases 
this year, of over six points, a reflection of its 
work around the consultation and adoption of 
its 2019-2023 national broadband strategy . In 
Kenya, greater transparency around spectrum 
allocations  by posting information publicly 
and substantial investments in international 
bandwidth with the country’s fifth submarine 
cable landing  drove the country’s score up 15% 
from 2019.16  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Broadband access and related policies should not be seen as a 
standalone or independent element of a government’s development 
agenda, but rather should be fully integrated into every aspect of 
development, human and economic.  Over the years, the growth of 
broadband access, the mobile revolution and the dissemination of 
digital applications in various sectors, have helped demonstrate the 
key role that a connected world and digital technologies can play to 
support development objectives, from the UN SDGs to the World Bank 
Group’s twin goals (eliminating extreme poverty and increasing shared 
prosperity). All aspects of human and economic development can 
benefit from an inclusive digital transformation, for instance through 
job creation, easier access to public services, gender equality, food 
safety, and better, more transparent and participative policymaking.
Yet, a major prerequisite to access opportunities in the digital era 
is access to good-quality, reliable, affordable, and safe internet 
connectivity. Nowadays, 3.6 billion people are still offline — most of 
them in low-income countries —  and therefore are excluded from 
the digital promises.
The next stage of broadband development to connect the unconnected 
is more complex, requiring innovative technological and financing 
solutions to connect rural and remote areas and marginalised 
populations, while at the same time promoting investments in 
next generation connectivity. Broadband policies in all segments of 
the broadband value chain — international connectivity, national 
backbone, middle mile and last mile connectivity — fundamentally 
matter as it is at the core of the digital inclusion agenda, with the 
ambitious yet necessary global goal to achieve universal internet  
access by 2030. “ 
Interview with Boutheina Guermazi,   
Director of Digital Development at the World BankWhat’s at stake?
“
www.a4ai.org  |  17A national broadband plan (NBP) is a strategic vision for a country’s ICT development. 
Unlike a new law or regulation, national broadband plans are policy documents that set 
out objectives and aspirations for the ICT sector over the medium- to long-term. They 
are drafted and published by a government authority, usually the ministry responsible 
for telecommunications or the relevant regulator. This drafting process can sometimes 
include other stakeholders — such as private internet service providers and civil society 
groups — but this is not guaranteed. These documents are frequently, but not always, 
published online and drafted transparently.2 NATIONAL BROADBAND PLAN?WHAT IS A
Thematically, national broadband plans can cover  
a range of issues, such as expanding internet 
access, regulating the telecommunications 
market, guiding e-government services, and 
fostering a digital economy. They exist as a 
category of similar, but never identical, policy 
documents. This report investigates what 
makes a good national broadband plan and 
summarises the findings of that research.
Over the past decade, national broadband plans 
have increasingly become a target for interna -
tional advocacy efforts from the United Nations. 
National broadband plans have been part of the 
UN Broadband Commission’s objectives since 
its launch in 2010 and were the first target  of its 
initial framework. After a 2018 revision , national 
broadband plans remain the central part of the 
Commission’s first target: that each country 
should have a funded plan. 
Despite this, national broadband plans are  
not universal. Even where they exist, few  
plans effectively guide the sector. Capacity  
and implementation remain critical challenges 
for success.2.1. Why do national 
broadband plans matter?
National broadband plans help a number of 
countries stand out in this year’s Index. The 
top three countries — Malaysia, Colombia, and 
Costa Rica — all stand out with the highest 
three scores for national broadband planning. 
Botswana makes one of the largest leaps in the 
ADI this year, moving up nine positions, and is 
the closest that a sub-Saharan African country 
has gotten to the Top 10 in the current model, 
while also taking the highest score in Africa for 
broadband strategy. In large part this leap was 
fueled by the adoption of a new broadband 
strategy in mid-2018  that has been an exemplar 
for the region.18  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020The Central American region is unique for its endemic lack of broadband plans. Among the six 
countries in the region, only Costa Rica, where access is the most affordable and average incomes are 
nearly triple anywhere else in the region, has a National Telecommunications Development Plan . In 
all other countries, the market lacks the stability and other benefits provided by an effective national 
broadband plan. A bit of history explains this disparity:The unaffordability of data in Central America
The difference in broadband planning between Costa Rica and the 
rest of the region can be explained partially by history. Costa Rica 
opened up its telecommunications market a decade after other 
Central  American countries did. This enabled stakeholders within 
Costa Rica to learn from others how to establish a well-functioning 
modern policy environment. A central feature of the resulting policy  
environment was a regulator  and a ministry that worked together 
to implement public policy to ensure broad coverage at a low price. 
Unfortunately, other Central American nations initially lacked the 
same institutional arrangement. These countries exclusively rely on a 
regulator to oversee the sector and there is a lack of public policy to 
guide the development. Nonetheless, they have pursued important 
reforms and where gaps still exist, USAFs and broadband plans will 
allow the countries to accelerate their progress.   “ 
Allan Ruiz,   
Director of Comtelca“
Mobile broadband remains above the ‘1 for 2’ affordability threshold in all of these countries except 
for Costa Rica, where the cost of 1GB mobile broadband is one of the most affordable  among low- 
and middle-income countries in the Americas.www.a4ai.org  |  19Figure 4. Affordability of 1GB Mobile Broadband in Central America
Source: Alliance for Affordable Internet10%
7.5%
5%
2.5%
0%
Affordability of 1GB Mobile Broadband, 2019 ‘1 for 2’ Affordability TargetCosta Rica El Salvador Guatemala Belize Nicaragua Honduras0.7%3.14%3.51%4.42%5.39%9.66%
The adoption of a broadband plan in these countries not only promises increases in these countries’ 
ADI scores, but also positive opportunities for lower internet prices for consumers through targeted 
public investment and greater market cooperation.
A lack of political will continues to stifle progress. However, Comtelca, 
a major public telecommunications stakeholder in the region, has 
strived to change this by working with policy makers to develop the 
Mesoamerican Digital Agenda along with other country initiatives 
meant to accelerate progress.  “ 
Allan Ruiz,   
Director of Comtelca“
National broadband plans correlate positively with greater internet 
affordability. Countries with a national broadband plan that sets clear, 
time-bound targets and interventions for reducing broadband cost  
and increasing penetration tend to have lower internet prices relative 
to average income.  This behaviour2 suggests that these policies could lay 
the groundwork for more affordable internet prices and greater broad-  
band access.
2. The model is detailed on Table 6 in Annex 3.20  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020In addition to greater affordability overall, stronger national broadband 
plans correlate to greater affordability among the poorest 20% of society. 
This suggests that national broadband plans hold the potential not just to 
reduce prices in general, but also bring them to a point where they are more 
affordable for the most marginalised.3
These plans can determine to what degree the internet can be a 
meaningful tool in people’s lives.  The number of people who have access 
to the internet and the cost at which they pay for that service is, in part, 
affected by a national broadband plan’s ability to guide the ICT sector. As 
such, the evaluation of national broadband plans has been part of the 
Affordability Drivers Index (ADI)  since its first edition in 2013. The Index 
brings together a wide range of policy, market, and infrastructure indicators 
to assess countries’ orientation towards an environment that correlates with 
cheaper internet prices.
3. The model is detailed on Table 7 in Annex 3.Figure 5. Comparison of 2018 Broadband Strategy scores vs. 2019 affordability
30%
20%
10%
0%
0 2 8
Source: Alliance for Affordable Internet
AFFORDABILITY OF 1GB MOBILE BROADBAND, 2019
BROADBAND STRATEGY CLUSTER SCORE (0-10)
Americas Africa AsiaLIMITED TO ONLY THE COUNTRIES IN THE 2018 ADI WITH 2019 AFFORDABILITY DATA
4 6www.a4ai.org  |  214. A list of the plans analysed as part of this report’s conclusions are available as Annex 4.  
5. Among the 72 countries included in the policy survey for this report, Jordan’s 2019-2021 ICT Strategy had the shortest intended 
duration while Thailand’s Digital Economy and Society Development Plan has a 20-year policy arc. 14 countries passed plans with 
no end date.2.2. What does a national broadband plan look like?
National broadband plans come in extra-  
ordinary variety.  As of September 2020, 174 
countries report having a national broadband 
plan  of some kind. These plans have a variety of 
names: strategies, policies, plans, and agendas, 
to name a few examples4. They also respond to 
the unique political priorities and geography of 
their country: the plan in Burkina Faso looks very 
different from the plan in Fiji. These plans also 
vary in their political lifespan: some countries 
plan in scales of two years, others in five to ten, 
and some see their national broadband plans 
as indefinite5. However, there are some general 
characteristics by which we can understand 
what a national broadband plan looks like.
Of the 72 countries in this year’s report, 65 have 
or have recently had a national broadband 
plan in effect. Of the plans with an end date, 
the average timeframe is six years; the median 
is five. This remains consistent across regions 
and income groups, although countries in Latin 
America and the Caribbean have slightly shorter 
average timeframes, with a median validity of 
four years.
This means these documents occupy a middle-
level in the policy environment: they are not as 
permanent as laws but also not as short-lived as 
a specific regulatory action or a policy project. 
They bridge between the two spaces to give 
strategic coherence to the multitude of smaller 
actions and help interpret how the foundational 
principles of the country’s laws respond to 
contemporary questions and innovations.
This lifespan also means that national 
broadband plans can be politically vulnerable. 
In countries like Brazil, Guatemala, and Mexico, changes in political power have led to changes 
in policy priorities. In the past two years, the 
broadband strategy cluster scores for Brazil 
and Guatemala have fallen to around half of 
their values in 2018, and these countries now 
hold two of the lowest positions for broadband 
strategy in their region. This year, Brazil and 
Mexico saw less than a 1% change to their ADI 
score, while Guatemala fell 12% from its 2019 
position, compared to a 6% average increase 
across all countries.
Table 1. Broadband strategy cluster scores*  
in Latin America and Caribbean
* A composite score tallied by averaging policy scores for 
targeted public spending in telecommunications and for 
broadband planning.2018 2020
Costa Rica 8.5 8.5
Peru 8.3 8
Dominican Republic 7 8
Colombia 7.5 7.5
Argentina 6.5 7.5
Ecuador 7 6.8
Mexico 7.5 6
Jamaica 6 6
Bolivia 5 5.5
Honduras 5 3.5
Brazil 5.5 3
Venezuela 3 3
Nicaragua 2 2.5
Guatemala 3.5 1.5
Haiti 1.8 1
Regional Average 5.6 5.222  |  A4AI Affordability Report 20202.3. What should a national broadband plan do?
National broadband plans should set ambitions for ICT development. While 
broadband plans in general address questions of economic performance, 
digital inclusion, and infrastructure, each plan will have different strategies 
and priorities. For example, planning can focus on building out 3G, 4G, or 5G 
networks, depending on the ubiquity of each generation of technology and 
where coverage gaps may exist.
Geography is an important factor. Among a handful of policy issues we 
measured within broadband plans this year, countries most consistently set 
targets around ensuring and expanding internet access in rural areas (45 
of 65, 69%). This illustrates the pressing nature of the ongoing urban-rural 
digital divide, but is just one example of a policy theme in a broadband 
plan. Most plans will aim to address multiple themes over multiple years. 
In addition to geography and coverage, digital skills and the affordability of 
devices and data tariffs remain persistent challenges and are addressed with 
varying frequency.
Good national broadband plans set targets around their priorities. All 
national broadband plans are aspirational. The effectiveness of an individual 
plan comes, crucially, at the point between aspiration and implementation: 
how well does a plan motivate policy change and positive actions from all 
stakeholders in the sector?
The most effective national broadband plans have regular reviews and 
iterations. The three leading countries in both this year’s and the 2019 indices 
— Malaysia, Colombia, and Costa Rica — demonstrate the impact of national 
broadband plans on internet affordability and the importance of iterative 
reviews in achieving excellence in this space. These three countries earned 
the highest scores this year of any countries on the indicator for the quality 
of targets within their national broadband plans and the widespread impact 
of these targets.
In these three countries, their broadband plans set targets, led the sector,  
and left evidence of impact in their wake. In Malaysia and Colombia, the  
timely sequencing of successive plans built on the achievements and 
addressed the shortcomings of each plan before it. In Costa Rica, the 
national broadband plan details a procedure for reviewing progress over  
the duration of the plan’s lifespan, including biennial updates published by 
the Ministry. This practice is unmatched among the countries in this report 
for its regularity, transparency, and depth. These activities ensure that the 
national broadband plan is not a once-off performance in these countries 
but the launching point for further and continued activity in the sector.www.a4ai.org  |  23
COLOMBIACheck out the good practices case studies for each of these three countries and how they 
leveraged their national broadband plans into impact.
Click on the flag for more:
COSTA RICA
 MALAYSIA
The iterative review process, paired with transparent and measurable policy 
targets, creates accountability and keeps national broadband plans relevant. 
In these high-performing countries and elsewhere, national broadband 
plans are not the finish line. They are the starting point for ongoing dialogue, 
cooperation, and development.
With clear targets, national broadband plans can lay out an agreed roadmap 
for all stakeholders to contribute and to challenge others in the sector to 
do more where performance falls short. This function can, when performed 
effectively, keep stakeholders engaged in broadband policymaking over time 
and ensure that each policy action conforms with the ambitions and targets 
of the national broadband plan.
Not all countries have a national broadband plan, and many people live in 
countries where the national broadband plan falls short of the quality that it 
could — and should — have. This has real consequences, not just economic. 
It defers the potential for higher service quality for a family whose children 
are now learning from home. It keeps prices so high that a freelancer has to 
ration out their data over time to make sure they don’t go over their spending 
limit. It leaves entire communities — usually the poorest, most isolated, and 
most vulnerable — unconnected.24  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020National broadband plans help set out roles and, through that clarity, can 
create new efficiencies and collaborations to accelerate greater access and 
affordability. This section details some examples of how governments, private 
sector, civil society, and cross-sectoral partnerships have all been enabled by 
national broadband plans.These plans have an impact and correlate positively with outcomes like more affordable 
internet prices, including for the poorest in society. But how does a policy document 
translate into action? For national broadband plans, they bridge together various policy 
instruments — laws, regulatory interventions, investments, and more — to provide a multi-
year narrative arc for a country’s ICT development. This is achieved, in part, through the 
relationships that the plan stewards among stakeholders.MAKE THE INTERNET CHEAPER?HOW DO NBP S
Table 2. How a broadband plan sets roles and impacts the market3
Source: Alliance for Affordable InternetPublic  
Sector
Private  
Sector
Civil  
Society 
Public-Private  
PartnershipsACTOR PLAN IMPACT CONSEQUENCE
Guide infrastructure
and investment
Catalyse private 
investments
Facilitate new 
policymaking processes
Create new efficienciesMakes public money smarter
Connects private investment  
with social benefits
Uses a wide range of  
experiences to set  
realistic targets
Enables innovative,  
new solutions to  
stubborn  
connectivity  
problemswww.a4ai.org  |  256. Details about the linear models supporting this conclusion are available in Annex 3.3.1. NBPs guide infrastructure  
and public investment
Public investment serves as the core of almost every national broad-  
band plan.  National broadband plans featured in last year’s Affordability 
Report  because of how they guide governments on investing in infrastructure, 
particularly at the first and middle mile. Particularly in situations where the 
service demand does not yet exist to justify private investment, public money 
frequently serves as a risk guarantee for network development while internet 
use continues to grow.
Figure 6. Comparison between broadband plans and public spending targets, 2020 ADI
10
8
6
4
2
0
Source: Alliance for Affordable Internet
EVALUATIVE SCORE (0-10) FOR PUBLIC SPENDING
EVALUATIVE SCORE FOR BROADBAND PLANNING (0-10)
Americas Africa Asia Oceania0 2 6 4 10 8This relationship between public money and national broadband plans is  
clear in the policy survey data: countries with stronger national broadband 
plans also tend to have a higher score for more clearly defined and targeted 
public investment strategies. These plans can help distinguish smart  
investments from less impactful projects. In turn, this financial efficiency 
can accumulate over time and turn multiple projects into greater returns on 
otherwise similar amounts of funding.26  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Countries like Malaysia and Rwanda demonstrate the accelerating impact 
of effective national broadband planning in expanding access and reducing 
prices. In Malaysia, the country has benefited from a strong sequence of 
national broadband plans, starting with the 1994 Multimedia Supercorridor 
to more recent plans such as the 2013 Digital Malaysia , National Digital 
Economy Initiative  and the 2019 National Fiberisation and Connectivity 
Plan . In Rwanda, the 2017 ICT Sector Strategic Plan  offers clear targets and 
funding commitments to reach them. This comes after a legacy of successful 
implementations of projects such as the Korea Telecom-backed 4G network  
and the Digital Ambassadors Programme .
Figure 7. Affordability of 1GB Mobile Broadband in East Africa (2015–2019),  
Comparing Rwanda with its neighbours
These policies have come with an extraordinary pace in falling internet  
prices compared to neighbouring countries. The cost of 1GB in Malaysia 
has fallen to nearly a third of what it cost as a fraction of someone’s income 
in 2015, while in Indonesia, the cost is still 79% of what it was in 2015. In 
Rwanda, the cost of 1GB has fallen to less than a fifth of what it meant for 
a user in 2015, faster than in neighboring Keyna, Tanzania, or Uganda. In 
turn, this affordability has allowed the digital economies in both Malaysia 
and Rwanda  to grow and these countries to become regional leaders in the 
digital economy.30%
20%
10%
0%
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Kenya
Source: Alliance for Affordable InternetTanzania Uganda RwandaAFFORDABILITY OF 1GB MOBILE BROADBANDwww.a4ai.org  |  277. See Annex 4 for more information about the plans analysed in this year’s report.Table 3. National Broadband Plans with Targets, by Theme
Source: Alliance for Affordable InternetNumber of Plans
4G Connectivity
Fixed Access
Rural Access
Data Affordability
Device CostsAFRICA
33
11
17
21
14
13AMERICAS
12
4
8
8
2
4ASIA
18
9
12
14
11
4OCEANIA
2
0
0
2
0
1LOW
15
5
7
8
7
7LOWER-
MIDDLE
29
10
16
20
10
7UPPER-
MIDDLE 
20
8
13
16
9
7The recent governmental change in Mexico 
and the lack of a coherent broadband strategy 
from the new government exemplifies how the 
absence of an effective national broadband plan 
has consequences. Mexico’s Red Compartida  
(shared network) featured in last year’s  
Affordability Report  as one of the most  
advanced examples of a wholesale open access 
network — a unique investment strategy to 
expand backbone and middle mile networks. 
However, since the last policy survey in 2018,  
the policy environment for broadband has  
shifted with the general elections results  in the 
same year. The new Mexican president, López 
Obrador, has promised a ‘fourth industrial 
transformation’ , with digital technology playing 
a catalysing role for the Mexican economy. 
However, with only high-level themes clarified  
in this government’s new national digital 
strategy, much remains uncertain in expanding affordable internet access to the widest number 
of people. As a result, Mexico’s score on the 
Affordability Drivers Index has stagnated this 
year and risks deferring potential growth in 
greater internet access and affordability.
National broadband plans can do more than 
guide investment at the backbone level, the 
high-capacity cables that link countries and 
cities. They can also help governments identify 
and tackle challenges for universal access,  
which can be the most stubborn at the last 
and most remote ‘mile’ of the network. This 
year’s policy survey catalogued the national 
broadband plans of 65 low- and middle-income 
countries7. Of five themes — 4G networks, fixed 
internet access, rural access, data afforda -
bility, and device costs — plans most regularly 
set targets around rural access (45 of 65). This 
trend was consistent across different regions 
and income groups.
This trend makes sense: rural areas have some of the most difficult business 
cases. They feature lower population density, more difficult terrain and  
environmental conditions, and have lower average incomes. All of these  
features make them less economically desirable than urban areas. To fill this gap,  
governments can employ innovative policies to support rural connectivity  to 
help fill gaps and to provide sufficient support to make these areas economi -
cally profitable. Universal Service and Access Funds — such as in the case of the 
Net Pracharat  program in Thailand — can also play a key role to achieve this.28  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020The Net Pracharat  program, most active in 2017, is an example of Universal Service and Access Fund 
providing financing and strategic direction to provide new coverage to rural areas. These areas are 
less likely to be economically profitable without additional support from the public sector, and USAFs 
can be a key tool in financing this kind of project.
The program’s success saw the number of rural households without internet access nearly halved 
(from 13% to 7%) from 2016 to 2018, and another 1.7 million rural households come online .Case study: Thailand’s Net Pracharat
The Net Pracharat program focuses on installing connectivity to 
unserved and underserved areas and citizens. It was established as 
a part of the national plan of Digital Thailand, which identified six 
strategies including “Developing country wide high-efficiency digital 
infrastructure” as a top priority and a basis for the other five strategies. 
The plan targeted more than 74,000 local villages to be connected 
with high-speed internet, provided either by telecom operators or 
government-owned telecommunication companies. Through the 
project, almost all of the villages where the most of Thai citizens reside 
are able to connect to high-speed internet. 
 
Aside from the ambitious targets and successful outcomes, the plan 
also addressed long-term sustainability by training a volunteer 
network which was designed for enhancing the awareness programme 
for how to access the internet and the benefit of being connected and 
maintenance of the network. The connectivity itself is important, but 
the adaptation to the connected society and skill-building by local 
citizens is also important.   “ 
Interview with Jongbong Park,
Director for project development for the Asia–Pacific Telecommunity“www.a4ai.org  |  29Through national broadband plans, targeted public investments  
become the foundation for a flourishing digital economy.  From the 
investment at the backbone and with support to cover the most remote 
areas, other actors are able to build extensions to the network, reach new 
communities, and generate market competition. The strength and reliability 
of this backbone over time, provided through the national broadband plan, 
impacts the opportunities available to private actors in the sector.
That said [financing forbearance], this should not prevent policy-makers from looking at  
public access solutions that can boost demand growth, and therefore create a business  
case! Likewise, it is worth looking at ways to improve traditional instruments such as  
Universal Service Funds with new priorities that could have a stronger impact, for instance  
on school connectivity or women inclusion.  “ 
   
Boutheina Guermazi,  
Director of Digital Development, World Bank “
3.2. NBPs catalyse private sector investments
On top of publicly-financed projects, national broadband plans give 
confidence for the private sector to plan on a longer term and make further 
advancements in coverage and affordability. This is in part achieved through 
the positive and collaborative relationship that can be sustained through 
the policymaking process, but also because regulatory certainty, such as 
spectrum allocation or licensing fees, can affect the cost of business. Effective 
plans cultivate these positive relationships between the public and private 
sector and provide stability for a competitive market to grow.
National broadband plans are meant to accelerate broadband deployment, and the best  
way to achieve this objective is to promote competition and incentivise the private  
sector, especially in a context of limited public resources. Another critical aspect of a  
good national broadband plan is its ability to provide regulatory predictability for the  
private sector, particularly in areas such as spectrum policy, licensing, and tax policy.  “ 
 
Boutheina Guermazi,   
Director of Digital Development, World Bank “30  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Tunisia’s rapid development of 4G mobile 
networks offers an example of how effective 
broadband planning and market competition 
work in harmony. The first 4G licences in 
Tunisia were awarded concurrently  to the  
three major network operators in March 2016. 
At the same time, the government set out a 
five-year plan for nationwide 4G coverage  as 
part of its strategy, Tunisie Digitale 2020 . Using 
market competition among the three operators, 
each of whom had strong 3G infrastructure 
in place , and building on some of the highest 
spectrum availability among its peer nations , 
the telecommunications market in Tunisia  
has offered not just improved service but 
competitive pricing as well. As of 2019, over 
90% of Tunisians  were covered by at least two 
4G networks, while the country has met the 
‘1 for 2’ affordability target and is the second- 
most affordable country in Africa for 10GB  of 
mobile broadband.
Other countries, such as Namibia and Guatemala,  
have had their broadband planning process 
frustrated by a lack of clarity in the roles between 
the public and private sectors. Namibia moves 
modestly (2.5 to 4) up from having the second-
worst score in Africa for broadband strategy to 
a score between the first and second lowest 
quartiles, while Guatemala moves (3.5 to 1.5) 
down to less than half of its original score for 
broadband strategy in 2018. Both countries 
have seen the regulatory process for telecom -
munications suffer from imperfect relationships 
between the public and private sector, be it due 
to mistrust or complicity.In Namibia, the situation has been captured by 
the extensive governmental ownership  of the 
two major network operators in the country. 
Here, the boundary between regulation in the 
public interest and in private financial interest 
for maximised profits have blurred. While 
Namibia reached the ‘1 for 2’ affordability target  
for mobile broadband in 2019 , this afforda -
bility is a reality only for the richest 20% of the 
population. For all of the remaining income 
quintiles, the average affordability for 1GB 
exceeds 2% of their average monthly income, 
rising up to nearly 14% for the poorest 20% of 
Namibians. The situation may hopefully change 
as Namibia adopted a new National Broadband 
Policy and accordant Action Plan  in mid-2019. 
However, the situation in Guatemala remains 
less optimistic where the political momentum 
following the 2017 Nación Digital  agenda  has 
faded away.
National broadband plans have the potential 
to foster a collaborative relationship between 
the public and private sectors. This matches 
with the ambitions of the ITU’s fifth (and latest) 
generation  of ICT regulatory environments. 
However, despite the opportunities available, 
this requires a sufficient amount of trust 
between the public and private sectors that 
may not always exist. National broadband plans 
can be the first building block towards a more 
positive relationship where one does not exist.
T[here has been t]he issue of mistrust between government and industry. We have issues  
where the governments have looked at the private-owned telecommunication sector as  
cash cows to milk rather than partners in the development exercise.  “ 
   
Kenneth Ashigbey,   
Chief Executive Officer, Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications “www.a4ai.org  |  313.3. NBPs facilitate inclusive policymaking
Table 4. Average Scores & Policy Targets,  
based on Consultations with National Broadband PlanPart of the reason why national broadband 
plans can be such effective relationship 
builders is through the interaction of various 
stakeholders in the drafting and consultation 
process. The inclusion of civil society creates 
greater accountability among the public and 
private sectors; however, such practices are  
not guaranteed.
Across our entire dataset this year, one of the 
most promising indicators paired with a strong 
national broadband plan that sets targets and 
has impact is the inclusivity of the drafting 
process. Countries with ‘open’ and inclusive, 
consultative processes outnumbered countries 
with ‘closed’ drafting, 42 to 23.These countries also had higher average 
evaluative scores for their national broadband 
plan and its impact and for the clarity around 
public spending on infrastructure. These plans 
also were more likely to set policy targets, such 
as those around rural access or affordability, 
and for those policy targets to have greater 
detail, such as a measurable goal, a time 
limit, and/or implementation detail about the  
responsible authority. This trend is very 
promising for its consistency: even as we divide 
by region or by income group, the distinguishing 
factor of public consultation holds true.
Source: Alliance for Affordable InternetOPEN PROCESS
CLOSED PROCESS
OPEN
CLOSED
OPEN
CLOSED
OPEN
CLOSED
OPEN
CLOSED
OPEN
CLOSED
OPEN
CLOSED
OPEN
CLOSEDAll Study 
Countries
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
Low-income
Lower-middle
Upper-middle42
23
20
13
7
5
14
4
1
1
9
6
16
13
16
459.17
49.37
51.11
47.29
75.03
52.69
63.35
47.97
50.92
65.39
41.69
35.24
57.21
52.50
70.37
60.396.10
4.98
5.63
4.88
6.14
4.30
6.82
5.88
5.00
6.00
5.11
4.42
5.66
5.19
6.97
5.135.90
4.54
5.50
4.42
7.00
5.20
5.93
3.75
6.00
6.00
5.33
4.33
5.72
4.27
6.34
5.752.86
1.52
2.85
1.46
2.86
1.20
2.93
2.25
2.00
1.00
3.00
1.17
2.50
1.77
3.00
1.25TOTAL SCORE,
ADI 2020 
(0–100)NBP SCORE,
ADI 2020  
(0–10)PUBLIC 
SPENDING 
SCORE, ADI 
2020 (0–10)AVERAGE 
NUMBER OF 
POLICY TARGETS 
(OF 5 THEMES)32  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Levels of transparency and consultation  
vary greatly among different countries. There 
is a large question of capacity here, connected 
to average income and government revenue. 
As the table above demonstrates, countries in 
higher income groups are more likely to have 
an open process surrounding their national 
broadband plan. This diversity, however, pro-  
vides an opportunity for knowledge exchange 
among different countries. Dr. Jongbong Park, 
the director for project development for the 
Asia–Pacific Telecommunity (APT), reflected 
on the experience of countries across the 
region: “Most [member countries] have limited 
expertise in formulating suitable policies or 
regulatory frameworks to their nations which 
require to set a playing field for all stakeholders 
to work together and provide foreseeable and 
transparent future directions.” Best practice 
forums, such as APT and Smart Africa, offer 
support for policymakers looking to make the 
process more inclusive and transparent.Positive case study examples of inclusive 
policymaking exist across the globe. In Costa 
Rica, the broadband plan underwent several 
consultations  with different constituencies, 
including local government, consumer groups, 
and other stakeholders, as part of the drafting 
and validation process. In Nigeria, the 2020 
national broadband plan  was stewarded by a 
committee chaired by someone working in the 
private sector. The 2018 broadband strategy  in 
Botswana makes specific recommendations for 
a coordination committee to carry the plan’s 
targets into implementation and reserves space 
on this committee for multiple governmental 
ministries, the private sector, academia, and 
consumer advocates. All three also held online, 
public consultations to allow any individual to 
give comment before finalisation of each plan. 
Each of these three countries is now a regional 
leader with some of the highest scores for 
broadband strategy in Central America, West 
Africa, and Southern Africa, respectively.
Because of the consultations with the private sector and civil 
society, we’ve come up with a plan that is realistic, ambitious, but 
achievable. I think the Covid-19 pandemic shows we were spot on in  
terms of what is required to improve broadband access in Nigeria. We 
set targets for access, for connectivity to schools, to health facilities,  
to all local government areas in the country, urban and rural areas,  
digital inclusion, and gender parity… I believe the broad consult-  
ations and the composition of the committee ensured that we came  
up with the right plan for Nigeria and really addressed the issues  
because we brought a lot of experience of the realities of the  
country into putting the plan together. “ 
   
Funke Opeke,   
Chief Executive Officer of MainOne Cable Company “
www.a4ai.org  |  33Strong practices for transparency and inclusion require dedication from all 
stakeholders. Successful and genuinely inclusive processes rarely happen 
without intentional capacity building and invitations to previously excluded 
stakeholders to engage. This offers an opportunity for leadership from any 
sector to instigate a more open process in broadband policy making. Positive 
practice exists, and countries looking to improve their process can and should 
look to the expertise of their peers.
Inclusive policy making practices hold some of the greatest potential 
to set ambitious targets and achieve them. The drafting process, when 
inclusive, offers an opportunity to align interests and expectations 
among stakeholders from across the sector and in turn, build trust. 
This alignment of interests and the consequent mutual accountability 
are positives in their own right; however, they also permit further  
partnerships that can advance progress in digital development.
National broadband plans set out national strategies with their vision and achievable  
milestones, in the areas of enhancing connectivity, quality of service, interconnections,  
network neutrality, awareness programme, and so forth. The plan provides a blueprint for  
the stakeholders to contribute and work together. “ 
   
Jongbong Park,   
Director for Project Development, Asia–Pacific Telecommunity “
3.4. NBPs create new partnerships  
and sources of accountability
Effective broadband planning, when inclusive to all stakeholders and 
responsive to individual barriers, opens up new opportunities. The Internet 
Para Todos partnership in Peru demonstrates how innovative policy changes 
can extend internet access to new communities and realise policy goals 
in the context of a national broadband plan. This project combines the  
government’s interest in increased internet use and mobile network  
coverage, especially in more remote areas, and the options for shared 
infrastructure among multiple private sector stakeholders to support an 
innovative business model that helps make internet service profitable in 
areas where traditional business models could not.34  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Broadband policies, from concept to implementation, require a close collaboration with 
private stakeholders to support competition, innovation and investments, and co-design 
targeted digital policies that improve inclusion and consumer protection without being 
perceived as ineffective burdens. This multi-stakeholder approach is essential to identify 
and enable new business and financing models (e.g. infrastructure sharing), especially in 
situations where the business case for investments is not clear. It is also critical to address 
swiftly emerging issues such as network security and set up new policy and regulatory 
framework for a safe integration of data-driven infrastructure in the value chain. “ 
   
Boutheina Guermazi,   
Director of Digital Development, World Bank“
This is such an example of a partnership that comes out of a trusting 
relationship between the public and private sectors and is replicable across 
different geographies. Earlier this year, the Ghanaian Universal Service and 
Access Fund, GIFEC, financially backed the deployment of 2,000 new sites  
based on the same technology as Internet Para Todos. Focused on rural 
connectivity, the plan aims to help multiple network operators reach these 
more remote communities in a way that is economically viable by sharing 
common physical infrastructure.
Where stakeholders disagree on the way forward, national broadband  
plans can become advocacy tools and reminders for the agreed objectives 
around expanding internet access and affordability. Ghana provides a good 
example of this dynamic. The controversial Communications Service Tax 
applies a specific levy on electronic communications that was increased 
in 2019  to 9%. It was then reduced temporarily to 5%  during the Covid-19 
pandemic in tandem with reduced tariffs from operators . While this is 
a temporary improvement, this is still a tax burden that raises the cost 
of business and makes affordability a harder goal to reach. Other policy 
tensions around spectrum licensing and their associated fees again expose 
the distinction of how much of a political priority broadband access is for the 
public sector vis-a-vis other goals.www.a4ai.org  |  35The issues of regulatory independence in Ghana is a major concern. The policymakers 
have overreaching influence on the regulators so that when it comes to the issue of making 
spectrum available, those decisions are not necessarily a regulatory one. Therefore, the 
regulator can’t necessarily implement the strategy here. Politicians might want to raise 
some amount of money to reduce the deficit rather than ensuring that we can expand 
broadband to everyone in the country. Another example is with the issue of taxation: 
the implementation of the CST law where the CST (Communications Service Tax) was 
introduced for only communications services and then increased. That’s not aligned with 
the broadband policy, but because of political expediency, it happens anyway. “ 
   
Kenneth Ashigbey,   
Chief Executive Officer, Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications“
3.5. NBPs can make the internet  
more affordable
National broadband plans help reduce internet prices over time by 
providing clarity to the potential roles for all stakeholders within the 
sector. This, in turn, creates new efficiencies by making both private and 
publicly-funded investments smarter and better informed of the lived 
realities of the people that these plans aim to support.
National broadband plans can provide clear expectations for public 
investment in the internet at each level of the network. Furthermore, 
plans can lay out the role for the private sector to build in complement 
to public investment and leverage market competition to the greatest 
benefit of consumers. With inclusive and transparent procedures, 
national broadband plans create accountability and enable civil society 
groups to advocate for continued progress. Plans can align actors 
across different stakeholder groups to encourage common action that 
results in greater internet affordability and creates accountability where 
tensions arise.36  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Based on the evidence collected from 72 countries about their broadband 
policy environments and the Affordability Drivers Index results this year,  
this report makes three top-level suggestions for better broadband planning 
in the future:National broadband plans are increasingly a necessity for success in digital development. 
Where these plans have fallen short so far, or where no plan is in place, governments have 
the opportunity to take big steps for transformative change in broadband policy.TO HAPPEN?WHAT NEEDS
1
2
3A plan must have inputs from a diverse and representative 
set of players across the private sector, public sector, and 
civil society  before publication.
4.1. Collect inputs from the private sector, 
public sector, and civil society
The most promising national broadband plans in this study were the  
products of consultations. Consultative processes start the chain reaction 
of correlating factors from a stronger national broadband plan to a  
higher overall score on the Affordability Drivers Index to lower internet  
prices for consumers.A plan must have targets that address a country’s most critical 
gaps, have a clear measurement and a time limit , and at least 
one target for network coverage and data affordability each.
A plan must come with funding commitments  and a stated 
plan for transparent assessment and review  that occurs at 
least every other year.4www.a4ai.org  |  37Winning the challenge of universal and equitable digital transformation requires a whole-
of-society approach to broadband policy making: a multi-stakeholder approach that involves 
governments, private sectors, users, civil society, and partners working hand in hand. “ 
 
Boutheina Guermazi,   
Director of Digital Development, World Bank   “
“A whole-of-government approach is required when it comes to looking at national digital 
development/roadmaps/plans, etc. All sectors need to embrace the shift to digital, and 
along with it a paradigm shift in how we look at the productivity and progress of each 
sector. It’s not a matter of tasking, for example, the ICT Ministry with developing a digital 
plan but rather it’s about ensuring all parts of government — and the sectors they look 
after — are not only a part of the plan but tasked with implementing the plan as well. “ 
 
Rajnesh Singh,   
Regional Vice President for Asia-Pacific, Internet Society“
Consultations allow stakeholders to negotiate and align interests to facilitate 
the next generation of digital development. This alignment helps build 
trust and efficiency in the sector by replacing tensions with cooperation. 
From Tunisia’s 4G advancement to Internet Para Todos in Peru, positive  
collaborations are coming out of effective consultative processes. These 
collaborations extend access to new areas and keep the broadband market 
competitive and dynamic.
We all have something to offer and should be part of the process from the initiation 
stage within the [broadband policy] framework. It’s not just about waiting to be called 
into the framework, but being an integral and equal partner in the development of the 
framework. It should not always be government-led: it should be more a collaborative effort 
between the public sector, private sector, the third sector, and customers, too. “ 
   
Kenneth Ashigbey,    
Chief Executive Officer, Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications “38  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Importantly, consultations should not just be a bilateral effort between public 
and private sectors. In addition to these stakeholder groups, it is essential 
that civil society is able to participate in the broadband planning process. This 
mimics the national coalition model  that A4AI adopts as the foundation for 
its country-level interventions. This inclusion has extraordinary potential in 
supporting all parts of the ICT ecosystem, including community networks  and 
public access points . As such, policymakers should be proactive in seeking 
out the contributions of civil society and the general public, and do so 
without assumption that civil society is monolithic:  consumer groups, 
library associations, women’s groups, gender equality advocates, people 
with disabilities and their support groups, and rural community represent -
atives are just a few examples. In addition, civil society groups looking to 
ensure their voice is heard can do so by championing each other’s voices into 
broader coalitions, such as was done at the Nigeria Broadband Infrastructure 
Forum , hosted in 2018 by A4AI.
Such underserved communities are where the greatest needs lie — as well where the greatest 
impact from digital opportunities can be had for social and economic development. In other 
words, the national broadband plan should have an emphasis on ensuring such communities 
are able to get connected quickly and efficiently. Unfortunately, this is not the case and in most 
instances establishing a community network is beset with a number of regulatory challenges, 
from connecting to upstream providers to the need for ISP licenses to spectrum and a host 
of other approvals needed, depending on the location and country in question. “ 
   
Rajnesh Singh,   
Regional Vice President for Asia-Pacific, Internet Society“
Bringing together a wide range of stakeholders creates the greatest 
opportunity to assemble a comprehensive list of problems in the market. 
This diversity is crucial to understanding all sides of these issues and the 
individual impacts of a single pain point on multiple, different parts of society. 
A key example of this, too often under-addressed in national broadband 
planning, are the market impacts of affordability and accessibility on women 
and girls and confronting the digital gender gap. Gender-responsive targets  
remain woefully underwhelming across different regions and income 
groups. If an inclusive group of informed and expert stakeholders is unable 
to share a complete understanding of the problem to be tackled, such issues 
stubbornly remain over time while other, more superficial indicators may 
indicate progress.www.a4ai.org  |  394.2. Set clear targets within  
national broadband plans
Targets turn a policy vision into objectives. 
Good targets have five important details: 
what needs to be done, who needs to do it, by  
when they need to do it, how much it will  
cost, and how we all make sure it’s been done  
(or, at least, how we make sure that we’re on the  
right path). The targets in the broadband 
plans for Malaysia, Colombia, and Costa Rica 
have been driving forces for their progress  
on the Affordability Drivers Index. Targets  
keep stakeholder interests in alignment from 
the publication date through the lifespan of  
the plan.
Targets create accountability. With a common 
understanding of the facts of what progress 
has been made and where gaps still exist, 
stakeholders can call attention to shortcomings 
in the implementation of a national broadband 
plan and suggest alternative ways forward. They 
also provide the evidence and grounding to the 
claims of those who have been most likely to be 
excluded from the policymaking process.4.3. Commit funding  
and promise to review
Governments cannot consider the job done 
once a national broadband plan has been 
written. The work of expanding internet access 
and reducing internet prices begins after the 
plan has been set and the stakeholders have 
agreed to the targets. From policy changes to 
investments, governments must then begin the 
process of carrying out the actions that have 
been agreed. This typically requires its own line 
of public spending and internal champions to 
lead the plan’s implementation.
Even after a project is agreed in a broadband 
plan, the cost of that project typically is not 
limited to just the capital expenditure required 
to lay the cable or build the tower. Of the 
US$428 billion projected  to provide universal 
access to broadband connectivity by 2030, 
US$46 billion — a little over 10% — is needed 
for policy and regulation and for ICT skills and 
content. The relevant institutions — be it the 
regulator or the Universal Service and Access 
Fund or otherwise — must have sufficient funds 
to carry out their responsibilities. Ongoing 
support is also required for collecting and 
analysing data to measure progress, publish 
updates, and convene subsequent workshops. 
The credibility of a national broadband plan 
depends not just on how it is received on its first 
day, but on how relevant it remains over time. 
Without financial support for implementation 
and review, national broadband plans have little 
chance to create a legacy in a country’s digital 
development.
40  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020This report was researched and written during 
a transformative period of time. The value 
of internet connectivity — for individuals, 
businesses, communities, and entire countries 
— was laid bare as a consequence of the global 
Covid-19 pandemic. In the coming years and 
decades, the internet is only going to become 
more important for participation in an increas -
ingly digitised economy and society.
While the theme for this year’s report seems 
counterintuitive in the current climate — how 
do you plan for unplannable disasters — this 
theme may be more important than ever before. 
Digital technology has proven its essential 
character in helping people and societies be 
resilient. The internet is no longer a niche policy 
issue: it affects the economy, education, health, 
transportation, and more. The decisions made 
as part of broadband policy have the potential 
to affect millions of people, from different 
backgrounds and across different parts of 
society. As we emerge out of lockdowns and 
recover, this will be a moment to return to the 
drawing board.CONCLUSION
[In] early 2020, some governments were still skeptical regarding the importance of 
broadband deployment compared to other development priorities. Covid-19 highlighted 
how broadband and the digital applications it empowered can support national 
resilience, from the dissemination of public health information and telemedicine 
to remote work/school solutions and digital cash transfers to the most in need. It is 
now crystal clear to all that broadband is an essential infrastructure that enhances 
people’s lives and supports the functioning of our modern societies. “ 
  
Boutheina Guermazi,   
Director of Digital Development, World Bank“5
www.a4ai.org  |  41FULL ADI RESULTS, 2020ANNEX 1
COUNTRYADI 
SCOREACCESS 
SUB-INDEXINFRASTRUCTURE 
SUB-INDEXADI RANK 
(CHANGE)*WORLD BANK 
INCOME GROUP, 
2020
Malaysia 85.67 95.65 67.16 1 (0) Upper middle
Colombia 85.26 86.94 75.08 2 (0) Upper middle
CostaRica 85.07 94.85 66.83 3 (0) Upper middle
Argentina 80.56 85.51 67.60 4 (+3) Upper middle
Peru 80.49 79.78 73.20 5 (-1) Upper middle
Thailand 76.92 85.85 60.34 6 (+2) Upper middle
Mexico 76.57 74.50 71.02 7 (-2) Upper middle
Turkey 74.50 77.21 64.38 8 (-2) Upper middle
Dominican Republic 71.52 76.90 59.02 9 (+1) Upper middle
Morocco 71.26 73.54 61.89 10 (+5) Lower middle
India 69.77 71.38 61.21 11 (-2) Lower middle
Brazil 68.80 71.56 59.20 12 (0) Upper middle
Botswana 68.72 77.49 53.11 13 (+9) Upper middle
Indonesia 68.67 75.41 55.10 14 (+2) Upper middle
Mauritius 68.66 76.70 53.80 15 (-2) High
Ecuador 68.33 68.91 60.96 16 (-5) Upper middle
Jamaica 67.50 71.25 57.04 17 (0) Upper middle
Pakistan 66.91 71.76 55.41 18 (-4) Lower middle
Nigeria 66.19 70.65 55.15 19(0) Lower middle
Fiji 65.39 66.55 57.71 20 (new) Upper middle
Jordan 64.78 64.49 58.63 21 (-2) Upper middle
Viet Nam 64.69 64.32 58.62 22 (+3) Lower middle
Ghana 63.41 67.12 53.39 23 (-2) Lower middle
Tunisia 61.95 65.57 52.18 24 (-2) Lower middle
Senegal 61.89 62.94 54.67 25 (+4) Lower middle
South Africa 61.77 66.78 50.62 26 (-2) Upper middle42  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020COUNTRYADI 
SCOREACCESS 
SUB-INDEXINFRASTRUCTURE 
SUB-INDEXADI RANK 
(CHANGE)*WORLD BANK 
INCOME GROUP, 
2020
Benin 60.02 57.56 56.51 27 (+3) Lower middle
Kenya 59.30 59.10 53.60 28 (+10) Lower middle
Cambodia 59.27 66.37 46.26 29 (+10) Lower middle
Côte d’Ivoire 59.25 64.32 48.28 30 (-2) Lower middle
Uganda 58.64 57.25 54.19 31 (+6) Low
Rwanda 58.19 63.99 46.59 32 (0) Low
Nepal 58.17 55.97 54.58 33 (+7) Lower middle
Algeria 55.62 65.60 40.10 34 (new) Lower middle
China 54.52 48.04 55.58 35 (+2) Upper middle
Egypt 54.18 59.47 43.51 36 (-1) Lower middle
Philippines 54.16 60.62 42.30 37 (-9) Lower middle
Myanmar 53.68 51.70 50.31 38 (+7) Lower middle
Kazakhstan 53.53 57.46 44.27 39 (+11) Upper middle
Honduras 53.51 50.02 51.68 40 (-4) Lower middle
Tanzania 52.88 46.63 53.86 41 (-7) Lower middle
Mali 52.42 53.27 46.35 42 (0) Low
Bolivia 51.54 48.17 49.79 43 (-11) Lower middle
Papua New Guinea 50.92 49.83 46.95 44 (new) Lower middle
Bangladesh 50.19 48.48 46.91 45 (-1) Lower middle
Gambia,The 49.94 54.40 40.52 46 (+7) Low
SriLanka 49.79 53.76 40.87 47 (-19) Lower middle
Zambia 48.14 48.27 43.22 48 (+1) Lower middle
Cameroon 47.77 48.91 41.87 49 (-2) Lower middle
Burkina Faso 46.42 45.07 43.15 50 (+2) Low
Mozambique 45.16 45.40 40.41 51 (-3) Low
Namibia 45.13 39.51 46.27 52 (-7) Upper middle
El Salvador 42.32 32.21 48.22 53 (new) Lower middle
Malawi 42.29 40.04 40.32 54 (+2) Low
Zimbabwe 42.03 44.59 35.29 55 (+2) Lower middle
Venezuela 40.35 41.39 35.30 56 (-5) Upper middlewww.a4ai.org  |  43COUNTRYADI 
SCOREACCESS 
SUB-INDEXINFRASTRUCTURE 
SUB-INDEXADI RANK 
(CHANGE)*WORLD BANK 
INCOME GROUP, 
2020
Madagascar 39.69 41.69 33.74 57 (new) Low
Angola 39.60 40.29 34.97 58 (new) Lower middle
Niger 38.54 43.85 29.39 59 (new) Low
Afghanistan 37.44 34.65 36.50 60 (new) Low
Guatemala 36.17 34.65 34.09 61 (-2) Upper middle
Laos 36.06 35.78 32.76 62 (new) Lower middle
Nicaragua 35.73 41.42 26.48 63 (+1) Lower middle
Sudan 31.03 34.42 24.55 64 (-1) Low
Burundi 30.24 34.03 23.43 65 (new) Low
Belize 24.63 17.18 29.64 66 (new) Upper middle
Liberia 24.32 26.88 19.34 67 (0) Low
SierraLeone 22.77 21.87 21.40 68 (0) Low
Ethiopia 20.37 21.45 17.25 69 (+2) Low
Congo, DR 20.22 18.18 20.25 70 (-1) Low
Haiti 19.90 16.89 20.93 71 (-1) Low
Yemen 0.00 0.00 0.00 72 (0) Low
*For fairness, rank change is measured only in comparison to other countries 
that were included in the 2019 Affordability Drivers Index.
44  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020The Affordability Drivers Index (ADI) is a composite measure that 
summarises in a single score an assessment of the drivers of internet 
affordability in various countries. Benefiting from the research 
framework established by the Web Index, the 2020 ADI covers 72 
countries and focuses on two key aspects driving affordability: 
telecommunications infrastructure and access to the internet.
Two different data sources are used in the construction of the Index: data 
from other providers (‘secondary data’) and data gathered through our own 
research (‘primary data’).
The primary data is only collected every two years through a multi-country 
expert survey. The survey includes questions — scored on a scale of 0–10 — 
on different issues regarding policy, regulation, and other aspects around 
broadband and affordable access to the internet. (The questions and the 
scoring guidance for each of those questions are available in the codebook  
provided to each researcher.) The questions were specifically designed by 
A4AI, the Web Foundation, and their advisers. These primary data, based on 
and aligned with the A4AI Policy and Regulatory Good Practices , attempt to 
assess the extent to which countries have achieved a policy and regulatory 
environment that reflects the best practice outcomes. Survey questions were 
scored based on predetermined criteria by country experts. The scores were 
checked and verified by a number of peer reviewers.
This year, we conducted a new round of policy surveys on the 72 countries 
covered by the ADI between April and June 2020 by regional policy experts, 
including a peer-review process to improve the accuracy of the results. 
In addition, we draw on a range of secondary indicators to derive the sub-  
indices described above as well as the final composite index. All secondary 
indicators have been updated with the latest available data as of  
September 2020.ADI METHODOLOGYANNEX 2www.a4ai.org  |  45The indicators used in the ADI represent a 
comprehensive set of factors that influence 
broadband affordability. However, this is not a 
complete list as there may be other important 
factors which cannot be included because they 
do not meet the criteria above.
The factors that the ADI covers are grouped into 
two sub-indices — infrastructure and access:  
The infrastructure sub-index   
measures the current extent of  
infrastructure deployment and 
operations, alongside the policy and 
regulatory frameworks in place to 
incentivise and enable cost-effective 
investment in future infrastructure 
expansion. Variables included in this 
sub-index include, for example, the 
amount of international bandwidth 
available in a particular country, and 
an assessment of a nation’s spectrum 
policy.  
The access sub-index  measures 
current broadband adoption rates 
and the policy and regulatory frame -
works in place to encourage growth 
and ensure provision of affordable  
and equitable access. This sub-index 
includes variables such as current 
internet penetration rates and an 
assessment of the effectiveness of 
a country’s Universal Service and 
Access Funds. We employ data from several large international 
databases to measure or proxy the dimensions 
under study. Before an indicator is included in 
the Index, it needs to fulfil four basic criteria:
Data providers have to be credible 
and reliable organisations, which are 
likely to continue  to produce these 
data (i.e., it is not a one-off dataset 
publication).
Data releases should be regular, 
with new data released at least every 
three years. There should be at least 
two data years for each indicator, 
so that a basic statistical inference 
could be made.
The latest data year should be no 
older than three years back from 
publication year.
The data source should cover at least 
two-thirds of the sample of countries, 
so that possible bias — introduced by 
having a large number of indicators  
from one source that systematically  
does not cover one-third or more of 
the  countries  — is reduced.
All the indicators included in the ADI are listed 
below, where they are grouped by sub-index 
and type (primary sources or secondary 
sources). The primary indicators (codes A1–A14) 
are collected via the policy surveys described 
earlier. The secondary sources include data 
collected by the ITU, GSMA Intelligence, World 
Bank, and Packet Clearing House. 1Data sources and data providers
246  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020TYPE (CODE) ACCESS SUB-INDEX INDICATORS
Primary (A5) Clear, time-bound targets in National Broadband Plan for reducing 
cost and increasing penetration
Primary (A12) Universal Service/Access Funds (USAFs) used to subsidise access 
for underserved and underprivileged populations
Primary (A4) ICT regulatory decisions informed by adequate evidence
Primary (A13) Specific policies to promote free or low-cost access
Primary (A11) To what extent have Universal Access/Service Funds (USAF) 
prioritised infrastructure investments that will reduce costs 
and increase access for underserved communities and market 
segments?
Primary (A2) To what extent does the government ICT regulator perform its 
functions according to published and transparent rules, with the 
ICT regulatory decisions influenced by public consultations?
Primary (A14) To what extent do the country’s broadband policies include 
strategies and programs to improve access and use among women 
and girls? 
Secondary (WI) Market Concentration, as Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
Secondary (ITU_K) Existence of National Broadband Plan
Secondary (WI_C) Mobile broadband connections (% of all connections)
Secondary (ITU_EYE) Cluster of ITU indicators (bundled)
Secondary (ITU_N) Percentage of individuals using the Internet
Secondary (Mobile_penet) Market penetration, as mobile internet unique subscribers 
Secondary (Smart_Phadpt) Smartphone adoptionTable 5. List of indicators included in the Affordability Drivers Indexwww.a4ai.org  |  47TYPE (CODE) INFRASTRUCTURE SUB-INDEX INDICATORS
Primary (A1) Flexible, technology and service neutral ICT licensing frameworks
Primary (A8) Specific guidelines for public infrastructure funding and telecoms 
subsidies
Primary (A9) Time bound government plan to make available broadband 
spectrum for high-speed data services
Primary (A10) Transparent, competitive, and fair process for increasing spectrum 
availability
Primary (A3) To what extent does the regulator and/or the competition 
commission enforce the country’s ICT licensing requirements and 
regulations?
Primary (A6) National policies in place facilitating efficient access to public rights 
of way and tower zoning permissions
Primary (A7) To what extent does the government facilitate resource sharing 
across telecommunications operators?
Secondary (ITU_A) International bandwidth per internet user (bits/s)
Secondary (ITU_L) Investment per telecom subscriber (average over 3 years)
Secondary (WB_A) Secure internet servers (per 1 million people)
Secondary (WBE) Access to electricity (% of population)8
Secondary (PCH) Existence of Internet Exchange Points (IXPs)
Secondary (ITU_EYEbn) Existence of number portability between mobile network operators 
Secondary (3G) 3G Network coverage, by population 
8. In previous editions of the ADI this indicator was coded as IEAA, Electrification Rate by the International Energy Agency. Due to 
limited data availability this indicator has changed this year to WBE, Access to electricity (% of population) from the World Bank. 
Correlation tests have been performed to ensure that the change does not translate into significant changes to the model. 48  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020Index Computation
There are several steps in the process of 
constructing a composite index. Some of those 
involve deciding which statistical methods to  
use in the normalisation and aggregation 
processes. In arriving at that decision, we 
took into account several factors, including 
the purpose of the Index, the number of 
dimensions we were aggregating, and the  
ease of disseminating and communicating it  
in an understandable, replicable, and trans-  
parent way.
The following seven steps summarise the 
computation process of the Affordability  
Drivers Index:
Take the data for each indicator from 
the data source for the 86 countries 
originally covered by the Web Index   
and the 23 countries that are exclu-  
sively part of the ADI, for a total  
sample of 109 countries. Impute  
missing data for every secondary 
indicator for the sample of 109 
countries over the period 2015–2019 
where appropriate.  Broadly, the 
imputation of missing data was done 
using two methods: country-mean 
substitution if the missing number 
is in the middle year (e.g., have data 
for 2016 and 2018, but not for 2017), 
or taking arithmetic average growth 
rates on a year-by-year basis. For 
the indicators that did not cover a 
particular country in any of the years, 
no imputation was done.
9. As an exception, for the WI indicator, a higher value indicates a more concentrated market and, therefore, weights as a more 
negative value in the Index’s calculation.Normalise9 the full (imputed) dataset 
using z-scores (z=(x-mean)/standard 
deviation), making sure that for all 
indicators, a high value is ‘good’ and 
a low value is ‘bad’.9
Where applicable, cluster some of 
the variables, taking the average of 
the clustered indicators post-normal -
isation. For the clustered indicators, 
this clustered value is the one to be 
used in the computation of the Index 
components.
Compute the two sub-index scores 
using arithmetic means, using the 
clustered values where relevant.
Compute the min-max values for 
each z-score value of the sub-indices, 
as this is what will be shown in the 
visualisation tool and other publi -
cations containing the sub-index 
values. The formula for this is: [(x –
min)/(max – min)]*100.
Compute overall composite scores 
by averaging the sub-indexes (at 
z-score level).2
13
4
5
6www.a4ai.org  |  49TABLE 6.  
NATIONAL BROADBAND PLANS  
AND INTERNET AFFORDABILITY. 
MULTI-YEAR MODEL 2015 - 201910
OLS
(Intercept)
Broadband Planning Score, 
Previous Year ADI from 
Dependent Variable
Source: A4AI
Average Monthly Income, 
Per Capita 
Source: World Bank
Population
Source: World Bank
Enabling Infrastructure11
Source: GSMA
NBP in effect that year
Binary Variable. Source: ITU ICT-EYE
Number of observations
R2
R2 Adj.
F0.279***
(0.043)
-0.005*
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.007*
(0.003)
-0.002***
(0.000)
0.020**
(0.010)
156
0.440
0.421
23.562
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01TABLE 7.  
NATIONAL BROADBAND PLANS IN 
2018  AND INTERNET AFFORDABILITY 
FOR THE POOREST 20% IN 2019
OLS
(Intercept)
Average Monthly Income, 
Per Capita
Source: World Bank
Price of 1GB Mobile 
Broadband, 2019 
Source: A4AI
Gini Coefficient
Source: World Bank
Broadband Planning ADI 
Score, 2018
Source: A4AI
Number of observations
R2
R2 Adj.
F
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.010.213*
(0.116)
-0.000***
(0.000)
0.002***
(0.005)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.021**
(0.010)
42
0.691
0.651
17.33
10. Data from 2015 to 2019 was used to build the model. This is a simple OLS model with no time dimension. Several 
years were used to get a larger sample. The ADI scores lagged one year with respect to the affordability of the data. 
11. The Enabling Infrastructure variable includes: international bandwidth per user, number of secure servers, access 
to electricity, and number of internet exchange points (IXPs).LINEAR MODELS AND 
REGRESSION DETAILSANNEX 350  |  A4AI Affordability Report 2020As part of our analysis, we assembled a catalogue of currently-enforced 
national broadband plans across the 72 countries in this year’s study. This 
table summarises the plans that formed the basis of our study and provides 
a link to that plan, or information about it, where that information is publicly 
available on the internet. More detailed information — including dates of 
enactment and expiry, existence of policy targets, and evidence of public 
consultation — is publicly available as a spreadsheet .NATIONAL BROADBAND 
PLAN CATALOGUEANNEX 4
COUNTRY PLAN NAME
Afghanistan ICT Policy for Afghanistan
Algeria Stratégie du haut et du très 
haut débit
Angola Plano de Desenvolvimento 
Nacional
Argentina Argentina Conectada: Plan 
de Telecomunicaciones y 
Conectividad
Bangladesh ICT Policy
Benin ennovbenin2021
Bolivia Broadband National Plan
Botswana National Broadband Strategy
Brazil Structural Plan of Telecom-
munication Networks (PERT)
Burkina Faso National Strategy for the 
Development of Digital 
Economy
Burundi Burundi Broadband Strategy
Cambodia Cambodian ICT Masterplan 
2020
Cameroon Strategic Plan for a Digital 
Cameroon by 2020COUNTRY PLAN NAME
China Broadband China Strategy 
and Implementation Plan
Colombia Plan TIC – El Futuro Digital 
de Todos
Congo, DR Plan National du Numérique
Costa Rica Plan Nacional de 
Telecomunicaciones
Côte d’Ivoire ICT Sector Development 
Strategy
Dominican 
RepublicDigital Agenda of the 
Dominican Republic
Ecuador National Plan for the 
Development of Broadband
Egypt eMISR National Broadband 
Plan
Ethiopia National ICT Policy and 
Strategy
Fiji Fiji National Broadband 
Policy
Gambia, The Gambia Broadband Strategic 
Plan
Ghana National Broadband Policy 
and Implementation 
Strategywww.a4ai.org  |  51COUNTRY PLAN NAME
Nigeria Nigerian National 
Broadband Plan
Pakistan Telecommunications Policy
Papua New 
GuineaNational Broadband Policy
Peru Ley de Promoción de la 
Banda Ancha y Construcción 
de la Red Dorsal Nacional de 
Fibra Óptica
Philippines National Broadband Plan: 
Building Infostructures for a 
Digital Nation
Rwanda ICT Sector Strategic Plan
Senegal National Broadband Plan of 
Senegal (Plan National Haut 
Débit du Sénégal
Sierra Leone National ICT Policy
South Africa SA Connect
Sri Lanka National Digital Policy
Sudan National Strategic 
Development Plan
Tanzania National ICT Policy
Thailand Digital Thailand Plan
Tunisia Plan National Stratégique 
Tunisie Digitale 2020
Turkey National Broadband Strategy 
and Action Plan
Uganda National Broadband Policy 
2018
Venezuela Tercer Plan Socialista de 
Desarrollo Económico y 
Social de la Nación
Viet Nam Wireless Broadband 
Masterplan
Zambia SMART Zambia Master Plan
Zimbabwe National ICT PolicyCOUNTRY PLAN NAME
Honduras Agenda Digital de Honduras
India National Broadband Mission
Indonesia Indonesia Broadband Plan
Jamaica MSET’s Strategic Business 
Plan
Jordan ICT Strategy
Kazakhstan Digital Kazakhstan
Kenya Kenya National Broadband 
Strategy
Laos National Broadband Plan: 
Vision 2030
Liberia Liberia ICT Policy
Madagascar Digital for Everyone and the 
Digital Development Project 
of Madagascar
Malawi National Broadband Strategy
Malaysia The National Fiberisation 
and Connectivity Plan
Mali Digital Mali 2020 - Strategy 
for the development of 
digital economy
Mauritius National Broadband Policy
Morocco Plan national pour le 
développement du haut et 
très haut débit
Mozambique National Broadband Strategy
Myanmar Wireless Broadband Plan for 
the Union of Myanmar
Namibia National Broadband Policy 
(NBP) for the Republic of 
Namibia
Nepal National Broadband 
MasterPlan
Nicaragua Good Government Plan
Niger Telecommunications and ICT 
Sector PolicyA global coalition working to  
make broadband affordable for all
Alliance for Affordable Internet | 1110 Vermont Ave NW, Suite 500, Washington DC 20005, USA
www.a4ai.org  |  @a4a_internet