TRADE AND GENDER LINKAGES:
THE GENDER IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGICAL UPGRADING IN AGRICULTURE TEACHING MATERIAL ON
UNCTAD TEACHING MATERIAL ON TRADE AND GENDER LINKAGES: THE GENDER IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGICAL UPGRADING IN AGRICULTURE UNITED NATIONS
Layout and Printing at United Nations, Geneva – 2007134 (E) – September 2020 – 571 – UNCTAD/DITC/2020/1
ISBN 978-92-1-112984-7TRADE AND GENDER LINKAGES:
THE GENDER IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGICAL UPGRADING IN AGRICULTURE TEACHING MATERIAL ON
Geneva, 2020UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENTii
ii
© 2020, United Nations
All rights reserved worldwide
Requests to reproduce excerpts or to photocopy should be addressed to the Copyright Clearance 
Center at copyright.com.
All other queries on rights and licences, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to: 
United Nations Publications 
405 East 42nd Street  
New York, New York 10017 
United States of America
Email: publications@un.org 
Website: shop.un.org
The designations employed and the presentation of material on any map in this work do not imply 
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the United Nations concerning the legal 
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries.
Mention of any firm or licensed process does not imply the endorsement of the United Nations.
References to country names in this publication correspond to the names in use historically during 
the periods for which data were reviewed.
This publication has been edited externally.
United Nations publication issued by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
UNCTAD/DITC/2020/1
ISBN: 978-92-1-112984-7 
eISBN: 978-92-1-005119-4  
Sales no.: E.20.II.D.22iii
iii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This module was prepared by an UNCTAD team including Elizabeth Ramey (lead author) and Chiara 
Piovani. Comments and suggestions were provided by Bob Bell Jr., Katalin Bokor, Laura Cyron, Claudia 
Contreras, Angel Gonzalez-Sanz, Katerina Joklova, Mariangela Linoci, Dong Wu, and Simonetta Zarrilli 
at UNCTAD; and by Valentina Franchi, Flavia Grassi, Maria Magdalena Heinrich, Jamie Morrison, Tacko 
Ndiaye, and Ide Nozomi at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Comments 
were also provided by Nursel Aydiner Avsar.
The module was coordinated and supervised by Simonetta Zarrilli, Chief of the Trade, Gender and 
Development Programme at UNCTAD. 
David Einhorn was in charge of English editing.
The publication of this module was made possible by the financial support of the Government of 
Finland, which is gratefully acknowledged.iv
iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  III
LIST OF BOXES V
LIST OF FIGURES V
LIST OF TABLES V
1. Introduction 1
2. Gender in the economy: Key concepts and relations 2
3. Gender and trade: A bi-directional relationship 9
4. Women’s roles in agriculture and trade  10
5. Agricultural technology and trade 12
6. Technology in agriculture and women’s participation in trade 14
6.1 Technology in all nodes of the food chain 14
6.2 Digital technologies 15
6.3 Gender-differentiated effects of agricultural technologies 16
6.4 Technology in global value chains: Opening opportunities for women 17
6.5 Organic farming, green technologies, and agroecology: Striving for sustainable agriculture 19
7. Factors affecting women’s adoption of technologies 20
7.1. Gender bias in agriculture research and development  21
7.2 Extension services and access to information and knowledge  22
7.3 Innovative approaches to research, development, and extension  23
7.4 Other constraints 25
7.4.1 Women’s autonomy and participation in leadership and decision-making  25
7.4.2 Access to financial services 26
7.4.3 Access to productive resources  26
7.4.4 Access to information and communications technology 27
7.4.5 Women’s work burden and time poverty 27
8. Conclusions and policy recommendations  28
Exercises and questions for discussion 30
Annex 1. Overview of technologies in agriculture  31
Annex 2. Case studies 33
A.2.1.  Florence Kondylis, Valerie Mueller, Glenn Sheriff and Siyao Zhu (2016): “Do female instructors reduce gender 
bias in diffusion of sustainable land management Techniques? Experimental evidence from Mozambique” 33
A.2.2 Munyaradzi Junia Mutenje, Cathy Rozel Farnworth, Clare Stirling, Christian Thierfelder, Walter Mupangwa, and 
Isaiah Nyagumbo (2019): “A cost-benefit analysis of climate-smart agriculture options in Southern Africa:  
Balancing gender and technology” 33
A.2.3.  Sophie Theis, Nicole Lefore, Ruth Meinzen-Dick, and Elizabeth Bryan (2018): “What happens after technology  
adoption? Gendered aspects of small-scale irrigation technologies in Ethiopia, Ghana, and Tanzania” 34
REFERENCES 35
ENDNOTES 40v
v
LIST OF BOXES
Box 1 Gender equality: International legal instruments and goals 8
Box 2 Artificial insemination technologies that support goat and sheep production in the Caribbean 14
Box 3 Addressing constraints on women’s mobility: Nano Ganesh 16
Box 4 Technology is not gender-neutral: Mechanized potato selection and gender roles 22
Box 5 Women’s empowerment in agriculture and innovation in Southeast Asia 23
Box 6 Gender impacts of participatory plant breeding programs 24
Box 7 Papa Andina: Promoting women’s participation in agricultural research and innovation 24
Box 8 Women-only branding and rural producer organizations: Café Femenino and Las Hermanas 25
Box 9 Communal leasehold forestry arrangements and labour-saving forestry and livestock practices in Nepal 26
Box 10 “Banish the hand hoe to the museum:” Sustainable agricultural mechanization in Africa 27
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Average time per day spent on unpaid work by sex, selected countries 3
Figure 2 Ratio of female to male labour force participation rate by region, 2019 3
Figure 3 Female representation in leadership positions by region, latest year available 4
Figure 4  International distribution of total employment by status and sex, 2019 5
Figure 5 Population with at least some secondary education, by sex and region, 2010–2018 5
Figure 6 Proportion of adults (15 years and older) with an account at a bank or other financial institution 
or with a mobile money service provider, by sex and region, 2017 6
Figure 7 Female agricultural holders by region (weighted), 2015 6
Figure 8 Factor-weighted gender pay gap by region, 2008–2017 7
Figure 9 Employment in agriculture by sex and region, 2019 11
Figure 10 Export markets of agricultural products by value, 2017 12
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 Part-time employment by sex, selected countries, 2018 4
Table 2 Gender Development Index by region, 2018 81
1
1. Introduction
This study examines the nexus between 
technology in agriculture and trade from a 
gender perspective. It is part of the teaching 
package on trade and gender prepared by 
the United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD)1, though it also serves as 
a stand-alone module. 
The study begins with an overview of the 
relationship between trade and gender that will 
provide the reader with the basic foundational 
concepts. It then explores the opportunities 
for women and the challenges they face in the 
process of technological innovation and adoption 
in agriculture. Typically, women face many 
barriers in access to agricultural technologies, 
and those technologies that are available often 
fail to address women’s particular needs. This 
study aims to understand how inequality in 
the process of innovation and dissemination of 
technology affects women’s access to trade in 
agriculture, and to evaluate how reducing this 
form of inequality could strengthen women’s 
opportunities to participate in and benefit from 
trade-related activities in the sector. Access to 
appropriate technology and the capacity to use 
it effectively are important factors to support 
women in agriculture, both as instruments for 
women to undertake new productive initiatives 
and/or to expand existing activities in agrifood 
value chains.2 
The next section provides an introduction to 
the role of gender in the economy, with an 
emphasis on the multiple dimensions of gender 
inequalities and the economic relevance – apart 
from reasons related to human rights and social 
justice – of pursuing gender equality. Section 
3 presents the two-way relationship between 
gender and trade: gender-based inequalities 
affect trade outcomes and trade has gender-
differentiated effects. Section 4 begins a gender analysis of technology in agriculture and trade 
with an overview of women’s roles in agriculture, 
and Section 5 then examines the interplay 
between agricultural technology and trade. 
Section 6 discusses various kinds of technologies 
in agriculture, and explores how technology 
can help support the participation of women 
in agrifood value chains (from production to 
storage, processing, packaging, and distribution) 
and foster ecological sustainability. This section 
also examines the channels through which 
agricultural technologies can impact women’s 
participation in agricultural trade. Section 7 
examines the barriers constraining women’s 
adoption of technology. The final section 
concludes and offers policy recommendations.
At the end of this module, students should be 
able to:
• Understand why gender matters in the 
economy 
• Describe the interplay between gender and 
trade 
• Appreciate the impact of gender inequalities 
in agriculture on trade outcomes
• Understand the relationship between 
technology and trade in agriculture, and 
explain why it matters in the process of 
economic development
• Know the types of technologies – from basic 
to advanced digital – used in agrifood value 
chains (from production to harvest and post-
harvest) and in sustainable agriculture 
• Appreciate the effects of agricultural 
technology on women’s participation in trade 
• Identify the constraints influencing women’s 
adoption and use of agricultural technologies, 
as well as possible solutions
• List policy recommendations to foster 
women’s access to technology and trade in 
agriculture.2
2
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture 2. Gender in the economy: Key 
concepts and relations
The concept of gender refers to the social norms 
and practices that ascribe different rights, 
opportunities, and responsibilities to men and 
women based on their sex, and typically assign 
an inferior status to those born female. Gender, 
in contrast to sex, is not the result of a “natural” 
distinction, but rather is a socially constructed 
category that assigns specific gender-based 
characteristics and behaviors to men and 
women in the household, the economy, and the 
society at large based on the system of norms, 
customs, and beliefs that prevail in each specific 
socio-cultural context. Gender-based differences 
in a society are then compounded by other social 
stratifiers, such as class, age, race, and ethnicity.
In this analysis, the focus is on the gender biases 
that may prevent women from accessing the 
same economic opportunities and roles as men. 
In this context, the term “gender inequality” 
refers to barriers that create economic 
disadvantages for women (e.g. limited or lack of 
land ownership); in contrast, the term “gender 
equality” refers to equitable treatment of men 
and women. According to UN Women, “Equality 
does not mean that women and men will 
become the same but that women’s and men’s 
rights, responsibilities and opportunities will not 
depend on whether they are born male or female. 
Gender equality implies that the interests, needs 
and priorities of both women and men are taken 
into consideration, recognizing the diversity of 
different groups of women and men.”3
By focusing on the multiple forms of gender 
biases that impact economic outcomes, this 
study examines the economy as a “gendered 
structure.” This means that it explicitly identifies 
and accounts for the various forms of gender 
inequalities that underlie economic institutions, 
relations, and transactions. By doing so, we 
acknowledge that gender inequalities lead to 
power imbalances between men and women, 
which have a critical impact on the economy. 
On the other hand, this also helps identify what 
changes need to occur to empower women and 
overcome existing gender inequalities.
Feminist economists have long contended that 
economic inquiry should not only deal with 
productive paid work (or “production,” which 
is typically considered the exclusive domain of 
economics), but should also include unpaid work 
(also referred to as “reproduction” or “unpaid care 
work”). Housework, cooking, child care, elderly 
care, collecting water and fuel, and attending 
any other physical or emotional need within 
the household or the community constitute essential supportive activities, which critically 
contribute to both social welfare and the steady 
functioning of the paid economic sphere. Based 
on traditional gender norms, it is women who 
handle the bulk of responsibilities in these non-
market activities. On the basis of traditional 
economic analysis, however, this work is invisible 
and has no economic relevance (Razavi, 2007).
To grasp the magnitude of unpaid work, which 
tends to be invisible in the official statistics, 
time-use surveys have become a key source of 
information. Figure 1 shows the average amount 
of time men and women spend each day on 
unpaid care work in selected countries across 
the world. As defined by ILO (2018a), unpaid care 
work includes domestic services for own final use 
within the household, caregiving services within 
the household, and community services and help 
to other households. In India, women spend on 
average close to five hours per day on unpaid 
work, as compared to men who only spend about 
half an hour. For Argentina, the corresponding 
figures are four hours and one and a half 
hours. In both developing and industrialized 
countries, women consistently hold the primary 
responsibility of unpaid work. 
As women are expected to hold the lion’s share 
of unpaid care work, they are constrained in their 
capacity to access the paid labour market at par 
with men. Figure 2 shows the ratio of female 
to male labour force participation in different 
world regions. The highest ratio is observed in 
sub-Saharan Africa (85 per cent) and the lowest 
in the Middle East and North Africa (30 per cent). 
Consistently, on average, a smaller share of women 
compared to men engages with paid work.4 
On average, prevailing gender norms all over 
the world tend to support a gender division of 
labour that primarily associates women with the 
sphere of reproduction and men with the sphere 
of production. Gender biases also affect women’s 
participation in the paid economy, resulting both 
in “horizontal” and “vertical” gender segregation 
of the labour market. “Horizontal gender 
segregation” refers to the observed pattern that 
sees women concentrated in fewer sectors than 
men – such as food production in agriculture, 
textiles and garments in manufacturing, and 
social services in the tertiary sector. “Vertical 
gender segregation” (also called the “glass ceiling 
effect”) refers to women’s underrepresentation 
in leadership and decision-making positions. 
Figure 3 presents data on women’s representation 
in parliaments and in managerial positions. In 
all world regions, the female shares lie between 
about 10 and 40 per cent. Male dominance in 
leadership positions is especially marked in Arab 
States and South Asia. 3
3
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture 050100150200250300350400
ArgentinaDenmarkRepublic
of
KoreaIndia Iraq Italy Qatar South
AfricaUnited
Republic
of TanzaniaUnited
StatesFemale Male
0102030405060708090
Sub-Saharan
AfricaEast Asia &
PacificEurope &
Central AsiaLatin America
& CaribbeanSouth Asia Middle East
& North AfricaAverage time (minutes) per day spent on unpaid work by sex, selected countries
Ratio of female to male labour force participation rate by region, 2019 (per cent)Figure 1
Source: ILO (2018a).
Note: Data based on most recent year available.
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (2020).Figure 24
4
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Women are also more likely than men to search 
for flexible job arrangements to be able to 
combine paid work with care responsibilities, 
which may greatly affect their career and income 
opportunities and, in turn, their capacity to access 
credit and other productive resources. Much 
more than men, women thus face the “double 
burden” of holding both paid and unpaid work. 
This means that women are more likely than 
men to search for part-time employment and/or 
hold more precarious forms of work.
Table 1 provides examples of the gender disparities 
with respect to part-time employment. Typically, 
women work far more often in part-time jobs 
than men. Alternatively, because of the lower pay 051015202530354045
Arab States East Asia
and the PacificLatin America and the
CaribbeanSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
AfricaShare of female seats in parliament (2018) Share of women in managerial positions (2019)Female representation in leadership positions by region, latest year available (per cent)
Sources: UNDP (2019) and ILOSTAT (2020).Figure 3
associated with these types of jobs, women may 
even decide to not engage with paid work, which 
makes them dependent on the income of their 
husband (or other male family members) and 
therefore vulnerable. 
To evaluate the nature of work, the 
International Labour Organization (ILO) 
provides international, sex-disaggregated data 
on employment status. As shown in Figure 4, 
women constitute a smaller share of employers 
and a larger share of “contributing family 
workers” (also known as unpaid family workers) 
than men.5 In relation to the latter category, 
the gender gap is particularly striking in South 
Asia, where women account for 33.5 per cent of 
 Part-time employment, female 
(per cent of total female employment)Part-time employment, male 
(per cent of total male employment)
Argentina 52.0 26.8
Brazil 35.5 21.0
Egypt 21.2 11.8
Euro area 50.5 25.9
Indonesia 42.1 25.8
Namibia 30.9 20.3
South Africa 20.9 11.8
Sweden 53.3 38.8
Turkey 33.4 18.0
United States 28.0 16.5
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (2020).Part-time employment by sex, selected countries, 2018 (per cent)Table 15
5
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture family work compared with about 8 per cent 
for men. Family work constitutes the most 
vulnerable form of employment, as it implies 
no independent access to income.
The traditional social norms associating 
women’s primary role with the sphere of the 
household, in addition to constituting both 
horizontal and vertical gender segregation, underlie gender gaps in education and in access 
to economic assets and resources.6 
Figure 5 shows the male and female population 
shares with at least some secondary education 
in different world regions. With the exception 
of Latin America and the Caribbean, women 
typically receive less education than men in all 
world regions.52,553,263,957,628,817,461,464,081,090,554,847,129,825,723,110,885,890,2
3,41,48,41,83,11,35,62,73,81,04,21,72,70,62,50,94,52,1
37,627,522,514,854,551,330,126,312,74,333,731,759,840,256,544,79,46,3
6,517,95,225,713,630,03,07,02,54,27,319,57,733,517,843,60,41,4South
Asia South-
Eastern
Asia and
the Pacific Arab
StatesWorld:
High
income World:
Low
income  Employees Employers Own-account workers Contributing family workers
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
MaleLatin
America
and the
CaribbeanSub-
Saharan
AfricaNorthern
AfricaWorld International distribution of total employment by status and sex, 2019 (per cent)
Source: ILOSTAT (2020).Figure 4
0102030405060708090100
Europe and
Central
AsiaFemale Male
Arab States East Asia
and the PacificLatin America
and the
CaribbeanSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
AfricaPopulation with at least some secondary education, by sex and region, 2010–2018 (per cent)
Source: UNDP (2019).
Note: Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. The population ages are 25 and older.Figure 56
6
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Figures 6 and 7 show that women – in comparison 
to men – engage less with financial institutions 
and financial transactions, and own a much 
smaller percentage of agricultural land. In many 
African and Asian countries, women face barriers 
to their right to own and inherit land due to 
statutory and customary law (World Bank, 2020). 
The gender gaps in education and economic 
resources contribute to perpetuating the economic disadvantage of women. Women’s 
lower education and knowledge, in particular 
in fields in which technological upgrading 
matters, may limit their competitiveness 
and ability to access skilled and better-paid 
employment opportunities. Because of more 
limited ownership of assets, women have no 
or less collateral to offer to banks, and so are 
constrained in their capacity to access credit and 
other financial services. 
0102030405060708090
Arab States East Asia
& PacificSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
AfricaLatin America &
CaribbeanEurope &
Central AsiaMale FemaleProportion of adults (15 years and older) with an account at a ban k or other financial institution 
or with a mobile money service provider, by sex and region, 2017
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (2020).Figure 6
0 5 10 15 20 25 30Sub-Saharan AfricaAsiaNorth, Central & South AmericaMiddle East/North AfricaEuropeOceaniaFemale agricultural holders by region (weighted), 2015 (per cent of total agricultural holders)
Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Gender and Land Rights Database (2015). Figure 77
7
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Data show that women’s unequal access to 
economic inputs is a major factor behind the 
productivity gap between men and women. In 
the case of agriculture, for example, empirical 
evidence from different countries shows 
that women are as productive as their male 
counterparts, but because of fewer entitlements 
to land and limited access to inputs, they are less 
efficient and produce a lower volume of crops 
(FAO, 2011). 
The disadvantage experienced by women in 
the economy is compounded by the gender 
gap in earnings. Historically, women’s earnings 
are lower than men’s either because of gender 
segregation (both horizontal and vertical) or 
because of direct gender discrimination. In some 
instances, the gap is also explained by women’s 
socialization to accept their secondary role in the 
economy.
The traditional measure used to evaluate 
earnings from a gender perspective is 
called the “raw gender wage gap,” which is 
calculated as the difference between the 
remuneration of men and women, measured 
as a ratio of the remuneration of men. A major 
constraint in the calculation of the gender 
wage gap across countries is data availability 
and cross-country comparability. When sex-
disaggregated data exist, they are mostly 
available only for non-agricultural work and 
often only for the formal manufacturing 
sector (neglecting the informal sector). Also, 
often they are available monthly rather than hourly (which precludes taking into account 
the different number of hours spent in the 
paid sphere of the economy by men and 
women), and are affected by the inclusion or 
exclusion of overtime pay, bonuses, payments 
in kind, and other allowances. 
To address some of these drawbacks, the ILO has 
developed an alternative measure of gender 
pay differences referred to as the “factor-
weighted gender pay gap.”7 The first step of this 
methodology consists of disaggregating female 
and male workers in (relatively) homogeneous 
subgroups and estimating the gender pay gap 
in each subgroup.8 The second step requires 
calculating the weighted average of all the 
subgroups’ estimated gender pay gaps, with 
weights corresponding to the size of each 
subgroup in the total number of workers.9
Figure 8 shows regional-disaggregated data 
on the factor-weighted gender pay gap, as 
provided by the ILO (2018b). Around the world 
there are clearly gender disparities in earnings; 
on average, women are paid about 80 per cent 
that of men.10 The largest portion of earning 
differentials between men and women cannot 
be explained by differences in either education 
or labour market characteristics (e.g. age, 
experience, occupation, or industry). Based 
on ILO (2018b), there are three drivers behind 
the unexplained share of remuneration gaps: 
women tend to have lower wage returns on 
education than men (for equal occupations as 
well); average wages tend to be lower in highly 
0510152025
Northern,
Southern
and
West EuropeEastern Europe
and Central
and
West AsiaNorth
AmericaLatin
America
and the
CaribbeanSub-
Saharan
AfricaNorth
Africa
and
Arab StatesAsia
and the
PacificWorldFactor-weighted gender pay gap by region, 2008–2017 (per cent)
Source: ILO (2018b).
Note: Data are the most recent available. Figure 88
8
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture feminized occupations and enterprises; and 
mothers tend to be paid less than non-mothers 
(also known as the “motherhood pay gap”). This 
finding points to the importance of national 
measures that promote equal pay between 
men and women, increase wages in feminized 
enterprises and industries, and reduce 
women’s burden of family responsibilities 
through care policies and/or more equitable 
distribution of family duties between men and 
women (ILO, 2018b). 
There are various aggregate indices to measure 
gender inequality. Among them, the Gender 
Development Index (GDI) is provided annually 
by the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) in the Human Development Report. It is 
available both by country and by region, which 
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) was signed by 
governments in 1979, entered into force in 1981, and has been ratified to date by 187 governments. CEDAW is the first 
legally binding instrument that prohibits discrimination against women in all domains. It is also the first document 
that states that women’s rights are human rights. The convention is the first document that explicitly recognizes 
that urban and rural areas face different challenges. Article 14 of CEDAW revolves around rural women, spelling out 
the rights that should be guaranteed to women to ensure gender equality and, in turn, that development in rural 
areas should be inclusive. 
The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (BDPfA) was signed in 1995 by 189 governments. The BDPfA is the 
first international legal instrument to incorporate a detailed set of strategic actions to ensure gender equality, which 
is identified as a matter of human rights and social justice, but also development and peace. The BDPfA revolves 
around 12 areas of concern: poverty, education and training, health, violence against women, armed conflict, the 
economy, power and decision-making, institutional mechanisms for the advancement of women, human rights, the 
media, the environment, and the girl-child. 
Among the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) – eight development goals set in 2000 to be achieved by 2015 – 
MDG3 focuses on gender equality and women’s empowerment. Specifically, it aims “to eliminate gender disparity in 
primary and secondary education by 2005, and in all levels of education by 2015.”
Since the expiration of the MDGs, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) have been set to be achieved by 2030. 
They consist of 17 development goals that aim to end poverty, build sustainable economies, and ensure peace and 
prosperity for all people by 2030. Gender equality is a stand-alone goal (SDG5), but gender equality and women’s 
empowerment are also integral to the fulfilment of each of the 17 SDGs. 
Source: UNCTAD Secretariat.Gender equality: International legal instruments and goalsallows for a regional comparative evaluation of 
gender disparities around the world.11 
The GDI measures gender disparities in levels 
of human development, as measured by health, 
education, and income as part of the Human 
Development Index (HDI). The GDI is calculated 
as the ratio of women’s HDI to men’s HDI, so 
it can be interpreted as the percentage by 
which women achieve men’s HDI. The GDI is 
calculated for 166 countries, which are then 
grouped in the regions indicated in Table 2. As 
shown, women’s HDI is always below men’s 
HDI; the largest gap is observed in South Asia 
(with women achieving 82.8 per cent of men’s 
HDI). Important gaps can also be observed in 
the Arab States (85.6 per cent) and sub-Saharan 
Africa (90 per cent).  Gender 
Development 
Index Human 
Development 
Index Life expectancy 
at birth 
(years)Expected years 
of schooling 
(years)Means years 
of schooling 
(years)Estimated gross 
national income 
per capita 
(in 2011 PPP US$)
Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male 
Arab States 0.856 0.634 0.74 73.8 70.2 11.7 12.3 6.4 7.8 5,338 25,343
East Asia and the 
Pacific0.962 0.725 0.754 77.8 72.9 13.5 13.3 7.5 8.3 11,385 17,728
Europe and Central 
Asia0.953 0.757 0.794 77.5 70.8 14.4 14.7 9.9 10.5 10,588 20,674
Latin America and 
the Caribbean0.978 0.747 0.764 78.6 72.3 14.9 14.1 8.6 8.5 9,836 18,004
South Asia 0.828 0.57 0.688 71.1 68.5 12.0 11.6 5.0 8.0 2,639 10,693
Sub-Saharan Africa 0.891 0.507 0.569 62.9 59.4 9.3 10.4 4.8 6.6 2,752 4,133
Source: UNDP (2019).
Note: PPP: purchasing power parity.Gender Development Index by region, 2018Table 2
Box 19
9
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Box 1 provides a review of the international 
commitments towards gender equality. Gender 
equality is a fundamental human right, but it is 
also central to social and economic development. 
As stated by UNDP , “Gender equality and 
women’s empowerment are not add-on issues 
in the development dialogue, but a mainstream 
dimension of the development discourse locally, 
nationally and globally” (UNDP , 2016, p.41).
3. Gender and trade: A bi-directional 
relationship
There is a bi-directional relationship between 
trade and gender: on the one hand, trade 
outcomes vary by gender, in turn impinging on 
women’s economic empowerment and well-
being;12 on the other hand, gender inequalities 
affect trade strategies for competitiveness, 
export performance, and trade policy effects. Let 
us examine both sides of this relationship.
Trade affects the distribution of income 
and resources, including between men and 
women, through various channels. First, 
trade may lead to changes in the structure of 
production, with export sectors expanding 
and import-competing sectors contracting. 
This, in turn, affects employment and workers’ 
compensation. In the context of economic 
volatility and the dominance of multinational 
corporations in world markets, the quality and 
security of employment tend to be reduced, 
and small-scale producers and low-skilled 
workers often bear the largest burden. Second, 
trade leads to a change in the relative prices 
of goods and services, which generate changes 
in real incomes that affect groups of producers 
and workers differently. Finally, trade openness 
may lead to a reduction in tariff revenues, which 
may have gender-specific effects through 
the impact on the size and composition of 
government expenditure (e.g. a reduction in 
social programmes and infrastructure).13 
Following conventional trade theory – based 
on the Heckscher-Ohlin-Stolper-Samuelson 
theorems – a country’s comparative advantage 
is based on its factor endowments (typically, 
labour,– including low-skill vs. high-skill 
labour – or capital), and a country will export 
those commodities that use its abundant 
factor intensively. With trade liberalization, 
the demand in world markets for those 
commodities is expected to rise, which will raise 
the compensation to the relatively abundant 
factor that is used intensively in exports. As 
developing countries are abundant in unskilled 
labour (and women constitute the bulk of unskilled labour), based on conventional theory 
trade liberalization should raise the demand 
for women’s labour (and lower the demand for 
male labour). In turn, women’s wages should 
rise (and men’s wages should fall). Based on 
this framework, trade liberalization thus helps 
promote gender equality. 
These claims have been challenged both by 
heterodox economic theory and empirical 
evidence. Heterodox economic theory contends 
that in international markets firms compete 
based on absolute production costs (rather than 
relative costs, as argued by conventional theory).14 
Women thus may serve as a source of competitive 
advantage for export-oriented firms to keep 
labour costs low.15 For this reason, women’s labour 
demand is likely to rise, but without an increase 
in women’s wages. Rather than promoting 
gender equality, trade may perpetuate or even 
exacerbate gender inequalities.
The historical evidence indicates that – following 
trade liberalization – female workers and 
producers are less likely to enter the expanding 
sectors (other than the traditionally female-
dominated sectors such as garments) due to 
traditional gender norms and gender biases that 
limit women’s access to productive resources 
and training. As a result, in the context of 
global integration, gender segregation has only 
marginally declined in developing countries. 
Female labour force participation has in fact 
increased, but a large share of women have 
remained concentrated in low-skilled activities, 
with little chance to access higher-value-added 
jobs that remain male-dominated. 
In manufacturing and services, export sectors 
have experienced a phenomenon known as 
“feminization of labour.” The term refers to 
both an increase in female employment – 
typically in labour-intensive, low-value-added, 
low-wage activities – and an extension of 
insecure working conditions, which have 
traditionally characterized female jobs, to male 
jobs (Standing, 1989, 1999).16 As producers, 
women – because of lower access to capital, 
technical skills, and education, in addition 
to larger unpaid care responsibilities – are 
more likely to own more informal, smaller, 
and less profitable businesses than their male 
counterparts.
In agriculture, trade has had more mixed effects. 
Women are often perceived as secondary 
workers who are relatively easier to lay off due 
to their low bargaining power. Women are 
often found in subsistence agriculture, which 
– in open markets – can be displaced by cheap 
imports. Women as producers face more severe 10
10
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture challenges in accessing international markets 
than do men (due to greater difficulties in 
meeting technical requirements, regulations, 
accessing credit, etc.). Trade liberalization, 
however, may benefit women farmers by 
providing larger markets for exports as well 
as opportunities to be integrated into global 
supply chains as producers (see Section 4). 
Moving to the impact of gender inequalities 
on trade, two dimensions should be 
considered: first, how gender inequality is 
used to promote export competitiveness 
and, in turn, economic growth; and second, 
how gender inequality hinders the capacity 
of women to become exporters and, thus, 
limits trade performance. Borrowing the 
terminology from van Staveren et al. (2007) 
and Elson (2007), female employees constitute 
a “source of competitive advantage” and 
“underachievers of competitive advantage” in 
their own enterprises, respectively.
As women tend to be paid less than men 
due to discriminatory gender norms and 
practices, female workers can be a source of 
price competitiveness for firms facing intense 
international competition (e.g. for export-
oriented firms that have integrated into the 
low-value segment of global value chains 
(GVCs), and are under great pressure to fulfil 
orders). Since labour costs constitute a large 
share of total costs, the gender wage gap can be 
exploited to cut costs. Women also constitute a 
large share of dependent subcontract workers 
(i.e. “homeworkers”), who are poorly paid 
and lack social security benefits. This type of 
employment can also be exploited as a source 
of competitive advantage. Women workers have 
represented a key source of competitiveness for 
some developing countries in labour-intensive 
exports, but in the long run this it is neither 
a sustainable nor a desirable strategy. It can 
impact countries’ terms of trade17 and it is in 
conflict with the ILO’s core labour standards and 
the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals.
As producers, women – often as small 
entrepreneurs or self- employed workers – 
face various types of discrimination due to 
patriarchal norms, traditions, and customary 
laws. This leads to gender inequalities in three 
domains: (1) health, nutrition, and technical 
and vocational training, in addition to holding 
the double role as expected caregivers and 
producers;18 (2) access to resources and 
opportunities (e.g. property, credit, technology, 
etc.); and (3) security, as women often have 
to cope with gender-based violence. These sources of gender disparities seriously impair 
women’s capacity to be as competitive as men 
in international markets.
The interplay between trade and gender shows 
the need to introduce gender provisions in trade 
agreements (e.g. equal working conditions 
for men and women). Towards these goals, 
collaboration among various government 
departments – with the participation of women’s 
organizations in civil society and/or multilateral 
development cooperation programmes – can 
raise the prospects that gender concerns will be 
taken into account in trade policies. This would 
help enhance the economic participation of 
women, especially in the production of goods 
with higher-value-added content, in turn 
contributing to reduce vertical and horizontal 
gender segregation.
4. Women’s roles in agriculture and 
trade 
Women are involved in trade in the 
agricultural sector in multiple ways: as 
contributing family workers, as farmers on 
their own account, as entrepreneurs running 
on- and off-farm businesses, and as wage 
workers. Rural households in developing 
countries typically pursue multiple livelihood 
strategies to diversify their income sources. 
Thus, women (as well as men) are often 
simultaneously involved in a wide range of 
activities and contractual arrangements, and 
this is observed in virtually all agricultural 
subsectors. Different economic roles, 
therefore, often tend to blend together. 
Women constitute over 60 per cent of the work 
force in agriculture in low-income countries 
and about 30 per cent in middle-income 
countries (World Bank, World Development 
Indicators, 2020). Based on data from the early 
2000s, women were found to provide over 
50 per cent of the world’s food, and more than 
80 per cent of the food in households and 
regions that are identified as food insecure 
(Shiva, 2009).
Figure 9 shows the shares of men and women 
employed in agriculture in different world 
regions. Agriculture is clearly a major source 
of employment for women in both South 
Asia and sub-Saharan Africa (about 60 and 
55 per cent of total female employment, 
respectively). It also remains important in the 
Arab world and East Asia and the Pacific (30 
and 24 per cent, respectively).11
11
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Women are highly involved in family farming, 
which remains by far the most predominant 
form of agriculture worldwide: almost 90 per 
cent of all farms globally – more than 570 million 
– are run by families and rely primarily on family 
labour (FAO, 2014, 2018c). 
Both men and women in family farming in 
developing countries are involved in multiple 
income-earning activities as a livelihood strategy. 
Daily and seasonally, women work on the farm but 
are also engaged in off-farm income-generating 
activities, such as processing and sales. In 
contrast to men, however, women also perform 
a disproportionate share of unpaid agricultural 
work (IFC, 2013). Male relatives usually own the land 
and women do not have access to or control over 
the resources employed by the family business. 
Often, women have little decision-making power 
and do not have control over their earnings, which 
are often paid out to male relatives. Women’s 
unpaid labour is critical to keep the cost of cash 
crop exports low, increasing their competitiveness 
in global markets.
Beyond farming, women constitute about half of 
the labour force in small-scale fisheries, and an 
estimated 290 million women and girls rely on 
livestock to generate income (FAO, 2016b, 2018g). 
Women also play a leading role in small-scale 
aquaculture production and processing, where 
household-based enterprises led by women are 
becoming increasingly common (FAO, 2016b). In 
many countries, women are also highly involved in the forestry and agroforestry value chains, 
although the lack of sex-disaggregated data 
make it difficult to provide global estimates on 
the degree of their participation (FAO, 2013). 
Although agriculture is key for women’s 
livelihood, men and women tend to hold different 
economic roles in the sector due to various forms 
of gender bias. Following the traditional gender 
division of labour – which assigns to women 
the lion’s share of unpaid care work and to men 
the leading role as income providers19 – women 
tend to be disproportionately involved in those 
subsistence activities that can be more easily 
managed alongside household responsibilities, 
such as cultivating vegetables and taking care 
of homestead gardens (Grassi et al., 2015). 
Consequently, women are less involved in 
commercial agriculture than men and, when 
they do get involved, they tend to hold lower-
skilled, lower-pay positions.20 Women are thus 
often used as a source of competitive advantage 
in agriculture. Women, in fact, are disadvantaged 
in access to education and training, coupled 
with the time and mobility constraints deriving 
from their disproportionate burden of domestic 
and care work, which prevents them from being 
as competitive as men.21 As a result, women 
are disproportionately employed in part-time, 
seasonal, and low-paid occupations both in export-
oriented industries and in local and regional 
agri-food value chains (FAO, 2018a). Furthermore, 
rural wage employment is characterized by a 
high incidence of seasonal jobs for both men and 010203040506070
Arab World East Asia &
PacificEurope
&
Central AsiaLatin America
&
CaribbeanSouth Asia Sub-Saharan
AfricaNorth
AmericaFemale MaleEmployment in agriculture by sex and region, 2019 (per cent of female and male employment)
Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (2020).Figure 912
12
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture women due to the specificities of the sector, but in 
most countries women are more likely than men 
to be employed seasonally (FAO, 2011). 
Over the past few decades, the expansion of global 
agricultural trade has opened new opportunities 
for women to engage in paid work outside the 
family farm. In particular, the shift from more 
traditional export crops (such as cocoa, coffee, 
and sugar) to non-traditional agricultural export 
crops (such as fruits, vegetables, and flowers), 
which are more labour-intensive to produce 
and process, has increased the demand for 
agricultural workers (World Bank, 2016; UNCTAD, 
2016). Women in agricultural-based economies, 
however, tend to engage with international 
trade more through wage employment on estate 
farms or packing houses than directly through 
the product markets. Women are often preferred 
for these occupations because they are perceived 
as secondary workers with lower bargaining 
power than men, and thus easier to be laid off.
Agro-industrial development represents a 
strategic source of diversification in agricultural 
production, and is of critical importance to provide 
employment and income opportunities for the 
rural population.22 Agro-industrial activities are 
characterized by high levels of female participation, 
especially in low-income countries (FAO, 2017b). 
This especially applies to dairy, roots and tubers, 
and fisheries, where home-based and community-
based processing units and activities are quite 
common. The increased demand for processed 
food in the expanding urban market in many countries has opened new market opportunities 
for family-run or women-led small-scale agro-
processors. However, that demand is also 
characterized by increased food quality and safety 
standards, which women might find more difficult 
to comply with due to their disadvantaged access 
to training, services, information, and adequate 
technologies (FAO, 2018a). In developing countries, 
women-owned enterprises are mostly small-scale 
and operate in the informal sector, but are an 
important source of local employment, especially 
for other female workers.
5. Agricultural technology and trade
Worldwide, more than 450 million farmers – 
85 per cent of whom operate on two hectares 
or less – buy or rent inputs, equipment, and 
machinery from a variety of local service 
providers and industrial firms, and supply their 
products to a network of processors, traders, 
and retailers. Increasingly complex regional and 
global agrifood value chains link producers to 
about 7 billion potential consumers worldwide 
(FAO, 2015). 
Two notable trends have been observed during 
the transformation of world food and agriculture 
trade in the past two decades (OECD, 2019). First, 
emerging and developing countries have been 
increasingly involved in global trade (both imports 
and exports). Figure 10 shows that Developing 
Asia has become the world’s second largest 
market (by value) for the export of agricultural 
0100200300400500600700
European
Union
(28)Developing
AsiaNorth
AmericaSouth and
Central
America and
the CaribbeanSouthern
Common
Market
(MERCOSUR)Common
Market
for Eastern and
Southern Africa
(COMESA)Southern
African
Development
Community
(SADC)Export markets of agricultural products by value, 2017 (billions of US$)
Source: WTO (2020).Figure 1013
13
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture products, and South and Central America and 
the Caribbean are the fourth largest (preceded 
by North America). Exports from middle- and 
low-income countries increased from 9.4 per 
cent of global agricultural trade value in 2000 
to 20.1 per cent in 2015. The growing importance 
of large emerging economies – especially, China, 
Brazil, India, and Indonesia – has marked a major 
change in world agricultural markets. A key 
aspect of this change has been the rapid growth 
in South-South trade (FAO, 2018e). 
Second, agricultural commodities increasingly 
travel along GVCs, typically under the direction 
of one or a few large multinational firms that 
have come to dominate trading, processing, and 
retailing of agricultural products. 
Both of these trends are linked to the role 
of technology in agriculture. Agricultural 
production more than tripled between 1960 
and 2015 in the context of the development of 
Green Revolution technologies (FAO, 2017b).23 
Today, however, there are new pressures on 
food production due to changes in dietary 
habits, with less consumption of cereals 
and more consumption of meats and dairy 
products, which – under the dominant 
industrial agriculture paradigm – are very 
energy-intensive. Urbanization in the context 
of a growing world population is increasing 
demand for processed, packaged, and prepared 
foods. Increasing demand for biofuels has 
led to the expansion of crop production, (e.g. 
corn and maize). These transformations, 
compounded by environmental challenges 
(e.g. climate change, biodiversity loss, land 
degradation, and the water crisis) have led to 
an increased focus on sustainable production 
to integrate social and environmental goals in 
the process of economic development (IPBES, 
2019; McIntyre et al., 2009; UNCTAD, 2013). 
Improvements in agricultural productivity 
through the adoption and diffusion of 
agricultural technologies allow for expanding 
production of goods that can be made 
commercially available for export (ILO and 
UNCTAD, 2013). Agricultural exports can play an 
important role in economy-wide growth and 
development (ILO and UNCTAD, 2013; DFID, 2015). 
There are two notable channels through which 
agriculture has the potential to contribute to 
economic growth through exports. First, there 
are expanding opportunities in high-value 
agricultural exports and agro-processing. The 
shift toward high-value exports has been most 
dramatic in Asia and Latin America, whereas 
in Africa this process has been occurring more 
slowly (Swinnen, 2015). High-value agricultural exports have important potential for raising 
rural incomes because their production is 
often labour-intensive (Swinnen, 2015). 
Second, commercialization can improve incomes 
and livelihoods for producers, which can drive 
demand for inputs and services from other sectors. 
This stimulates employment both in related 
upstream activities – such as seed multiplication, 
fertilizer production, and supply of other inputs 
– and downstream activities – such as agro-
processing and storage. It also contributes to 
rural economic diversification through increased 
production of local nonagricultural goods and 
services such as housing and transportation. 
The creation of a range of nonagricultural jobs 
and incomes, in turn, can have positive spillover 
effects on the rest of the economy.24 
Successful technology-driven agricultural 
development can therefore promote trade, 
and access to technologies can promote 
greater access to domestic, regional, and global 
agricultural markets and value chains (Mellor, 
1987; DFID, 2015).
When discussing the potential impact 
of agricultural technology on trade and 
development, both positive and negative 
environmental and economic aspects must be 
examined. This is particularly relevant given 
the global urgency to support a sustainable 
production model. To meet these challenges, 
food systems will not only have to adapt and 
become more diversified, but also produce more 
with less, while preserving planetary boundaries 
and enhancing the livelihoods of farmers (FAO, 
2017b).25 From an environmental point of view, 
technology can support more efficient use 
of natural resources such as water and land. 
However, it can also accelerate the depletion of 
non-renewable resources and contribute to the 
deterioration of the natural environment (e.g. 
intensive ploughing depletes soil fertility). 
As for economic impacts, technology can promote 
farmers’ income by increasing yields and by 
enhancing value addition in the agricultural 
sector. Technology, however, can also lead to job 
losses though automation and mechanization, 
and through the generation of larger demand for 
skilled workers over workers performing routine 
tasks (WTO, 2017).26 In addition, technology can 
strengthen the market power of international 
agrobusinesses and large farms vis-à-vis small-
scale farming, in turn reinforcing disparities 
within countries or between high-income 
countries and countries with high rates of 
hunger and poverty. 14
14
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture In this context, trade can help technology in 
agriculture generate net economic gains by 
fostering productivity and food production, and 
by generating new income and employment 
opportunities. Madagascar provides evidence 
of these positive effects. Since the 1990s, 
smallholder farmers, now numbering in the 
thousands, have supplied high-value fruits and 
vegetables to Europe under contract farming 
combined with intensive farm assistance and 
supervision programs to fulfill complex quality 
requirements and phyto-sanitary standards of 
supermarkets (Minten et al., 2009). Technology 
spillovers have helped increase rice productivity 
by 70 per cent, improving farmer incomes and 
food security. The effects have been especially 
strong for the poorest farmers (FAO, 2015 
Swinnen, 2015). 
Trade can also help stimulate the adoption of 
agricultural technology through its effects on 
both output and input markets. Production for 
global markets as well as import competition 
can provide farmers with the incentive to invest 
in new technologies,27 and it can help generate 
the income to do so. In addition, global markets 
can help farmers access many new technologies 
such as improved seeds, chemical fertilizers, 
or machinery. Globalization of production can 
also facilitate the transfer of knowledge to 
geographically dispersed participants. In this 
sense, GVCs can play a crucial role in linking 
producers and other actors to reliable market 
outlets, providing access to key inputs, and 
facilitating technology transfers (FAO, 2015). 
6. Technology in agriculture and 
women’s participation in trade
This section provides an overview of technologies 
that are of particular relevance for women’s roles 
in agriculture and trade,28 and examines the 
gendered differentiated effects of agricultural 
technologies.6.1 Technology in all nodes of the food 
chain
Production processes in agriculture can be 
more or less complex, depending on the scale of 
operation and on the sector or commodity (i.e. 
crops, fisheries and aquaculture, forestry, and 
livestock). It is also often the case that small-
to-medium-scale commercial farming entities, 
where women are more likely to be employed, 
do not limit themselves to one farming activity 
alone, but rather integrate crops with forestry, 
livestock, or aquaculture production. These 
various activities require different technologies. 
Technological developments, driven by the 
private sector and development partners, have 
focused on this diversity of requirements. 
Among key production technologies, there are 
particular inputs, in the form of improved seeds 
or animal breeds, designed or adapted to better 
fit local conditions and needs. Box 2 explains how 
artificial insemination technologies can foster 
high quality breeding and productivity. 
Technology has allowed for mechanization of 
agricultural production across all of its subsectors. 
This applies to a wide range of operations, 
such as land clearance, crop management and 
animal health, water usage, and the application 
of fertilizers and pesticides. When considering 
technologies for harvesting and post-harvesting, 
it is important to note that the handling of 
commodities and products contributes to the 
definition of their market value, in a context 
where regional and international buyers are 
increasingly pushing for higher quality standards 
and sanitary measures/certifications for food 
quality and safety . 
During harvest, time and labour availability 
are always of the essence and technology is 
very important, as farmers need to ensure 
that the crops or produce they harvest are not 
damaged and that they have systems in place 
Faced with challenges in obtaining goats of high-quality breeding stock from overseas due to physical risks for the 
animals and high expenses, farmers in the Caribbean have shifted to importing frozen semen to improve the genetic 
stock and diversity of their goat and sheep herds.
In 2015, the Guyana Livestock Development Authority and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO) collaborated to strengthen the capacity of livestock technicians from Dominica, Grenada, Suriname,  
St. Lucia, and Guyana to apply small ruminant breeding technologies, with a focus on artificial insemination in 
goats. This training followed similar sessions in Antigua, Dominica, The Bahamas, Belize, and St. Kitts and Nevis.
The training sessions put in place a solid technical foundation that will ensure that the countries can successfully 
implement and manage a goat artificial insemination programme, with the aim of modernizing and strengthening 
the small ruminant sector.
Source: FAO (2015).Artificial insemination technologies that support goat and sheep production in the CaribbeanBox 215
15
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture to appropriately manage their goods. Moreover, 
consumer demand is spread evenly throughout 
the year while agricultural commodities are 
seasonal, which calls for appropriate storage to 
avoid losses and to preserve seeds for the next 
season. Depending on the commodity, there are 
different technologies supporting harvest and 
post-production activities such as processing, 
storage, and transport. Post-harvest technologies 
can help link small and medium-scale farmers to 
regional and international markets. See Annex 
1 for examples in the production of cereals, 
perishable commodities, and essential oils.
Technology does not only support production 
processes. It has gradually grown to play an ever-
increasing role in support of the other nodes 
of the food chain, linked to the aggregation 
(drying, storing, shelling, and cooling products), 
processing (sorting and milling), and distribution 
(packaging and shipping) of food. Technology 
also supports appropriate linkages between 
the nodes through finance, transport, and 
organizational processes. 
6.2 Digital technologies
The concept of agricultural technology today 
is no longer limited to biological innovations 
(improved seeds and animal breeds), 
mechanization (machinery and equipment), 
and improved inputs (irrigation, fertilizers, 
and pesticides). Beyond production itself, 
technology is also embodied in management 
and organizational processes. This covers storage 
and market infrastructure – such as warehouses 
and food collection points – as well as means of 
transport for agricultural goods and the entire 
sphere of information and communication 
technologies. The most innovative technologies 
consist of mobile applications that connect 
farmers to key services and information, ranging 
from veterinary or horticultural experts and 
advice to weather reports, market information 
and product buyers, global positions systems 
(GPS) for mapping soil quality or crop yields, and 
data management systems such as blockchain, 
which allows for reliable and traceable digitable 
records of transactions, in turn strengthening 
linkages along the entire food chain and 
expanding sources of financing. 
The design and dissemination of digital 
technologies can help address a number of 
different challenges, such as the availability 
of labour, the depletion of natural resources, 
climate change, biodiversity, and human health. 
In this regard, the concept of “agriculture 4.0” 
refers to the use of modern technologies (e.g. 
artificial intelligence,29 the Internet of Things,30 drones, big data analytics31) to generate efficient 
and sustainable production in agriculture. This 
approach targets precision agriculture, which 
focuses on increasing production efficiency by 
utilizing a set of information technologies and 
automated equipment. Agriculture 4.0, however, 
is also about connected and knowledge-based 
production systems that focus on ever-increasing 
automation, efficiency in the food chain, and 
improved management processes. Among 
the key technologies, there are devices and 
applications that provide access to information 
and services, such as drones, GPS, geographic 
information system (GIS), sensors, and mobile 
phones. Some of these devices can increasingly 
store, share, and analyze “big data” to support 
agricultural forecasting and inform smarter 
decision-making (Braun et al., 2018).
Some technologies, such as mobile applications 
and e-commerce platforms, are already 
commonly used and accessible to farmers. 
Others, such as artificial intelligence and 
blockchain, which are more sophisticated and 
complex, are still partly under development. 
Some technologies are knowledge-intensive 
and costly to operate and maintain, so their 
utilization varies depending on the commodity 
and scale of a farming operation. Potential users 
of these technologies must be willing and able 
to invest in the acquisition of the required skills, 
and organizations must be in place to support 
the transition to more digitalized operations. 
Sophisticated digital agricultural technologies 
are transforming food production and trade 
systems, and they offer opportunities for 
farmers to increase productivity, sustainability, 
competitiveness, market linkages, and 
participation in agriculture value chains. 
Digital agriculture can help women and 
other smallholders in developing countries 
overcome or compensate for the barriers they 
face in improving their competitiveness and 
accessing export markets (OECD, 2019). It can 
also complement existing technologies, making 
women farmers more productive. Box 3 provides 
one example of how the Internet of Things 
technology can be applied in agriculture to help 
women overcome constraints to mobility and 
improve efficiency.32 
The increased flow of information enabled by 
digital technology can also create incentives for 
smallholders to add value to their products, as 
information about production practices, quality, 
or other dimensions that might bring a price 
premium can be recorded and passed along to 
consumers. One example is being piloted for 
coffee exports from Ethiopia and Uganda, where 16
16
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture between 19 and 28 per cent of coffee-producing 
households are headed by women (International 
Coffee Organization, 2018). Bext360 combines 
all machine vision and blockchain technologies. 
The “bextmachine” at coffee collection points 
evaluates the coffee cherries when farmers 
deposit them, provides a market price along 
with advice on how to improve the quality, and 
then tracks the coffee to the end consumer. This 
increases farmers’ return for investing in high-
quality production practices (OECD, 2019). 
6.3 Gender-differentiated effects of 
agricultural technologies
Upgrades in agricultural technology can 
positively impact a country’s trade in agriculture. 
This process, however, often happens at the 
expense of small family farms, where women 
constitute a large share of the workforce, albeit 
often unpaid and invisible. Mechanization and 
industrial agriculture – also referred to as the 
Green Revolution technologies – have often 
favored better-off farmers who can adopt new 
technologies to increase production and profits 
more quickly. This initial advantage tends to 
widen as increased profits are reinvested in more 
sophisticated technologies to further increase 
productivity. Smaller farmers may be displaced 
onto less fertile land, or abandon or sell their 
farms, leading to land concentration in the 
hands of fewer, larger commercial enterprises. 
Experience has shown that small-scale actors 
need institutional and financial support and 
access to appropriate technologies to be 
able to increase efficiency and increase their 
competitiveness.
Historically, Green Revolution technologies 
have exhibited important gender-differentiated 
effects. The case of high-yielding varieties of 
rice in Asia illustrates how rural women’s 
work burden often increased (rather than 
being reduced), and how women from poor 
households often lost their livelihoods. Adopting 
the package of high-yielding varieties of seeds, 
machinery, irrigation technologies, and chemical fertilizers and pesticides increased the need for 
cash income, which often intensified women’s 
work burden in small-holder farms, either by 
pushing them into agricultural wage work, or 
into doing more unpaid work to avoid the use 
of hired labourers. On the other hand, landless 
women who relied on wage labour for survival 
often lost their livelihoods to mechanization of 
post-harvest activities or suffered from flat or 
falling wages. Men tended to take over more of 
the buying and selling of crops, and to own and 
operate the new equipment, reducing women’s 
control of income produced and relegating them 
to the more labour-intensive tasks of weeding 
and transplanting.
In addition, the focus on increased yields ignored 
the many other uses of rice plants, including 
as fodder for livestock or for fish ponds, and 
as straw for mats or thatching, which served 
important domestic uses and as the basis of 
income-generating activities. In addition, the 
use of purchased hybrid seeds over indigenous 
varieties tended to overlook and undermine 
women’s role in preserving and managing local 
biodiversity (FAO, n.d.; Sobha, 2007). 
As this discussion indicates, technologies may have 
important benefits in terms of improving yields, 
increasing incomes, and supporting trade, but 
these benefits may be distributed unequally. The 
concerns associated with the Green Revolution 
continue to be an issue with new technological 
developments. While increasing numbers of male 
and female smallholders benefit from participation 
in modern agricultural supply chains, the gender-
differentiated impacts of new technologies must 
be carefully considered. Future technological 
change in agriculture must be more inclusive, 
while meeting the challenges of increasingly 
globalized and complex agricultural value chains 
and taking into account the urgent need to reduce 
agriculture’s environmental footprint.
The following subsections examine some ways 
in which agricultural technology can present 
new opportunities for women’s participation in Mobile phones can be used to control machinery remotely. Nano Ganesh is a remote control for water pumps 
developed by an Indian company, Ossian Agro Automation. Its electronic hardware for turning pumps off and 
on can be activated remotely by mobile phone. This helps women (and men) farmers use water more efficiently. 
Without remote controls, farmers either have to make special trips to the fields at night to turn pumps on 
(electricity is often available only during off-peak hours), or they have to leave the pumps on to run on the 
intermittent electricity supply, wasting water, reducing income, and eroding soil. Women farmers, in particular, 
find the nighttime trips risky and difficult. This innovation has also generated new activities, which provide 
additional sources of income for women in the company’s rural call centers, electronics assembly, and in 
marketing and training.
Source: FAO (2018a).Addressing constraints on women’s mobility: Nano GaneshBox 317
17
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture trade. In particular, we examine technologies for 
meeting standards in (1) high-value agricultural 
production and (2) green technologies and 
sustainable agriculture practices, which are 
some of the key areas for the development of 
agricultural technology moving forward.
6.4 Technology in global value chains: 
Opening opportunities for women
As mentioned in Section 3, expanding trade in 
high-value agricultural products such as fresh 
fruits and vegetables through GVCs represents 
a promising opportunity for women and 
other small-scale producers and processors in 
developing countries, provided they can meet the 
standards and regulations for safety, quality, and 
efficiency required by these markets.33 Standard 
requirements, which have become more 
stringent and widespread in recent decades, 
are among the primary constraints to trade in 
agriculture (Redden 2017). 
There is widespread evidence that the 
proliferation of gender-blind standards has 
led to the exclusion of women and other small 
agents from GVCs because women, as producers, 
are more likely to lack the financial or technical 
capacity for compliance. Thus, standards 
may favor larger, more industrialized, formal 
enterprises and contribute to the consolidation 
of actors across nodes of value chains (Redden, 
2017; Swinnen, 2015; UNECE, 2019). For example, 
in some cases food safety and other standards 
for fresh produce have caused a shift from 
smallholder to vertically-integrated estate 
production (UNECE, 2019).34 
Technology can either help widen or close 
these gaps. Access to technology, resources, 
and technical expertise is often a prerequisite 
for participation in production processes and 
business operations within GVCs – a prerequisite 
that women may find it difficult to meet (Bamber 
and Fernandez-Stark, 2013). 
On the other hand, women who do get access 
to new technologies through GVCs may obtain 
the means to achieve competitiveness and 
meet international standards. In this process, 
women can benefit both as small producers and 
entrepreneurs, and as workers. Participation 
in GVCs is a means of accessing technology, 
extension services, and other resources provided 
by lead firms to ensure that their suppliers 
meet the demand for high-quality products. 
And workers whose employers invest in training 
or technology transfer may receive a wage 
premium and greater job security. All of these 
impacts can create flow-on welfare effects for the 
wider community. Many high-value-added crops require labour-
intensive production techniques, which cannot 
be easily mechanized and in which women 
often specialize. In this regard, for example, 
women small producers have been successful in 
breaking into the segments of horticulture value 
chains that require careful handling or attention 
to detail, thus capitalizing on traditional gender 
roles that associate men with tasks requiring 
physical strength and women with tasks 
requiring precision and dexterity. 
The horticulture industry is of great importance 
for developing countries because of its economic 
returns and employment generation, which 
enable positive interplay between trade and 
technology as described in Section 3 (Bamber and 
Fernandez-Stark, 2013). There are cases in which 
access to simple yet appropriate technology, 
along with training, has enabled women to 
successfully upgrade to meet standards and 
achieve competitiveness in GVCs. One example 
is in the production of mangoes in Burkina Faso. 
Mango So is a medium-sized fruit and vegetable 
processing company established in 2001 that 
contracts with numerous local producers. Eighty-
five per cent of its factory workers are women. 
The company faced challenges in meeting 
sanitary and phytosanitary standards and 
organic certification standards for supplying the 
European market. A major issue was the use of 
wooden tables to process mangoes, as the wood 
is prone to pest and soil contamination. Another 
key issue was access to efficient technology 
for drying mangoes. With support from the 
Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF)35 and the 
World Bank Aid for Trade, Mango So was able 
to acquire steel tables for processing and new 
drying tunnels, as well as provide training on 
production practices, hygiene, safety, and use 
of the new equipment. The result has been 
increased training and upgraded employment 
opportunities for women working for Mango So, 
along with increased employment for others in 
the community as exports have expanded along 
with income-earning opportunities (Redden, 
2017; UNECE, 2019).
Another interesting case refers to the use of 
new technology for processing shea butter, 
an activity traditionally done by women that 
has helped them gain access to a particularly 
promising niche market and high-value GVC. 
Shea butter has been dubbed “women’s gold,” 
not only for its gold colour, but also because 
it provides livelihoods for millions of women 
across Africa. While there is growing demand 
for natural and organic shea butter for food 
and cosmetic uses in markets in the United 
States and Europe, and shea is indigenous 18
18
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture to Africa, the shea nut is often exported and 
processed elsewhere because processors in 
Africa have been unable to ensure consistent 
and high quality of their shea butter. New 
technologies such as kneaders, roasters, 
hydraulic or screw presses, and nut crushers 
have helped mechanize some shea processing 
operations to complement traditional manual 
methods. This has enabled women to improve 
the quality of the shea butter they process, 
and to access lucrative markets, improving 
profitability and incomes (Europa, 2018). One 
study of women-owned microenterprises in 
Northern Ghana found that the adopters of 
improved shea butter processing technologies 
had better performance in terms of increased 
income, savings, employment, investment, and 
credit levels (Mohammed et al., 2013). 
Finally, technology has helped women access 
high-value GVCs in honey production. Ethiopia 
is the largest producer of honey in Africa, but 
the quality and yield from traditional hives is 
too low to meet the growing global demand 
for high-quality honey, beeswax, and other 
bee products. Traditional harvesting and hive 
technologies are inefficient and unprofitable, 
and largely male-dominated. Traditional hives 
are made of hollow logs hanging from trees 
located away from homes, making it difficult 
to monitor the quality of honey and requiring 
climbing trees. In addition, honey is usually 
harvested at night. This presents numerous 
challenges for women, for whom household 
duties or social conventions prevent them from 
traveling long distances and climbing trees at 
night. Modern box and frame hive technology 
can make it easier to harvest honey at the right 
time, requires very little land, is relatively cheap, 
and can be located near homes, thus offering 
the entry point for women to participate in 
the honey value chains and to produce higher-
quality and greater quantities of honey. For 
instance, through its work with Zembaba, 
an umbrella organization of beekeeper 
cooperatives, Oxfam has expanded women’s 
role in honey production and marketing in the 
Amhara region of Ethiopia. Growing demand 
for honey has been used to leverage support for 
greater participation by women, and through 
new hive technology, women have been able to 
provide a higher quality product and expand 
their participation in a lucrative market (King, 
2013; KIT, Agri-ProFocus and IIRR. 2012). 
Digital technologies can also help women and 
other smallholders better access upstream 
inputs and knowledge, facilitating their potential 
integration into global value chains. Information 
and communications technology (ICT) can help women address many of the traditional barriers 
to adopting new technologies in agriculture, 
such as time and mobility constraints, access 
to finance, information, training, networks, and 
markets. Traditional technologies such as rural 
radios continue to be important, but newer 
ICT such as smartphones and the Internet are 
increasingly important prerequisites for the use 
of digital agricultural technologies. The following 
are examples of recent digital technologies that 
can support women’s competitiveness and 
integration in global markets:
• The use of remote sensing, the Internet 
of Things solutions using wireless sensor 
network systems (such as the example 
discussed in Box 3), and applications based 
on machine learning and machine vision can 
help smallholders access services in remote 
areas where experts are unavailable (OECD, 
2019). 
• A new platform in Africa, developed with 
the support of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) and the Consortium of 
International Agricultural Centers (CGIAR) 
in Africa, aims to provide cheap and 
affordable access to knowledge on crop 
diseases, including for crops with which 
women are more likely to be involved, 
with easy-to-understand images and other 
content. 
• An artificial intelligence (AI), smartphone-
based assistant called Nuru (Swahili for 
“light”) can diagnose multiple diseases 
in cassava, pest infestations in African 
maize, and diseases in potatoes and wheat 
(OECD, 2019). Plant diseases and pests are a 
significant threat to production, and losses of 
food crops can be particularly devastating for 
smallholders and prevent them from being 
able to expand commercial production or to 
take the risks of adopting new production 
practices. 
• UN Women’s “Buy From Women” enterprise 
platform launched in Rwanda in 2016 maps 
farmers’ plots and generates a production 
forecast, which help women smallholders 
negotiate more precisely with buyers and 
financial institutions. Farmers can also access 
information about market prices and weather, 
training on climate-smart agricultural 
practices (Munyaradzi et al., 2019; see Annex 
2), mobile money, and suppliers, customers, 
and financers (FAO, 2018b; UN Women, 2016).
Digital agriculture technologies can also help 
women overcome constraints to accessing 
higher-value markets for their products. For 
example, these technologies can help solve 
problems of coordination between buyers and 19
19
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture large numbers of geographically scattered 
smallholders in value chains, making it easier 
for smallholders to learn about and meet the 
demands for product quantity, quality, and 
safety, and less risky and costly for the buyers to 
rely on those smallholders. These technologies 
can also help women farmers cooperate among 
themselves and increase their bargaining power. 
Various platforms have been developed to 
connect buyers and sellers by providing market 
information or virtual marketplaces. One example 
is the Connected Farmer Alliance, a public-private 
partnership between the United States Agency 
for International Development (USAID), Vodafone, 
and TechnoServe that enables agribusiness to use 
M-Pesa mobile money to make purchases from 
farmers and to extend loans. 
6.5 Organic farming, green technologies, 
and agroecology: Striving for 
sustainable agriculture
Organic farming provides a promising area 
to support the ability of women to increase 
their participation in high-value agriculture 
activities and trade, while at the same targeting 
a reduction in the environmental impact of 
conventional agriculture. Organic production 
is typically dominated by small-scale farmers 
– many of whom are women – and relies on 
techniques such as crop rotation, composting, 
and biological pest control (in place of 
fertilizers and pesticides). The use of genetically 
modified organisms is also prohibited. Organic 
farming can thus use locally available inputs 
and technologies (ILO and UNCTAD, 2013). 
Demand for organic food has been expanding 
rapidly worldwide due to growing health 
and environmental concerns, and the trend 
is expected to continue (Willer and Lernoud, 
2019). As women tend to have limited access 
to chemicals and other inputs associated with 
industrial agriculture, and thus are more likely 
to use traditional production systems, with the 
right assistance they may consider obtaining 
organic certification to access high-value niche 
markets, such as those for certified organic 
products, thus turning a disadvantage into a 
strength (World Bank et al., 2009). 
Women may also be more capable of adopting 
innovative sustainable practices and green 
technologies when they start as outsiders in 
activities from which they have traditionally 
been excluded.36 For example, women members 
of Manduvira, a fair-trade sugar cooperative in 
Paraguay, were found to be early adopters of 
biodynamic farming techniques in sugarcane 
farming,37 a cash crop with which women have 
relatively little experience. One of the reasons found for this was that, having grown up as 
farmers, men are more “set in their ways” 
while women are “often more eager to receive 
guidance” (Clugston, 2014: 4). 
Even if gender-based constraints limit women’s 
participation in organic farming, women may 
still find opportunities as suppliers of inputs 
to organic production processes. For example, 
women in Mali are largely excluded from 
organic cotton production because they lack 
access to organic fertilizers and credit, and their 
household responsibilities interfere with the 
labour demands of weeding and composting. 
Instead, they produce biopesticides from kobi 
oil, an input that has become essential for pest 
management and has created a new income-
earning opportunity (KIT, Agri-ProFocus and IIRR. 
2012).
There is increasing international recognition 
that the global environmental crisis and 
the urgency of food security for a growing 
population call for a paradigmatic shift in 
agriculture production towards agro-ecological 
practices (UNCTAD, 2013). While organic 
production focuses on input substitution (i.e. 
a biological insecticide in place of a more toxic 
synthetic one) that leaves the monoculture 
structure unchanged, agroecology commits to 
a more holistic transformation. Agroecology is 
based on the “application of ecological concepts 
and principles to the design and management 
of sustainable agroecosystems” (Gliessman, 
2007: 18). The technology that is the foundation 
of agroecology involves the integration of 
traditional, local knowledge and practices with 
modern agroecological science. The goal is 
to replace conventional production methods 
(based on monocultures, and energy-intensive 
industrial inputs) with sustainable agrosystem 
management (in which external inputs are 
replaced with local biological interaction 
synergies38) in order to support poly cultures, 
biodiversity, ecological conservation, and energy 
efficiency, in turn fostering more resilient 
farming systems. 
Agroecology has the potential to promote food 
security for a growing population, empower 
smallholder farms, and help promote climate 
stabilization by reducing dependence on 
chemicals and fossil fuels (Altieri, 2009; Migliorini 
and Wezel, 2017; UNCTAD, 2013, 2017). At the core 
of agroecology is shared knowledge among local 
farmers and between farmers and technical 
experts. There is evidence that this participatory 
approach has led to a new recognition of the role 
of women in rural economies and to initiatives 
that have helped address gender inequality. For 20
20
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture example, in Casemance, Senegal, rural women’s 
organizations have been active in promoting the 
use of agroecology to support food production, 
while also advocating for rights and resources (e.g. 
access to land) and representation in decision-
making (New Field Foundation, 2010). Similarly, 
in Uruguay, the Calmañana herb co-operative 
– an organization established by women in the 
1990s – provides technical assistance to help 
households increase income and food security 
through the use of agroecological principles. 
The cooperative puts women’s interests at 
the centre of its mission in the form of income 
diversification, fulfilment of family nutrition, and 
support for solidarity and women’s leadership 
(Oliver, 2016).39
Supporting agroecology – which, as discussed 
in UNCTAD (2013), is key for the long-term 
sustainability of agriculture – can help re-value 
women’s traditional knowledge on seed 
conservation, biodiversity, and nutrition (Shiva, 
2016) while also opening up new possibilities for 
their economic participation in agriculture and 
participation in trade.40 In addition, agroecology 
is characterized by lower initial costs, simple 
production techniques, and stable returns. 
This makes agroecology more affordable 
and accessible for women than industrial 
agriculture. 
There is evidence that agroecological practices 
can be a pathway for women’s empowerment. 
For example, the system of rice intensification 41 
– an agroecological method for growing rice – 
can achieve 20 to 50 per cent higher yields than 
conventional production methods, facilitating 
greater income generation and food security. 
About 90 per cent of the world’s rice is produced 
in Asia and women play a major role in rice 
farming. In Indonesia, women contribute over 
70 per cent of labour in upland rice production; 
in Bangladesh, women constitute over 45 per 
cent of labour in the sector (Segal and Minh, 
2019). Rice production is also heavily dependent 
on women’s unpaid and/or low-valued labour 
(Nguyen et al., 2019). With conventional practices, 
in fact, women perform backbreaking tasks like 
seedling removal, which involves constantly 
bending over to transplant and weed in hot and 
humid conditions. The SRI potentially enables 
women to work under healthier conditions 
and raise productivity, which can help generate 
surplus for the market. The principles of the 
system of rice intensification have been adapted 
to other crops as well, such as wheat, maize, 
millet, sorghum, vegetables, and tubers (Tiki, et 
al., 2015).7. Factors affecting women’s adoption 
of technologies
Based on the concepts explained in Section 3, 
due to discriminatory social norms and gender 
stereotypes women in agriculture in all regions 
face constraints that impinge on their productive 
and entrepreneurial potential and affect their 
ability to participate in and benefit at par with 
men from trade expansion and value chain 
development (UNCTAD, 2014). In agriculture, 
women face limited access to land, financial 
resources and credit, extension services, training, 
rural development policymaking, and reliable 
public transportation and rural infrastructure to 
market their products. Many of these constraints 
contribute to explaining women’s lower access 
to and use of technology and related inputs. Men 
and women do not necessarily have different 
propensities or abilities to use agricultural 
technologies, but gender-based constraints – in 
particular, women’s more limited ability to access 
information and training – explain differences in 
technology access and use. 
Gender differences in the use of inputs 
and technology vary across regions and 
circumstances, suggesting that specific 
local conditions matter. However, evidence 
consistently suggests that men adopt new 
agricultural production technologies at 
higher rates and faster than women (Ragasa 
2012).42 There are gender gaps for a wide range of 
agricultural inputs and technologies, including 
machines and tools, fertilizers, crop protection 
products, animal breeds, improved plant 
varieties, and irrigation schemes (FAO, 2018a; 
Peterman et al., 2014; Croppenstedt et al., 2013). 
These differences apply across the spectrum of 
technologies from basic to sophisticated digital 
agriculture technologies and ICT. A considerable 
gender gap persists, for example, in relation 
to mobile ownership and use of the Internet. 
Based on ITU (2019), the Internet gender user 
gap is 22.8 per cent in developing countries and 
42.8 in the least-developed countries.43 
These sources of inequality are important in 
relation to trade because women’s lack of access 
to technologies and other resources contributes 
to their lower productivity and segregation 
into positions of economic vulnerability in 
agriculture.44 Because access to technology 
facilitates participation in trade and trade 
provides opportunities to access technology, 
women in agriculture are often confronted with 
a low-productivity trap. For example, a number 
of studies have found that women’s yields are 
lower than men’s within the same household. 
These yield differences almost always disappear, 21
21
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture however, when the level of access or usage of 
resources – in particular technology-related 
inputs and services such as fertilizer or extension 
services – are taken into account (Croppenstedt 
et al., 2013). This low-productivity trap, in turn, 
inhibits an efficient functioning of value chains 
and an expansion of trade, as women input 
providers miss out on potential markets, and 
agribusinesses miss out on the potential for 
high-quality and reliable supplies of produce 
from women farmers and agro-processors (FAO 
2019a). 
7.1. Gender bias in agriculture research 
and development 
Due to the traditional sources of gender bias, the 
important role that women play in agriculture 
and food systems contrasts with their limited 
representation among researchers, scientists, 
professors, graduate students, and managers 
at agricultural research and development 
organizations. In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, 
only one in four agricultural researchers is 
female, while in Latin America the number is one 
in three (Beintema and Marcantonio, 2010). While 
the number of women in research organizations 
has begun to increase in recent years, women 
remain underrepresented in higher-level 
positions and educational degrees, and therefore 
rarely participate in decision-making about 
agricultural innovations (Meinzen-Dick, et al., 
2010: 76). 
Greater gender balance in innovation activities 
can yield a variety of benefits. First, women may 
have a unique perspective on the challenges faced 
by all farmers, and female farmers in particular. 
Second, a greater diversity of perspectives 
contributes to a greater diversity of insights 
and creative problem-solving. Various studies 
indicate that gender-balanced teams function 
more effectively. For example, researchers at 
the University of Castilla La Mancha in Spain 
found that gender-balanced research teams in 
a technological context were associated with 
higher levels of ground-breaking innovation 
than those that were either all male or all female 
(Díaz-García et al., 2013).
A lack of women at all levels of research, but 
particularly in managerial and upper-level 
research positions, makes it less likely that the 
particular needs of women in food systems will 
be addressed appropriately through agriculture 
research and development. This shortage of 
women in agricultural research can be self-
perpetuating, as a lack of role models for girls 
and young women sends the message that these 
fields are not for them. In the case of sub-Saharan African countries, sex-disaggregated data on 
agricultural researchers at different levels of 
authority and expertise – ranging from students 
to managers, which include directors, deans, and 
department heads – shows that men account for 
at least 60 per cent of all of these positions. The 
imbalance is greater at higher-level positions. 
Men’s dominance is especially striking at the 
managerial level, with a share of over 80 per cent 
(Beintema and Marcantonio, 2010).45
These imbalances tend to compound the implicit 
gender bias observed in the content of research 
and development in agriculture, which tend to 
focus on commercial agricultural products and 
activities, such as cash crops and large livestock, 
which are typically managed or controlled by 
men. In contrast, kitchen gardens, small livestock, 
and small-scale commercial and staple crops, 
commonly viewed as female pursuits, receive less 
research attention. Similarly, women’s needs for 
labour-saving technologies in their processing 
and production tasks such as weeding, 
transplanting, and drying are underserved. This 
is due to the fact that much of women’s work 
in agriculture is underestimated, as it is often 
provided as an unpaid contribution to family 
farms or businesses and considered to be just an 
extension of “household work.” 
When technological research and development 
fail to account for women’s needs, women are 
less likely to adopt the resulting innovations, 
reinforcing the idea that they are unqualified or 
uninterested in technology. For example, male 
and female farmers often prefer different crops 
or crop varieties. Men who grow maize to sell 
prioritize particular traits, such as high yield, and 
so are more likely to adopt the more expensive 
high-yielding varieties, which require more 
fertilizer and chemicals to grow. Women, on the 
other hand, are often more likely to prioritize 
traits related to their household and caregiving 
responsibilities, and to adopt technologies that 
are consistent with their roles in production 
for family use or for sale in local markets. Thus, 
women may prefer crop varieties that respond 
to their priorities in terms of nutrition, taste, 
safety, and ease of processing and cooking. 
Women’s varietal choices are also linked to their 
roles in processing and selling traditional maize 
products as well as other factors such as cooking 
time (due to its impact on firewood and labour 
needs) (Beuchelt and Badstue, 2013). 
One area where women’s needs are often 
overlooked in the design of technologies is 
women’s physical needs. Technologies are often 
designed with the average man’s body and 
strength in mind, making tools and equipment 
difficult or even impossible for women to use. 22
22
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Ploughs, for example, are often too heavy or have 
handles that are too high. In one case, treadle 
pumps for irrigating fields in Bangladesh were 
designed for the average weight and strength of a 
man, but mostly used by women who suffered pain 
and exhaustion as a result. Fertilizer is typically 
sold in sealed 50-kg bags that are heavy to lift and 
require access to transport, credit, and adequate 
storage, access that women are less likely to have. 
Smaller bags are both more costly and more likely 
to be adulterated (Croppenstedt et al., 2013). 
In contrast to these examples, Box 4 presents an 
example of how collecting feedback from women 
helped to design a new labour-saving machine 
for potato sorting.
7.2 Extension services and access to 
information and knowledge 
Extension services are a key channel through 
which producers get information through 
training and demonstrations by extension agents 
about new products and practices generated 
in agricultural research and development 
institutions. Extension services, however, are 
characterized by many forms of gender bias. 
First, women are underrepresented as extension 
agents. Only 15 per cent of extension workers 
worldwide are women (FAO, 2018a). Second, 
in general, women also have less access to 
extension services than men. For example, in 
Mozambique, twice as many men as women in 
agricultural value chains benefit from extension 
services (45 versus 23 per cent). In Honduras, 
women account for just 33 per cent of extension 
service beneficiaries. The same is true for Asian 
countries. In Cambodia and Viet Nam, for 
example, women account for just 10 and 25 per 
cent of the beneficiaries of extension services, 
respectively (Bamber and Staritz, 2016). As women’s role in agriculture often goes 
unrecognized due to prevailing gender 
stereotypes, women remain largely underserved 
by advisory and business development services, 
which fail to target them as legitimate clients. 
Extension typically targets export-oriented crops, 
which tend to be male-dominated. Extension 
agents may also provide information to men 
only, assuming they are responsible for making 
most production decisions and will pass along 
the information to others in the household. 
In their design and implementation, extension 
services often do not acknowledge the gender-
specific obstacles experienced by women. Training 
may be scheduled at times or locations that are 
not accessible to women due to their childcare 
and other responsibilities, or their inability to 
travel. Services may not take into account women’s 
more limited access to radios and mobile phones. 
Services delivered by male agents or trainers may 
also be inaccessible to women where social norms 
prohibit them from interacting with males who 
are not their relatives. As a result of these obstacles, 
women often rely on second-hand information 
from informal networks rather than from expert 
providers. This helps explain why their uptake of 
improved practices, technologies, and business 
skills and, by consequence, their productivity and 
efficiency, are often lower than that of their male 
counterparts (FAO, 2018d). In addition, rural women 
are more likely to have lower levels of education 
and literacy, and often speak only indigenous 
languages. This inhibits their capacity to make 
informed choices about technologies and to adopt 
and use them effectively. When women are given 
appropriate information, they can play a key role in 
adopting improved technologies and practices, as 
discussed in Box 5 regarding the case of women’s 
empowerment and households’ adoption of high-
yielding varieties of rice in Southeast Asia. Researchers from the Latin American gender team of the International Potato Center (CIP) in Lima, Peru wanted to 
understand what underlies technology adoption decisions for men and women in high-elevation Andean communities 
where farming systems are based on potato cultivation. The researchers from CIP , which is part of the Consortium of 
International Agricultural Centers, found that technology adoption decisions are the result of the complex interaction 
of multiple factors, including the characteristics of the technology itself and gender roles. In turn, the technologies that 
are ultimately adopted may carry forward gender biases if the needs of users are not taken into ac count at all stages. 
For example, in Jacopampa, Plurinational State of Bolivia, women are responsible for manually sorting and selecting 
potatoes by size. But although equipment to save time by mechanizing this task was introduced, it was never actually 
adopted. The women who were the targeted users of the technology, in fact, were not explicitly included in the 
collection of feedback and demonstration of the new technology. More men than women participated in validation 
meetings about the new equipment, and they were able to operate the equipment without difficulty. However, the 
equipment was not suited to the physical requirements of women. As a result, women found the equipment too 
high to operate, and had difficulty lifting the heavy bags of potatoes to feed into the machine. Once this barrier to 
adoption was understood, a simpler, gravity-fed, low bearing machine was suc cessfully introduced. 
Sources: Babini (2017); and Polar et al. (2017: 42). Technology is not gender-neutral: Mechanized potato selection and gender rolesBox 423
23
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture How can women’s empowerment lead to better adoption of agricultural and farming technology? That question 
motivated a study by Akter et al. (2017) of 12,000 farming households in Southeast Asia that assessed women’s 
empowerment using a measure called the Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index. The index considers a 
series of factors to measure empowerment, including data on access to extension services (training, agricultural 
information, and agricultural technologies).
The division of farming tasks between men and women in the region demonstrates common patterns. Men 
dominate decision-making over most resources, whereas women’s participation in key decisions varies across the 
region. For example, the study found that the largest degree of women’s involvement in decision-making is in the 
Philippines. Most rice farming decisions there are made jointly by husbands and wives, and women play important 
roles in community and agricultural groups. Women also participate more actively than men in most agricultural 
meetings organized by the local extension office, and their husbands listen to the information they convey. 
In Myanmar and Indonesia, on the other hand, there is low representation of women in formal groups, which leads to 
a lack of access to extension services. Women in these two countries are keen to participate in meetings and training, 
but invitations typically are only extended to men.
Ac cording to the study, empowered women have access to more networks and information, including about 
available technologies, that enable them to make more informed production decisions for their farms and advocate 
for measures that would improve household incomes and welfare. This finding shows the importance of addressing 
gender gaps in agriculture through country-specific gender interventions.
Source: Akter et al. (2017). Women’s empowerment in agriculture and innovation in Southeast AsiaBox 5
These issues are compounded by the top-down 
organization of research, development, and 
extension systems. New knowledge typically 
originates in research institutions, gets 
incorporated into new products and practices 
for users, and finally flows into extension 
systems and is distributed to farmers and other 
users through training and demonstration. 
Farmers are typically seen as passive recipients 
of knowledge and as dependent on external 
sources of expertise that flow in one direction 
through a hierarchical structure. Conventional 
approaches therefore lack feedback mechanisms 
through which research, development, and 
extension institutions can collect information 
about technology users, especially women, and 
be held accountable for meeting their needs. 
Extension services should explicitly account for 
gender roles in agriculture, including through 
the recruitment of female extension workers 
(UNCTAD, 2017).
7.3 Innovative approaches to research, 
development, and extension 
Since the mid-1990s, there has been growing 
recognition that centralized research, 
development, and extension systems have 
failed to deliver substantial benefits to 
women by promoting innovations that benefit 
farmers who already have greater access to 
assets and education. Alternative approaches 
to agricultural innovation and extension 
seek to address the problems associated 
with the conventional top-down model of 
innovation by moving toward more holistic, 
systems-based, and integrated approaches that address the multiple dimensions of 
innovation processes and recognize multiple 
actors and their needs. These approaches are 
built around the recognition that knowledge is 
not simply transferred from providers to users, 
but generated and exchanged in a continuous 
learning process (World Bank et al., 2009: 258). 
The concept of agricultural innovation systems 
has been developed to conceptualize innovation 
as an inclusive process that involves not only 
research and development, but also collective 
participation, sharing of knowledge among 
diverse agents, and context-specific conditions 
(Freeman, 1987; World Bank et al., 2009; World 
Bank, 2011). In this framework, farmers and other 
stakeholders have the opportunity to develop 
agricultural technology along with researchers. 
Women are explicitly recognized as critical 
actors in agricultural innovation systems as is 
the need to incorporate their perspectives and 
involve them (World Bank et al., 2009). 
Participatory approaches have the benefit of 
identifying and incorporating the needs of 
farmers and other users as well as building 
on their existing knowledge in technology 
development, monitoring, and evaluation. While 
participatory approaches are not necessarily 
gender-sensitive, those that explicitly incorporate 
a gender dimension show promising results. 
Participatory approaches – as well as innovation 
platforms46 – can help recognize and develop 
women’s innovative and technical capacity in 
order to enable them to better solve their own 
problems (Carr and Hartl, 2010). Box 6 discusses 
how a gender-sensitive participatory approach 24
24
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture to plant breeding can benefit women. Box 7 
discusses the Papa Andina Project, which involves 
the use of an innovation platform for bringing 
together a variety of stakeholders, with explicit 
attention to recognizing and valuing women’s 
traditional roles, knowledge, and importance to 
successful research and innovation.
Participatory approaches can be considered 
for agricultural extension services as well. They 
could include informal or formal peer-to-peer 
sharing of information by participants rather 
than delivery in a top-down manner by outside 
experts. One example is the Farmer Field Schools 
(FFSs), initiated by the FAO in 1989 in Asia, which have now expanded to more than 90 countries 
in all regions. Participants in an FFS learn by 
doing and experimenting with new practices 
in their own local contexts, guided by a trained 
facilitator. Evidence shows that the FFS approach 
is effective in developing the technical skills of 
farmers, improving productivity and income, and 
in many cases contributing to gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. The use of the approach 
in Jordan and Tunisia, for example, helped women 
gain self-confidence and increased community 
recognition of their work. It also increased 
opportunities for women to network among 
themselves, which led to the formation of formal 
and informal organizations (FAO, 2016a). Participatory plant breeding programs involve farmers directly in the process of plant breeding and creating new 
plant varieties. Researchers are able to draw on farmers’ knowledge and experience of local conditions, while farmers 
can select and adapt crop varieties to their specific environments, agricultural practices, and needs. Many studies 
find that participatory plant breeding leads to faster adoption and higher yields because it explicitly incorporates 
and responds to the interests and priorities of diverse users. However, many studies also indicate that the benefits for 
women are limited unless these programs incorporate an explicit gender dimension and address women’s specific 
constraints, such as lack of mobility and transport, time burden, need for knowledge and training, and gender norms. 
Women are often central to local agricultural innovation systems, particularly with respect to plant breeding 
techniques, generation of new plant varieties, and serving as repositories of knowledge about local varieties and 
genetic information. In various parts of the world, women are responsible for sorting and selecting seeds for different 
crops. In a survey of over 150 participatory plant breeding projects, Ashby and Lilja (2004) found that consulting 
women and involving them in varietal evaluation led to better ac ceptability and faster adoption. Cec carelli and 
Grando (2007) conclude that participatory plant breeding gives voice to farmers and marginalized women in 
combining scientific discovery and traditional knowledge. Participatory plant breeding approaches that involve 
women in the development of NERICA (or New Rice for Africa, a new high-yield rice variety) in West Africa and beans 
in Rwanda have led to better performing varieties and enhanced benefits for women. 
Sources: ACET, ed. (2017); Meinzen-Dick et al. (2010); and Ragasa et al. (2014).
The Papa Andina project, launched in Peru, Plurinational State of Bolivia, and Ecuador in 1998 and hosted by the 
International Potato Center combines new institutional arrangements for fostering agricultural innovation, namely 
a stakeholder platform and a participatory market chain approach. The project aims to help smallholders access 
modern marketing chains and includes several innovative gender elements. The project is funded by the Swiss 
Agency for Development and Cooperation, among other donors. 
The Papa Andina network brings together researchers, farmers, agricultural service providers, and market chain actors 
such as chefs, supermarkets, and processors. The network works to create new mutually reinforcing relationships, 
production techniques, products, and markets. One of the results of the project has been the creation of a high-value 
niche market for small-scale potato farmers through the branding of traditional potato varieties. T’ikapapa is the 
commercial brand supporting the sale and export of native potatoes in the region. Other results include new pest 
management techniques, higher yields, higher prices for native potatoes, increased farmer revenues, more stable 
markets, and increased farmer self-esteem. 
Donor agencies established the need for a gender analysis and the involvement of women farmers in research and 
development as a key requirement of the project. Resource-poor women farmers are viewed as key stakeholders 
in the potato value chain. Events and activities highlight women’s knowledge, so that their roles are recognized 
and reinforced. For example, innovation fairs provide opportunities for farmers and communities to highlight the 
enormous genetic diversity of the potatoes they cultivate – at one fair, a family exhibited more than 600 varieties – 
as well as women’s important role in the preservation and maintenance of that diversity. Papa Andina demonstrates 
the value of women’s involvement in agricultural innovation. Women have reported feeling recognized and 
rewarded for their efforts, and they have also been able to access new commercial opportunities. 
Sources: World Bank et al. (2009); and Devaux et al. (2011).Gender impacts of participatory plant breeding programs
Papa Andina: Promoting women’s participation in agricultural research and innovationBox 6
Box 725
25
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture 7.4 Other constraints
This subsection examines the impact of 
constraints discussed in Sections 1 and 2 on 
technology adoption by women and presents 
some solutions. It is important to highlight that 
gender-based constraints tend to be interlinked 
and mutually reinforcing. For example, women’s 
lack of ownership of land and other forms 
of collateral limits their access to financial 
services, which, in turn, inhibits their ability to 
purchase many forms of new technologies and 
inputs such as machinery (IFC, 2016). Based on 
this observation, this subsection considers the 
interplay between women’s access to inputs 
and technology and gender barriers to women’s 
autonomy and participation in leadership and 
decision-making; barriers to access to financial 
services, productive resources, and ICT; and 
women’s work burden and time poverty. As 
noted above, discriminatory cultural norms and 
laws, in addition to gender stereotypes, are the 
underlying drivers – directly or indirectly – of 
these constraints and inequalities. 
7.4.1 Women’s autonomy and participation in 
leadership and decision-making 
As discussed in Section 1, women tend to be 
underrepresented in positions of authority, as they 
typically face limitations on their participation 
in leadership and decision-making. This also 
applies to decision-making and priority-setting 
regarding agricultural technology at several 
levels, including households, communities, and 
organizations. For example, in many countries 
women are disadvantaged in their access to local 
associations and organizations. Membership in 
producer associations or cooperatives is often given automatically to the male member of the 
household, despite the fact that the bulk of the 
work might be done by the woman. Women’s 
participation may also be hampered by time and 
travel constraints, costs or rules requiring asset 
ownership, or minimum size of a business as 
conditions to participate. 
Participation in such groups has important benefits, 
particularly for small-scale producers who have 
greater access to resources and bargaining power 
when they can act collectively. Benefits include 
networking, learning about market opportunities, 
accessing information, getting help and support, 
and relieving other gender-based constraints in 
access to resources, finance, and training. A number 
of studies find that local producer organizations 
are important in promoting technology use 
(Ragasa, 2012). This can be especially important for 
women, as they are more likely to operate smaller-
scale enterprises, and it is easier for small-scale 
farmers to gain access to new technologies when 
they can pool their resources through producer 
organizations or cooperatives. 
Cooperatives and producer organizations for 
women can be effective means of helping women 
access the benefits of networks and institutional 
support as well as overcome obstacles to 
affordability and transfer of information about 
new technologies. “Women-only” branding can be 
an innovative marketing way to overcome barriers 
to women’s access to cooperatives and producer 
organizations. Box 8 discusses two examples of how 
such branding supports women’s collective action 
through rural producer organizations, which, in 
turn, can help address a number of gender-related 
constraints to women’s adoption of technology 
and participation in trade. 
Women generally lack access to formal, urban, international markets as well as to rural producer organizations. The 
case of women-only branding by women’s coffee producer cooperatives illustrates an innovative way that women can 
address these barriers and gain access to high-value niche markets for fair trade and socially responsible products.
Marketed as “coffee that empowers,” Café Femenino, a woman-owned brand of coffee, was founded in 2004 by 
Peruvian women farmers, and now includes 10 cooperatives of women coffee farmers in Plurinational State of 
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, Rwanda, and Sumatra. The brand is sold in the United 
States, Canada, Australia, United Kingdom, and continental Europe as fair-trade, organic and high-quality coffee. 
To women farmers who participate in the brand, cooperatives provide legal rights to the land they farm, leadership 
positions within the cooperatives, financial and decision-making power, and direct payment for their coffee. Fair 
trade premiums increase the visibility and value of women’s work in coffee production, while boosting family 
incomes. These arrangements have resulted in improved living conditions in coffee-growing areas, including better 
nutrition, improved sanitation, new wet-processing mills, and new roads. 
The fair trade and organic coffee grower’s cooperative in Nicaragua, SOPPEXCCA, markets the coffee made by its 
women producers under a separate label called “Las Hermanas.” It has been supplying Peets Coffee, a United States 
specialty coffee retailer, since 2001. The superior quality of Las Hermanas has been recognized in the annual “Cup of 
Excellence” coffee competition. The premiums generated by the brand have helped women develop their technical 
capacity in coffee production; produce, manage, and market their own coffee; and gain titles to land.  
Sources: Café Femenino (2018); Chan (2010); KIT et al. (2012); and World Bank et al. (2009).Women-only branding and rural producer organizations: Café Femenino and Las HermanasBox 826
26
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture 7.4.2 Access to financial services
Limited access to finance is another major 
constraint to women’s productivity and efficiency 
in agriculture. Without sufficient access to 
credit, women are often unable to bear the risks 
and upfront costs associated with purchasing 
new equipment and inputs that embody new 
technologies, or making the innovations and 
investments necessary to expand their businesses, 
adopt new production practices, or meet the 
standards required for international trade. 
Although the number of female “agripreneurs” 
is increasing, because women are typically 
“underachievers of competitive advantage” (as 
discussed in Section 2), there is only a small 
group of top-performing, growth-oriented 
women entrepreneurs. This explains why, rather 
than targeting commercial opportunities, the 
vast majority of women’s enterprises revolve 
around subsistence production (UNCTAD 2014; 
IFC, 2016; FAO, 2018d).
Alternative financial models that work for 
women have been largely limited to small-scale, 
context-specific arrangements. Input suppliers 
and buyers, cooperatives, and microfinance 
institutions are becoming increasingly 
important financing channels for smallholders 
and small and medium-size enterprises. 
However, the availability of financial products 
and the volumes of credit and savings provided 
by these informal or semi-formal institutions 
might not be sufficient for women entrepreneurs 
to consolidate or expand their business. These 
kinds of institutions also tend to be credit-led 
and fail to provide the broader range of financial 
services that agri-entrepreneurs need. For these 
reasons, it is important to strengthen links with 
formal financial institutions by both building 
the capacity of these service providers to better target women workers and entrepreneurs in 
the agriculture sector, and by supporting the 
introduction of innovative financial products. 
Some examples of innovative financial 
arrangements that have had some success 
include women-only financial products and 
funds, arrangements that accept a broader range 
of types of collateral, group lending schemes, 
investment clubs, ICT-led services, forward 
financing provided by agribusiness, and bridging 
partnerships between formal and semi-formal 
and microfinance institutions (FAO, 2018a). 
7.4.3 Access to productive resources 
Women’s disadvantage in ownership of and 
access to productive resources (e.g. labour,47 land, 
livestock, water, fisheries, and forest) is a key 
factor in explaining differences in adoption rates 
as well as productivity between male and female 
farmers (Doss, 2001; Ragasa, 2012). 
Men’s greater control of land and labour means 
that they have not only collateral to access credit 
to finance the purchase of new technologies 
and workers to implement them, but also 
greater access to contract farming and more 
lucrative roles in modern agricultural value 
chains – and the access to new technologies 
that these roles can bring (Croppenstedt et al., 
2013). Such access, along with clearly defined 
and secure ownership and control of productive 
resources, are key to providing women with the 
appropriate incentives and abilities to adopt 
new technologies, and to promote sustainable 
use of these assets. Box 9 illustrates how a 
gender-sensitive approach focused on securing 
access to land and livestock assets, combined 
with training, promoted women’s adoption of 
new technologies and allowed women to engage 
in additional income-earning activities in Nepal.
In 2004, Nepal adopted an innovative institutional arrangement that allowed for increasing tree crops and livestock 
without degrading the forest. The programme has also provided important improvements to women’s livelihoods. 
Through the Leasehold Forestry and Livestock Programme, communities in the Himalayan foothills were granted 
40-year renewable leases over the forest, and new crops and goats were introduced along with sustainable production 
practices and business and marketing techniques. The programme provided women – who are often landless and 
spend much time each day collecting water, animal fodder, or wood for fuel – with access to land where they could 
rear their goats and plant suitable grasses, legumes, and fodder trees. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations provided technical assistance and capacity-building to a number of projects that promoted communal 
forestry leaseholding. In particular, women adopted a type of grass that was utilized for making brooms, the sale of 
which provided an additional source of income. The grass was also used for forage of livestock and the dried stems as 
sticks to support growing vegetables.
Women using the assigned land (rather than walking long distances searching for ground grasses) reported significant 
time savings (between 3 and 10 hours per day). This enabled them to engage in other income-earning activities. 
The case of Nepal shows how a gender-sensitive strategy focusing on access to land and livestock assets, in addition to 
training, can enhance women’s adoption of technologies.
Sources: FAO (2019a); and Shapiro et al. (2015).Communal leasehold forestry arrangements and labour-saving forestry and livestock practices in NepalBox 927
27
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture 7.4.4 Access to information and communications 
technology
While much progress has been made in recent 
decades, a gender gap still persists in access to 
ICT. This is especially the case for rural women in 
developing countries who face what is known as a 
triple divide: digital, rural, and gender (FAO, 2018a). 
This gap means that fewer women participate 
not only in the use, but also in the development 
of digital agricultural technologies. For example, 
the Overseas Development Institute finds that 
digital agriculture in East Africa is resulting in 
new forms of exclusion. In the dynamic “ AgTech” 
industry, women own fewer than 30 per cent of 
firms in Kenya, Uganda, and Rwanda, and none 
in the United Republic of Tanzania, South Sudan, 
and Burundi (Krishnan, 2018). 
One way to promote women’s greater digital 
literacy and challenge stereotypes blocking 
women’s use of ICT is to design digital platforms 
specifically to meet women’s needs. One 
example is the #VALUE4HERConnect digital 
platform, Africa’s first online platform for female 
agripreneurs. The platform, part of a program 
led by the Technical Centre for Agricultural and 
Rural Cooperation (CTA) to empower women in 
agriculture, was launched in 2019 and has over 
400 women members. Through the network, 
women can access buyers, market information, 
financing, and capacity-building opportunities, 
as well as a Women2Women forum for sharing 
information to help them grow their businesses, access global markets, and increase incomes 
(Biztech Africa, 2019; CTA, 2019). 
7.4.5 Women’s work burden and time poverty
As discussed in Section 1, the division of labour 
based on traditional gender roles, assigns 
women a major – if not exclusive – responsibility 
for domestic and care work, and this burden is 
likely to be particularly time-consuming and 
onerous in rural areas due to the lack of services 
and infrastructure. 
Helping women access labour-saving technologies 
is an important, yet often overlooked, way to help 
them free up time and improve their agricultural 
productivity. Labour-saving technologies that 
target production and post-harvest activities can 
help women save time in planting, cultivating, 
harvesting, processing, packing, storing, and 
transporting agricultural products. Box 10 
discusses an initiative to promote mechanization 
in African agriculture. Climate-smart practices 
such as zero-till or low-till agriculture have the 
potential to reduce the drudgery for women of 
such tasks as hand weeding. Other labour-saving 
practices include integrated systems such as the 
rice-fish or rice-shrimp aquaponics system. Rice 
and fish are cultivated together, and fish feed on 
the weeds while also fertilizing the rice. This can 
reduce the time that women spend weeding and 
applying chemicals to the rice (FAO 2019a). 
An initiative to promote sustainable agricultural mechanization in Africa under the slogan to “banish the hand 
hoe to the museum by 2025” is challenging the stereotypical image of an African woman cultivating her farm 
with a simple hand hoe. In part, this image reflects the reality of low levels of mechanization in Africa. There are 
5 tractors for every 1,000 farmers in Africa, compared with almost 1,600 tractors for every 1,000 farmers in the 
United States. This is compounded by gender-based norms that relegate women to the labour-intensive tasks of 
weeding along with gender-based constraints on their access to mechanized equipment. For example, in some 
parts of Africa, it is considered inappropriate for women to work with oxen or to drive tractors (Ragasa, 2012). 
Sustainable mechanization is a means to reduce the burden of hard labour, relieve labour shortages, improve 
productivity of agricultural operations, and enhance profitability and market access. Sustainability refers to the 
technology’s economic, social, environmental, and cultural dimensions. 
A public-private partnership between the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa and the Leasing Leveraging 
Livelihoods Consortium, for example, seeks to overcome the two key barriers to mechanization in African 
agriculture – lack of financing and lack of training – by coupling lease-to-own financing with training on how 
to use the equipment. 
Sources: USAID (2016); and Food and Agriculture Organization, Sustainable agricultural mechanization, available at http://www.
fao.org/sustainable-agricultural-mechanization/overview/what-is-sustainable-mechanization/en/ (accessed 1 May 2020).“Banish the hand hoe to the museum:” Sustainable agricultural mechanization in AfricaBox 1028
28
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture 8. Conclusions and policy 
recommendations 
This module presented key concepts on the 
interplay between gender, the economy, and 
trade and applied them to a gender analysis 
of the interaction between technology in 
agriculture and trade. On the one hand, women 
face barriers in access to existing technologies; on 
the other hand, technological innovation often 
does not take into account women’s needs and 
economic roles. These forms of gender inequality 
can prevent women from accessing trade in 
agriculture or benefitting from trade in the same 
way as their male counterparts. Since technology 
facilitates trade, and trade, in turn, provides 
opportunities to access technology, women in 
agriculture are often confronted with a low-
productivity trap. When countries increase their 
participation in trade in the agricultural sector – 
as has been the case for developing countries over 
the last few decades – women workers tend to be 
hired as sources of competitive advantage and 
women entrepreneurs are often underachievers 
of comparative advantage. 
Agriculture – encompassing not only raising 
crops, fish, and animals, but also activities 
related to food processing and packaging – is a 
key sector for women’s livelihoods around the 
world. Over the last few decades, developing 
countries have become important traders in 
agriculture (especially in the export of high-value 
commodities), and agriculture has increasingly 
become organized around global value chains. 
However, as women’s primary role is still often 
associated with householding, a large number 
of women perform unpaid agricultural work or 
hold irregular, precarious jobs in export-oriented 
activities and/or in agrifood value chains.
Trade liberalization, by itself, has differentiated 
effects on women, depending on the incidence 
of gender inequalities in the society and the 
economy, and on household dynamics. Gender-
sensitive measures are critical to ensure that 
rural women participate in and benefit from 
trade (not only international trade, but also 
regional and subregional trade). Technology in 
agriculture can be a powerful tool to increase 
women’s economic status, and trade can 
represent a vehicle for access to and the diffusion 
of technologies. Labour-saving technologies can 
raise women’s productivity, providing them 
with the time to engage in income-generating 
activities and the capabilities to potentially 
meet international standards and access higher-
value markets. As traditional activities become 
mechanized, however, some women may face (at 
least temporarily) job losses, while some activities may become more profitable but be acquired by 
men. In these circumstances, it is important to 
adopt appropriate policies supporting training 
and extension services, credit provision, and 
dissemination of information on new economic 
opportunities for women, in addition to 
measures supporting women’s ownership and 
control of technologies. 
To address the gender bias in the process of 
technology diffusion and innovation, gender 
sensitivity needs to be adopted from the initial 
stages of research and development (including 
the hiring of high-level research and managerial 
positions) to the stages of extension. This is key 
to ensure that technology can support women’s 
empowerment and help reduce sources of 
gender discrimination (UNCTAD, 2011).
At the national level, agricultural policy and 
science, technology, and innovation should 
adopt a gender-sensitive approach, with special 
concern afforded to increasing participatory 
links between agricultural research institutions 
and female smallholder farmers. 
Gender considerations should be taken directly 
into account in setting policies and research 
priorities to ensure that the different economic 
roles and challenges of both men and women 
are appropriately recognized (e.g. physical 
differences, differential trait preferences, 
different crops and practices targeted for research 
and improvement, and production of field crops 
versus food processing and its distribution). In 
this regard, it is important to support capacity-
building in data collection and processing in the 
agricultural sector, involving both agricultural 
ministries and national statistical offices. 
Targeting greater participation of women in 
agricultural research requires supporting women 
in higher education in science and improving 
their access to both formal and informal 
networks where they are often discriminated 
against. A key pre-condition is institutional 
support to challenge cultural stereotypes that 
tend to perceive science as a male field and 
caregiving as primarily women’s work. In this 
regard, family-related policies can play a very 
important role in reducing women’s burden 
of family responsibilities and help raise their 
productivity and economic opportunities (e.g. 
child care, parental leave, health care, transport, 
etc.).
Affordable, government-sponsored training 
and education are a key prerequisite to make 
extension more inclusive. Extension services, 
which are critical for the dissemination of 
innovation, should consider experimenting with 29
29
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture new delivery methods or employ more female 
extension agents to guarantee that both men and 
women receive equal exposure to information 
and knowledge. For example, training should be 
scheduled and organized taking into account 
women’s family responsibilities and cultural 
norms. There is also evidence that female 
extension agents can be more successful in 
reaching female farmers, especially in remote 
rural areas and in more patriarchal societies 
(Meinzen-Dick et al. 2014; see also A.2.1 in Annex 2).
Digital technologies have been increasingly 
adopted in extension services and are becoming 
an important source of information and 
productivity. However, because women are less 
involved in ICT, there is a need for more public 
effort to increase access to and use of ICT by the 
rural poor. Education and training are essential 
to help women take advantage of new digital 
technologies, so addressing gender disparities at 
all levels of education and training is key. 
There is evidence that participatory approaches 
to the process of technical change and extension 
can be successful to ensure that innovation 
and dissemination reflects the needs of the 
various stakeholders involved. However, an 
explicit gender dimension is required in order 
for participatory approaches to help in tackling 
women’s constraints and gender barriers. This 
will require institutional support to foster the 
organization of women into groups, which will 
help with information-sharing, building support 
networks, and promoting effective change.
Participatory approaches should receive great 
attention, especially in the context of ongoing 
ecological challenges and the urgency for 
technological innovation in agriculture to help 
generate sustainability. Women, in fact, are 
typically the custodians of traditional knowledge, 
which includes biodiversity conservation. 
Biodiversity – in contrast to the dominant 
monoculture system – supports soil fertility and 
crop resilience to pests and diseases without the 
use of external inputs (Shiva, 1992, 2016). Based 
on the evidence that a larger number of women 
than men tend to reject technologies that may 
have an adverse impact on the environment 
and local communities, women’s involvement 
in decision-making and the incorporation of gender considerations throughout the process of 
technological change and adoption can advance 
gender equality while supporting sustainable 
farming practices and reducing the carbon 
footprint of agriculture (UN Women et al. 2016). 
Government support to organic farming, climate-
smart approaches, and agroecological practices is 
critical to contribute to climate stabilization and 
preservation of biodiversity, while also providing 
great economic opportunities for small-scale 
farmers, especially women (see A.2.2 in Annex 2). 
The adoption of agricultural innovation is 
intrinsically related to access to and control of 
productive resources. In order for women to 
benefit from technical change, it is important to 
evaluate how in each context public investment 
(especially in infrastructure), financial services, 
and the legal setting affect men and women, 
and identify what corrections can be made to 
reduce the gender gap in the control of economic 
resources. Customary and statutory legal rights, 
marriage laws, and inheritance provisions are 
all legal areas that often prevent women from 
having control of the land at par with men 
(Bamber and Staritz, 2016). Gender sensitization 
training for officials and information campaigns 
are valuable tools to help raise gender awareness 
and adopt gender targets. In this regard, it is 
important to strengthen efforts to collect sex-
disaggregated data to help shed light on the 
various forms of gender inequality and inform 
gender-sensitive policies. 
Technology has the potential to help women 
increase productivity, become more competitive 
in trade, and access higher-value activities in the 
global agrifood chains.48 In addition, technology 
can help in developing sustainable farming 
practices, which are essential to cope with 
the effects of climate change and to improve 
the livelihoods of rural women (who are at 
especially high risk of suffering the impact of 
the climate crisis) (Huyer, 2016). Addressing the 
existing gender gaps in access to technology 
and the process of innovation is an important 
step towards fulfilling the 2030 Sustainable 
Development Goals, including those for food 
security, sustainable agriculture, gender equality, 
and empowerment of all women and girls.30
30
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Exercises and questions for discussion
1. What are some commonly observed dimensions of gender inequality that affect women’s 
participation in the economy? 
2. How can gender disparities in earnings be measured?
3. How can trade affect the gender distribution of income and resources? And how can gender 
inequalities impact trade?
4. What are the different forms of gender bias in the agriculture sector?
5. What opportunities has global agricultural trade opened for women?
6. How has technology contributed to transform world agriculture markets?
7. What are the key economic and environmental challenges that have led to a growing search for 
sustainable techniques of production?
8. How can agricultural technology positively impact trade? And how can trade support productivity 
and innovation in agriculture?
9. Why and in what ways do agricultural technologies typically exhibit gender-differentiated 
effects?
10. How can technology support women’s competitiveness and integration in global value chains?
11. In what ways can sustainable production practices support women’s empowerment?
12. What are the key explanatory factors behind the gender gaps in the adoption of technologies?
13. How can research and development and extension become gender-sensitive?
14. What are some examples of initiatives aiming to tackle the gender-based constraints that 
impinge on women’s adoption of technology? 
15. What measures could national policies consider to help women benefit from technological 
change?31
31
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Annex 1. Overview of technologies in agriculture 
This annex presents examples of key agricultural technologies in three broad areas: production, 
harvest and post-harvest, and digital technologies. Without aiming to be exhaustive, the annex aims 
to highlight those technologies that are most relevant to women engaged with trade in agriculture
Category Subcategory Examples
Production 
technologiesSeeds and breeds designed or adapted 
to fit local conditions and needsNew Rice for Africa (NERICA), a cross between African and 
Asian rice species, with short growth duration and resistance 
to harsh conditions.
Artificial Insemination to increase genetic diversity for remote 
livestock populations, helping farmers adapt to changing 
conditions and demands.
Animal health technologiesVaccines and antibiotics, which can reduce the burden of 
diseases.
Mechanization of a wide range 
of operations including land 
clearance, management, water 
usage, application of fertilizers, and 
pesticides
Smart energy such as solar, wind, 
biomass, and hydroelectric can replace 
fossil fuels and diesel enginesDrip irrigation systems, which are highly adaptable to 
different topography and efficient, and particularly suited to 
fruit and vegetable value chain. Drip irrigation favours use by 
women because there are less physical strength requirements 
(Bamber and Fernandez-Stark, 2013).
Wind turbines that run farm machinery, pumps, air-
conditioners, and poultry equipment.
Solar-powered surface irrigation water lifting stations; solar-
powered pumps are particularly suitable for women, as they 
are not as heavy as traditional pumps and can be located near 
the house (Theis et al., 2018). 
Sustainable practices to increase 
production while preserving the 
environmentOrganic agriculture, which relies on ecosystem management 
rather than external inputs; and eliminates the use of 
synthetic inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides, genetically 
modified seeds and breeds, irradiation, preservatives, 
additives, and veterinary drugs. 
Conservation agriculture, which focuses on soil preservation 
through minimum disturbance, permanent cover, and crop 
rotation. No-till methods can reduce women’s work burden 
when they are primarily responsible for weeding.
Agroecology, described by the FAO (2018h, 1) as “an integrated 
approach that simultaneously applies ecological and social 
concepts and principles to the design and management 
of food and agricultural systems. It seeks to optimize the 
interactions between plants, animals, humans and the 
environment while taking into consideration the social 
aspects that need to be addressed for a sustainable and fair 
food system.” 
For example, aquaponics combines aquaculture and 
hydroponics so that farmers cultivate complementary 
plants and aquatic animals in a recirculating environment. 
According to the FAO (2018h, 2), “ Agroecological innovations 
are based on the co-creation of knowledge, combining 
science with the traditional, practical and local knowledge 
of producers. By enhancing their autonomy and adaptive 
capacity, agroecology empowers producers and communities 
as key agents of change.”
Integrated pest management, which minimizes the use of 
pesticides, is a combination of crop management approaches 
from cultural, biological, mechanical, and chemical 
perspectives; techniques include intercropping, crop rotation, 
efficient fertilizer application, mulching, and cover cropping 
(among others).32
32
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Category Subcategory Examples
Harvest and post-
harvest technologiesHarvest, processing, and storage 
technologies for non-perishable 
commodities such as cerealsTractors can perform a variety of functions: combine 
harvesters cut, thresh, and pre-clean the grain; mechanical 
drying offers reduced handling losses and better control over 
air temperature and space (Kumar and Kalita, 2017); mills 
grind grains into flour and can be powered by water, wind, or 
motors and come in a variety of sizes; bags for storing flour 
prevent moisture and pest contamination and spoilage; 
processes of treating and handling food stop or control 
spoilage and minimize the possibility of foodborne illness; 
food fortification can help meet nutritional objectives; and 
compliance with measure, such as Good Manufacturing 
Practices and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points can 
strengthen food security.
Cold chain technologies for perishable 
commodities, such as fruits and 
vegetables, fresh milk, meat, and fish Cold chain technologies vary from simple methods using ice 
to forced air, hydro-cooling, or vacuum cooling; cold storage 
technologies can range from small walk-in cold rooms to 
large-scale commercial refrigerated warehouses; for transport, 
cold can be provided with ice or trailer-mounted refrigeration 
systems (Kitinoja, 2013).
Technologies for commercialization 
of specialty and traditional crops and 
products to ensure high-quality and 
consistent productionProduction of essential oils, spice, oleoresins, powders, and 
specialty extracts and blends relies on indigenous knowledge 
plus technologies for processing, such as steam distillation 
or extraction with food solvents such as ethanol (Douglas et 
al., 2005).
Digital technologies
(Agriculture 4.0)Digital platforms and mobile phone 
applications (apps) allow access to 
information and key services (for 
example, e-commerce or e-extension) 
targeted to the agricultural sector, 
including weather forecasts, advice 
on crop management, information on 
market prices, veterinary and financial 
servicesAgriMarketplace mobile phone app connects producers and 
traders.
e-Nutrifood provides information on producing, conserving, 
and eating nutritious foods.
Weather and Crop Calendar provides farmers with early 
warning systems to adapt to climate change.
Cure and Feed Livestock provides information on disease 
control and feeding strategies (FAO, 2019b).
Internet of Things (IoT) refers to 
technologies that connect the 
Internet to sensors and other devices 
that transmit information; networked 
sensors in the IoT monitor the health, 
location, and activities of people and 
animals, production processes, and 
the natural environment (OECD, 2019)Animal biochip transponders can monitor blood pressure, 
temperature, or digestion.
Water management using IoT sensors to monitor the 
function of remote water pumps can anticipate maintenance 
needs and pump malfunctions (Westbase.Io 2018).
Drones can be used to survey crops, and potentially for 
pest management and to time planting and harvesting as 
technology progresses.
Distributed ledger technologies are 
decentralized digital systems for 
recording transactionsBlockchain technology, which according to the FAO’s 
AGROVOC Multilingual Thesaurus is “an information 
technology that acts as a shared ledger for digital storage and 
tracking of data associated with a product or service, from the 
raw production stage until it lands in the consumer’s hand 
in real time” (http://agrovoc.uniroma2.it/agrovoc/agrovoc/
en/page/c_4c8d2418). Blockchain is a database for recording 
transactions as well as a platform to execute smart contracts 
that can digitally facilitate, verify, or enforce a contract (OECD, 
2019; Tripoli and Schmidhuber, 2018). Blockchain traces the 
provenance of products along the value chain and contributes 
to faster and more reliable financial transactions. The first 
attempts to use blockchain technologies in the seafood 
industry were initiated in 2017, but it has not been widely 
adopted to date because of the fear of sharing commercial 
data with competitors (FAO, 2018f).
Source: Prepared by the UNCTAD secretariat.33
33
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Annex 2. Case studies
A.2.1.  Florence Kondylis, Valerie Mueller, 
Glenn Sheriff and Siyao Zhu 
(2016): “Do female instructors 
reduce gender bias in diffusion 
of sustainable land management 
Techniques? Experimental evidence 
from Mozambique”
Objective and background
This paper evaluates the role of gender in the 
dissemination of sustainable land management 
(SLM) techniques in Mozambique. Specifically, 
the paper examines whether introducing 
female messengers improves information 
dissemination of SLM to female famers.
Data and methodology
The analysis uses a large-scale field experiment 
in the Zambezi valley of Mozambique. In 2010, 
the experimental communities were randomly 
selected to have a female messenger trained in 
SLM requested to teach the techniques to other 
women. 
Household panel surveys were conducted in 
the experimental areas 15 and 27 months after 
the initial training in October 2010. The surveys 
targeted SLM awareness, knowledge, and 
adoption; they were administered to at most 
two individuals per household, the household 
head, and his/her partner or spouse. The final 
sample included 2,461 men and 3,423 women in 
3,685 households in 2012 and 2,122 men and 2,954 
women in 3,440 households in 2013.
Findings
The results show that women’s awareness of 
SLM increased by 9 percentage points in 2012 
and that adoption of the technique increased by 
5 percentage points in 2013 in communities with 
female messengers. The traditional provision of 
training in SLM practices to male messengers 
only had a significant impact on male farmers. 
These results indicate that the provision of 
extension services through male-dominated 
networks may perpetuate gender inequalities 
in agriculture. In contrast, adding a female 
messenger may increase women’s access to 
information. This outcome is due to two reasons: 
first, male messengers appear to be incentivized 
by the presence of female messengers to more 
effectively connect to both male and female 
farmers; second, female famers seem to be 
motivated by the presence of female messengers 
to increase their demand for information.A.2.2 Munyaradzi Junia Mutenje, Cathy 
Rozel Farnworth, Clare Stirling, 
Christian Thierfelder, Walter 
Mupangwa, and Isaiah Nyagumbo 
(2019): “A cost-benefit analysis of 
climate-smart agriculture options in 
Southern Africa: Balancing gender 
and technology”
Objective and background
This study aims to evaluate whether there are 
gender-based costs and benefits associated 
with climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and to 
assess their relationship with intra-household 
decision-making practices among small farmer 
households in Malawi, Mozambique, and 
Zambia. CSA technologies refer to measures that 
aim to increase productivity, help farmers adapt 
to the effects of climate change and manage 
climate risks, and reduce the carbon footprint of 
agriculture. 
Data and methodology
The empirical analysis follows three stages: (1) 
an ex-post cost-benefit analysis of different CSA 
options at the household level; (2) stochastic 
dominance to assess the role of perceived risks in 
the adoption consideration of CSA technologies; 
and (3) a dynamic mixed multinomial logit to 
identify the factors that influence the households’ 
decision to invest in CSA technologies. 
The data include 1,440, 696, and 1,448 households 
in Malawi, Mozambique, and Zambia, respectively, 
covering 3,622, 2,106 and 5,212 maize-legume 
plots in these three countries over two years.
Findings
The cost-benefit analysis indicates that CSA 
technologies that included soil and water 
conservation improved maize varieties, and that 
cereal-legume diversification is associated with 
net positive economic benefits. The analysis 
of maize yields suggests that risk-averse 
farmers prefer CSA technologies that minimize 
production risks. The regression analysis shows 
that women’s bargaining power, exposure to 
drought shock, and access to CSA technology 
information increase the likelihood of investing 
in CSA technologies. The positive role exercised 
by women’s bargaining power indicates that, 
to foster the adoption of CSA options among 
smallholder farmers, it is important to promote 
women’s active participation in intra-household 
decision-making. The empirical evidence thus 
suggests that the success of CSA depends on 
both technical CSA interventions and programs 
that support women’s empowerment within the 
household.34
34
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture A.2.3.  Sophie Theis, Nicole Lefore, Ruth 
Meinzen-Dick, and Elizabeth 
Bryan (2018): “What happens after 
technology adoption? Gendered 
aspects of small-scale irrigation 
technologies in Ethiopia, Ghana,  
and Tanzania”
Objective and background
This study focuses on the intrahousehold 
distribution of benefits from technology adoption, 
using small-scale irrigation technologies as a 
case study. The objective is to go beyond the 
traditional focus on technology adoption as a 
goal in and of itself by evaluating the extent to 
which both men and women within the same 
household gain from adoption or acquisition of 
technology.
Data and methodology
This study uses qualitative data collected in 19 
communities in Ethiopia, Ghana, and the United 
Republic of Tanzania in 2016. Specifically, the 
study is based on 38 gender-separated focus 
groups (i.e. 19 focus groups of men and 19 
focus group of women), with each focus group 
including between 5 and 16 men or women. The 
discussion questions centred around gender preferences for water technologies, technology 
choices, roles and responsibilities of both men 
and women, household use and management 
of irrigation technologies, and perceived benefits 
and incentives related to small-scale irrigation 
technology adoption.
Findings
The empirical results from the three countries 
show that the costs and benefits of technology 
adoption are not equally distributed within the 
household. As women’s primary economic role is 
associated with domestic duties and agricultural 
work on family plots, men tend to hold more rights 
of use, management, fructus, and alienation, 
as well as stronger claims to these rights. 
Consistent with previous studies, these findings 
indicate that targeting women with technology 
alone is unlikely to ensure full ownership and 
management of the technology by women 
because of asymmetric bargaining power 
within the household. Supporting women’s 
economic empowerment through technology 
(e.g. distributing motor pumps to women) is 
by itself insufficient if not accompanied by 
complementary social and institutional changes 
that promote more equitable gender roles and 
relations.35
35
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture REFERENCES
ACET, ed. (2017). African Transformation Report 2017 - Agriculture Powering Africa’s Economic Transformation. 
(African Center for Economic Transformation. Accra, Ghana and Washington, DC). Available at http://
acetforafrica.org/acet/wp-content/uploads/publications/2017/10/ATR17-full-report.pdf
AgDevCo (2017). Successful models to empower women in outgrower schemes. Case Study No. 2. Available at 
https://www.agdevco.com/uploads/reports/SDU_Gender_Case%20Study_AW_digital_Jan%202018.pdf.
Akter S, Rutsaert P , Luis J, Htwe NM, San SS, Raharjo B and Pustika A (2017). Women’s empowerment and gender 
equity in agriculture: A different perspective from Southeast Asia. Food Policy. 69:270–279. Available at  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2017.05.003.
Ali D, Deininger K and Duponchel M (2016). Investigating the gender gap in agricultural productivity: Evidence 
from Uganda. World Development. 87:152–170. 
Altieri MA (2009). Agroecology, small farms, and food sovereignty. Monthly Review (July-August):102–113.
Ashby J and Lilja N (2004). Participatory Research: Does It Work? Evidence from Participatory Plant Breeding. Paper 
presented at the 4th International Crop Congress: New directions for a diverse planet. Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia, 26 September to 1 October.
Babini C (2017). Technology is not gender neutral. Consortium of International Agricultural Centers Available at 
http://www.rtb.cgiar.org/blog/2017/10/15/technology-is-not-gender-neutral/
Bamber P , and Fernandez-Stark K (2013). Global value chains, economic upgrading, and gender in the horticulture 
industry. In: Staritz C and Reis GR, eds. Global Value Chains, Economic Upgrading, and Gender. World Bank. 
Washington, DC
Bamber P , and Staritz C (2016). The Gender Dimensions of Global Value Chains. International Centre for Trade and 
Sustainable Development. Geneva.
Beintema NM and Marcantonio FD (2010). Female participation in African agricultural research and higher 
education – new insights: Synthesis of the ASTI-Award benchmarking survey on gender-disaggregated 
capacity indicators. IFPRI Discussion Paper No. 00957. International Food Policy Research Institute . Available 
at : https://gatesopenresearch.org/documents/3-357
Beuchelt T and Badstue L (2013). Gender, nutrition- and climate-smart food production: Opportunities and trade-
offs. Food Security. 5:709–721. Available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-013-0290-8.
Biztech Africa (2019). Africa’s first online platform for female agripreneurs launched. 14 June. Available at  
https://www.biztechafrica.com/article/africas-first-online-platform-female-agripreneurs-/14716/
Braun AT, Colangelo E and Steckel T (2018). Farming in the era of Industrie 4.0. Procedia CIRP . 72:979–984.
Café Femenino (2018). Our story. Available at Rhttps://www.cafefemenino.com/story
Carr M and Hartl M (2010). Lightening the Load: Labour Saving Technologies and Practices for Rural Women. Practical 
Action Publishing.
Ceccarelli S and Grando S (2007). Decentralized-participatory plant breeding: An example of demand driven 
research. Euphytica. 155:349–360.
Chan M-K (2010). Improving opportunities for women in smallholder-based supply chains. Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation. Available at https://docs.gatesfoundation.org/documents/gender-value-chain-guide.pdf
Clugston C (2014). The business case for women’s participation in agricultural cooperatives: A case study of the 
Manduvira Sugarcane Cooperative, Paraguay. ACDI/VOCA. Available at http://www.acdivoca.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/05/ACDI-VOCA-Leland-CDP-Paraguay-Business-Case-for-Women-Participation-Agricultural-
Cooperatives.pdf .
Croppenstedt A, Goldstein M and Rosas N (2013). Gender and agriculture: Inefficiencies, segregation, and low 
productivity traps. The World Bank Research Observer. 28(1):79–109.
CTA (2019). #VALUE4HERConnect. Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation ACP-EU. Wageningen, 
The Netherlands. Available at https://value4her.hivebrite.com/
Desmarais AA (2003). The via Campesina: Peasant women at the frontiers of food sovereignty. Canadian Women 
Studies. 23(1):140–145.
Devaux A, Ordinola M and Horton D, eds. (2011). Innovation for development: The Papa Andina experience. 
International Potato Center (CIP), Lima, Peru.
DFID (2015). DFID’s conceptual framework on agriculture. Department for International Development. London.
Díaz-García C, González-Moreno A and Sáez-Martínez F (2013). Gender diversity within R&D teams: Its impact on 
radicalness of innovation. Innovation: Management, Policy and Practice. 15(2):149–160.
Doss CR (2001). Designing agricultural technology for African women farmers: Lessons from 25 years of experience. 
World Development. 29(12):2075–2092. Available at https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-750X(01)00088-2.
Doss CR (2015). Women and agricultural productivity: What does the evidence tell us? Yale University Economic 
Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 1051. Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=268266336
36
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Douglas M, Heyes J and Smallfield B (2005). Herbs, spices and essential oils: Post-harvest operations in developing 
countries. United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization. 
Vienna. Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5090e.pdf
Duflo E (2012). Women empowerment and economic development. Journal of Economic Literature. 50(4): 1051–
1079. 
Elson D (2007). International Trade and Gender Equality: Women as Achievers of Competitive Advantage and 
as Sources of Competitive Advantage. Presented at the International Labour Organization International 
Symposium on Gender at the Heart of Globalization.
Europa M (2018). African tech innovation in the driver’s seat of shea butter evolution. Face 2 Face Africa.com. 
25 January. Available at https://face2faceafrica.com/article/african-tech-innovation-drivers-seat-shea-butter-
evolution 
FAO (n.d.). Women and the green revolution. In: Women: The key to food security. Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations. Rome. Available at http://www.fao.org/3/x0171e/x0171e00.htm#TopOfPage 
FAO (2006). Gender and Law: Women’s Rights in Agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. Rome.
FAO (2011). The State of Food and Agriculture 2010-11: Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gender Gap 
for Development. (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). Rome. Available at  
http://www.fao.org/publications/sofa/2010-11/en/
FAO (2013). Women in Forestry: Challenges and Opportunities. (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. Rome). 
FAO (2014). The State of Food and Agriculture 2014: Innovation in Family Farming. (Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4040e.pdf
FAO (2015). The State of Agricultural Commodity Markets 2015. (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5090e.pdf.
FAO (2016a). Developing Gender-sensitive Value Chains: A Guiding Framework. (Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6462e.pdf.
FAO (2016b). Promoting Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Fisheries and Aquaculture. (Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6623e.pdf
FAO (2017a). Food systems and value chains: definitions and characteristics. In: Climate Smart Agriculture 
Sourcebook, 2nd edition. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome. Available at http://
www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-sourcebook/production-resources/module-b10-value-chains/
chapter-b10-2/en/
FAO (2017b). The State of Food and Agriculture 2017: Leveraging Food Systems for Inclusive Rural Transformation. (Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i7658e.pdf.
FAO (2018a). Developing gender-sensitive value chains. Guidelines for practitioners. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations. Rome. 
FAO (2018b). e-Agriculture: Women, agriculture and ICTs. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 
Rome. 1 September. Available at http://www.fao.org/e-agriculture/news/women-agriculture-and-icts 
FAO (2018c). FAO’s Work on Family Farming. Preparing for the Decade of Family Farming (2019–2028) to Achieve the 
SDGs. (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/
CA1465EN/ca1465en.pdf.
FAO (2018d). Gender and ICTs: Mainstreaming Gender in the Use of Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICTs) for Agriculture and Rural Development. (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 
Rome). Available at https://www.un-ilibrary.org/women-and-gender-issues/gender-and-icts_f02215d2-en
FAO (2018e). The State of Agricultural Commodity Markets 2018. (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/I9542EN/i9542en.pdf.
FAO (2018f). The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture: Meeting the Sustainable Development Goals. (Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome).
FAO (2018g). World Livestock - Transforming the Livestock Sector through the Sustainable Development Goals. (Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/CA1201EN/
ca1201en.pdf
FAO (2018h.) The 10 Elements of Agroecology - Guiding the Transition to Systainable Food and Agricultural Systems. 
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome). Available at http://www.fao.org/3/I9037EN/
i9037en.pdf
FAO (2019a). Fostering the Uptake of Labour-saving Technologies. (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations. Rome.) Available at http://www.fao.org/3/CA2731EN/ca2731en.pdf
FAO (2019b). In action - Digital services in Africa. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome. 
Available at http://www.fao.org/in-action/africa-digital-services-portfolio/en/
Freeman C (1987). Technology Policy and Economic Performance: Lessons from Japan. Pinter. London. 
Gliessman SR (2007). Agroecology: Ecological Processes in Sustainable Agriculture. Boca Raton, FL. CRC Press.37
37
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Grassi F, Landberg J and Huyer (2015). Running Out of Time: The Reduction of Women’s Work Burden in Agricultural 
Production. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome. Available at http://www.fao.
org/3/a-i4741e.pdf 
Homann-Kee Tui S, Adekunle A, Lundy M, Tucker J, Birachi E, Schut M, Klerkx L, Ballantyne PG, Duncan AJ, Cadilhon 
JJ and Mundy P (2013). What are innovation platforms? Innovation Platforms Practice Brief 1. International 
Livestock Research Institute. Nairobi.
Huyer S (2016). Closing the gender gap in agriculture. Gender, Technology and Development. 20(2):105–116. Available 
at https://doi.org/10.1177/0971852416643872
IFC (2013). Working with Smallholders A Handbook for Firms Building Sustainable Supply Chains. (International 
Finance Corporation. Washington, DC). Available at https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/8dc5628042112f
dbba2fff494779b2ad/Handbook+-+Working+with+Smallholders.pdf?MOD=AJPERES
IFC (2016). Investing in Women along Agribusiness Value Chains. (International Finance Corporation. Washington, 
DC). Available at https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/d19235d7-2ba7-4f7b-b0c6-5198fe9e4d30/
Women+in+Agri+VC_Report_FINAL.pdf?MOD=AJPERES 
ILO (1993). Resolution concerning the International Classification of Status in Employment. 13th International 
Conference of Labour Statisticians. International Labour Organization. Geneva.
ILO (2018a). Care Work and Care Jobs - For the Future of Decent Work. (International Labour Organization. Geneva).
ILO (2018b). Global Wage Report 2018/2019 - What Lies Behind Gender Pay Gaps. (International Labour Organization. 
Geneva).
ILO and UNCTAD (2013). Shared Harvests: Agriculture, Trade and Employment. (International Labour Organization 
and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Geneva). 
International Coffee Organization (2018). Gender Equality in the Coffee Sector. (ICO. London).
IPBES (2019). Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of 
the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Bonn.
ITU (2019). Measuring Digital Development - Facts and Figures 2019. (International Telecommunication Union. 
Geneva).
King S (2013). Women’s collective action in the honey sector in Ethiopia. Oxfam International. February.
KIT, Agri-ProFocus, and International Institute of Rural Reconstruction (2012). Challenging Chains to Change: 
Gender Equity in Agricultural Value Chain Development. (KIT Publishers, Royal Tropical Institute. Amsterdam).
Kitinoja L (2013). Use of cold chains for reducing food losses in developing countries. PEF White Paper No. 13-03.  
The Postharvest Education Foundation.
Kondylis F, Mueller V, Sheriff G and Zhu S (2016). Do female instructors reduce gender bias in diffusion of sustainable 
land management techniques? Experimental evidence from Mozambique. World Development 78:436–449.
Krishnan A (2018). How AgTech is changing East African economies. Overseas Development Institute. 11 October. 
Available at https://www.odi.org/blogs/10693-how-agtech-changing-east-african-economies (accessed 
5 May 2019).
Kumar D and Kaalita P (2017). Reducing Postharvest Losses during Storage of Grain Crops to Strengthen Food Security 
in Developing Countries. (ADM Institute for the Prevention of Postharvest Loss. University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign).
Marsden K and Garzia M (1998). Agro-industrial policy reviews - Methodological guidelines. Training Materials for 
Agricultural Planning No. 42. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome.
McIntyre BD, Herren HR, Wakhungu J and Watson RT (2009). Agriculture at a Crossroads: International Assessment 
of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development Global Report. Island Press. Washington, DC.
Meinzen-Dick R, Quisumbing AR and Behrman JA (2014). A system that delivers: Integrating gender into agricultural 
research, development, and extension. In: Quisumbing A, Meinzen-Dick R, Raney T, Croppenstedt A, Behrman J 
and Peterman A, eds. Gender in Agriculture. Springer. Dordrecht 
Meinzen-Dick R, Quisumbing A, Behrman J, Biermayr-Jenzano P , Wilde V, Noordeloos M, Ragasa C and Beintema 
N (2010). Engendering agricultural research. IFPRI Discussion Paper No. 00973. International Food Policy 
Research Institute. Washington, DC. Available at http://ebrary.ifpri.org/utils/getfile/collection/p15738coll2/
id/1655/filename/1656.pdf
Mellor JW (1987). Links between technology, agricultural development, economic growth and trade creation. In: 
Ryan J, ed. Building on Success: Agricultural Research, Technology and Policy for Development. Australian Center 
for International Agricultural Research. Canberra. 
Migliorini P and Wezel A (2017). Converging and diverging principles and practices of organic agriculture 
regulations and agroecology: A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development. 37(63).
Minten F Randrianarison L and Swinnen J (2009). Global retail chains and poor farmers: Evidence from Madagascar. 
World Development. 37(11):1728–1741.
Mohammed F, Boateng S and Al-hassan S (2013). Effects of adoption of improved shea butter processing technology 
on women’s livelihoods. American Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences. 1(4):244–250. 
Monjane B (2015). Peasant women power in Mozambique. Farming Matters. December.38
38
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Moser C (1989). Gender planning in the third world: Meeting practical and strategic gender needs. World 
Development. 17(11): 1799–1825.
Munyaradzi JM, Farnworth CR, Stirling C, Thierfelder C, Mupangwa W and Nyagumbo I (2019). A cost-benefit 
analysis of climate-smart agriculture options in Southern Africa: Balancing gender and technology. Ecological 
Economics. 163: 126–137. 
New Field Foundation (2010). Rural women’s associations and sustainable agriculture in Casamance, Senegal. 
New Field Foundation. Available at https://tinyurl.com/72q2me5 
Nguyen H, Mortensen S and Pravalprukskul P (2019). Pathways for women’s empowerment in agriculture in South 
and Southeast Asia. Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) Discussion Brief. January. 
OECD (2019). Digital Opportunities for Trade in Agriculture and Food Sectors. (Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development. Paris).
Oliver B (2016). The earth gives us so much: Agroecology and rural women’s leadership in Uruguay 
Culture, Agriculture, Food and the Environment: The Journal of Culture and Agriculture. Available at  
https://doi.org/10.1111/cuag.12064
Segal R and Minh LN (2019). Unfair Harvest - The State of Rice in Asia. Oxfam. London. Available at  
https://www.oxfam.org/en/research/unfair-harvest-state-rice-asia
Peterman A, Behrman J, and Quisumbing A (2014). A review of empirical evidence on gender differences in nonland 
agricultural inputs, technology, and services in developing countries. In: Quisumbing A, Meinzen-Dick R, Raney 
T, Croppenstedt A, Behrman J and Peterman A, eds. Gender in Agriculture. Springer. Dordrecht.
Polar V, Babini C and Velasco C (2017). Technology Is Not Gender Neutral: Factors that Influence the Potential 
Adoption of Agricultural Technology by Men and Women. International Potato Center. La Paz, Bolivia.
Quisumbing AR, Meinzen-Dick RS, Raney TL, Croppenstedt A, Behrman JA, and Peterman A (2014). Synopsis of 
gender in agriculture: Closing the knowledge gap. IFPRI Issue Brief No. 84. International Food Policy Research 
Institute. Available at https://ideas.repec.org/p/fpr/issbrf/84.html
Ragasa C (2012). Gender and Institutional Dimensions of Agricultural Technology Adoption. Presented at the 
International Association of Agricultural Economists Triennial Conference, Foz do Igausu, Brazil. August. 
Available at http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/126747/2/IAAE.2012.gender.pdf
Ragasa C, Sengupta D, Osorio M, Ourabah Haddad N and Mathieson K (2014). Gender-specific Approaches and 
Rural Institutions for Improving Access to and Adoption of Technological Innovations. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations. Rome.
Razavi S (2007). The political and social economy of care in a development context: Conceptual issues, research 
questions and policy options. UNRISD Programme Paper No. 3. United Nations Research Institute for Social 
Development. Geneva. 
Redden J (2017). The Role of Aid for Trade in Building the Capacity of Developing Country Firms to Meet Sustainability 
Standards. International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development. Geneva. Available at https://www.
greenindustryplatform.org/sites/default/files/downloads/resource/The%20Role%20of%20Aid%20for%20
Trade%20in%20Building%20the%20Capacity%20of%20Developing%20Country%20Firms%20to%20
Meet%20Sustainability%20Standards.pdf .
Rockström J, Steffen W and Noone K (2009). A safe operating space for humanity. Nature. 461:472–475
Shapiro B, Adhikari BR, Baral NR, Hancock B, Kafley G, Koirala P and Reijmerinck J (2015). Regenerating Forests and 
Livelihoods in Nepal: A New Lease on Life – Unfolding the Experience of 20 Years of Poverty Alleviation through 
Leasehold Forestry in the Himalayas. CABI. Wallingford, UK.
Shiva V (1992). Women’s indigenous knowledge and biodiversity conservation. India International Centre Quarterly. 
19(1/2):205–214. 
Shiva V (2009). Women and the gendered politics of food. Philosophical Topics. 37(2):17-32.
Shiva V (2016). Who Really Feeds the World? The Failures of Agrobusiness and the Promise of Agroecology. North 
Atlantic Books. Berkley, CA.
Sobha I (2007). Green Revolution: Impact on gender. Journal of Human Ecology. 22(2):107–113. 
Sommerville C, Cohen M, Pantanella E, Stakus A, and Lovatelli A (2014). Small-scale aquaponics food production 
Integrated fish and plant farming. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper 589. Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations. Rome.
Standing G (1989). Global feminization through flexible labour. World Development. 17(7):1077–1095.
Standing G (1999). Global feminization through flexible labour: A theme revisited. World Development. 27(3):583–602.
Stoop W and van Walsum E (2013). SRI - A grassroots revolution. Faming Matters (March).
Swinnen J (2015). Value Chains, Agricultural Markets and Food Security. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations. Rome. Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5226e.pdf . 
Tejiani S and Milberg W (2010). Global defeminization? Industrial upgrading, occupational segmentation and 
manufacturing employment in middle-income countries. Working Paper No. 2010-1. Schwartz Center for 
Economic Policy Analysis and Department of Economics, School for Social Research, New School. 39
39
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture Theis S, Lefore N, Meinzen-Dick R and Bryan E (2018). What happens after technology adoption? Gendered aspects 
of small-scale irrigation technologies in Ethiopia, Ghana, and Tanzania. Agriculture and Human Values. 
35(3):671–684.
Tiki S, Chun LL and Savann O (2015). SRI cultivates the well-being of women. Farming Matters (December).
Tripoli, M and Schmidhuber J (2018). Emerging Opportunities for the Application of Blockchain in the Agri-food 
Industry. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and International Centre for Trade and 
Sustainable Development. Rome and Geneva. 
Twin (2013). Empowering Women Farmers in Agricultural Value Chains. Available at http://www.fairtradeamerica.
org/~/media/fairtrade%20america/files/reports/empowering-women-farmers-in-agricultural-value-
chains-twin%20(2013).pdf
UNCTAD (2011). Applying a Gender Lens to Science, Cechnology and Innovation. (United Nations publication. New 
York and Geneva). 
UNCTAD (2013). Trade and Environment Review 2013: Wake Up Before It Is Too Late. (United Nations publication. Geneva). 
UNCTAD (2014a). Teaching Material on Trade and Gender. Volume 1: Unfolding the Links. (United Nations publication. 
New York and Geneva). 
UNCTAD (2014b). Teaching Material on Trade and Gender. Volume 2: Empirical Analysis of the Trade and Gender 
Links. (United Nations publication. New York and Geneva). 
UNCTAD (2016). Trade as a Tool for the Economic Empowerment of Women. Note by the United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development Secretariat. (United Nations publication. Geneva). Available at https://unctad.org/
meetings/en/SessionalDocuments/ciem8d2_en.pdf
UNCTAD (2017). The Role of Science, Technology and Innovation in Ensuring Food Security by 2030. (United Nations 
publication. Geneva). 
UNCTAD (2019). Borderline: Women in Informal Cross-border Trade in Malawi, the United Republic of Tanzania and 
Zambia. (United Nations publication. Geneva). 
UNDP (2016). Human Development Report 2016 - Human Development for Everyone. (United Nations Development 
Programme. New York).
UNDP (2019). Human Development Report 2019– Beyond Income, Beyond Averages, Beyond Today: Inequalities in 
Human Development in the 21st Century. (United Nations Development Programme. New York).
UNECE (2019). Gender Responsive Standards. (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. Geneva). 
UN Women (2016). Empowering women farmers of Rwanda through mobile technology. 13 October. Available 
at http://www.unwomen.org/news/stories/2016/10/empowering-women-farmers-of-rwanda-through-
mobile-technology (accessed 5 May 2019).
UN Women, UN Desa, and UNFCCC (2016). Implementation of gender-responsive climate action in the context of 
sustainable development. Expert Group Meeting Report. Bonn, Germany. 14–16 October.
USAID (2016). New model aims to banish the hoe to the museum. U.S. Agency for International Development. Washington 
DC. 11 November. Available at http://agra.org/sstp/news/new-model-aims-to-banish-the-hoe-to-the-museum
van Staveren I, Elson D, Grown C and Çağatay N, eds. (2007). The Feminist Economics of Trade. Routledge. London 
and New York.
Webster T (2017). Films from the climate change front line. The New Humanitarian. 24 December. Available at  
https://www.thenewhumanitarian.org/video/2017/12/24/films-climate-change-front-line (accessed 5 May 2019).
Westbase.io (2018). IoT for farming in developing countries – How can it help? 24 October. Available at  
https://www.westbase.io/iot-for-farming-in-developing-countries/ (accessed 12 June 2019). 
Willer H and Lernoud J (2019). The world of organic agriculture. Statistics and emerging trends 2019. Research 
Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL), Frick and IFOAM - Organics International. Bonn. 
World Bank, ed. (2011). Agricultural Innovation Systems: An Investment Sourcebook. (World Bank. Washington, DC).
World Bank (2016). World Feminization of Agriculture in the Context of Rural Transformations: What Is 
the Evidence? (World Bank. Washington, DC). Available at http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/790991487093210959/pdf/ACS20815-WP-PUBLIC-Feminization-of-AgricultureWorld-BankFAO-FINAL.pdf
World Bank (2019). World Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of Work. (World Bank. Washington, DC).
World Bank (2020). Women, Business and the Law 2020. (World Bank. Washington, DC).
World Bank, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and International Fund for Agricultural 
Development, eds. (2009). Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook. (World Bank. Washington, DC).
WTO (2017). World Trade Report. Trade, Technology and Jobs. (World Trade Organization. Geneva).40
40
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture ENDNOTES
1 The teaching manual is comprised of Volume 1 (Unfolding the Links) (UNCTAD, 2014a) and Volume 2 (Empirical Analysis of 
the Trade and Gender Links) (UNCTAD, 2014b). The teaching manual has been developed with the intention of enhancing the 
capacity of policymakers, civil society organizations, and academics to evaluate the gender effects of trade and trade policy 
and formulate gender-equitable policies. The three modules of Volume 1 have been followed by the development of additional 
teaching devoted to examine the specific circumstances and institutions of individual world regions, namely the Common 
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), East African Community (EAC), Southern Africa Development Community 
(SADC), and Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR).
2 An agrifood value chain “incorporates the full range of activities required to bring a product or service from conception to 
production, delivery to consumers, and final disposal after use” (World Bank et al. 2009: 174). In the modern global economy, 
food production is often the result of a series of interlinked activities, including harvesting, processing, distribution, 
consumption and disposal. The range of actors and their interlinked value-adding activities involved in food markets leads to 
the establishment of “food systems.” Food systems are comprised of all food products that originate from crop and livestock 
production, forestry, fisheries, and aquaculture, as well as the broader economic, societal, and natural environments in which 
these diverse production systems are embedded (FAO, 2017a).
3 See UN Women, Gender mainstreaming: concepts and definitions. Available at https://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/
conceptsandefinitions.htm.
4 It is important to note that in the poorest countries, as indicated by the case of sub-Saharan Africa, women often have to work 
– and thus have no choice – given the high incidence of poverty and the lack of social safety nets provided by the state.
5 As defined by the ILO (1993: 3), a contributing family worker is “a person who holds a self-employment job in a market-oriented 
establishment operated by a related person living in the same household, and who cannot be regarded as a partner because 
of the degree of his or her commitment to the operation of the establishment, in terms of the working time or other factors 
to be determined by national circumstances, is not at a level comparable with that of the head of the establishment.”
6 The Millennium Project Task Force on Education and Gender Equality has developed an operational framework that 
distinguishes between three domains of gender equality: (a) capabilities (e.g. knowledge and health); (b) access to resources 
and opportunities (e.g. ownership of economic assets, employment, political representation); and (c) security (i.e. vulnerability 
to violence and conflict). This module focuses on the first two domains.
7 “Pay” is measured as wages or earnings received by employees, as opposed to income received through other forms of labour 
(e.g. self-employment).
8 Subgroups are identified through the following primary criteria: age, working-time status, and public-sector vs. private-sector 
employment (ILO, 2018b).
9 In comparison to the factor-weighted gender pay gap, the raw gender wage gap underestimates the magnitude of gender 
earning differentials in more than 70 per cent of the countries examined by the ILO (2018b).
10 This example should help in reading the values shown in Figure 8. In the world, the factor-weighted gender pay gap is 18.8 per 
cent. This means that women are paid 81.2 per cent of what men are paid. The same criterion should be used to interpret the 
other data.
11 Other aggregate indicators available are the Gender Inequality Index provided annually by the United Nations Development 
Programme in the Human Development Report; the Gender Gap Index introduced by the World Economic Forum in 2006; and 
the Social Institutions and Gender Index launched in 2009 by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
12 It is important to note that the impact on women, in turn, varies based on age, class, ethnicity, and other social stratifiers.
13 Even if the government manages to replace tariff revenues with alternative tax revenue (through either direct or indirect 
taxes), this shift may have a gender-differentiated impact.
14 Absolute costs refer to the level of production costs, which are used as a measure of efficiency. Lower production costs indicate 
higher efficiency. Relative costs are based on the concept of opportunity cost, which is defined as the value of the next-best 
alternative to the current use of the available economic resources. Lower opportunity cost indicates higher relative efficiency.
15 The principle of comparative advantage, which is at the core of standard trade theory, suggests that countries compete based 
on relative unit costs. In contrast, the concept of competitive advantage states that countries compete based on absolute unit 
costs (rather than relative costs).
16 As economies shift to the production of higher-value-added goods at higher capital intensity, feminization of employment 
may be reversed (i.e. “defeminization” of employment). Women, in fact, are preferred for low-productivity, low-pay jobs (Tejani 
and Milberg, 2010).
17 Higher gender wage differentials lead to lower export prices; in turn, per any given level of exports, a country can purchase 
fewer imports. 
18 These dimensions are referred to as “capabilities.”
19 Care work is particularly time-consuming and onerous in rural areas due to lack of services and infrastructure.
20 There is evidence that even when a crop is traditionally female-intensive, its commercial exploitation causes men to enter the 
sector and take over production and/or marketing.
21 A study for Uganda found that care activities accounted for half of the difference in productivity between male- and female-
owned plots, after taking into account factors such as increased access to inputs (Ali et al., 2016).
22 Agro-industries refer to those industries that use raw materials and/or intermediate products generated in the agricultural 
sector. According to the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC), agro-industry includes the food industry, 
beverages and tobacco; textiles, wearing apparel and leather-industries; wood and wood products, including furniture; paper 
and paper products, printing and publishing; and rubber products (Marsden and Garzia, 1998).41
41
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture 23 Green Revolution technologies refer to industrial agriculture technologies, which include higher-yielding seed varieties, more 
effective pesticides and fertilizers, and new irrigation systems. Initially developed by Norman Borlaug, an American scientist 
in Mexico in the 1940s, Green Revolution technologies spread worldwide in the 1940s and 1950s.
24 This potential effect needs to be balanced with the historical evidence. Because of trade liberalization and food policies that 
subsidize industrial agriculture to make food products cheap, agricultural production has become much more energy- and 
capital-intensive. It has proved increasingly difficult for small farmers in developing countries to remain competitive and 
many of them have been forced to move to urban areas.
25 Planetary boundaries refer to the environmental limits within which humanity can pursue development in a sustainable 
manner (Rockström et al., 2009).
26 According to the World Bank (2019), however, the extent of job losses due to automation is unclear, whereas there is evidence 
that technology leads to a net increase in labour demand.
27 New technologies do not necessarily refer to innovative techniques of production from a global perspective; they can also 
refer to modernization of production through the adoption of available technologies.
28 See Annex 1 for an explanation and examples of each technology.
29 Artificial intelligence refers to the use of computer systems or computer-controlled robots to perform tasks that traditionally 
require human intelligence.
30 Internet of Things technology refers to interconnection via the Internet of computing devices and digital machines capable 
of collecting and sharing digital information.
31 Big data analytics consists of the process of extracting information from “big data,” which are defined by the large and diverse 
types of data collected through a wide variety of sources (e.g. social networks, customer databases, mobile applications, 
business transactions, etc.)
32 See Annex 1 for a discussion of the Internet of Things.
33 Standards may cover a range of aspects related to production, including worker health and safety, environmental sustainability, 
product quality, or efficiency of the production process. One important category of mandatory standards for agricultural 
products is sanitary and phytosanitary standards, which cover human, animal, and plant life or health, and may specify how 
products should be handled or that they should not contain harmful substances (UNECE, 2019). Other examples of standards 
include fair trade, whether a product is organic, gender equality, or other social responsibility standards. The increase in 
standards has been exponential in recent years – with over 20,000 types, according to the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) – and is attributed to growing consumer awareness and the concern by lead firms in GVCs to ensure 
high quality and corporate reputation (Redden, 2017).
34 It is important to note that the impacts of these shifts may differ depending on the nature of economic participation. 
For example, although women as smallholder producers may lose out from such a change, women as workers in estate 
production may benefit in terms of better working conditions, pay, and stability of employment (UNECE, 2019).
35 The EIF is a multilateral organization that provides technical and financial support to the least-developed countries to 
enhance their participation in the international trade system.
36 The advantage of “outsider” status has been seen in other cases as well. For example, since the 1990s the growth of more 
lucrative employment opportunities in services and software in India that require English-speaking skills has provided job 
opportunities for women who had been excluded from traditional caste networks for finding jobs. As a result, among the 
lower castes, girls are now more likely to be educated in English than boys, because they are “free” from the social expectations 
that keep the boys locked into traditional, but less lucrative, career paths (Duflo, 2012).
37 Biodynamic farming is an approach to sustainable and organic farming that requires the application of very specific 
biodynamic preparations and allows access to lucrative niche markets (Clugston, 2014).
38 Agroecology exploits complementarities between different elements of nature (among crops, plants, soils, and animals). As 
examples, traditional poly culture bean, corn, and squash cropping can help enhance the yield of all of them; the squash 
controls weeds, and beans fix nitrogen (Gliessman, 2007). Aquaponics allows for combining aquaculture (raising aquatic 
animals in tanks) with hydroponics (cultivating plants in water) in a symbiotic environment (Somerville et al., 2003). Following 
the principles of agroecology, ecologically balanced agriculture can avoid the use of fertilizers and pesticides, support 
productivity, and build on local, diverse agrosystems (Shiva, 2013).
39 La Via Campesina, an international farmers’ movement started in the early 1990s to advocate for small-scale and sustainable 
farming, has placed gender issues (e.g. equality and human rights, economic justice, and social development) at the center of 
its agenda (Desmarais, 2003)
40 For example, the Mozambican Farmer’s Union, UNAC, has promoted agroecology to support as the conservation of native 
seeds and local systems of food production. Women play a key role in many of UNAC’s activities (Monjane, 2015).
41 The system of rice intensification (SRI) originated in Madagascar in 1980 and since then has spread worldwide. As explained 
by Stoop and van Walsum (2013: 8), “SRI is not a fixed package of practices but involves a set of interdependent agronomic 
principles. It is a system, and scientists are now looking at the fundamental plant physiological processes that can explain 
the SRI phenomenon. The practice of spacing single plants more widely enables plants to create more and stronger tillers and 
roots and become much more efficient in their uptake of water and nutrients and in utilizing solar radiation. The result is a 
crop that is more resilient to droughts, pests and diseases. Moreover, the combination of aerobic soil conditions and the use 
of organic fertilizer creates a favourable environment for interactions between roots and the soil’s micro-organisms – a factor 
that has been seriously neglected by modern farming methods and research.”
42 The definition of agriculture generally employed in these studies is limited to production and harvest activities. Also, 
due to significant data constraints, most studies simply compare only male- and female-headed households, which 
leaves out female farmers in male-headed households (Ragasa 2012). For an extensive discussion of measurement and 
data-related issues, see Doss (2015). A related issue is that the vast majority of existing studies focus on sub-Saharan 
Africa, where men and women are typically responsible for separate plots and agricultural activities are more gender-
differentiated, and hence sex-disaggregated data are easier to gather. A recent survey of the state of gender research 42
42
Trade and Gender Linkages: The Gender Impact of Technological Upgrading in Agriculture in agriculture found that 59 per cent of studies were conducted in sub-Saharan Africa, followed by 22 per cent in South 
Asia, 10 per cent in Latin America, and 6 per cent in Southeast Asia (Quisumbing et al., 2014).
43 The Internet user gender gap is measured as the difference between the Internet user penetration rates for males and 
females relative to the Internet user penetration rate for males, calculated as a percentage (ITU, 2019).
44 In the language of Module 3, women in agriculture may be “sources of competitive advantage” as paid or unpaid family 
workers contributing to the commercial activities of others or “underachievers of competitive advantage” as owners of 
their own businesses or as self-employed producers. In terms of women as sources of competitive advantage, producers use 
existing inequalities to cut costs and increase exports by hiring female workers for lower-wage, lower-skilled, casual, and 
flexible work. In terms of underachievers of competitive advantage, which is the most relevant case to the discussion here, 
gender inequality can be a barrier to the growth and competitiveness of women-owned businesses (UNCTAD, 2014a).
45 The evidence refers to nine sub-Saharan countries: Botswana, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, South 
Africa, Uganda, and Zambia (Beintema and Marcantonio, 2010).
46 According to Homann-Kee et al. (2013: 1), “ An innovation platform is a space for learning and change. It is a group of individuals 
(who often represent organizations) with different backgrounds and interests: farmers, traders, food processors, researchers, 
government officials etc. The members come together to diagnose problems, identify opportunities and find ways to achieve 
their goals. They may design and implement activities as a platform, or coordinate activities by individual members.”
47 Women who manage agricultural activities are found to face more challenges than men in hiring workers (Doss, 2001).
48 See A.2.3 in Annex 2 for a study on intra-household distribution of benefits from technology adoption.TRADE AND GENDER LINKAGES:
THE GENDER IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGICAL UPGRADING IN AGRICULTURE TEACHING MATERIAL ON
UNCTAD TEACHING MATERIAL ON TRADE AND GENDER LINKAGES: THE GENDER IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGICAL UPGRADING IN AGRICULTURE UNITED NATIONS
Layout and Printing at United Nations, Geneva – 2007134 (E) – September 2020 – 571 – UNCTAD/DITC/2020/1
ISBN 978-92-1-112984-7