/gid00020/gid00022/gid00019/gid00023/gid00006/gid00026
50 kg
TRANSFORMING 
A DIGITAL 
LANDSCAPE:  
7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR ProjectCONTENTS
TIMELINE  4
ACRONYMS  6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  7
INTRODUCTION  9
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES  11
Introduction  11
Country-Based Activities  12
Incorporating DFS into USAID Projects in Bangladesh  12
Expanding Government-to-Person 
Payments in Liberia  13
India’s Journey to a Cashless Society  14
Digital Financial Services for Agriculture in Burma  15
Assessments of DFS Ecosystems  16
Stakeholder Convenings and Knowledge Products  16
DIGITAL INCLUSION  21
Introduction  21
Country-Based Activities  22
Thailand  22
Mozambique  22
Extending Connectivity  26
Mobile Access Landscape Assessment  26
Collaboration with MIT  26
USAID Tools  27
Last-Mile Connectivity  27
Gender and ICT  29DEVELOPMENT INFORMATICS  33
Introduction  33
Mobile Data Collection  34
Real-Time Data for Adaptive Programming Initiative  34
Real-Time Data for Adaptive Programming 
Toolkits and Technical Assistance  36
Additional Research on the Use of Data in Development  37
USAID/Cambodia Mission Engagement  37
Open Data in Developing Countries  37
Responsible Data Guidelines for Digital Development  38
Ethnographic Studies  38
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT  
TO FEED THE FUTURE  41
Introduction  41
Mission Engagements and Technical Assistance  42
Accelerating Data-Driven Agriculture  
Development in Cambodia and Nepal  44
Enhancing a Digitally-Enabled Seed System in Nepal  45
Cambodia Digital Development for Feed the Future —  
Digital Model for NOURISH Condition Cash Transfers  45
Digital Agriculture Convenings and Knowledge Products  45
Guide to the Use of Digital Tools to Expand  
Access to Agriculture Insurance  46
Evidence-Building Case Studies  47
KNOWLEDGE AND INSIGHTS  49
Introduction  49
Principles for Digital Development  50
Digital Development Trainings and Forums  50
Digital Development Awards  50
Digital Download  51
LOOKING FORWARD  52
SELECT mSTAR RESOURCES  54THE mSTAR PROJECT
KEY STATS
Learning documents 
produced725
Countries 
worked in26
42,570
Onboarded users  
of digital services54,490
Views and downloads 
of learning productsEvents329
People who  
attended events17,826
Partners  
worked with101ANNUAL HIGHLIGHTS
 ÆmSTAR launches!
 ÆmSTAR holds the Mobiles! 
conference with 300 attendees.
 ÆBegan operations in Bangladesh to digitize implementing partner payment streams. It grew into a four-year effort that enrolled over 36,500 individuals, the majority of whom were women, into digital financial service accounts and helped USAID implementing partners (IPs) and their beneficiaries transact over $2.7 million digitally, created two new loan products, and worked with over 10 IPs.
 ÆInitiated work in Mozambique on groundbreaking research into optical character recognition, mobile access and usage, and agriculture. ÆHeld the Spotlight on Mobiles for Development in Asia Forum where 100 stakeholders gathered to discuss how to apply technology innovations in Asia to development projects. 
 ÆBegan work on the Mozambique mVacciNation study with Vodafone and GlaxoSmithKline to examine whether mobile health applications have an impact on increasing vaccination coverage. 
 ÆmSTAR/Bangladesh organized a Mobile Money Consultative Group, providing a platform for organizations to discuss opportunities, challenges, gaps and benefits of mobile financial services.
PUBLISHED
 ÆDigital Finance for Development: A Handbook for USAID Staff
 ÆIntegrating Mobiles into Development Projects ÆHeld the first Digital Development Training, kicking off a series of worldwide trainings attended by more than 224 USAID staff.
 ÆBegan collaboration with the Government of Liberia and USAID Liberia Mission, onboarding Ministry of Education staff onto digital salary payments. The activity eventually included Ministry of Health staff and enrolled 4,902 staff. 
 ÆMobilized the creation of the Principles for Digital Development and led the launch event, attended by over 250 participants. By 2019, the Principles have grown to over 150 signatories. 
PUBLISHED
 ÆElectronic Payment Systems 101 and 201 Briefers 
 ÆLaunched the mAccess Diagnostic Tool, providing access to mobile data for use in programming, policy and advocacy. YEAR 1 YEAR 2 YEAR 3
3
Events25
Events31
Events30
Products44
Products32
Products
Countries 
worked with4Countries 
worked with3Countries 
worked with11 Event attendees400over
Event attendees749
Event attendees967Over 7 years of implementation, from 2012 to 2019, the mSTAR project helped usher in the era of digital development. Led  by 
FHI 360 and funded by USAID, mSTAR worked closely with USAID’s Global Development Lab and Missions, implementing 
partners, civil society, local governments and the private sector. Across digital inclusion, digital financial services, development informatics, digital tools in agriculture and knowledge sharing, mSTAR accomplished a wide-range of successes that helped propel the digital development sector forward. See mSTAR’s major accomplishments below. 
63
Events77
Events86
Events45
Events136
Products208
Products208
Products93
Products
Countries 
worked with13Countries 
worked with11Countries 
worked with9Countries 
worked with8 Event attendees2,728
Event attendees6,014
Event attendees Event attendees5,647 1,590
 ÆIn partnership with USAID 
and the U.S. Treasury, organized the first Inter-Agency Financial Inclusion Forum.
 ÆBegan support for the Digital Development for Feed the Future (D2FTF) initiative, which included 15 activities
 ÆHosted the Harnessing the Data Revolution Resilience Summit.
 ÆLed the Mali Digital Financial Services convening, bringing together participants representing government, donors, implementing partners and private sector.
 ÆLaunched Catalyst: Inclusive Payments Ecosystem Partnership in India.
PUBLISHED
 ÆGuide to the Use of Digital Financial Services in Agriculture
 ÆBusiness Models for the Last Billion: Market Approaches to Increasing Internet Connectivity
 ÆBegan work with D2FTF to create a digitally-enabled seed system in Nepal. 
 ÆWith USAID and the U.S. Treasury, held the second Inter-Agency Financial Inclusion Forum and the first Financial Inclusion Forum Practitioners Day with over 200 attendees.
 ÆThe Catalyst activity held multiple partner convenings in India, bringing together more than 100 organizations and almost 150 participants to discuss financial inclusion for the poorest segments of India.
 ÆLaunched the Civil Service Agency Help Desk in Liberia, which enabled the government to better respond to questions regarding mobile money salary payments and built confidence in the service.
PUBLISHED
 ÆMozambique Mobile Access and Usage Study
 ÆOpen Data in Developing Economies: Toward Building an Evidence Base on What Works and How
 ÆHeld the second annual Digital Development Awards . 
 ÆHosted the Digital Financial Inclusion for Development Forum with over 200 attendees. 
 ÆWorked with GSMA to develop coverage maps for target countries for public distribution. 
PUBLISHED 
 ÆThe Role of Digital Financial Services in Accelerating USAID’s Health Goals 
 ÆDigital Farmer Profiles: Reimagining Smallholder Agriculture 
 ÆConsiderations for Using Data Responsibly at USAID 
mSTAR ENDS! 
 ÆExtended three small grants to digital ag grantees in Myanmar to integrate DFS into their services.
 ÆmSTAR staff led the launch of USAID’s WomenConnect Challenge.
 ÆHosted the Digital Development Forum, and awarded the first-ever Digital Development Awards.
 ÆIn India, mSTAR began a rural supply chain digitization activity with Intellecap, resulting in in over 600 women adopting digital payments.
PUBLISHED: 
 ÆGuide to the Use of Digital Tools to Expand Access to Agricultural Insurance
 ÆThe Role of Digital Financial Services in Accelerating USAID Education Goals
 ÆGender and ICT Survey Toolkit
 ÆGuides on real-time data and adaptive management
 ÆInvestor Landscape and Enterprise LandscapeYEAR 4 YEAR 5 YEAR 6 YEAR 7
The Mobile Solutions Technical Assistance 
and Research (mSTAR) Project is funded by USAID and led by FHI 360. This document is made possible by the generous support of the American people through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). The views expressed here do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Agency for International Development or the U.S. Government.TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
6ACRONYMS
BFS USAID Bureau for Food Security
CATI Computer Assisted Telephone Interview
CCT Conditional Cash Transfer
CDD Center for Digital Development
CIAT International Center for Tropical Agriculture
D2FTF Digital Development for Feed the Future
DD Digital Development
DevInfo Development Informatics 
DFID UK’s Department for International Development
DFS Digital Financial Services
DI Digital Inclusion
FtF Feed the Future
GOL Government of Liberia
GSMA Mobile Network Operator Industry Association
ICRISAT International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
ICT Information and Communication Technology
IP Implementing Partner
K&I Knowledge and Insights
Lab USAID’s Global Development Lab
MAUS Mobile Access and Usage Survey
MCHIP Maternal and Child Health Integrated Program
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MMSP Mobile Money Service Provider
MNO Mobile Network Operator
MOE Ministry of Education
MOH Ministry of Health
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
mSTAR Mobile Solutions Technical Assistance and Research
NASF Nepal Seed and Fertilizer Project
NOURISH Integrated Nutrition, Sanitation and Hygiene
OCR Optical Character Recognition
NGO Non-governmental Organization
PEPFAR U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
RTD4AM Real-Time Data for Adaptive Management
SFMP Sustainable Fisheries Management Project
SMS Short Message Service
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
USAID U.S. Agency for International DevelopmentTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Technological innovations have profoundly 
affected every sector of development. Today, approximately 1.4 billion people can access a mobile phone, 3.5 billion use social media, and internet availability continues to expand. Unfortunately, this digital revolution has not translated into equal access across countries and segments of society. Instead, a digital divide has arisen where vulnerable and marginalized populations in lesser developed counties are unable to benefit from the digital revolution, which could further exacerbate inequality. 
In 2012, when the Mobile Solutions Technical 
Assistance and Research (mSTAR) Project began, the potential for mobile solutions and technology to advance social and economic progress globally was becoming more apparent. The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) adopted this mindset early among the wider donor community and saw an opportunity to make a strategic investment. Funded by USAID and led by FHI 360, mSTAR was designed to be a broad, flexible and responsive technical assistance and action learning project, tasked with fostering the rapid adoption and scale-up of mobile solutions in developing countries. Over the past seven years of implementation, mSTAR has worked together with 26 USAID missions and 101 partners to help increase financial and market inclusion, as well as citizen empowerment and accountability in. As a result of mSTAR support, 329 learning events were held for 17,826 participants, 42,570 people were supported to use digital services and 725 learning documents were created and shared with end users and the development community. 
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
8
INTRODUCTION
The mSTAR Project was a cooperative 
agreement between USAID’s Global 
Development Lab (Lab) and FHI 360 to foster the rapid adoption and scale-up of digital technologies for development. mSTAR worked closely with four teams in the Lab’s Center for Digital Development (Lab/CDD) and additionally supported other teams and USAID missions with the objective of providing technical assistance and thought leadership for digital development (DD) built on evidence-based practices and standards to enable effective programming and learning. This program objective fed into the Lab/CDD’s aim “to advance the use of enabling technologies and data-driven approaches to empower underserved communities and improve the effectiveness of the development enterprise.” To achieve this, mSTAR operated dozens of concurrent activities around the globe. This report includes information about activities implemented over the seven-year life of project, including results and performance indicators. The report is organized according to five areas of focus: digital financial services (DFS), digital inclusion (DI), development informatics (DevInfo), Digital Development for Feed the Future (D2FTF) and knowledge and insights (K&I).
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LPmMoney
Back Select1 Balance
2 Withdraw money
3 Send money
4 Pay bill
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
9
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
10 TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
10
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
11NOTABLE ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER THE DFS WORKSTREAM INCLUDE :
1 Built capacity of local 
partners in India to support 
the cashless initiative, helped five local fintech firms expand their operations to serve lower-income merchants, and successfully implemented pilots to digitize payments in dairy and poultry value chains. 2 Launched the first digitally-
enabled agriculture credit product in Bangladesh and facilitated approximately $2.7 million in transactions among 36,515 individuals.3 Developed a digital payment 
system process with the Government of Liberia (GOL) and enrolled nearly 5,000 civil servants to regularly receive mobile money salary payments.
4 Developed a number of key publications including a first-of-its-kind learning document on incorporating 
DFS in health systems, called The Role of Digital Financial Services in Accelerating USAID’s Health Goals , 
as well as the Guide to the Use of Digital Financial Services in Agriculture , and Digital Finance Handbook.TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
11The application of DFS in the development sector is becoming increasingly widespread. DFS can contribute to inclusive economic growth by reaching a country’s most vulnerable and marginalized populations. Projects and donors use DFS as an opportunity to expand reach to populations that may not be financially included. mSTAR has supported USAID’s DFS team efforts to strengthen digital financial market systems and policies, while also contributing to DFS sector integration and learning. This has been achieved through several means. mSTAR has supported USAID in accelerating the use of DFS within sector-specific portfolios such as agriculture, health and education. mSTAR has created guides and briefs, conducted country assessments and organized workshops and convenings for agency staff and IPs. Additionally, mSTAR has led on-the-ground implementation of DFS projects in Bangladesh, Liberia, India and Burma. 
INTRODUCTIONDIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES 
View the Digitial Financial Services  StorymapTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
12COUNTRY -BASED ACTIVITIES
INCORPORATING DFS 
INTO USAID PROJECTS IN 
BANGLADESH
In Bangladesh, mSTAR supported 
the acceleration and adoption of 
DFS, including mobile money and agent banking, within the USAID mission’s programs from 2013 to 2017. As part of this engagement, mSTAR/Bangladesh established a grant fund that helped IPs transition from cash to electronic and mobile payments and awarded three grants to Dnet, Worldfish and Social Marketing Company , 
which focused on agriculture, health and education programs. mSTAR/Bangladesh also provided technical assistance to the Reading Enhancement for Advancing Development project implemented by Save the Children, assisting project staff with mobile financial services and short-term, on-demand assistance to USAID IPs in Bangladesh. mSTAR/Bangladesh successfully worked with local mobile financial service providers and advocated for bKash, the country’s largest provider, to waive its 0.5% bulk payment disbursement fee for all USAID-funded projects.
BANGLADESH  
HIGHLIGHTS
Assisted 36,500 individuals  – the 
majority of whom are women – into 
DFS accounts and helped USAID IPs and their beneficiaries transact over 
$2.7 million  digitally.
mSTAR/Bangladesh worked with Feed the 
Future (FtF) programs exploring opportunities for accelerating the use of digital payments within agricultural value chains. The project published an in-depth assessment as part of the short-term technical assistance provided to USAID’s Rice Value Chain project. The 
assessment looked at the financial behavior of key stakeholders along the rice value chain to identify opportunities to digitize payments. It also evaluated the potential scope of incorporating mobile money into the project’s payment streams
Engagement with the Private Sector 
mSTAR/Bangladesh collaborated with the private sector to develop tailored products for low-income segments and to find win-win solutions that are attractive to private actors and offer public good. As part of this initiative, mSTAR/Bangladesh launched the IFIC Amar Account as a pilot with IFIC Bank Limited and the International Rice Research Institute. The unique transactional account has both deposit and loan facilities bundled into a single account and is designed specifically for farmers. In addition, mSTAR/Bangladesh helped launch a near-field communications-enabled debit card tied to micro-credit for agricultural inputs for smallholder farmers with Bank Asia and the USAID Agricultural Extension Support Activity. A year after launching the products, mSTAR/Bangladesh had facilitated loan disbursements to more than 1,500 farmers.  
To disseminate knowledge and stimulate 
discussions across the mobile money ecosystem, including among USAID IPs, beneficiaries and mobile financial service providers, mSTAR/Bangladesh hosted a workshop series focused on topics related to mobile money and DFS. 22 workshops were held over the course of the project. A mobile money consultative group was also created. It met 12 times and now lives on under the United Nations Capital Development Fund.  
By the end of the engagement, mSTAR/
Bangladesh developed 75 knowledge products including technical reports, videos, and informational sheets on DFS, along with a monthly e-newsletter. Before closeout, an independent evaluation was conducted to assess mSTAR/Bangladesh’s impact on USAID-funded projects. Findings revealed that mSTAR/Bangladesh achieved a transaction target (total volume) that was 1.76 times higher than originally planned. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
13Additionally, the evaluation found that digitizing 
transactions as part of USAID/Bangladesh projects led to financial savings and reductions in disbursement processing time. The evaluation report can be found here. 
EXPANDING 
GOVERNMENT -TO-
PERSON PAYMENTS IN LIBERIA 
In 2009, the GOL committed 
to eliminating the use of cash 
in government transactions and passed the Public Financial Management Law and Ministry of Finance Regulation to create a legal framework for cashless transactions. After these commitments, USAID/Liberia and mSTAR supported the GOL to map payment flows of both person-to-government and government-to-person payments and identify optimal points to digitize. This initial engagement led to a larger two-year project to digitize salary payments for civil servants in the two largest ministries. 
LIBERIA HIGHLIGHTS
15 Liberian counties covered
61 large-scale events
4,870  GOL staffed enrolled in 
mobile  money
mSTAR/Liberia took the lead in convening stakeholders by facilitating a partnership with the GOL and Lonestar MTN, and later with Orange Mobile Money, the two in-country mobile money service providers. Government stakeholders included the Ministry of Education (MOE), Ministry of Health (MOH), Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, and the Civil Service Agency. The participation of all stakeholders was necessary to achieve success. mSTAR worked closely with these entities and the mobile money service providers (MMSPs) to design and implement a process for civil servants to enroll in mobile money salary payments. To prove a successful use case, the stakeholders began with an initial enrollment of MOE staff in Nimba County. This initial enrollment and successful payment helped jumpstart the scale-up of payments and the inclusion of the MOH into this payments option. mSTAR brought the MOH into the activity by achieving buy-in from senior leadership, conducting a study of MOH staff payments and how staff would react to this new system, and initiating and promoting collaboration among all stakeholders on a regular basis to continuously keep momentum alive.
mSTAR traveled with the staff from the Civil 
Service Agency, MOE and MOH, as well as MMSPs, to rural areas in all 15 Liberian counties and held 61 large-scale events inviting civil servants to enroll. From both ministries, 4,870  
staff enrolled by the end of the activity in April 2018.
mSTAR/Liberia also engaged in several 
important activities relating to DFS  
ecosystem-building: 
• Facilitated agreement on the memorandum of understanding between Liberian MMSPs and the GOL, which allowed the GOL to use the mobile money modality for salary payments. Initially, just Lonestar reached an agreement with the GOL. While this was a good start, the lack of competition was problematic. After more than a year of discussions, mSTAR brokered another agreement with a second MMSP , Orange Money, resulting in more options and better service for the MOH and MOE staff enrolled in the system. 
• Created a help desk at the Civil Service Agency to offer civil servants redress on mobile money problems. 
• Assisted the Central Bank of Liberia in writing the National DFS Strategy and MOH standard operating procedures for mobile money use in an emergency. 
During the final months of implementation, the project focused on sustainability and ensuring that the GOL was prepared to continue scaling up enrollment. As part of the handover, the TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
14mSTAR team developed a communications 
handover plan; organized three regional trainings for local GOL representatives, and two stakeholder sustainability workshops attended by more than 60 stakeholder participants; and regularly met and discussed handover with new political appointees. Before the project’s closeout, the GOL and private sector stakeholders publicly committed to continuing to drive this mobile money salary payment process forward.
INDIA’S JOURNEY TO A 
CASHLESS SOCIETY 
The government of India made a commitment to become the first cashless society and to digitize 
major transactions. In support of this, USAID made a significant commitment to support financial inclusion in India. This commitment focused on expanding merchant acceptance of digital payments, a critical and underdeveloped piece of India’s financial inclusion puzzle. USAID’s commitment filled an important gap in existing efforts to build a more inclusive digital finance ecosystem in India. 
mSTAR/India implemented the Cashless 
CATALYST project, targeting urban, second-tier cities, and a rural supply chain. The goal of CATALYST was to realize an inclusive digital economy in India by demonstrating and scaling a replicable, affordable and sustainable approach to expand the adoption and use of digital payments.  
mSTAR supported CATALYST in close 
collaboration with the Institute for Financial Management and Research. The overarching CATALYST design and implementation focused on two objectives: (1) to advocate for policies that promote adoption and use of digital payments and (2) to identify business models to scale up this approach. From inception through the end of data collection in November 2018, a total of 3,951 merchants and 2,026 consumers were on-boarded onto a digital payment platform, with 35,936 transactions made 
among them.CATALYST collaborated with policymakers by providing key insights to expert committees on integration of digital payments in various value chains, sharing findings from the pilots to the Joint Secretary at Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and producing a policy white paper for regulators on potential digital payments solutions to test.
CATALYST supported payment use cases 
implemented in the Jaipur Digital Payments Lab. The selected payment use cases were: (1) eMitra consumer-to-government payments, (2) dairy business-to-business and consumer-to-business payments, (3) consumer-to-business payments with small stand-alone businesses, (4) newspaper consumer-to-business subscription payments, (5) transit payments, (6) fast-moving consumer goods supply chain business-to-business payments, (7) customer-to-business payments among low-income populations, and (8) credit as a hook. Under each payment use case, CATALYST facilitated digitization of the value chain and payment processes, as well as onboarding of merchants, registration, training, and monitoring the digital transactions conducted between businesses and between consumers in a number of value chains. 
To respond to the second objective, CATALYST 
tested four business models on supply chain, fixed store, low-income cluster and roving merchants to validate whether there were viable cases for digital payments in each of those cases. To further increase adoption and use of DFS by merchants and/or consumers, in 2018 CATALYST launched a six-month incubator program for five fintech firms, all of which received grants to support the expansion of their services for lower income consumers and merchants in Jaipur. The incubatees are MeraPaper , Fingpay , Kaleidofin, PayBee, and 
PayNearby . 
Given the focus on generating lessons, CATALYST conducted a total of 17 partner convenings, developed 25 learning notes, two policy white papers, 16 blogs/op-eds, 21 user stories, five infographics and four newsletters, published on the CATALYST website. The knowledge products showcase TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
15the realities merchants face when deciding to go 
digital. CATALYST also published five reports highlighting mixed-method data collected to help CATALYST better understand the financial needs and patterns of a low-income population and share recommendations to overcome hurdles to adopting digital payment solutions. 
Female Farmer Inclusion in DFS in India 
To respond to USAID’s need to identify payment digitization opportunities with high potential to economically benefit women, mSTAR worked with Intellecap Advisory Services to investigate and test how DFS can be appropriately integrated into rural payment streams within the dairy, food and beverage, and poultry value chains to create more efficiency and transparency. 
Dairy Value Chain Pilot: In Odisha, a state 
in eastern India, mSTAR and Intellecap launched an ecosystem activity to digitize payments across dairy aggregators, payment banks, microfinance institutions and dairy farmers. As part of the pilot, banking points were established through “group associates” in rural villages, and more than 200 dairy farmers were trained in DFS and financial planning. At end-line, about 80 percent of women reported an increase in their income. 
Food and Beverage Value Chain Pilot: In 
Maharastra, a state spanning west-central India, mSTAR and Intellecap focused a pilot on creating a digital ecosystem for women entrepreneurs and workers in the food and beverage value chain. The pilot pulled together two groups of female entrepreneurs manufacturing food. The pilot used women digital agents to assist women in carrying out household and business transactions. Not only did more than 10 stores start selling the entrepreneurs’ food products, but also the product purchases were cashless. Moreover, product aggregators and partner organizations have, on their own, started to link the women’s groups to activities like packaging, generating employment in the rural areas. The natural occurrence of these follow-on activities demonstrates the success and local adoption of the pilot. Additionally, post-pilot program results showed that 75 percent of the participants increased their sales revenues due to digitization.  Poultry Value Chain Pilot: Focusing on rural women entrepreneurs in the poultry sector, mSTAR and Intellecap worked to digitize poultry income payments, improve access to credit and develop a local digital spending ecosystem. With a local women’s poultry cooperative, the pilot targeted 14 villages in Gumla District of Jharkhand and affected 370 women. An end-line assessment indicated that compared to the earlier process of visiting their nearest bank branch, 97 percent of the women poultry farmers witnessed a reduction in the time to withdraw cash. 
India’s DFS Journey Map 
To assess the adoption of digital payments by customers and small merchants and to track USAID’s investment in boosting the DFS ecosystem in India, mSTAR developed a DFS Journey Map for India. The map covers all digital payment scenarios and developments in India over a four-year period, including digital identity, private sector innovation, regulatory support/barriers and the government’s assistance in advancing toward a cashless society.  
DIGITAL FINANCIAL SERVICES FOR 
AGRICULTURE IN BURMA 
mSTAR/Burma support began in 2015 with an 
assessment to gauge the potential for DFS to improve productivity in four agricultural value chains: rice, sesame, pulses and aquaculture. mSTAR identified agriculture sector challenges, including poor infrastructure, limited formal financial services, market volatility, strong liquidity pressures and adverse weather. mSTAR then provided recommendations for how DFS could alleviate some of these challenges. Primary among them were promoting development of a robust DFS ecosystem, developing customer-centric products, facilitating product and model innovations, and ensuring efficient delivery of formal financial services through agents and digital accounts. 
Based on the findings and recommendations, in 
2018 mSTAR launched a small-grants program to support the integration of DFS into existing digital agriculture platforms in Burma. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
16Three grantees were selected under this 
activity. Village Link applied their grant funds 
to enable farmers to repay loans using the Htwet Toe mobile application. Greenovator  
enabled farmers to pay membership fees for the Myanmar Tea Association using the Green Way app and trained 1,344 of farmers on financial literacy. Tun Yat used their grant to integrate 
mobile money for equipment rental and easy-to-use loan applications to enable farmers to apply for small, digital loans for the services offered via an online marketplace.
DIGITAL 
TRANSACTIONS DURING PILOT
1,197  digital transactions 
MMK  45,374,580  in total digital 
transactions 
6,451 users participated in 
DFS training
ASSESSMENTS OF DFS ECOSYSTEMS
The mSTAR team supported local governments 
in assessing DFS ecosystems and provided recommendations to policymakers on how to boost DFS ecosystems and support inclusive economic growth. In Afghanistan, USAID activities included helping the Afghan government and financial institutions develop a legal framework to foster economic growth, generate employment opportunities, and work with mobile network operators to introduce and expand the use of financial services through mobile phones. Within this context, mSTAR conducted a landscape assessment and provided recommendations for strengthening and scaling DD programing and applications throughout USAID’s portfolio in Afghanistan. Additionally, mSTAR supported President Ghani’s policy coordination unit in drafting recommendations on creating a more inclusive electronic financial system in Afghanistan, digitizing civil servant salary payments and rolling out the Afghan digital identity system, e-Tazkira. In Mali, mSTAR collaborated with USAID/
Mali, the Government of Mali, development partners and the private sector to identify how the government could use DFS to achieve its development objectives. mSTAR conducted an assessment and payment streams mapping, which outlined opportunities and constraints to digitization. The assessment served as the foundation for a two-day seminar in Bamako attended by more than 140 stakeholders who included representatives of the Government of Mali, donor community, private sector and IPs. 
In East Africa, mSTAR assessed the case for 
mobile network operators (MNOs) to offer 
cross-border services, increasing the ease of transfers and the availability of food in deficit areas. The assessment examined improvements to integration, reduced barriers to trade and increased agricultural productivity by better connecting farmers to markets through mobile payment systems.
STAKEHOLDER CONVENINGS AND 
KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS 
mSTAR contributed to the growing body of 
knowledge on the integration of DFS in the development sector. mSTAR and USAID organized the first-of-its-kind Financial Inclusion Forum in 2015 and, based on the its success, held a second forum in 2016. Both forums were attended by representatives of U.S. and foreign governments, financial institutions, corporations and nonprofits. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew and Co-Chair of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Bill Gates, delivered opening remarks and together with participants explored ways to foster greater access to safe and affordable financial services. The second annual Financial Inclusion Forum in 2016 included an armchair chat with Wall Street Journal reporter Jacob Schlesinger, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew, USAID Administrator Gayle Smith, and International Monetary Fund Managing Director Christine Lagarde, speaking on behalf of strong regulatory environments, ensuring customer protections, and encouraging the public and private sectors to work together. This event also featured the first-ever Financial Inclusion Practitioners Day. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
17
Pathways  
to self-reliance
#DFI4DDespite 
advancements in 
financial inclusion there remains a dearth of proven financial services models that accelerate development priorities in health, agriculture/resilience, food security, women’s economic empowerment, governance and energy. In response, mSTAR and USAID 
organized a one-day convening to present the latest evidence and lessons learned in the advancement of priority development outcomes through DFS and to identify emerging DFS models and practices across the key development priorities. The one-day event, called Digital Financial Inclusion for Development 
Forum (DFI4D), was held in April 2019 and was attended by representatives from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, MasterCard Foundation, the Mix, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, Google, Facebook, and Beyonic, among others. Participants discussed and presented evidence-based projects and successful DFS practices from USAID missions, projects and private sector endeavors such as HERProject in Bangladesh, BBOXX in Rwanda and Kaleidofin in India. mSTAR also developed key guides, furthering the digital financial services sector. In 2014, mSTAR developed the Digital Finance Handbook, designed for USAID personnel to maximize the agency’s contribution to the growth of DFS in emerging markets.
 
Digital Finance  
for Development
A HANDBOOK FOR USAID STAFF
The document enables USAID and IPs to 
identify opportunities to use inclusive DFS in USAID programs. The handbook provides tools and guidance to project implementers and showcases how DFS contribute to inclusive economic growth. Additionally, mSTAR developed Mission Critical: Enabling Digital 
Payments for Development aimed at USAID and other government employees to guide them in engaging policymakers and regulators in emerging markets and advancing an enabling environment for digital payments.In partnership with USAID, mSTAR established the Digital Financial Services 
Community of Practice, which provided a platform for learning, innovation and peer-to-peer exchange, generating a “force multiplier” effect among agency staff and increasing the understanding and applicability of DFS in USAID priority sectors. As part of the community of practice, mSTAR supported the USAID DFS team in preparing a presentation for the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor meeting that stimulated dialogue among donors for increasing market-level coordination in DFS investments. 
mMoney
Back Select1 Balance
2 Withdraw money
3 Send money
4 Pay bill
mMoney
Back Select1 Balance
2 Withdraw money
3 Send money
4 Pay bill
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
18
Mission Critical:  
Enabling Digital Payments   for Development
A USAID OPPORTUNITY BRIEF
A guide for USAID and other government employees to engage with policy  
makers and regulators in emerging markets to advance financial inclusion
mSTAR has contributed to the development 
of new knowledge products about the use of DFS in agriculture, health and education sectors. Guide to the Use of Digital Financial 
Services in Agriculture, developed by mSTAR and USAID, is a tool for USAID’s FtF staff and IPs to accelerate FtF goals through DFS by reaching inclusive agriculture sector growth and improved nutritional status. The guide is meant to be a diagnostic tool that will help an IP or FtF staff diagnose and assess agriculture value chains to determine where and how DFS can help address specific agricultural challenges. The framework in the guide is based on four in-country assessments of FtF countries: Tanzania, Uganda, Ghana and Haiti. Through the development of the guide, mSTAR supported workshops for FtF IPs in Ghana and Uganda to disseminate assessment findings from their respective countries and to develop activity plans to incorporate DFS in their work. 
              SUSTAINABLY REDUCE GLOBAL POVERTY AND HUNGEREvidence suggests that there is a $430 billion short-
fall in serving this population’ s demand for finance . 
Farmers face a range of roadblocks in managing their 
farms as a business, from purchasing inputs, to accessing financial services, to storing and selling produce . Adv ancing Digital Financial Inclusion 
for Smallholder F armers
Smallholder farmers are the frontlines of ev ery de veloping 
country’s food suppl y.  They serv e as the linchpin in 
poverty-re duction strategies, such as Feed the Futur e. 
Howeve r, most farmers lack access to financial se rvices 
and products to enable them to in vest in their farms . Digital financial services (DFS)  present a 
promising oppo rtunity to address some of these pressing 
needs and complement USAID’s past and cur rent 
portfolio of work to achieve greater impact . 
ROADBLOCK  
Smallholder farmers cannot sa ve 
for long-term in vestments
DFS can enable: Savings products 
and se rvices ROADBLOCK  
Women disempo wered in 
decision-making in agriculture
DFS can enable: Impr oved access to  
markets and better control of fundsROADBLOCK  
Smallholder farmers not competitive  in commercial supply chains
DFS can enable: Digitizing payments throughout the 
value chain to low er costs for buy ers (and farmers) 
and increase price transparencyROADBLOCK  
Appropriate credit products don’ t exist for smallholder farmers
DFS can enable: Lower transaction costs to lend to smallholder farmers, making credit more  available
ROADBLOCK  
Cost of buying quality and quantity inputs 
is prohibitive and risky
DFS can enable: Increased purchasing po wer, 
reduced risk , decreased transaction costs ROADBLOCK  
Managing and mitigating weather risks to crops
DFS can enable: We ather-indexed microinsurance , 
purchase of weather risk-mitigating farm equipment 
(i.e., drip irrigation, climate re silient seeds)ROADBLOCK  
Limited ability to manage post-harvest loss and speculate for higher prices for ha rvests
DFS can enable: Access to storage facilities with inventory -based credit 
The Role of Digital Financial Services in
ACCELERATING  
USAID EDUCATION  GOALS
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
Another USAID priority is to identify ways to 
leverage benefits of DFS in education projects. In partnership with the USAID DFS team, mSTAR developed The Role of Digital Financial Services in Accelerating USAID Education Goals , 
a brief that demonstrates how the integration of DFS supports achievement of three strategic USAID goals for education: 1) improved reading skills for 100 million children in primary grades, 2) improved ability of tertiary and workforce development programs to generate workforce skills relevant to a country’s development goals, and 3) increased equitable access to education in crisis and conflict environments for 15 million learners. Based on the literature review and stakeholder interviews, mSTAR identified how integration of DFS in education projects supports achievement of all three education goals. The brief is a collection of examples and success stories that provides development practitioners with a good understanding of why DFS should be integrated in education projects and how best to do so.
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
18TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
19mSTAR and USAID also developed The Role of 
Digital Financial Services in Accelerating USAID’s Health Goals , a brief intended for global health 
practitioners and IPs. The document demonstrates how DFS catalyzes health results by supporting USAID’s health systems, strengthening core functions and strategic outcomes. It also shows how financial inclusion protects households and communities against financial shocks and catastrophic expenditures due to health-related expenses. Most importantly, the brief outlines practical applications of DFS in the health sector and provides readers with a collection of case studies and success stories. 
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/gid00020/gid00022/gid00019/gid00023/gid00006/gid00026
The Role of Digital Financial Services in
ACCELERATING  
USAID’s  HEALTH   
GO
ALS
One of the practical applications discussed in 
the brief is digitizing salary payments for health workers to support strengthening the health system workforce, reduce transaction costs and improve transparency and program governance. Additionally, distribution of beneficiary payments and incentives via digital platforms such as mobile money improves the speed, efficiency and transparency of payment delivery and provides sources for monitoring and evaluation to track beneficiaries’ use of health services and community health workers’ performance in real-time. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
19TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
20
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
211 In Mozambique, mSTAR 
conducted a mobile access 
and use study that revealed the ways Mozambicans use mobile technology. The insights from the study were used to inform FtF and Financial Sector Deepening Mozambique’s programming in the country.  2 mSTAR furthered the 
connectivity sector, publishing Business Models for the Last Billion: Market Approaches to Increasing Internet Connectivity  
and conducting a landscape of investors and investees in last-mile connectivity. 3 In 2019, mSTAR partnered 
with the Mobile Network Operator Industry Association (GSMA) to produce the first publicly-available tools with a high level of accuracy to assess mobile coverage and identify uncovered populations. 
4 mSTAR published both the Gender and ICT Survey Toolkit and the Gender and ICT Online Training and 
Curriculum. They have been featured by multiple groups, including the World Bank. The online training has been completed more than 1,500 times. NOTABLE ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER THE DI WORKSTREAM INCLUDE:TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
21The practice of DI includes fostering a more enabling policy and regulatory environment, identifying and supporting innovative business models, and providing relevant content to make technology accessible to underserved populations. mSTAR focused not only on the availability of mobile connection and technology, but also sought to support the ability of individuals, especially from marginalized and vulnerable segments of society, to afford mobile services and confidently use them. Therefore, under the DI workstream, mSTAR worked to identify the barriers that prevent individuals from accessing mobile phone services, conducted trainings on DD, and created a DD handbook and toolkit for measuring how uptake of and usage of information and communication technologies (ICT) differs by gender. INTRODUCTIONDIGITAL INCLUSION 
View the Digitial Inclusion StorymapTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
22COUNTRY -BASED ACTIVITIES 
THAILAND
In Thailand, mSTAR assisted USAID’s 
Regional Development Mission in Asia to identify places to include mobile solutions in their programming and 
develop staff and IP interest and capacity around DD in priority sectors. To help achieve this, mSTAR organized workshops, trainings and contests across the Asia Pacific region. In 2013, mSTAR led a one-day Mobile for Development Forum for local technology firms, MNOs, USAID IPs and donors. Due to the success of the one-day workshop in Bangkok, Thailand, mSTAR designed and facilitated a follow-on four-day Mobile for Development workshop for USAID staff and also wrote Integrating Mobiles into Development Projects . 
Integrating Mobiles into 
Development Projects
CLICK HERE TO START
This handbook was prepared for the U.S. Agency for International Development by 
FHI 360 and OpenRevolution as part of Associate Award AID-OAA-A-12-00073 
under the FIELD-Support Leader Award EEM-A-00-06-00001-00. It does not 
necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the U.S. Government.  
By Josh Woodard, Jordan Weinstock, and Nicholas Lesher
AUGUST 2014
To further boost and identify promising mobile solutions — including mobile service apps and other mobile technologies that can positively affect climate change, food security, health, governance and biodiversity in Southeast Asia — mSTAR organized mobile for development contests in 2014 and 2015. In 2014, three finalists were identified — Dimagi, Fanispan and Kmutt — focusing on health and forest 
sectors. In 2015, the finalists were Amader Daktar , Farmers Friend and Maymay, focusing 
on health and agriculture sectors. Capitalizing on the success of the workshop, training and two contests, mSTAR facilitated the Harnessing the Data Revolution for Resilience Summit in 2016 to catalyze a dialogue on how digital data can transform the design, implementation and monitoring of international development programs to support resilience capacities at various scales. The summit aimed to highlight both existing case studies and promising new approaches that use advances in data and technology to build resilience. With mSTAR support, USAID’s Regional Development Mission in Asia and the Rockefeller Foundation then co-sponsored the Digital Technologies for Resilience Workshop in 2017. The interactive workshop aimed to create a space where participants could share with and learn from like-minded peers who were effectively making use of digital technology to enhance resilience. Participants also explored new ideas and partnership opportunities to expand the scale of digital technology for resilience efforts. 
MOZAMBIQUE 
mSTAR technical and management assistance to USAID/Mozambique began in 2013. Support varied from assessment of mobile service use by 
Mozambicans to testing digital applications in the health sector. 
Digital Impact on Health and Agriculture 
in Mozambique 
In partnership with Innovations for Poverty 
Action, mSTAR conducted the mAgri study in 2013. The study’s two primary objectives were:
• To test if the introduction of mobile banking increases post-harvest saving and spurs pre-planting investment in farming inputs by reducing transaction costs. 
• To learn more about the target population and the technology (mKesh) at the heart of the intervention to identify potential implementation obstacles that might affect a larger, future scale-up of the study. 
The sample consisted of smallholder farmers with high poverty and low access to financial services. Study findings revealed that farmers who received a savings bonus through a mobile banking application increased their consumption of agricultural inputs. The study also found that mobile banking savings bonuses increase the probability of a farmer owning and using a bank account. These results are positive for programs 
and policymakers interested in increasing agricultural investment through savings bonuses or interest delivered through a mobile money platform. 
In 2015, mSTAR conducted an evaluation 
of the Maternal and Child Health Integrated Program (MCHIP), USAID’s flagship global program for maternal, newborn and child health. MCHIP was implemented in more than 40 countries and focused its efforts on the reduction of maternal, newborn and child morbidity and mortality, contributing to the achievement of Millennium Development Goals 4 (reduce mortality of children under five), 5 (reduce maternal mortality), and 6 (combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases). In Mozambique, the project was implemented at the national level, with model maternity wards in all provinces. The aim of the mSTAR evaluation was to assess MCHIP/Mozambique’s performance and its contributions to the USAID/Mozambique Integrated Health Office’s results framework. USAID/Mozambique requested assistance from mSTAR and its partner, Maraxis, to use mobile data collection methods, but the evaluation highlighted challenges with mobile data collection at the local level due to the lack of available infrastructure. 
mSTAR also conducted the mVacciNation 
study from 2013 to 2018 in Mozambique. 
As part of the study, mSTAR, USAID, Gavi, Vodafone and the University of Cape Town evaluated mVacciNation, a mobile phone application that followed the supply and demand chains for vaccines in Nampula Province, Mozambique. The goal of the study was to identify if the use of mobile health applications increases vaccination coverage. The study also sought to test different SMS and voice call reminders as a part of the application, calculate the cost-effectiveness of the application, and assess the impact of the application on health system processes. Preliminary findings revealed challenges with public-private partnership and buy-in from health personnel to use the tool or participate in the study.
Once completed, the mVacciNation application 
was rolled out in 12 health facilities. However, due to limited uptake of the application at these treatment health facilities, the intervention was cancelled in 2017. As a result, endline data collection to measure the effectiveness of the application was not completed and all TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
23 KC Nwakalor/Digital Development CommunicationsTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
24evaluation activities were terminated. The early 
cancellation illustrated the importance of securing buy-in from public health staff at facilities sampled, conducting more in-person training and providing guidance when introducing new technology for public health officials. 
Mobile Access and Usage Survey (MAUS) 
Before 2016, there was little available information about mobile phone use, ownership and reception by province and district in Mozambique, which made it challenging for the Mission and IPs to integrate technology in their projects. To help address this gap, mSTAR conducted MAUS, implementing a household survey and computer-assisted telephone interviews (CATIs) in the provinces of Manica, Nampula, Tete and Zambezia. To conduct the study, mSTAR again partnered with Maraxis. In the process of conducting the MAUS, mSTAR sought to leverage funding from additional donors, but securing the funding led to implementation delays and revisions to the study’s sampling frame. mSTAR worked with all stakeholders to accelerate the study timeframe with the appropriate sampling once funding was secured.
The Household Survey
mSTAR completed a household survey, employing a stratified multistage sampling design to obtain a representative respondent population in four target provinces in Mozambique. The sample covered 2,417 households, with approximately 535 interviews per province. The total number of adult respondents and other household members was 4,917. The objectives of the survey were to:
1. Determine access to mobile phones and services, in the four target provinces
2. Describe patterns of mobile phone use in the four target provinces
3. Identify the barriers to access and use of mobile phones and servicesThe household survey revealed that coverage 
of and access to mobile phones were generally good. For example, 82 percent of respondents reported that mobile coverage was available in their community, and 61 percent reported that they had used a mobile phone in their lifetime. Additionally, 18 percent reported accessing the internet within the past year. It is important to highlight that in the four target provinces women were 22 percent less likely than men to be a mobile phone user. In Manica, a province with good coverage and high mobile use, only 15 percent of females reported access to the internet compared to 42 percent of men. All respondents reported comfort using phones (voice as well as SMS features), and 42 percent of them used their phones daily. The majority of the respondents valued access to information through mobile phones, demonstrating an opportunity for IPs and donors to use mobile technology to disseminate information and reach vulnerable populations. Data also revealed a substantial digital divide by gender in Mozambique, which development practitioners must consider to ensure DI.
   
 
  
Mobile Acces and Usage Study 
in Mozambique 
 
July 21, 2016 Mozambique Mobile Access and 
Usage Study  
Household Survey Results 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Dr. Daan Velthausz & Dr. Rotafina Donco  
 
a Donco  
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
25CATI
In partnership with mSTAR, Maraxis conducted 
experimental CATI research, which consisted of two rounds of interviews, with allocation of participants into one of three treatment groups:
• Group 1 – participants were not contacted 
• Group 2 – participants received a weekly SMS reminder
• Group 3 – participants received a weekly SMS reminder and an airtime incentive 
The objectives of CATI survey were to:
1. Describe patterns of mobile phone use
2. Measure changes in mobile phone use among active users
3. Test the impact of SMS reminders and incentives (air credits) 
CATI enumerators were based in a Maputo call center and conducted interviews with thousands of active mobile users in the target provinces in February (baseline) and June (endline) of 2016. The majority of mobile phone users accessed through CATI methodology were well-educated, young, urban, and male — 90 percent of them owned the phone they were using. As with the household survey, CATI research revealed solid mobile network coverage in the four provinces, but 39 percent of CATI respondents had swapped their SIM cards for better reception. Only one-third of respondents had access to internet and of those, 10 percent more men than women had access. 
The CATI survey demonstrated 
that weekly reminders, together with incentives like airtime, increased retention by approximately six percent. 
The CATI methodology was relatively low cost 
and quick, which helped reach respondents from a wide geographic area. Findings demonstrated that sending only weekly SMS messages as reminders to survey respondents did not increase subsequent survey retention rates. When SMS reminders were coupled with airtime incentives, retention increased by approximately six percentage points, a statistically significant increase. mSTAR recommended that development practitioners conduct additional research to explore and compare mobile phone-administered interviews to face-to-face interviews with the same study respondents, looking into reasons behind the gender digital divide.  
To disseminate study findings, mSTAR held 
an event in Mozambique in September 2016, developed an infographic and produced two blogs, The First Step in Developing Effective 
Mobile Programs: Understanding the Landscape,  
and Mobile-based Surveys: Can You Hear 
Me Now? 
MOZAMBIQUE MOBILE  
ACCESS & USAGE STUDY
As an increasing number of people 
access mobile services across Mozambique, private and public actors alike are recognizing opportunities to apply mobile technology to accelerate development outcomes. 
While the opportunities are immense and quickly 
expanding, development and humanitarian practitioners often lack a detailed understanding of who is using mobiles and how. Without data on key populations, designing effective and efficient programs able to take advantage of the mobile opportunity remains a challenge. T o address this gap, USAID/Mozambique and DFID, through DAI’s Financial Sector Deepening project, commissioned mSTAR at FHI 360 to conduct a multi-faceted Mobile Access 
and Usage Study (MAUS). Through two surveys, 
MAUS examined the availability and accessibility of mobile technologies and the dynamic ways they are being used in the daily lives of Mozambicans. OBJECTIVES
MAUS employed a collaborative design 
process with donors, government and MNOs to develop and conduct two complex surveys. The study collected  data in the four target provinces of Manica, Nampula, T ete and Zambezia.   The surveys aimed to: 
1.
3.2.Determine  access to mobile  
phones & services
4.Identify  barriers to access & usage
Describe patterns of mobile phone usage
Measure changes in mobile phone usage among 
a panel of active users over time
5.Test the impact of SMS reminders and incentiveson participant retention rates
COMPUTER-ASSISTED TELEPH ONE “CATI” SURVEY
The CATI survey featured remote data collection using live enumerators and dedicated software for dialing phone 
numbers and capturing responses digitally. Based in a Maputo call center, enumerators conducted interviews with thousands of active mobile users over the phone in February (baseline) and again in June (endline).
15,000
mobile numbersIn baseline collection, data 
collectors called nearly
and completed approximately
3,000
callsT o examine the effectiveness of common methods 
used to retain participants in surveys over time, the system placed each surveyed user into one of three groups. No contactGROUP 1 GROUP 2
Received SMSGROUP 3
Received SMS + 
airtime incentive+ 
MT
During endline collection, enumerators used the same questionnaire as the baseline calling to see if usage had changed over time and gauge respondent perceptions of the survey methodology. 
This product is made possible by the generous support 
of the American people through the  United States Agency for International Development (USAID). The contents are the responsibility of  FHI 360 and do not reflect the views of USAID  
or the US Government.
CONTACT USFIND OUT MORE 
mstarproject.wordpress.com
mSTAR_Project@FHI360.orgmSTAR_Project 
Mateus Augusto
Mozambique Activity ManagerEmail: maugusto@fhi360.orgHannah SkellymSTAR Program ManagerEmail: hskelly@fhi360.orgManica Nampula Tete Zambezia
Percentage of adult 
population  that has 
ever used a mobile phone
Percentage of mobile 
users using their phone 
on a daily basis
Percentage of adult 
population  that owns 
a mobile phone
Percentage of adult 
population  that access 
the  internet via mobileThe household survey employed traditional face-to-face interviews and 
collected data digitally with tablets. Enumerators interviewed a representative sample of adults on their access and use of mobile phones, as well as use by other members of the household.
MOBILE USAGE ACROSS PROVINCESHOUSEHOLD SURVEY
86%
84%63%
55%58% 46%
83% 59% 41% 30% 60% 38% 32% 20%
42% 15% 20% 13% 22% 14% 19% 13%85% 80%
Percentage of users that have ever:
94%
31%23% 84%32% Used voice
Used SMS
Sent moneyReceived money
Used social mediaHOUSEHOLD SURVEY SNAPSHOT OF RESULTS 
BARRIERS TO ACCESS  
AND USAGE
Among non-users, cost is the most 
commonly cited barrier
85%
cite cost of 
handset26%
cite the cost  of airtime
Lack of access to electricity  is the 
second major barrier to use 
All Provinces21%
Zambezia47%2892038726of respondents reported coverage in their village82%
of phone owners can send an SMS from their home95%Mobile phone usage of the CATI respondents: Call Statistics:
95%
own a phone47%
of the panel completed a second interview at endline20%
of all calls resulted in a successful  
interview at baseline
51%
dual SIMCATI SURVEY SNAPSHOT OF RESULTS  
25%
smartphone32%
have a mobile 
money accountMT
Digital Solutions for Health
In addition to conducting research and 
evaluation, mSTAR worked with the President’s Malaria Initiative, USAID/Mozambique and the Government of Mozambique to enhance the timeliness and quality of select malaria TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
26commodity stock data used for decision-making 
in stock management. The President’s Malaria Initiative conducted a malaria commodity stock reporting activity in 2017 and aimed to develop the SMS messaging platform, RapidPro, to enable staff to report weekly stock levels for malaria commodities at the district, health facility, and community health worker levels in Zambezia province. The platform sent customized reports to data users and provincial decision-makers. The final report demonstrated that SMS reporting of commodity levels worked well in this specific context. Data reporters were eager to respond to requests for reports. Most reporters made zero or only a few mistakes, and the alert message and supervisor involvement triggered an alert to submit on time. Over 26 weeks, 441 of 661 requested submissions were completed. The first missed submission was not until week six when staff turned over. Community health workers responded quickly using their own phones. They were much faster and made fewer mistakes than the health facility and warehouse reporters. 
From 2016 to 2017, mSTAR implemented the 
Mozambique PEPFAR optical character recognition (OCR) activity and supported PEPFAR and USAID/Mozambique to identify technology solutions capable of enhancing the timeliness and quality of HIV and health data routinely collected in health facilities throughout the country. mSTAR conducted primary research to recommend specific OCR technology solutions and developed guides for recommended solutions to ensure that healthcare workers have the appropriate information to digitize health registries. mSTAR made recommendations on how the MOH might update its routine data collection forms at the health-facility level to enable OCR use at a national level.EXTENDING CONNECTIVITY 
MOBILE ACCESS LANDSCAPE 
ASSESSMENT
In 2013, mSTAR completed a landscape 
assessment of how the development community and wider mobile industry/ecosystem define and address the key and persistent barriers to DI and access to technology. This assessment informed an engagement strategy for how USAID can best use its resources and global presence to facilitate scalable digital solutions that meet the needs of its development beneficiaries. mSTAR findings identified three enablers that the mAccess team at USAID would be well positioned to support: relevant content, digital literacy, and cultural acceptability of mobile use. The mobile access landscape assessment also proposed partnership with complementary corporations and organizations, such as:
• MNOs that can bring infrastructure, devices and distribution mechanisms 
• Private sector players like Cisco and Microsoft that can bring specialized knowledge from their core business as well as corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiatives 
• Other donors to bring additional funding and develop relationships at all levels
COLLABORATION WITH MIT
To further enhance DI and raise awareness of the issue, mSTAR partnered with MIT’s Innovations journal to design and coordinate a special issue, Digital Inclusion: The Vital Role of Local Content in 2014. mSTAR facilitated a collaboration between USAID, academia, industry and nonprofits to feature cases authored by leading academics, globally recognized executives and political leaders. The special issue included articles on building a foundation for DI, inequitable distributions of internet geographies, a social network for farmer training, and other related analyses and perspectives on digital policies developed by experts such as Mark Surman, Christopher Burns, Mark Graham, Matthew Guilford. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
27
USAID TOOLS
From 2014 to 2018, mSTAR continued to work 
on developing a suite of resources and toolkits to address the digital divide. The mAccess Diagnostic Tool was created in partnership with Research ICT Solutions and meant to allow comparison between mobile ecosystems across countries. The tool is particularly powerful when used to identify obstacles to lower mobile prices. It links a set of indicators that tell a story about the health of the mobile sector and where the most effective intervention should be targeted. It is designed to be user-friendly and web-based so that USAID missions can use it to assess the mobile access ecosystem in targeted countries, regions or populations. The diagnostic tool is different from other similar tools because it interprets indicators on its own, analyzes links among indicators, allows users to define which benchmark countries to include and allows comparison and support of analysis. 
mSTAR developed a user manual to accompany 
the diagnostic tool; the manual is designed to help USAID staff and IPs use the diagnostic tool either to determine what steps need to be taken to create a conducive mobile ecosystem or how mobiles may be integrated into USAID programs. The toolkit was tested with 213 users from USAID/Washington as well as missions to help mSTAR identify changes needed and update the toolkit to make it more useful for the agency. 
LAST-MILE CONNECTIVITY
In 2016, mSTAR led a landscape assessment called Business Models for The Last Billion: 
Market Approaches to Increasing Internet Connectivity . In collaboration with Resonance, 
the landscape assessment identified and analyzed innovative business models and technologies that expand digital access and inclusion for poor or marginalized populations worldwide. The report was developed after a literature review and conversations with more than 100 industry and technology leaders, entrepreneurs, investors, government officials and development practitioners. It focused on low-cost business models that can enable the world’s lowest income consumer to participate in the emerging digital economy. One of the key findings was that existing models have succeeded to some extent but face challenges when scaling because of lack of early-stage financing, limited partnership opportunities and unfamiliar or restrictive regulations. The assessment also provided suggestions for programs and pilot activities to test and use these business models and technologies. 
BUSINESS MODELS FOR 
THE LAST  
BILLION:
MARKET APPROACHES TO  
INCREASING INTERNET  
CONNECTIVITYTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
28In 2016, mSTAR disseminated findings at 
a launch event attended by more than 60 attendees from the development sector. The majority of attendees strongly agreed that the report helped them to identify new ideas and business models to ensure connectivity and connect the unconnected. 
From 2017 to 2018, mSTAR worked with 
USAID’s DI team to implement activities enabling investment in last-mile connectivity opportunities, referred to as the Last-Mile Connectivity Initiative. mSTAR’s approach was to work simultaneously on several fronts, taking advantage of opportunities where and when they arose, and establishing and cultivating diverse partnerships and connectivity ventures. mSTAR supported three main components of the initiative: 
1. Building awareness and increasing the availability and accessibility of information on the financial and social opportunities presented by businesses providing connectivity that are both low-cost and profitable.  
2. Highlighting successful last-mile businesses and generating matchmaking opportunities between potential investees and investors.  
3. Exploring and encouraging new entry by investment actors and avenues for providing risk capital to enable promising, early-stage innovations.  
mSTAR engaged in several impact investment forums, including international conferences to raise awareness of the investment case. mSTAR organized sessions at Transformational Business Network Asia, SANKALP Asia, Asia Venture Philanthropy Network, and Social Capital Markets. The primary objective of the sessions at these road show events was to raise awareness of the importance of private sector engagement and impact investment in last-mile connectivity. 
mSTAR also partnered with Intellecap to 
develop a white paper, Investing to Connect: A Framework for Assessing the Commercial Opportunity and Social Impact of Mobile and Internet Connectivity , on financial and social key performance indicators for last-mile voice and internet connectivity. This paper targeted both enterprises and investors, including traditional and a growing wave of impact investors, to create a common language and set of metrics related to connectivity. More than 30 stakeholders with expertise in areas such as investment, technology and enterprise models related to last-mile connectivity provided insights to guide the development of the paper. An advisory panel of experts, including the International Telecommunication Union, GSMA, DIFD, Asian Development Bank, and multiple connectivity enterprises reviewed a draft of the report to offer early feedback and incorporate suggestions for inclusion. 
INVESTING TO CONNECT
A framework for assessing the commercial opportunity and social 
impact of mobile and internet connectivity 
In 2018, mSTAR continued working on the 
Last-Mile Connectivity Initiative and partnered with GSMA to produce and publicize multilayer maps depicting mobile coverage areas. These maps are publicly available and can serve as a trusted resource for coverage information. Projects that implement technology platforms can use the maps to find areas where coverage does not currently exist, making them ideal for investment. The maps contain both mobile coverage and sociodemographic data to assist IPs and USAID missions in designing projects TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
29and to provide additional information to 
potential investors. 
GSMA produced five coverage maps: Rwanda, 
Zambia, Cote D’Ivoire, Nigeria, and Liberia.  
The development of the coverage maps is one of the best examples of how partnership with local MNOs and IPs can benefit marginalized communities. 
Another objective of the partnership was 
to conduct research in areas where mobile internet infrastructure was being delivered to determine the social and economic impact of the investment. Baseline data (quantitative and qualitative) were collected at locations where there was an opportunity to collaborate with an operator deploying rural mobile internet connectivity. GSMA is now working with additional partners to conduct this work in Uganda or other appropriate sites yet to roll out 3G. 
GENDER AND ICT 
A common misperception is that digital technologies are increasing inclusion of marginalized and vulnerable populations. While true in some contexts, in many others, cultural, social, economic or other barriers restrict women’s ability to access important services such as education, health care, agriculture and finance. 
In 2015, to guide the USAID DI team’s future 
investments in reducing the gender digital divide, mSTAR drafted a gender and ICT strategy. The aim of the strategy was to understand the barriers to women’s access and use of digital products, to determine strategies to increase the number of women and girls with access to technology, and to integrate DI activities more fully with other programs at USAID.  At the same time, mSTAR brought together a group of more than 20 thought leaders from tech companies, UN organizations, MNOs, consulting firms, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), project implementers, donors and policymakers for a half-day roundtable discussion on key barriers to addressing the gender digital divide in India. Participants identified cost, network quality and coverage, security and harassment, operator/agent trust, technical literacy and confidence, locally relevant content, social norms, SIM registration and perception of usefulness as drivers of the gender digital divide across the globe. Participants suggested that promoting use cases can be one of the more promising approaches to overcome issues around perception and usefulness and to reduce the gender digital divide. 
After the gender and ICT strategy was created 
and roundtable discussion held, mSTAR developed the Gender and ICT Survey Toolkit  
in partnership with USAID’s DI team. The goal of the toolkit is to provide development practitioners, governments, researchers and service providers with necessary tools, practical resources and guidance on how to collect relevant data on women’s access to and use of mobile phones and other connected devices and how to construct landscape assessment of women’s DI in the context of their own programs. Beyond simply gathering the data, users will learn how to understand the implications of landscape assessments and apply lessons for program or product design. The toolkit was launched in 2017 via a series of webinars and live events. More than 250 experts and implementers attended the toolkit launch events and provided overwhelmingly positive feedback on the “eye-opening” and “inspiring” content and sessions. 
Gender and 
Information 
Communication 
T echnology (ICT)
SURVEY  
TOOLKIT
* *TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
30To further ensure that USAID IPs and missions 
used and applied the toolkit in their projects and portfolio, mSTAR conducted customized trainings and design sessions with users. For example, in 2017, mSTAR staff conducted a series of workshops and planning sessions with the USAID/Uganda Mission to equip agency staff and partners with knowledge on how to understand and assess the gender digital divide. As part of the engagement with USAID/Uganda, mSTAR collaborated with the USAID CDD team to develop a list of recommendations for the Mission and local IPs. The recommendations urged Mission stakeholders and IPs to integrate a common language on gender and ICT and DD across all project appraisal documents, to pursue direct implementation of the Gender and ICT Survey Toolkit through existing activities, assign Mission points of contact to Ugandan government ICT organizations and aggregate demand for mobile-phone-based tools and platforms across Mission activities. 
Also in 2017, mSTAR partnered with USAID’s 
DI team and Panoply Digital to develop the Gender and ICT Online Course. The goal of the online course was to guide USAID staff, IPs and other stakeholders in integrating gender and ICT in programming. This curriculum provides participants with both a knowledge base for effectively incorporating gender and ICT into their programming and reviews the importance of thinking about gender when designing an ICT intervention, thereby contributing to progress toward USAID development outcomes.
The course presents three modules that provide participants with an understanding of key gender and ICT considerations when designing initiatives, projects and products with digital components. The course incorporates interactive content, including quizzes on key lessons, and is based on curriculum-design best practices. Staff at USAID can receive professional certification for completing the course.
Finally, mSTAR’s support of gender and 
ICT activities also included staffing for the WomenConnect Challenge. From 2018 to 2019, mSTAR’s director of the WomenConnect Challenge worked with USAID and IPs to successfully launch the challenge in its first round. More than 500 applications were received from 89 countries. Nine winners were selected who worked across 13 countries. The second round of WomenConnect Challenge is launched to support Women’s Global Development and Prosperity initiative.  
WOMENCONNECT 
CHALLENGE WINNERS:
1. AFCHIX
2. Equal Access International
3. Gram Vaani
4. Humanitarian OpenStreetMap 
5. Innovations for Poverty Action
6. Institute for Financial Management 
and Research 
7. Mali Health
8. GAPI and Bluetown
9. ViamoTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
31
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
32
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
331 Together with TechChange, 
mSTAR developed Mobile 
Data Solutions — a live, facilitated online course focused on using mobile data collection to improve the quality and efficiency of research and evaluation in development projects. 2 mSTAR and partners 
launched a real-time data for adaptive management initiative to test how real-time data systems can create a more efficient and responsive approach to development. 3 mSTAR worked with USAID 
and partners to develop and launch the Considerations for Using Data Responsibly at USAID . KEY ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER DEVINFO WORKSTREAM INCLUDE:TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
33The ability to access current and relevant data can empower decision-makers to adjust their programs based on what is and is not working. Digital data collection tools can rapidly clean, aggregate and share information; eliminate errors; perform powerful analysis; and produce compelling visualizations for more adaptive management. mSTAR supported USAID’s Development Informatics (DevInfo) team in developing tools, conducting assessments and building the body of knowledge related to ICT use in data collection and decision-making. Missions, bureaus and implementers have benefited from innovative mobile data demonstration cases designed for scale, policy reform to incorporate mobile data solutions into USAID programs, and capacity building around mobile data collection and use among USAID staff and implementers.
While improved data collection and 
management offers opportunities to maximize project outcomes, it can also pose increased risks related to privacy, data ownership, security and consent. mSTAR and partners supported USAID in developing the Considerations for Using Data Responsibly at USAID , which 
provides tools for identifying risks associated with data. INTRODUCTIONDEVELOPMENT INFORMATICS 
View the DevInfo StorymapTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
34MOBILE DATA COLLECTION 
To contribute to the growing body of knowledge 
about mobile data, in 2013 mSTAR partnered with TechChange to develop a mobile data course, called Mobile Data Solutions. This live, facilitated online course focused on using mobile data collection to improve the quality and efficiency of research and evaluation in development projects. This course was offered in 2013 and 2014. The online course consists of four modules:
1. Introduction to Mobile Data Solutions
2. Project Design
3. Implementation
4. Data Analysis, Visualization and Sharing
As a follow-up to the courses, mSTAR worked closely with TechChange and experts from USAID’s DevInfo and DD teams to convert the module into a self-paced online course. The course is available on the TechChange website and was made available on USAID University in March 2015. 
Additionally, mSTAR published Paper-to-
Mobile Data Collection: A Manual to help USAID missions and IPs engaged in monitoring and evaluation make informed choices on transitioning from paper and pen to mobiles. The manual was launched at the USAID West Africa Training in January 2015. Three major topic areas covered in the manual are an introduction to mobile data collection and the benefits it can offer, how to evaluate the suitability of mobile data collection tools for a given project, and how to successfully build the capabilities needed for transitioning to mobile data collection.
paper-to-mobile  
data collection:
a manual
REAL-TIME DATA FOR ADAPTIVE 
PROGRAMMING INITIATIVE 
In partnership with the DevInfo team, starting 
in 2016 mSTAR worked to create a more adaptive and participatory approach to development in complex settings. The Real-Time Data for Adaptive Management (RTD4AM) approach tests how real-time data systems can create a more efficient and responsive approach to development. The goal of the initiative was to create an “applied toolbox” for mission staff and IPs to increase their use of adaptive management. 
In 2017, mSTAR and partner Institute of 
Development Studies finalized three public-facing reports serving as the culmination of the first phase of extensive research and strategic input from the Practical Adaptation Network, comprised of representatives from IPs, USAID, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and private tech companies. The reports include: 
1. Bridging the Gap: How Real-Time Data Can Contribute to Adaptive Management in International Development.  This briefing 
paper summarizes findings from the first phase of research that compromised 56 interviews and a literature review of 120 TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
35books, papers and articles. The paper defines 
real-time data systems for development and addresses important questions like how to implement real-time data systems for development work and how real-time data contribute to adaptive management. The key highlight of the research is the list of identified benefits of real-time data systems for development. Benefits noted in the brief include that real-time data enables an understanding of new voices and making rapid and timely responses, optimizes sharing collective learning and perceptions, and aids in adapting and scaling new business models. The paper set the foundation for later research that addressed when, where  
and how real-time data systems can contribute to  adaptive management in international development.  
 
Bridging the Gap: 
How Real-Time Data Can Contribute to Adaptive Management in International  Development
 Bridging the Gap: 
How Real-Time Data Can  
Contribute to Adaptive Management 
in International Development
2. Bridging Real-Time Data and Adaptive 
Management: Case Study Report.  After the 
initial research, Bridging Real-Time Data and Adaptive Management: Case Study Report focused on addressing research questions such as when, where, and how real-time data systems can contribute to adaptive management practices. The research team used an evidence-based approach, based on literature review, interviews with experts, workshops, and four country case studies. The study evaluated four case studies in four distinct areas of development work: mobile nutrition through M-Posyandu in Indonesia, urban flood resilience through PetaJakarta in Indonesia, agricultural marketing and knowledge through the Listening Project in Tanzania, and birth registration through UNICEF’s Registration Insolvency and Trusteeship Agency project in Tanzania.  
 
Bridging Real-Time Data  
and Adaptive Management:  
Case Study Report
 
Key findings of the study are summarized in 10 common lessons about critical enabling factors for bridging real-time data and adaptive management in a more systematic and sustained fashion. Some lessons learned involve topics such as the importance of investing in the capacity of individuals and teams to be “data ready” and strengthening data culture in the team. 
3. Bridging Real-Time Data and Adaptive Management: Ten Lessons for Policy Makers and Practitioners. The third and final report on real-time data outlines key lessons about institutional preparedness, design and implementation of interventions that seek to bridge real-time data systems and adaptive management principles. The study draws on a year-long research program that included literature reviews, key informant interviews, and case study research in Indonesia and Tanzania. The target audience of the report is policymakers and practitioners who have TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
36the capacity and resources to decide if, when 
and how to integrate real-time data systems and adaptive programs.  
 
Bridging Real-Time Data  
and Adaptive Management:  
T en Lessons for Policy  
Makers and Practitioners 
4. Journal Article: Can ICT-enabled real-time data contribute to adaptive management in development programming? In December 2018, a journal article was published based on a qualitative study that explored whether ICT-enabled real-time data systems can help to improve the way adaptive management is operationalized in international development programs. 
REAL-TIME DATA FOR ADAPTIVE 
PROGRAMMING TOOLKITS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
In November 2017, mSTAR  facilitated a 
workshop to support the DevInfo team to operationalize a conceptual framework developed by Institute of Development Studies under the initiative. Borrowing from the FHI 360 SCALE+ methodology, mSTAR guided 23 participants across USAID to build consensus around the conceptual framework and identify actions that would move the initiative from concept to practice. Based on outcomes of the workshop, mSTAR and the DevInfo team planned the second phase of the RTD4AM work, taking a two-pronged approach: 1) to develop two guides for USAID staff on how to conduct conversations about real-time data and build feedback loops, and 2) to support USAID missions with technical assistance to identify entry points for the use of data and feedback loops to make timely programmatic decisions and adaptations. 
mSTAR commenced work on two guides, one 
on data conversations and one on feedback loops, with a team of consultants in 2018. The mSTAR team worked with the DevInfo team to identify key USAID staff and other stakeholders to interview and provide input into the purpose and content of the two guides. Following a series of interviews, the teams used the information it gathered to design A Guide to Digital Feedback Loops . 
A Guide to Digital  
Feedback Loops
An approach to strengthening  
program outcomes through data  
for decision making
The guide is a user-friendly toolkit that presents examples of how USAID missions are using digital feedback loops to improve their programs across sectors and provides worksheets to help staff consider how they might use digital feedback loops tailored to their own context. The teams also designed the Data Conversations Guide to provide useful definitions, examples, 
critical considerations, sample questions, templates, and other resources to help staff engage with data in conversations at any stage in the program cycle. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
37To ensure that these guides are used among 
appropriate audiences, mSTAR and DevInfo organized two workshops to raise awareness about the guides and gather feedback from other stakeholders in USAID’s CDD and mission staff. While the data conversations workshop was more internal to the DevInfo team, the digital feedback loops workshop included USAID mission staff from Mali, Nigeria, Moldova, and other USAID bureaus. The follow-up soft-launch webinar, which was attended by more than 90 people, featured a sneak peek of the guide along with real-world examples of digital feedback loops in program implementation.
ADDITIONAL RESEARCH ON THE 
USE OF DATA IN DEVELOPMENT 
USAID/CAMBODIA MISSION 
ENGAGEMENT 
Based on the results of the convening, the 
RTD4AM initiative also included technical assistance to USAID missions. USAID/Cambodia’s Food Security and Environment Office was interested in exploring how they could improve the use of data and data feedback loops to make timely programmatic decisions and adaptations. They engaged the DevInfo team and mSTAR to develop a set of findings and recommendations drawn from both remote and in-person technical assistance. In-person technical assistance was conducted in July 2018 with the objective of assessing the Food Security and Environment team’s current data processes and uses, which included an assessment of data use in Abt Associate’s Harvest II project resulting in a finding report and recommendations. 
OPEN DATA IN DEVELOPING 
COUNTRIES 
In 2016-2017, mSTAR further supported the 
DevInfo team in collaboration with the GovLab, an organization which focuses on strengthening institutions through the use of data, to document the value and impact of open data initiatives in low- and middle-income countries. mSTAR and researchers at GovLab hosted a series of events and workshops at the Open Data Research Symposium and International Open Data Conference to gather input into the research findings and conduct interviews with case study stakeholders. GovLab led a successful workshop at the conference, with 22 open data researchers, practitioners, institutional decision-makers and funders in a discussion on what is working in developing countries and how the field can scale and replicate successes. The findings are presented in a report called, Open Data in Developing Economies: Toward Building an Evidence Base on What Works and How , which is published along with 12 
case studies illustrating the contributions of open government data across sectors and select countries.
OPEN DATA’S IMPACT
JULY 2017OPEN DATA  
IN DEVELOPING 
ECONOMIES
Stefaan G. Verhulst and Andrew YoungToward Building an Evidence Base 
on What Works and Howwww.odimpact.org
The GovLab
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
38RESPONSIBLE DATA GUIDELINES 
FOR DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT 
mSTAR supported the DevInfo team to develop 
guidance on practices and policies that foster responsible collection and management of data and mitigate privacy and security risks for participants in USAID DD programs. The project was completed in four phases: 
1. Conducted responsible data practice research including a literature review, legal landscape analysis, and key informant interviews with stakeholders at USAID and IPs 
2. Developed draft guidelines based on the literature review
3. Tested the applicability of the guidelines in real-world DD activities in Nigeria, Kenya and Uganda 
4. Refined the draft guidelines based on the country case study findings, stakeholder analysis and feedback on draft guidelines
Findings were presented at various events including ICT4Ag, the 2017 East African Integrated Digital Health Road Map Conference in Uganda, Technology Salon DC, MERL Tech DC 2017, Global Digital Health Forum 2016 and 2017, and American Evaluation Associate 2017. 
The Considerations for Using Data Responsibly  
at USAID document includes guidance on how 
to better collect and use data to understand development disparities. It includes principles and tools that help stakeholders protect vulnerable and marginalized populations when gathering sensitive data. The document was presented at an invite-only roundtable attended by the document’s research consortium, advisory committee and stakeholders. The roundtable was followed by a promotional campaign, including a five-day blog series, a Tech Salon event, a Twitter chat, and the launch at the ICT4D conference in Uganda in 2019. CONSIDERATIONS FOR USING DATA RESPONSIBLY AT USAID i
Considerations  
for Using Data  
Responsibly at  
USAID
ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES  
In 2017, mSTAR completed an ongoing activity 
with the DevInfo team to conduct ethnographic research on data use in the Indonesia, Uganda and Zimbabwe USAID missions. The goal of the research was to inform a report on how USAID missions manage data flow and use data as a resource for improved decision-making and adaptive programming. mSTAR worked with partner Reboot to produce an internal report, Balancing Upstream (Ac)countability & 
Downstream Impact at USAID: Opportunities & Challenges for Adaptive Management, which explored how USAID can better leverage digital technologies to encourage, support and strengthen adaptive management at the agency through a systems lens.
Additionally, mSTAR developed research 
documents and communications products, including:
• Journey to Self-Reliance talking points and project-specific briefs which explore how data and digital technology can effectively support countries on their journey to self-reliance
• Social media research that provided a general overview of social media prevalence and use in priority USAID geographies, descriptions of thematic areas of social media use in development, brief descriptions of current 
applications of social media tools in USAID projects, and an overview of potential risks
• Selecting Digital Tools for Beneficiary Engagement and Mobile Data Collection, two-page briefs  
Selecting Digital T ools for 
Beneficiary Engagement
Selecting a digital tool for your activity starts with the problem you are trying to solve, rather than the 
technology you are trying to use. If you start with the technology, your initiative can end up fragmented from the rest of your activity. T o build a strong initiative, you must first answer two questions:
Y ou can then decide what type of beneficiary engagement will benefit your activity. The chart below 
describes various ways in which you can engage your audience with digital tools.  
One-way 
communication to send information out to audience.
One-way communication 
that sends information that is designed for audience to further share with others. 
One-way communication in which information is collected from audience.
Two-way communication 
that is more of a conversation and exchange of information.What is  
your objective?Who is  your audience?
INFORM
EMPOWER
COLLECT
ENGAGEACTIVITY AUDIENCE
i• A video on how the USAID project B+WISER 
successfully used DevInfo tools and integrated 
digital technologies into their work
LAWIN IMAGE
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
39TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
40
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
41The CDD and the USAID Bureau for Food 
Security collaborated with mSTAR to implement the Digital Development for Feed the Future (D2FTF) initiative. The goal of the initiative was to demonstrate how the results and cost effectiveness of FtF can be increased when FtF teams in Washington, D.C. and the field leverage digital approaches in accordance with best practices. In the beginning of the engagement, mSTAR supported the D2FTF team to develop a campaign to promote increased digital savviness among FtF staff in D.C. and in missions. To inform the design of the campaign, mSTAR staff conducted market research with USAID FtF staff that included both key informant interviews at FtF target missions worldwide and in Washington, D.C., and online surveys to gather market research data. After the first engagement, mSTAR and D2FTF designed and implemented new activities and initiatives that were in line with these findings and helped to inform better programmatic design at the mission level.
INTRODUCTION
1 To better use digital farmer 
profiles in development projects, mSTAR developed an in-depth landscape assessment, Digital Farmer Profiles: Reimaging Smallholder Agriculture.2 In partnership with USAID/
Nepal, USAID/Cambodia and the Center for Excellence for Sustainable Agricultural Intensification and Nutrition, mSTAR developed practical recommendations for adopting a common data structure and implementing a digital data repository capable of improving data sharing and analysis across the FtF portfolios in Cambodia and Nepal.3 In Nepal, mSTAR worked 
together with USAID/Nepal and the Nepal Seed and Fertilizer Project to provide recommendations for digitizing the seed catalogue and seed balance sheet and to identify potential entry points for digital solutions.KEY ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER D2FTF WORK-STREAM INCLUDETRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
41DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT FOR  
FEED THE FUTURE  
View the D2FTF StorymapTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
42MISSION ENGAGEMENTS AND 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE  
mSTAR and D2FTF worked with USAID/Ghana 
to understand how the Sustainable Fisheries Management Project and the Agricultural Development and Value Chain Enhancement Project (ADVANCE) use ICT and DFS in their programs. Based on this research, mSTAR and D2FTF created a strategy document for each partner outlining how they can enhance their ICT and DFS initiatives to maximize project impact. mSTAR then refined the two strategy documents and explored additional ICT interventions that could drive each project forward.
After completion of the strategy documents, 
mSTAR proposed recommendations to both projects in Ghana: 
• To develop a mobile application that identifies pests and makes real-time recommendations on what pesticides are available to contain them. The app would allow field staff to collect pictures of pests from the field, analyze them via an image recognition algorithm, and connect users to an inventory system of recommended pesticides. The interest in this product was driven by the recent outbreak of an armyworm moth infestation across West Africa.
• To develop a fisherfolk engagement hub that would serve as the central channel for communication with fisherfolk. This hub would help stem ineffective communication and improve access to information while improving feedback mechanisms to fisherfolk. 
Based on these recommendations and feedback from D2FTF and USAID/Ghana, mSTAR determined the most relevant areas where D2FTF could support the USAID/Ghana mission programs were in improving the identification and treatment of common crop pests using digital channels; identifying the challenges to users in existing and proposed mobile money services that serve fisherfolk in Ghana; and creating a common definition of smallholder farmers based on data collected about smallholders in FtF priority countries, including Ghana. Pest Management Ecosystem Assessment 
in Ghana 
Based on desk research and in-country 
interviews with smallholder farmers and extension workers, mSTAR and AMZ Venture LLC developed a needs assessment and technical requirement report to guide development of a mobile application for pest identification and treatment. The needs assessment reviewed existing technologies that farmers use and the landscape for pest management solutions from low- to high-technology options. The report identifies points for collaboration and integration into existing pest management processes, apps and products and appropriate end-users. The assessment concluded with problem statements for Ghana and globally, as described below: 
• Ghana problem statement: Fall armyworm continues to be a danger to maize and other crops because farmers either miss the signs at the early stages or often miss a key part of the treatment protocol.
• Global problem statement: Major pest and disease outbreaks endanger crop yields and farmer livelihoods because by the time key actors identify a dangerous pest or disease as an issue, it is already spreading in an unknown manner, impacting crops. 
Based on the needs assessment and the identified problem statements, the technical requirement report provided recommendations on how to use technology to resolve the fall armyworm issue in Ghana and major pest and disease outbreaks globally. Because of low rates of smartphone ownership and low digital literacy levels among smallholder farmers in Ghana, recommendations were made 1) to expand radio and voice calls for fall armyworm response in Ghana and 2) to conduct a two-day workshop for interactive radio techniques in Ghana. Recommendations for the global problem statement included preparing the model implemented in Ghana to be quickly activated in case of other pest outbreaks globally and bringing together satellite and remote sensing organizations to build predictive modeling for disease outbreak. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
43After the in-country research and the speed 
with which fall armyworm spread across Africa, it became apparent that fall armyworm is an African issue rather than just a Ghanaian problem. Therefore, instead of suggesting a high-level technology intervention for Ghana, the second and third phase of the mSTAR pest management activity was canceled and instead, using mSTAR findings, USAID launched a prize competition for digital innovations addressing fall armyworm across Africa.
Digital Farmer Profiles 
To complete a landscape assessment on how farmer profiles are defined, conceptualized and employed, mSTAR worked together with Grameen Foundation to conduct desk research and stakeholder interviews. The goals of the report were to 1) provide a comprehensive scan to determine how “farmer profiles” are an opportunity to support existing and new business models; 2) discuss how digital farmer profiles impact agriculture and food security programming through the lens of “big data” analytics and; 3) provide clarity on varying interpretations of the term itself. Grameen Foundation conducted more than 50 key informant interviews with service providers, funders and other actors and also conducted an in-depth desk review to produce the report Digital Farmer Profiles: Reimagining Smallholder Agriculture. 
DIGITAL FARMER PROFILES: 
Reimagining Smallholder Agriculture
The report provides an in-depth discussion of challenges in defining a smallholder farmer and also identifies three models of how farmer profiles are defined and how data are gathered, managed and stored. The insights and identified models are supposed to guide development organizations, USAID and other funders in using these three models in their everyday operations. 
The interest among IPs and development 
practitioners around digital farmer profiles was substantial, thus Grameen Foundation collaborated with mSTAR to develop and design an infographic of the report and hosted a webinar, Data-Driven Agriculture: The Future of  Smallholder Farmer Data Management and Use, which was attended by more than 100 people. In addition, mSTAR and Grameen Foundation presented the report at the ICTforAg and SEEP conferences in 2018. 
The report, which highlighted fragmentation in 
the agriculture data ecosystem, drew interest from the ICT4ag community. As a result, mSTAR and the D2FTF team conducted a one-day workshop and a follow-on activity. The goal of the new activities was to examine ways D2FTF can contribute to addressing the current fragmentation in the agriculture data ecosystem and increase the sophistication of farmer-centric solutions deployed. The workshop enabled stakeholders to identify four archetypes of farmer profiles that are widely used by development practitioners. mSTAR also developed an animated video on farmer profiles and developed a blog series featuring mAgri  
and Agromovil. 
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
44
DATA-DRIVEN AGRICULTURE
The Future of Smallholder Farmer 
Data Management and Use
DIGITAL FARMER PROFILES: THEN AND NOW
A digital farmer profile is a profile that can capture comprehensive data on a farmer and their farm. 
It can be developed over time, provide real-time data flows between farmers and stakeholders, and it can be accessed simultaneously by multiple service providers such as financial service providers, input suppliers, agro-processors and farmer cooperatives.
OBD=Out-bound dialing     
IVR=Interactive Voice Recording    
API= Application Programming InterfaceB2B=Business to Business  
B2C=Business to consumerThe type of service provider does not 
necessarily determine what data they collect, how  they collect it, or how  it is 
used, but service provider models are an important starting point for understanding farmer profile data management.
Farmers need to make decisions in critical moments. The aggregation of information from their profile data, remote-sensing data, satellite and weather data makes this possible. Big data is one promise that can bring fragmented data, resources and service providers together to support a farmer’s ecosystem. As digital management of farmer profile data becomes the norm, the farmer becomes only one of many sources of that data, and only one of its many users.  More than 500 million smallholder farms worldwide play a significant role in food 
production and genetic diversity of food supply. Mobile technology, remote-sensing data and distributed computing and storage capabilities are changing how smallholder farmers are identified, understood and supported. 
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
DATA GENERATORS: SERVICE PROVIDERS
Service providers who collect data on and from smallholder farmers fall into four main models.
DATA CAPTURE, ANALYSIS AND USE
Digital data capture is the starting point for developing a digital farmer profile ecosystem.  
Leveraging the three methods of data capture below increases the accuracy of profiles.
DATABASE
/three.LP/two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP/seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
1 3
Paper Surveys
Digital Surveys
Human-centered Design
(Qualitative)National ID 
Registry
Land Management PEOPLE FACILITATED
(i.e., extensions agents,
researchers)REMOTE SENSING 
OR CAPTURE
Registration
Usage
Chatbots
CrowdsourcingPhone-based
Capture
SMS
OBD
IVR
Call CenterGPS
Phone Usage
TransactionsPassive Mobile
CaptureMobile Phone 
Applications
Satelitte
DronesSensors
Weather
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
Registry
Facebook
Phone Data
Other Datasets
DATABASE2MOBILE PHONE
DATA AND REVENUE FLOWS
Changing methods of data capture are giving rise to new configurations within service provider models.
KEY CONSIDERATION
When assessing how to leverage farmer profile data USAID staff and  
Feed the Future partners should consider:T oday, farmers provide data to service providers 
in exchange for support services. In the future,  farmers might monetize their own data. 
All service providers should consider how to 
compensate farmers for their data. This can be a pathway to farmers’ financial sustainability and protect their privacy.
• How are smallholder farmers defined?
• What is the landscape of service provider models? 
• What is the technology environment for supporting  digital capture, analysis and timely use of data? 
• What data is commonly collected, what are the gaps  
and is data being shared?
• Are there farmer profile data sources that can be  
leveraged to build dynamic farmer profiles?• What farmer archetypes have been created by programs  and can they be leveraged by other service?
• What is the policy and legal environment for data sharing,  consumer protection and privacy? 
• How is data shared post-project? 
• What may be the utility of the projects’ data assets for  other service providers?
• What investments by USAID and other donors can support the development of a digital data ecosystem for farmer profiles?
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
/three.LP /two.LP /one.LP
/six.LP /five.LP /four.LP
/nine.LP /eight.LP /seven.LP
* /zero.LP /numbersign.LP
NGOTA
PROVIDERS
GOVT.RESEARCHNGO / GOVERNMENT  COMMERCIAL
B2C
Market
ServicesB2B
DONORS & INVESTORSFARMER
SERVICES
SERVICESSERVICESB2C
INFORMATION
SERVICES
B2C
MARKET
SERVICES
B2C
FINANCIAL
SERVICESB2C
AGGREGATOR
This product is made possible by the generous support of the American people through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). 
The contents are the responsibility of FHI 360 and do not reflect the views of USAID or the US Government.For additional information digital agriculture technologies, including farmer profiles, please visit  www.usaid.gov/digitalag
EXTENSION 
AGENT
SERVICE 
PROVIDERFARMERTHEN  NOW
DIGITAL
FARM DATA
SATELLITE
MOBILE
PHONE
DRONES
WEATHER
FARMER
PLANTS/
ANIMALSAPIs
(financial 
services, 
other)SERVICE
PROVIDER(S)
EXTENSION
AGENTSSENSORS
(soil,water)
DIGITAL
FARM DATA
PROJECT MANAGEMENT/ 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
1
2
3
4RESEARCH ENTITIES
GOVERNMENT / NGO 
EXTENSION SERVICESCOMMERCIAL SERVICE PROVIDERS (B2B AND B2C)HCD Human-Centered Design Mobile 
Money Value Chain Research 
In collaboration with IDEO.org, mSTAR 
conducted human-centered design research to identify and address challenges of existing mobile money services, especially related to issues like ease of use for fisherfolk in Ghana. The research aimed to better understand the actors along the fisher value chain. It also aimed to provide recommendations to MMSPs to improve existing mobile money services.
Based on in-country human-centered design 
interviews, focus groups and observations, IDEO.org developed Ghana Fisheries Ecosystem map, Ghana Fisheries Future Plan Cookstove, and Ghana Fisheries Insights. 
ACCELERATING DATA-DRIVEN 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT IN CAMBODIA AND NEPAL 
In partnership with the D2FTF team, USAID/
Nepal, USAID/Cambodia and the Center for Excellence for Sustainable Agricultural Intensification and Nutrition, mSTAR implemented an activity to accelerate data-driven agriculture in Cambodia and Nepal. The goal of the activity was to improve data structure, storage and governance so that FtF researchers and IPs can more easily analyze data and gain new access to digital data. In partnership with Development Gateway and Athena Infonomics, mSTAR conducted capacity assessments with key actors in the FtF data ecosystem in Nepal and Cambodia, to examine how a centralized, multi-stakeholder data repository could best support in-country data producers and users. Building on the capacity assessment findings, the team developed practical recommendations for adopting a common data structure and implementing a digital data repository capable of improving data sharing and analysis across the FtF portfolios. Development Gateway presented results at two workshops on their analysis of approximately 25 sample FtF datasets, representing more than 3,500 variables, to find common interoperability principles and standards for structuring and defining data. The team also provided USAID/TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
45Cambodia and Nepal with recommendations on 
potential research questions to examine by using multiple FtF datasets and avenues for building insights and encouraging interoperability. 
ENHANCING A DIGITALLY -
ENABLED SEED SYSTEM IN NEPAL 
In partnership with the D2FTF team, USAID/
Nepal, and the Nepal Seed and Fertilizer Project (NSAF), and with support from a team of information technology and seed system consultants, mSTAR provided recommendations to digitally-enable critical information products and services for the national seed system and share findings and recommendations to help grow the body of knowledge about good practices in digitally-enabled seed systems. In line with the expressed needs of the Seed Quality Control Center, mSTAR focused on potential avenues and recommendations for digitizing the seed catalogue and seed balance sheet, which tracks the supply and demand of seeds in Nepal. With support from NSAF, the mSTAR team first conducted in-country information gathering and consultations with 94 seed system stakeholders, including government officials (policymakers, researchers, development bodies), seed companies, agrovets/seed traders, NGOs, cooperatives and farmers in the major agricultural production regions of the country. These consultations informed an extensive understanding of the current seed system and potential entry points for digital solutions and led to recommendations for digitizing the seed catalogue and seed balance sheet in Nepal, as well as an overall digital vision and roadmap for the seed system. mSTAR hosted a workshop in August 2018 with approximately 40 participants from USAID, NSAF and seed system stakeholders to gather feedback on the recommendations and introduce the digital vision and roadmap for the seed system. Based upon feedback received at the workshop, the mSTAR team designed system specifications and requirements for the seed catalogue and seed balance sheet, including key mandatory functional requirements and a terms of reference document to guide a procurement. CAMBODIA DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT 
FOR FEED THE FUTURE — DIGITAL MODEL FOR NOURISH CONDITION CASH TRANSFERS
mSTAR supported the Integrated Nutrition, 
Sanitation and Hygiene (NOURISH) project in Cambodia to design and recommend a digital, scalable conditional cash transfer (CCT) model to replace the project’s current cash-based CCT system to incentivize the use of key health and nutrition services and stunting-prevention behaviors. Based on initial design recommendations, mSTAR developed a roadmap to transition the cash-based CCT system to a beneficiaries, management system capable of 1) improving data collection and CCT beneficiary servicing, 2) reducing time to enroll and streamlining the know-your-customer processes, and 3) managing risks by reducing the number of data errors and transposition of numbers. mSTAR designed the system architecture for the beneficiaries’ management system and, based upon these specifications, configured and installed necessary servers and databases to run the system. As a feature of this system, mSTAR designed a user-facing Cash4Khmer Android-based app and web management portal. The Cash4Khmer app allows field-based users to collect data and images in the field for transmission and input into the web portal and features application programming interfaces linking financial institutions to facilitate CCT payments.  After user acceptance testing, mSTAR worked with NOURISH to incorporate the new digitized processes into the project’s operations manual.
DIGITAL AGRICULTURE 
CONVENINGS AND KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS 
mSTAR and D2FTF organized a number of 
workshops dealing primarily with the role of technology and agriculture. The first of these workshops was held at the Sustainability Innovation Lab at Colorado in the University of Colorado – Boulder. The workshop brought together a cross-disciplinary group of researchers, agronomists, digital ag-tech startups, data scientists, non-profits, foundations TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
46and venture capital firms. The participants 
examined how data science can maximize impact in agricultural development. 
Following the success of the Colorado 
workshop, mSTAR and D2FTF organized two Evidence-to-Action workshops in 2017 and 2018, which gathered more than 60 D.C.-based FtF IPs to explore how digital tools can be used to address challenges and opportunities across the FtF programmatic portfolio. IPs such as RTI International, FHI 360, Development Associates Inc., Chemonics, Mercy Corps, Grameen Foundation, Tetra Tech and others attended the two convenings and shared their FtF program successes and challenges. 
To further engage USAID missions, mSTAR and 
DFTF held a workshop on digital solutions for agriculture in Phnom Penh, Cambodia that was attended by USAID IPs and USAID/Cambodia Mission staff. mSTAR assisted in design and implementation of a four and a half-day digital agriculture training in Pretoria, South Africa, which included presentations and a game on precision agriculture. 
GUIDE TO THE USE OF DIGITAL 
TOOLS TO EXPAND ACCESS TO AGRICULTURE INSURANCE 
mSTAR completed and published the Guide 
to the Use of Digital Tools to Expand Access to Agricultural Insurance. The guide features a rich discussion on how to use newly available digital tools to increase the reach and adoption of insurance for small-scale farmers to manage risk and help them withstand shocks. The aim of the guide is to help USAID and development partners effectively leverage tools to expand access to and use of agricultural insurance and achieve key U.S. Government global food security strategy objectives, such as inclusive and sustainable agriculture-led economic growth and strengthened resilience among people and systems. To further disseminate 
GAME IMAGE
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
47the knowledge and promote the integration of 
digital tools in agricultural insurance, mSTAR launched the guide during the IP convening in 2018, conducted a webinar for overseas IPs and USAID missions and led a blog series on Agrilinks. The series included pieces titled Four Best Practices to Make Agriculture Insurance More Available and Affordable, Vulnerable Populations See Relief  in Insurance Innovations, AMA Innovation Lab and D2FTF Use Digital Tools to Break Down Barriers to Agricultural Insurance, and How Can Digital Tools Improve Access to Agricultural Insurance?
1
USING DIGITAL TOOLS TO  
EXPAND ACCESS TO
AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE
NEXT
EVIDENCE-BUILDING CASE STUDIES
mSTAR completed eight case studies to 
document how organizations within the FtF zones of influences are using digital tools and technologies to more effectively meet their goals, while recording improved agriculture outcomes.
1. One Acre Fund
2. Naatal Mbay
3. International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
4. International Center for Tropical Agriculture
5. ADVANCE II
6. Musoni Case Study 
7. Youth, ICT and Agriculture
8. DFS for Agriculture
Six case studies provide the general digital landscape of the host country of the organizations, followed by specific discussions about how these organizations have integrated digital tools in their programming. The case studies also showcase the challenges, lessons learned and the impact of using ICT in agriculture value chains, projects or research. 
mSTAR created three videos illustrating 
successful case studies of the use of digital financial services in agriculture in 
Malawi , Ghana  and Bangladesh . 
The videos educate and encourage USAID mission staff and implementing partners on using digital financial services in agricultural projects. 
Two case studies are meta-analyses. Youth, 
ICT and Agriculture is a landscape assessment of how and if ICT can draw more youth to employment in agriculture value chains. The youth case study also provides a list of successful youth agriculture projects that used digital tools to foster and increase youth participation. DFS for Agriculture synthesizes what we know has worked and highlights the greatest potential for DFS to affect agricultural outcomes and improve farmer livelihoods.TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
48
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
49KEY HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE K&I WORKSTREAM INCLUDE
1 mSTAR launched the Digital 
Development Awards, or 
“Digis,” which recognized USAID projects that implement innovative uses of digital technology to solve development challenges. 2 mSTAR designed and 
launched DD trainings for USAID staff across India, Zambia, El Salvador, Uganda, Ghana, Bangkok, Pakistan, Washington, D.C., and South Africa. The trainings provide hands-on lessons on DD from expert USAID staff, building capacity and sharing knowledge and best practices across USAID missions and bureaus.3 mSTAR distributed the 
Weekly Reader, reaching more than 980 staff each Friday and sharing valuable resources, jobs and events from the ICT4D world.
4 mSTAR organized Tech Tuesdays, webinars which helped highlight innovation and experts from 
across ICT4D. TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
49mSTAR worked with the Lab’s Knowledge and Insights team to increase knowledge of the CDD’s work and the role of digital tools in development across USAID and the development sector. Leading deliverables include the well-received Digital Development Training 101 and Digital Development Training 201, which advanced USAID staff ’s knowledge of digital tools through hands-on workshops in Washington, D.C., and missions. mSTAR also worked with the K&I team to create “Mary,” “Joy” and “Samuel,” three characters that have helped USAID staff around the world understand the importance of digital technology in the daily lives of beneficiaries. Over the past seven years, mSTAR’s collaboration with the K&I team has resulted in factsheets, microsites, awards, events, trainings, videos and many other channels to enhance the value of DD.INTRODUCTIONKNOWLEDGE AND INSIGHTS  
View the K&I StorymapTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
50PRINCIPLES FOR DIGITAL 
DEVELOPMENT  
In 2016, mSTAR published From Principle 
to Practice: Implementing the Principles for 
Digital Development, reflecting insights of 500 individuals from more than 100 organizations. During the report’s development, nine distinct discussions evolved that led to the establishment of the Principles of Digital Development. These principles are living guidelines aimed at helping development practitioners integrate established best practices in the use of ICTs in development projects.  The report was launched at a major event attended by approximately 200 people from more than 150 organizations. Keynote speakers included then U.S. Global Development Lab Executive Director Ann Mei Chang, Co-Lead of UNICEF’s Innovation Unit Chris Fabian, and Kate Wilson, CEO of Digital Impact Alliance. The event and report started a movement in the development community to champion the principles in development programs. mSTAR and USAID have been the primary mobilizers and conveners in the effort to influence the ICT4D community to promote and adopt the nine principles. As of 2019, more than 100 donors, IPs, and private sector organizations have endorsed the Principles for Digital Development, including the World Bank, Mercy Corps, the United Nations Children’s Fund, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
FROM PRINCIPLE TO PRACTICE:   
Implementing the Principles  
for Digital Development
Perspectives and Recommendations from the 
Practitioner CommunityPRINCIPLES for
Digital Development
BY ADELE WAUGAMANIn 2015 and 2016, some of the endorsing 
organizations hosted monthly deep-dive events focusing on each of the principles. These events brought together more than 240 participants across the UN system, academia, private sector, government, NGOs and USAID IPs to discuss key questions related to data privacy and security, collaborative development, open source data standards, and leveraging lessons learned in the field. 
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT TRAININGS 
AND FORUMS 
In 2016, in collaboration with USAID, mSTAR 
developed 101 and 201 level DD trainings to enhance USAID staff ’s understanding of digital tools. To better understand the local ecosystem, mSTAR designed forums to occur alongside these trainings. Over seven years, trainings took place in countries like South Africa, Pakistan, India and the United States. Since then, training attendees have been the champions of DD. The trainings focused on successful implementation of ICT4D programs using mSTAR and other Lab-supported programs as examples. Participants learned how to incorporate ICT into programs through interactive and hands-on workshops, lectures and panels composed of Lab thought leaders. Participants received resources, best practices, and tools to grow the conversation beyond USAID and demonstrate to fellow practitioners the power of technology in development. 
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT AWARDS 
In an effort to celebrate USAID missions, bureaus and partners embracing cutting-edge technologies and advanced data analysis to accelerate impact, the Lab sponsored the first-ever Digital Development Awards in 2017. In total, 125 USAID projects applied for the 2017 Digis, the majority of them from Africa. The applications represented five areas: DI, digital information systems, digital finance, advanced data and geospatial analysis, and crosscutting. mSTAR worked closely with CDD to select five winners: B+WISER, ADVANCE II, Clean Team, Digital Green, and CPM. All five 2017 winners demonstrated collaborative, innovative and TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
51localized approaches in integrating technology in 
their projects. mSTAR and the K&I team further engaged with Digi winners, inviting them to Washington, D.C., for a DD training and events to further their knowledge of DD.
To showcase the winners, mSTAR and the K&I 
team created a booklet and a video on each of the projects: 
Expanding Opportunities in Agriculture with 
Digital Tools: CPM’s 2017 Digi Award Stor y
Digital Integration to Amplify Agricultural Extension’s 2017 Digi Award Story
Smartcards for Sustainable Communities: 
USAID’s ADVANCE II Project’s 2017 Digi Award Story
Using Open Source Software for Forest 
Protection: B+WISER’s 2017 Digi Award Story 
To honor the Digi winners and illuminate the 
progress the development community has made in DD over the past 10 years, mSTAR and the K&I team hosted the first-ever Digital Development Forum. The forum gathered experts, practitioners and leaders in the DD sector to discuss learnings and best practices developed over the past 10 years of DD. The 2017 Digi Award winners were honored at the event.
Based on the success of the 2017 Digis, mSTAR 
and CDD held a second Digi Awards in 2018. mSTAR received more than 140 applications. mSTAR and CDD selected five winners: Digital Inclusion in the Peruvian Amazon, Feed 
the Future Tanzania Land Tenure Assistance, FlaverDor and the Moldova Competitiveness Project, Jamii Africa and SHOPS Plus , and 
WeMunize and the Maternal and Child Survival Program. Like in the previous year, winners traveled to Washington D.C., to share their project stories with a wider audience of USAID staff and IPs and attend a DD training. To honor the winners, mSTAR and the K&I team hired photographers to capture images and stories of the projects. The stories were featured in a display in the USAID lobby, on USAID’s Exposure site, and in a social media takeover. Ensuring a Healthy Family: A mobile insurance platform is making health care affordable in Tanzania
Automating Public Health: How calls and texts 
from trusted community leaders remind families to get children vaccinated
Disease-detecting Drones: Protecting Moldova’s 
wine industry from a disease that wipes out vineyards and threatens livelihoods
Her Land Rights: How documented property 
rights gave a Tanzanian widow financial stability
Preserving Peruvian Culture: Internet 
connectivity in the Amazon rainforest helps local arts and culture flourish   
DIGITAL DOWNLOAD
To share the key achievements of the CDD, mSTAR supported the development and publication of the first-ever annual report for the CDD: the 2017 Digital Download. Due to interest generated by the 2017 report, mSTAR also supported the development of 2018 Digital Download. The annual report highlights key achievements of the five technical areas of CDD: DI, DFS, DevInfo, The GeoCenter and D2FTF . In addition to providing information 
about CDD-specific activities, the annual report also offers opportunities for IPs and other stakeholders to learn about the ecosystem development and major market changes in the five main technical areas.
DOWNLOAD2017DIGITAL
2018
DIGITAL DOWNLOAD
2018DIGITAL DOWNLOADTRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
52As a pioneer in the ICT4D field, mSTAR made 
tremendous impact in responding to emerging needs of IPs and USAID missions to adapt and use new technologies to benefit those most in need. Together with its partners, mSTAR was able to experiment, pilot, assess, and research new tools, technologies and methodologies from 2012 until 2019. LOOKING FORWARD 
For the past seven years mSTAR has made its mark on developing the digital ecosystem and contributing to the growth of the body of knowledge related to DFS, safer and more efficient data practices, expanding the reach of DI, and ICT for agriculture. From providing grants to small agriculture companies in Burma, to establishing a cashless ecosystem in India, to developing the Principles for Digital Development, mSTAR has worked alongside innovators, thought leaders and experts in the sphere of ICT to use the benefits of technology to reduce the digital divide and alleviate development challenges. 
While the current digital revolution presents 
new opportunities and challenges for development practitioners, many challenges remain across the digital development sector. The benefits of DFS have yet to be fully realized by rural and vulnerable segments of society. Incorporation of real-time data in decision-making and ensuring adaptive management is still to be maximized by development practitioners. Digital agriculture solutions still require significant funding and testing. The digital gender divide continues to grow in locations around the world.
mSTAR’s work, however, paves the way for 
these challenges to be resolved. mSTAR’s resources and lessons learned show how to reduce the digital divide to enable equal access and use of mobile phones and other forms of technology. The G ender and ICT Toolkit, the 
Guide to the Use of DFS in Agriculture, and 
the Digital Feedback Loops Guide are just a few 
examples of tools that lay the groundwork for IPs and partners to strengthen their projects and solve these challenges. 
/gid00020/gid00028/gid00033/gid00032/gid00045/gid00001/gid00005/gid00032/gid00039/gid00036/gid00049/gid00032/gid00045/gid00036/gid00032/gid00046
/gid00012/gid00036/gid00028/gid00041/gid00034/gid00028/gid00001/gid00002/gid00053/gid00036/gid00038/gid00036/gid00050/gid00032/gid00132/gid00134/gid00165/gid00133/gid00137
/gid00002/gid00030/gid00030/gid00042/gid00045/gid00031/gid00036/gid00041/gid00034/gid00001/gid00047/gid00042/gid00001/gid00052/gid00042/gid00048/gid00045/gid00001/gid00035/gid00036/gid00046/gid00047/gid00042/gid00045/gid00052/gid00164/gid00001/gid00047/gid00035/gid00032/gid00045/gid00032/gid00001
/gid00028/gid00045/gid00032/gid00001/gid00045/gid00036/gid00046/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00028/gid00030/gid00047/gid00042/gid00045/gid00046/gid00001/gid00047/gid00035/gid00028/gid00047/gid00001/gid00040/gid00028/gid00052/gid00001/gid00029/gid00045/gid00036/gid00041/gid00034/gid00001/gid00030/gid00042/gid00040/gid00043/gid00039/gid00036/gid00030/gid00028/gid00047/gid00036/gid00042/gid00041/gid00046/gid00001/gid00047/gid00042/gid00001/gid00052/gid00042/gid00048/gid00001/gid00028/gid00041/gid00031/gid00001/gid00052/gid00042/gid00048/gid00045/gid00001/gid00029/gid00028/gid00029/gid00052/gid00001/gid00029/gid00032/gid00030/gid00028/gid00048/gid00046/gid00032/gid00001/gid00042/gid00033/gid00165 /gid00167/gid00167
/gid00186/gid00001/gid00017/gid00045/gid00036/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001/gid00030/gid00028/gid00032/gid00046/gid00028/gid00045/gid00032/gid00028/gid00041/gid00001/gid00046/gid00032/gid00030/gid00047/gid00036/gid00042/gid00041NAME /gid00012/gid00036/gid00028/gid00041/gid00034/gid00028/gid00001/gid00002/gid00053/gid00036/gid00038/gid00036/gid00050/gid00032/gid00132/gid00134/gid00165/gid00133/gid00136
/gid00015/gid00042/gid00045/gid00047/gid00035/gid00133/gid00138 AGE
SHEHIA
/gid00020/gid00028/gid00033/gid00032/gid00045/gid00001/gid00005/gid00032/gid00039/gid00036/gid00049/gid00032/gid00045/gid00036/gid00032/gid00046
/gid00012/gid00036/gid00028/gid00041/gid00034/gid00028/gid00001/gid00002/gid00053/gid00036/gid00038/gid00036/gid00050/gid00032
/gid00132/gid00134/gid00165/gid00133/gid00136
/gid00006/gid00041/gid00047/gid00032/gid00045/gid00001/gid00041/gid00028/gid00040/gid00032/gid00001/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001/gid00041/gid00048/gid00040/gid00029/gid00032/gid00045
 /gid00020/gid00006/gid00015/gid00005/gid00143/gid00163/gid00001/gid00008/gid00032/gid00047/gid00001/gid00021/gid00045/gid00032/gid00028/gid00047/gid00040/gid00032/gid00041/gid00047
/gid00144/gid00163/gid00001/gid00014/gid00052/gid00001/gid00014/gid00183/gid00021/gid00010/gid00003/gid00002/gid00145/gid00163/gid00001/gid00007/gid00036/gid00041/gid00031/gid00001/gid00004/gid00039/gid00036/gid00041/gid00036/gid00030/gid00146/gid00163/gid00001/gid00010/gid00041/gid00049/gid00036/gid00047/gid00032/gid00001/gid00007/gid00045/gid00036/gid00032/gid00041/gid00031/gid00147/gid00163/gid00001/gid00009/gid00042/gid00050/gid00001/gid00047/gid00042/gid00001/gid00021/gid00042/gid00043/gid00183/gid00022/gid00043/gid00148/gid00163/gid00001/gid00002/gid00031/gid00031/gid00001/gid00005/gid00032/gid00043/gid00032/gid00041/gid00031/gid00028/gid00041/gid00047/gid00151/gid00163/gid00001/gid00020/gid00032/gid00047/gid00047/gid00036/gid00041/gid00034/gid00046
VOUCHERVOUCHER/gid00132/gid00134/gid00165/gid00133/gid00136
/gid00014/gid00052/gid00001/gid00014/gid00183/gid00021/gid00010/gid00003/gid00002/gid00001/gid00003/gid00032/gid00041/gid00032/gid00033/gid00036/gid00047/gid00046
/gid00143/gid00163/gid00001/gid00014/gid00052/gid00001/gid00009/gid00032/gid00028/gid00039/gid00047/gid00035/gid00001/gid00007/gid00048/gid00041/gid00031/gid00046
/gid00001 /gid00012/gid00046/gid00035/gid00001/gid00142/gid00163/gid00142/gid00142/gid00142/gid00163/gid00001/gid00003/gid00028/gid00030/gid00038
/gid00143
 /gid00020/gid00006/gid00015/gid00005/gid00132/gid00134/gid00165/gid00133/gid00136
/gid00014/gid00052/gid00001/gid00009/gid00032/gid00028/gid00039/gid00047/gid00035/gid00001/gid00007/gid00048/gid00041/gid00031/gid00046
/gid00012/gid00046/gid00035/gid00001/gid00142/gid00163/gid00142/gid00142
/gid00143/gid00163/gid00001/gid00004/gid00042/gid00049/gid00032/gid00045/gid00032/gid00031/gid00001/gid00020/gid00032/gid00045/gid00049/gid00036/gid00030/gid00032/gid00046
/gid00144/gid00163/gid00001/gid00008/gid00032/gid00047/gid00001/gid00021/gid00045/gid00032/gid00028/gid00047/gid00040/gid00032/gid00041/gid00047/gid00145/gid00163/gid00001/gid00002/gid00030/gid00047/gid00036/gid00049/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00001/gid00005/gid00032/gid00043/gid00032/gid00041/gid00031/gid00028/gid00041/gid00047/gid00146/gid00163/gid00001/gid00018/gid00048/gid00036/gid00047/gid00001/gid00017/gid00045/gid00042/gid00034/gid00045/gid00028/gid00040/gid00142/gid00163/gid00001/gid00003/gid00028/gid00030/gid00038
/gid00143
 /gid00020/gid00006/gid00015/gid00005
VOUCHERVOUCHER
HOSPITAL
H O S P I T A L I E R
mMoney
HERE
/gid00020/gid00022/gid00019/gid00023/gid00006/gid00026
/gid00020/gid00022/gid00019/gid00023/gid00006/gid00026
mMoney
HERE
TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
53# INDICATOR TOTAL
PROGRAM OBJECTIVE: PROVIDE TECHNICAL SUPPORT AND THOUGHT LEADERSHIP FOR DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT 
BUILT ON EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICES AND STANDARDS TO ENABLE EFFECTIVE PROGRAMMING AND LEARNING.
Intermediate Result 1: Increased effective utilization of digital technologies in USAID and partner programs
IR.1.a Number of mSTAR trainees effectively utilizing digital technologies in their work. 6,390
IR.1.b Number of USAID and partner programs who have adopted or made an explicit commitment 
to adopt digital development to enhance development outcomes as a result of project assistance.89
Sub. IR 1.1. Increased awareness and capacity of USAID and partner program staff to apply digital technologies effectively. 
1.1.a Number of USAID and partner program staff who report an increased understanding of digital 
technologies as a result of mSTAR project interventions558
1.1.b. Number of learning event participants reporting increased understanding of digital development 5,350
Sub. IR 1.2. Deeply engaged audience for digital tools and services 
1.2.a Number of new digital technology learning products 725
1.2.b Number of learning events for digital development 329
1.2.c Number of attendees at digital development learning events 17,826
1.2.d Number of views and downloads of digital technology learning products 55,062
1.2.e Number of new buy-ins from donors and private sector partners 30
1.2.f Number of engagements facilitated by mSTAR with digital financial services stakeholders 48
Intermediate Result 2: Improved enabling environment for digital and financial inclusion
IR.2.a Improved score for priority countries on World Bank FinDex (Denotes the percentage of 
respondents who report having an account (by themselves or together with someone else). India- 79.9 ; Bangladesh- 50.0; Burma- 26.0; Liberia- 35.7
IR.2.b Improved score for priority countries on Freedom House index (1 representing the most free and 7 the least free)2018 Scores for Freedom Rating: India 2.5; Bangladesh 4; Burma 5; Liberia 3
IR.2.c Improved score for priority countries on World Bank Doing Business survey (out of total 189 countries)Rankings benchmarked 2019: India 77; Bangladesh 176; Burma 171; Liberia 174
Sub-IR 2.1 Improved market systems that enable underserved populations to access digital technologies 
2.1.a Number of countries who have adopted or have made an explicit commitment to adopt policies 
or regulations to increase the use of digital technologies6
2.1.b Number of new products or services designed to meet the wants and needs of USAID project beneficiaries introduced as a result of mSTAR project interventions21
2.1.c Number of market assessments conducted for digital technologies 9
2.1.d Number of recommendations from market assessments adopted for digital technologies in priority countries  11
IR 3: Increased user demand and capabilities with regard to digital tools and services
IR.3.a Number of users receiving payments by digital tools and services 40,577
IR.3.b Number of users making payments by digital tools and services 1,993
IR.3.c Number of users using digital tools and services 42,570TRANSFORMING A DIGITAL LANDSCAPE: 7 Years of Learnings from the mSTAR Project
54Sub-IR 3.1: Increased research utilization for digital technologies
3.1.a Number of research activities conducted by mSTAR for digital technologies 25
3.1.b Number of recommendations resulting from mSTAR research activities utilized by programs 1
3.1.c Number of new approaches and technologies introduced for digital development 14
Sub-IR 3.2: Increased engagement with digital development stakeholders3.2.a Number of engagements facilitated by mSTAR with digital financial services stakeholders 51
SELECT mSTAR RESOURCES
Gender and Information Communication  
Technology (ICT) Survey Toolkit  
https://www.usaid.gov/documents/15396/  
gender-and-ict-toolkit
Guide to the Use of Digital Financial Services 
in Agriculture  
https://www.usaid.gov/digitalag/documents/digital-financial-services-agriculture-guide
Digital Farmer Profiles: Reimagining 
Smallholder Agriculture  
https://www.usaid.gov/digitalag/documents/data-driven-agriculture
Using Digital Tools to Expand Access to 
Agriculture Insurance  
https://www.usaid.gov/GlobalDevLab/documents/using-digital-tools-expand-agricultural-insurance
Considerations for Using Data Responsibly at USAID  
https://www.usaid.gov/responsibledataAccelerating USAID’s Health Goals  
https://www.usaid.gov/documents/15396/role-digital-
financial-services-accelerating-usaids-health-goals
Accelerating USAID Education Goals  
https://www.usaid.gov/digital-development/digital-
finance/education-brief
Business Models for the Last Billion: Market 
Approaches to Increasing Internet Connectivity  
https://www.usaid.gov/documents/15396/business-models-last-billionA Guide to Digita Feedback Loops: An Approach to Strengthening Program Outcomes Through Data for 
Decision Making  
https://www.usaid.gov/digital-development/digital-feedback-loops
The Potential of Using Digital Financial Services for 
Savings Groups in Bangladesh  
https://www.findevgateway.org/sites/default/
files/publication_files/mstarbangladesh_savingsgroupassessment_feb2016_0.pdf
Impact of Open Data in Developing Economies  
http://odimpact.org/developingeconomies.html
Bridging the Gap: How Real-Time Data Can 
Contribute to Adaptive Management in International Development  
https://www.usaid.gov/digital-development/rtd4am/briefing-paper
Bridging Real-Time Data and Adaptive Management: 
Case Study Report  
https://www.usaid.gov/digital-development/rtd4am/case-study-report
Bridging Real-Time Data and Adaptive Management: 
Ten Lessons for Policy Makers and Practitioners  
https://www.usaid.gov/digital-development/rtd4am/
policy-design-lessons
mSTAR: Mobile Solutions Technical Assistance and 
Research/Liberia  
https://www.fhi360.org/resource/mstar-mobile-solutions-technical-assistance-and-researchliberia