Results from a 
Baseline Study of  Gender and Entrepreneurship in East Java, Indonesia
Evidence-based Report  
Series on Women’s Economic Empowerment
Mayra Buvinic, James C. Knowles, 
and Firman WitoelarApril 2018
UNEQUAL VENTURES
CONTEN TS
About the Evidence-based Report  
Series on Women’s Economic  
Empowerment 1
1.  East Java Study Sample and Research 
Questions 3
Box 1.  Methodology of the baseline study 4
2.   Prior Evidence on Women Entrepreneurs  
in Indonesia 7
3.   Baseline Results: Gender Differences in  
Characteristics, Economic Outcomes,  
and Correlates of Success 9
4.  Implications of the Findings 17
Photos courtesy of ExxonMobil Foundation.
 1ABOUT THE EVIDENCE-BASED REPORT SERIES 
ON WOMEN’S ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT
The Center for Global Development’s 
Evidence-Based Report Series on Wom -
en’s Economic Empowerment presents 
summary findings and policy implica -
tions of rigorous research that tests the impact 
of mobile savings and business training on the 
growth of women’s businesses and their income. 
The series also provides links to the detailed re -
search undertaken in collaboration with research 
and implementing partners. The series opened 
with Mindful Saving , which highlights the main 
messages from the research evidence to date 
about what empowers women economically and 
how to measure it.1 It explores the impact of pro -
viding women with access to savings and to busi -
ness training programs and summarizes findings from an evaluation of a mobile savings and train -
ing program in Tanzania.
Unequal Ventures is the second report in the 
series. It summarizes results from an analysis of 
a baseline survey (for an upcoming impact eval -
uation of a branchless banking mobile savings 
product) of women and men entrepreneurs in 
East Java, Indonesia, focusing on the relationship 
between the gender of the entrepreneur and eco -
nomic outcomes.
The evidence generated from this series feeds 
into She Counts , a global platform created in 
partnership with Women’s World Banking and 
the ExxonMobil Foundation, that promotes the 
power of putting asset-building tools and resourc -
es in the hands of women business owners.
The evidence generated 
from this series feeds 
into She Counts, a global 
platform that promotes 
the power of putting 
asset -building tools in 
the hands of women 
business owners
The Indonesia trial is testing 
whether providing financial 
literacy training for women 
who are potential bank 
clients and varying financial 
incentives to bank agents 
promoting a new mobile 
savings product make a 
difference in increasing 
women entrepreneurs’ 
uptake of formal 
savings and in improving 
economic outcomes 31. EAST JAVA STUDY SAMPLE AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS
A study of women and men business 
owners in East Java offers a unique 
opportunity to analyze characteristics 
of entrepreneurs and their business -
es by gender for a country where such systematic 
data are scarce. The study is one of two random -
ized controlled trials launched in 2015 to assess 
the power of mobile savings and training for 
women entrepreneurs. This report details base -
line results from the Indonesia trial, still under 
way, which is testing whether providing finan -
cial literacy training for women who are poten -
tial bank clients and varying financial incentives 
to bank agents promoting a new mobile savings 
product make a difference in increasing women 
entrepreneurs’ uptake of formal savings and in 
improving economic outcomes. Short-term re -
sults of the other trial, in Tanzania, were reported 
in the first report in this series.2
The Indonesia study sample in East Java
Indonesia, like many other low- and middle-
income countries, has few nationally representa -
tive datasets from which to draw valid compar -
isons between women and men entrepreneurs 
and their enterprises. The random selection of 
women and men business owners in East Java for 
this study on a branchless banking mobile savings 
product provides valuable data that are largely free of sampling biases and that can be used to compare 
the characteristics of entrepreneurs by gender.
The sample is comparatively large. It includes 
4,828 business owners, 2,852 of them women 
and 1,976 men, from 401 villages in five districts 
(kabupaten ) of East Java. Village lists of entrepre -
neurs, collected by survey staff, were prepared as 
the basis for randomly selecting 12 business own -
ers in each sample village (7 women and 5 men). 
In addition to owning at least one currently op -
erating nonfarm business, the surveyed entrepre -
neurs had to be between the ages of 18 and 55, re -
side in the village, and have a mobile phone with 
an active account (since the project introduced 
mobile saving services). See box 1 for a brief dis -
cussion of the study methodology.
The baseline study questions
The baseline study sought to answer three related 
questions:3
• Are there gender differences in entrepreneurs’ 
earned income and savings?
• Do differences in characteristics (endow -
ments)4 of women and men entrepreneurs 
help explain observed differences in economic 
outcomes?
• Which factors are related to more successful 
entrepreneurial ventures, and do these factors 
differ for women and men entrepreneurs?4  |  UNEQUAL VENTURES
Sample
From lists of entrepreneurs prepared by field sur -
vey staff in 401 villages in five districts in East 
Java, 4,828 business owners (2,852 women and 
1,976 men) were randomly selected; in each vil -
lage, 12 entrepreneurs were selected, 7 women 
and 5 men. To be eligible for the project, entre -
preneurs had to own at least one business, reside 
in the village, be 18–55 years old, and have a mo -
bile phone with an active account.
Baseline survey
Using a computer-assisted interview format, inter -
viewers conducted a baseline survey lasting about 
an hour and a half with each entrepreneur in Jan -
uary 2018. The survey included questions about:
• 21 indicators of entrepreneurs’ characteristics, 
such as sex and age, business experience, high -
est level of schooling, cognitive ability, willing -
ness to take risks, and household and business 
assets.
• Indicators of business practices, such as wheth -
er the entrepreneur keeps records and knows 
the costs of products; eight of these were also 
combined into an index of adherence to recom -
mended business practices.
• Income of primary and second business, other 
income (from wage employment, other busi -
nesses), savings, and loans during the past 12 
months.
Statistical analysis
Propensity score matching. To assess how much of 
the observed differences in entrepreneurs’ eco -
nomic outcomes are explained by differences in 
characteristics (question 2), the multivariate analy -
sis was conducted using propensity score matching (since regression analysis would have resulted 
in unreliable estimates because of some highly 
skewed, discrete, or correlated variables). The pro -
pensity score was obtained from a probit regression 
model in which the dependent variable was binary, 
taking a value of 0 for men and 1 for women, and 
the covariates include a set of entrepreneur char -
acteristics: age group, highest level of schooling 
completed, cognitive ability, marital status, having 
children and the number of children, risk aversion 
(and how it relates to age), household size, house -
hold assets (and how it relates to age), and business 
assets (and how it relates to age and marital status). 
Women were then matched with men on the basis 
of their estimated propensity scores.
Difference in differences analysis. The study also 
used a difference in difference analysis to analyze 
differences in characteristics and outcomes be -
tween more and less successful entrepreneurs for 
each gender and also to check for any significant 
gender differences in those differences (question 
3). The less successful group includes the bottom 
50% of entrepreneurs in reported average monthly 
profits (1,539 women and 895 men) in the past 
12 months in their primary and second business -
es combined, while the more successful group 
includes the top 50% (1,239 women and 1,072 
men). Differences in differences were analyzed 
for 21 indicators of characteristics, 22 savings in -
dicators, 19 indicators related to use of financial 
services, 14 business practices indicators, 15 indi -
cators related to business inputs (such as having 
a second business and number of hours worked), 
and 10 other business indicators. The results of 
these analyses and the full list of indicators can be 
found online in the tables in Knowles 2018 , op. cit.
BOX 1
METHODOLOGY OF THE BASELINE STUDYGrowing evidence in 
Indonesia shows that, 
overall, women-owned 
firms are smaller and 
less productive than 
those owned by men
 72. PRIOR EVIDENCE ON WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS IN INDONESIA
In Indonesia, micro, small, and medium enter -
prises are a critical element of inclusive growth, 
contributing 43% of gross national product. 
The sector is recognized as having helped 
maintain the country’s economic resilience during 
the 2008 financial crisis, and as a consequence, 
support for such enterprises has been a public 
sector priority. The government has encouraged 
underserved populations – particularly women – 
with low labor force participation rates to enter 
self-employment.5
Women-owned businesses in Indonesia
Growing evidence in Indonesia shows that, over -
all, women-owned firms are smaller and less pro -
ductive than those owned by men
Women make up a large and growing share of 
the self-employed population in Indonesia.6 In 
2015, there were an estimated 22–33 million 
women entrepreneurs in Indonesia, accounting 
for over half of the country’s micro, small, and 
medium enterprises.7 The entrepreneurship prev -
alence rate is similar for women and men (36% 
for women and 38% for men), but the majority of 
women operate smaller and less productive enter -
prises, mostly in the informal sector.
Characteristics of women entrepreneurs
The gender gap in business performance is attrib -
utable largely to differences in choice of sector 
of activity, in human and financial capital, and 
in legal and social constraints encountered by 
women but not by men in the business world
Existing data for Indonesia support the gen -
eral finding, widely observed across countries 
and situations, that the gender gap in business 
performance is related to women running sub -
sistence-level firms in more traditional, less profitable sectors; having less access to key re -
sources such as business knowledge and networks, 
capital, and technology; and facing legal discrimi -
nation and social constraints.8
Prior to the current study, the largest and most 
comprehensive survey of women entrepreneurs in 
Indonesia sampled 1,633 women micro and small 
entrepreneurs in 48 villages in eight provinces in 
2015.9 It found that the most common business sec -
tor for women entrepreneurs was trade (50%), fol -
lowed by manufacturing (24%) and services (13%). 
Most enterprises (97%) were informal and unregis -
tered and followed substandard financial practices.
About half of the women in that survey were 
entrepreneurs by necessity, choosing this occupa -
tion because they needed income and could not 
find alternative wage or salaried employment. 
Only a small minority (15.4%) embraced entre -
preneurship in response to a business opportunity 
and owned businesses that showed consistent signs 
of growth. While most of these more growth-ori -
ented businesses were also informal and concen -
trated in trade, their owners were more likely to 
have business plans and keep business records and 
to have higher demand for financial services, sug -
gesting that business practices and financial capi -
tal matter for entrepreneurial success.10
Women entrepreneurs’ access to formal finan -
cial services is low. Only 14.5% of the women in 
the World Bank study had borrowed from a bank 
in the past 12 months, and only 12.9% had bor -
rowed from a formal financial institution other 
than a bank.11 A higher percentage (40%), but 
still low by global benchmarks, had a savings ac -
count in their name at a financial institution.
The women entrepreneurs in the current study 
in East Java share many characteristics with the 
subsistence-level, necessity-only entrepreneurs in 
the World Bank survey. But there are also some 
important differences, as is reported next.Men earn significantly 
more, on average, from 
business and other 
sources of income than 
women. The large gender 
differences in economic 
outcomes are only partly 
explained by differences in 
characteristics by gender
93. BASELINE RESULTS: GENDER DIFFERENCES
IN CHARACTERISTICS, ECONOMIC OUTCOMES,AND CORRELATES OF SUCCESS
This section first describes the main char -
acteristics of women and men entrepre -
neurs. It then summarizes analyses in 
response to the three questions raised 
in the introduction on gender differences in eco -
nomic outcomes, possible explanations for these differences, and factors associated with more suc -
cessful entrepreneurial ventures.
Characteristics of women and men 
entrepreneurs
Women and men entrepreneurs run mostly small, 
subsistence-level firms with few or no employees, likely aimed at local markets, with limited oppor -
tunities for expansion
Most of the sample entrepreneurs operate small 
businesses. Around 24% have no employees and 40%–44% have just one helper – spouse, family member, or employee. Only 9% of men entrepre -
neurs and 4% of women entrepreneurs employ 5–19 employees. Slightly more men (19.3%) than women (15.6%) run a second business in addition to the primary one, perhaps as a way to expand a limited local market. (There are a total of 4,825 primary businesses and 827 secondary businesses in the sample.
12)More women than men run informal firms, and their activities are more concentrated in a few sectors
Firm registration is low overall. Only 17.5% of 
men entrepreneurs and 11.4% of women entre -
preneurs have registered their primary or second -
ary business. Women’s firms are highly concen -
trated in retail shops (46.9% of their primary and secondary businesses combined) and groceries or food stalls (an additional 28.9% of combined firms). Men’s firms are more diversified, distribut -
ed fairly evenly across retail shops (20.4%), food stalls and groceries (19.1%), repair shops (18.5%), and other types of businesses (31.7%).
13
Women earn less than men across different sec -
tors of business activity
Women have consistently lower average monthly 
profits than do men across all business sectors for their primary business (figure 1). The literature on gender and entrepreneurship suggests that the sector or type of business in which women typi -
cally operate is one of the main reasons for their firms’ lower profits.
14 That finding is not support -
ed by this study. Analysis of profits of the pri -
mary business by type of business and gender of 
Women Men0.00.51.01.5Figure 1. Women entrepreneurs in East Java have lower average monthly 
proﬁts than men across all business sectors, 2017
Millions of rupiah
2.0
All business
typesOther Processing Services Retail
shopRestaurant Grocery0.951.01 1.03
0.850.831.101.261.41 1.44 1.47
1.341.291.461.62
Source:  Knowles 2018 .10  |   UNEQUAL VENTURES
the entrepreneur suggests that the gender gap in 
earnings would not shrink significantly if women operated the same types of businesses as men do – women’s business profits would increase by lessthan 3%.
15 This is partly because profit differen -
tials between business types are not very large.
Basic demographic and educational character -
istics of women and men entrepreneurs tip the 
scales in favor of men
Most entrepreneurs are married, but men 
entrepreneurs reside in larger households, which gives them more labor assets to draw onWhile the share of married entrepreneurs is near -
ly identical among women (91%) and men (90%), men reside in larger households, with an average of 4.80 members compared with 3.99 for women. That household size advantage for men appears to provide them with more unpaid workers for their businesses. A positive relationship emerges in the analysis for household size and unpaid workers, even after other factors are controlled for, such as the entrepreneur’s own labor inputs, number of paid workers, and marital status.
16
Women entrepreneurs are younger and less educated than men entrepreneurs, which adds to women’s disadvantageWomen entrepreneurs are more heavily repre -
sented than men entrepreneurs in the younger age groups (18–40), whereas men entrepreneurs are more heavily represented in the older age groups (41–55). This difference is important because several gender differentials in other character -
istics vary with the entrepreneur’s age. Male en -
trepreneurs in all age groups are more likely to have completed upper secondary schooling (49% of men and 39% of women overall), but this gen -
der differential is wider in the younger age groups (61% for men and 48% for women in the 18–40 age group).
Men report significantly greater business assets 
than women
The overall value of men entrepreneurs’ assets 
is more than twice that of women entrepreneurs (figure 2). The gap favoring men increases with the entrepreneur’s age, reaching a maximum of more than three times women entrepreneurs’ as -
sets in the oldest age group (51–55).
Entrepreneurs’ economic outcomes by 
gender
Men earn significantly more, on average, from 
business and other sources of income than women
Earnings from the main sources of income are 
sharply higher for men entrepreneurs than for women entrepreneurs. Men have higher average monthly profits from their primary and secondary businesses combined, which is the largest income source for both women and men, and from other, lesser income sources, which includes wage and salary earnings and profits from other businesses (figure 3). The gender differential favoring men is 2:1 for primary and secondary business, 3:1 for average monthly wage and salary earnings, and 4:1 for profits from businesses other than primary and secondary.
Despite men’s higher reported income, women 
entrepreneurs are more likely to report having 
Women MenFigure 2. The value of men entrepreneurs’ assets is more than twice that 
of women entrepreneurs’ assets in East Java, 2017
Millions of rupiah
0102030405060
Total 51–55 46–50 41–45 36–40 31–35 26–30 18–2518.72
14.7123.1720.4119.4316.6218.35
13.4643.3148.08
45.6152.71
45.26
36.3834.71
27.43
Source:  Knowles 2018 .UNEQUAL VENTURES   |  11
  Among entrepreneurs, women are more 
likely than men to save in an informal network, 
includ-ing ROSCAs, while men are more likely to 
save in a formal bank or at home. There are large 
gender differentials favoring men in saving in a 
formal bank account (more than 3:1) and 
at home (al-most 2:1), whereas there are 
smaller gender dif-ferentials favoring women 
in saving in a ROSCA or in other savings 
instruments.
What helps explain differences in 
economic outcomes by gender?
To answer questions about gender differences in 
economic outcomes, the outcomes were com-
pared for a sample of women and men entrepre-
neurs who were well matched in characteristics, 
using the statistical technique of propensity score 
matching.19 Characteristics that were matched 
include age, marital status, household size and 
number of children, as well as education level, 
cognitive ability, willingness to take risk, and 
business and household assets.20 Despite large 
gender differences in characteristics in the sam-
ple, the study was able to match women and men 
entrepreneurs on relevant characteristics to com-
pare outcomes in this matched sample.
The large gender differences i n economic out-
comes are only partly explained by differences in 
characteristics by gender
Before matching, the distributions of the estimat-
ed propensity scores (pscores) are quite different 
between women and men entrepreneurs, as was 
expected (figure 5, left panel). After matching, 
however, the two distributions overlap almost Women Men01234Figure 3. Among entrepreneurs in East Java, men 
have signiﬁcantly higher average monthly proﬁts 
from all sources than women, 2017
Millions of rupiah per month
5
Total
earned incomeOther
incomePrimary/secondary
business proﬁt1.91
0.211.704.04
0.843.20
Note: “ Other i ncome” sou rces i nclude p rofits f rom o ther bu sinesses 
and wage and salary earnings.
Source:  Knowles 2 01 8.
any saving s – and t o report higher saving s relative 
to their e arned i ncome
More women entrepreneurs (84%) than men 
(69%) reported having any savings in the past 
12 months in any savings instrument (including 
a formal bank account, at home, or in a rotat -
ing savings and credit association, or ROSCA17). 
While men saved more than women in absolute 
terms (11.0 million rupiah compared with Rp. 
6.1 millio n),18 women saved substantially more 
than men as a share of their reported earned in -
come, both overall (almost 2:1) and in all age 
groups (figure  4 ). For both women and men en -
trepreneurs, the savings ratio decreases steadily 
with age, which is contrary to the usual life-cycle 
pattern in which savings ratios tend to be lower 
am
ong both young and old age groups.
Women MenFigure 4. Women entrepreneurs in East Java save signiﬁcantly more than 
men as a share of average monthly income overall and in all age groups, 2017
Share of annualized earnings (%)
0102030405060
Total 51–55 46–50 41–45 36–40 31–35 26–30 18–2539.2
29.733.632.238.944.8 45.246.9
22.0
16.618.9 19.123.425.3 25.129.0
Age group
Note:  Extreme values (the top 2%) of the reported saving ratios have been excluded to reduce the effect of 
possibly spurious outliers (winsorization).
Source:  Knowles 2018 .12  |  UNEQUAL VENTURES
completely, meaning that there are men entrepre -
neurs with the same or similar estimated pscores 
as most women entrepreneurs, indicating that the matching was successful (figure 5, right panel).
The before and after matching distributions of 
the total value of business assets, a highly skewed characteristic with the largest pre-matching gen -
der gap, again show successful matching (figure
 6)
.
This analysis shows that the sharp gender dif -
ferences in earnings and economic outcomes are only partly explained by differences in charac -
teristics that give men entrepreneurs a head start over women entrepreneurs.
Matching on entrepreneurs’ characteristics reduc -
es by only 32% the gender differential in average 
monthly total earned income favoring men
As shown earlier, estimates of gender differentials 
in average monthly earned income by source all favor men entrepreneurs. Matching reduces gen -
der differentials in three of the four sources of monthly earned income (the exception is wage 
and salary earnings; figure 7). However, none of 
the reductions is statistically significant. These re -
sults suggest that other factors (such as social cus -
toms and gender discrimination) account for the 
remaining statistically significant gender differ-
ential of almost Rp. 1.5 million a month in total 
earned income.
Matching on entrepreneurs’ characteristics 
only slightly reduces some gender differentials 
in savings favorin g women and others favoring 
men
Matching only slightly reduces gender differen -
tials favoring women entrepreneurs for having 
any saving during the past 12 months and for the 
amount saved as a share of annualized total earn -
ings. Matching reduces by 15% the differential fa -
voring men for total annual savings as well as for 
the amounts saved in formal bank accounts and 
at home.Figure 5. After matching on entrepreneurs’ characteristics, estimated propensity scores are very 
similar for women and men entrepreneurs in East Java, 2017 
Density
Unmatched Matched
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00.51.01.52.0
Pr(sex)Women’s
pscores
Men’s
pscores
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.000.00.51.01.52.02.5
Pr(sex)Women’s
pscoresMen’s
matched
pscores
Source:  Knowles 2018 .
Figure 6. After matching on entrepreneurs’ characteristics, the natural logarithm of the value of 
total business assets is similar for women and men entrepreneurs in East Java, 2017 
Density
Unmatched Matched
10 15 20 250.000.050.100.150.200.25
Log of business assets (not winsorized)Women’s
pscoresMen’s
pscores
10 15 20 250.00.10.20.3
Log of business assets (not winsorized)Men’s
matchedpscores
Women ’s
pscores
Source:  Knowles 2018 .UNEQUAL VENTURES   |  13
Matching on entrepreneurs’ characteristics sub -
stantially reduces the estimated gender differen -
tials favoring men in some important business-re -
lated outcomes
Matching reduces by a substantial 39% the gen -
der differential favoring men entrepreneurs for 
the number of paid workers. In addition, match -
ing reduces to statistically insignificant levels gen -
der differentials for having a second business, an index of adherence to eight recommended busi -
ness practices,
21 and registering at least one busi -
ness (figure 8).
Matching on the entrepreneurs’ characteristics 
only somewhat reduces gender differentials favor -
ing men for accessing information technology and financial services
Before matching, gender differentials in four 
other characteristics – ownership of a smart phone, accessing the internet, having an individu -
al bank account, and taking out a loan during the past 12 months – are statistically significant and favor men. Matching on these characteristics re -
duces all four estimated gender differentials, but not significantly (figure 9).
Characteristics associated with successful 
entrepreneurship by gender
The study classified entrepreneurs into two groups 
by degree of business success. Entrepreneurs with reported average monthly business profits above the median in the last year were classified as more successful, and those with profits at or below the median as less successful. Classified in this way, the sample of women entrepreneurs includes 1,239 more successful entrepreneurs and 1,539 less successful entrepreneurs, while the sample of men entrepreneurs includes 1,072 more suc -
cessful entrepreneurs and 895 less successful entrepreneurs.
22 More successful women entre -
preneurs have a higher representation among retail operations (52% of the primary business -
es) than do less successful women entrepreneurs (44%). More successful men entrepreneurs have Figure 7. Matching on entrepreneurs’ characteristics reduces by less than 
one-third gender diﬀerentials for entrepreneurs in East Java in three of 
four sources of monthly earned income, 2017
Millions of rupiah
–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50.0
Total earned
incomeWage and
salary earningsOther
proﬁtSecond
business proﬁtPrimary
business proﬁt
Unmatched gender  Matched gender Standard
diﬀerence diﬀerence error–2.13–0.18
–0.44–0.26
–1.24 –1.46–0.18 –0.37 –0.13
–0.78
Note:  Gender differentials are unchanged for “wage and salary earnings” and are statistically insignificant for 
“second business profits.”
Source:  Knowles 2018 .
Figure 8. Matching on entrepreneurs characteristics 
reduces to statistically insigniﬁcant levels gender diﬀerentials for entrepreneurs in East Java in three important business-related outcomes, 2017
Proportion
-0.3-0.2-0.10.00.1
At least one
business registered
(proportion)Business
practices
index (0–8)Has second
business
(proportion)–0.06 –0.19–0.04
–0.06–0.19–0.04
Unmatched gender diﬀerence
Matched gender diﬀerenceStandard error
Source:  Knowles 2018.14  |  UNEQUAL VENTURES
a higher representation among grocery stores and 
food stalls (23.5%) than do less successful men 
entrepreneurs (19%).
The analysis looked at differences between more 
and less successful entrepreneurs for each gender 
as well as the gender differences in differences23 
for 21 indicators of entrepreneurs’ characteristics, 
such as age, educations, business experience, cog -
nitive ability, and household and business assets.24
It is important to underscore that this analy -
sis can only suggest relations between variables; 
it cannot establish a causal link. A significant re -
lationship between business success and a given 
indicator may reflect a causal link between the 
two and a third unobserved factor. For example, 
a significant relationship between higher profits 
and adherence to recommended business prac -
tices might be observed because age or education 
affects both profits and business practices. In ad -
dition, there is the possibility of causation in both 
directions: adherence to recommended business 
practices may make a business more profitable, 
but it is also plausible that at least some entrepre -
neurs may follow recommended business practic -
es if their business is more profitable for whatever 
reason (such as good luck).
Successful entrepreneurs, both women and men, 
share characteristics that sharply differentiate 
them from less successful ones, including regis -
tering the business, having more business experi -
ence, and being willing to take risks
Data on 21 indicators of entrepreneurs’ char -
acteristics show that differences between more successful and less successful men entrepreneurs 
and between more successful and less success -
ful women entrepreneurs are highly significant 
in most cases.25 For example, business registra -
tion, number of years of business experience, and 
willingness to take risk are positively and highly 
significantly related to business success for both 
women and men. More successful women entre -
preneurs are 8% more likely than less successful 
ones to have at least one business registered; for 
men entrepreneurs the difference is 12%. More 
successful entrepreneurs have more business ex -
perience than less successful ones: 2.0 more years 
for women and 1.2 for men.
The differences between more and less suc -
cessful entrepreneurs for most of the remaining 
indicators are highly significant for business suc -
cess for both women and men entrepreneurs, in -
cluding for a household asset index and the total 
value of business assets.26
Being older, however, is associated with a great -
er likelihood of business success only for women, 
while being married and having children is asso -
ciated with greater success only for men
The 1.1 year age difference between (older) more 
successful women entrepreneurs and (younger) 
less successful women entrepreneurs is highly sig -
nificant, whereas the smaller 0.6 year difference 
between more and less successful men entrepre -
neurs is not statistically significant. Conversely, 
the differences between more and less successful 
women entrepreneurs for the indicators “currently 
married” and “has children” are both statistically Figure 9. Matching on the entrepreneurs’ characteristics only somewhat 
reduces gender diﬀerentials favoring men over women entrepreneurs in 
East Java in accessing information technology and ﬁnancial services, 2017
Percent
–25–20–15–10–50
Took out any loans
in last 12 monthsHas bank account
in own nameUse phone to
access internetOwn
smart phone–18.2 –13.7 –13.9 –7.6 –14.4 –11.3 –11.7 –7.6
Unmatched gender  Matched gender Standard
diﬀerence diﬀerence error
Source:  Knowles 2018 .UNEQUAL VENTURES   |  15
insignificant, whereas the differences are both 
highly significant among men entrepreneurs.
Having a bank account in one’s name is signifi -
cantly related to business success for both women 
and men
More successful women entrepreneurs are 10% 
more likely than less successful ones to have a 
bank account in their name, and more successful 
men entrepreneurs are 16% more likely. Using an 
account for saving, checking the account balance, 
and taking out a business loan are positively and 
significantly related to business success among 
both women and men entrepreneurs. In addition, 
using an account for microcredit is positively and 
significantly related to success for women entre -
preneurs, while using an account for letters of 
credit, vehicle loans, and health or life insurance 
is positively and significantly related to success 
for men entrepreneurs. Knowing about mobile 
money applications is positively and significantly 
associated with business success among men but 
is positively but not significantly associated with 
success among women.
More successful women and men entrepreneurs 
save more than their less successful counterparts, 
suggesting the importance of savings to entrepre -
neurial success
Most of the estimated differences between more 
and less successful women and men entrepreneurs 
for 22 savings indicators (such as having any sav -
ings in the last 12 months; having any informal 
savings, e-savings, or savings at home) are signif -
icant and positive, suggesting that more success -
ful entrepreneurs save more than less successful 
ones do.27More successful women and men entrepreneurs 
are more likely than less successful ones to ad -
here to recommended business practices
Estimated differences for 12 of 14 indicators of 
business practices are positive and statistically sig -
nificant for both women and men entrepreneurs, 
including the 8 indicators in the business practic -
es index.28 These differences, however, are larger 
among men than among women entrepreneurs.
Having a second business is associated with great -
er business success among both women and men
More successful women entrepreneurs are much 
more likely than less successful ones to have a sec -
ond business (24% versus 9%); the difference is 
even larger among men entrepreneurs (29% versus 
10%). More successful women and men entrepre -
neurs also work more days in a typical month and 
more hours in a typical day in their second busi -
nesses. However, working more in wage and salary 
work or in other business pursuits beyond the pri -
mary and second businesses is negatively associat -
ed with profitability among both women and men 
entrepreneurs, suggesting that too much diversifi -
cation of work activities may negatively affect prof -
itability in primary and second businesses.29
Business help from a spouse is also positively and 
significantly associated with greater business suc -
cess for both women and men
More successful women and men entrepreneurs 
are more likely to receive business help from a 
spouse (8% more likely for women and 7% for 
men). Business help from another male house -
hold member is positively associated with success 
among women entrepreneurs but not among men 
entrepreneurs.The randomized controlled 
trial that is collecting 
baseline data is exploring 
in more depth many of 
the constraints affecting 
women entrepreneurs that 
were highlighted in this 
analysis and will identify 
ways to address them 174. IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS
This rich dataset generally supports pre -
vious findings for Indonesia and the re -
sults of cross-country analyses of gender 
and entrepreneurship, while adding a 
few twists. These are discussed below, along with 
their potential policy implications.
Leveling the playing field for entrepreneurial ven -
tures may require more than equalizing charac -
teristics between women and men entrepreneurs
Entrepreneurial ventures are highly unequal 
in East Java. The study supports evidence from 
cross-country studies showing sharp gender dif -
ferentials in characteristics and economic out -
comes in favor of men. However, this study also 
finds that differences in measured characteris -
tics explain less than a third of observed gender 
 differences in total earned income, suggesting 
that policies to improve women’s entrepreneurial 
ventures will need to address a broader array of 
factors that tilt entrepreneurial environments in 
favor of men.
An important implication of these findings is 
that policies designed to boost women entrepre -
neurs’ economic status by improving their char -
acteristics, while helpful, may not be sufficient to 
close gender gaps in economic outcomes. It may 
also be necessary to address social, cultural, and 
political factors that hold women entrepreneurs 
back even when their characteristics are similar 
to those of men entrepreneurs. This could include 
examining potential biases against women clients 
in the delivery of financial and other services – an 
observation that motivated the studies that are 
documented in this series – and then overcoming 
them through information and other measures, 
including incentives for bank agents to enroll 
women clients.
It is nonetheless the case that increasing wom -
en’s education and training and improving their business practices are potentially important pol -
icy concerns
The gender disparity in education, which per -
sists even among the younger age groups in this 
study, is worrisome and suggests that less edu -
cated young women are becoming entrepreneurs 
in greater numbers, likely out of necessity. This 
and the fact that good business practices are asso -
ciated with more successful entrepreneurs would 
support this focus of policy, especially for young -
er cohorts.
On the other hand, encouraging women to di -
versify their entrepreneurial activities may have 
less of an effect in the Indonesian context than in 
some others
Encouraging women entrepreneurs to shift to 
more male-dominated occupations or sectors may 
have less of an effect on women’s business out -
comes in the context of East Java than in other 
cases documented in the literature. In East Java, 
interventions to increase women’s profits within 
the sectors or types of businesses in which they 
are currently engaged may have a greater payoff in 
reducing gender disparities in outcomes.
The data for Indonesia support women’s greater 
preference for savings and its association with 
entrepreneurial success, but women still resort to 
more informal saving mechanisms than men do
Although women entrepreneurs save significantly 
less in absolute amounts, they save substantially 
more as a share of their reported earned incomes 
than men entrepreneurs, both overall (almost 2:1) 
and in all age groups, as underscored in the first 
report in this series.30 Women’s stronger prefer -
ence to save, however, occurs mainly through 
informal mechanisms, perhaps because of both 
higher transaction costs for women and gender 
biases in the delivery of formal financial services. 
18  |  UNEQUAL VENTURES
This situation is inefficient and a potential con -
tributor to unequal entrepreneurial outcomes. 
Awareness of these data may be useful input for 
banks and other formal financial services provid -
ers and help define women entrepreneurs as a 
new market segment for savings and other finan -
cial products.
It is encouraging that some of the main charac -
teristics associated with more successful entrepre -
neurs are well known in the literature and do not 
vary significantly by gender
A successful venture is defined on the basis of the 
entrepreneurs’ combined profits from primary and 
secondary businesses. More successful women and 
men entrepreneurs exhibit characteristics that vary 
little between them (the main exceptions are dif -
ferences in savings and business assets, which vary 
substantially) but that vary sharply between them 
and less successful women and men entrepreneurs.
These positive characteristics include following 
good business practices, having access to assets 
and financial services, having access to help -
ing hands in the business, and owning a second 
business
More successful entrepreneurs, both women and 
men, have higher levels of most well- studied 
characteristics, including business experience, 
registered businesses, cognitive ability, and will -
ingness to take risk, while they also save more, 
have a bank account in their own name, are more 
likely to follow recommended business practices, 
and have a spouse who helps in running the busi -
ness. Running a second business may help over -
come the limitations of local markets.
The growth-oriented women entrepreneurs 
highlighted in the World Bank Indonesia survey31 
discussed earlier in this report are likely a por -
tion of the more successful women entrepreneurs 
identified here, which highlights the potential im -
portance of access to good business practices and 
financial services.
Older women run more successful ventures than 
younger ones, while being married and having 
children is associated with more business success 
for menThis finding suggests that experience matters 
more for women than for men, perhaps to com -
pensate for women’s greater education deficit in 
all age groups. It also supports evidence in ad -
vanced economies that shows that marriage is 
beneficial to men’s professional advancement. 
More important, perhaps, marriage provides 
family labor more readily in the case of success -
ful men entrepreneurs than of successful women 
entrepreneurs.
The gender gap favoring men entrepreneurs in 
smart phone ownership and access to the internet 
needs to be addressed
The baseline data analysis suggests that enhanc -
ing women’s information and knowledge and re -
ducing gender bias in financial and other service 
delivery systems would improve women entre -
preneurs’ access to saving and credit services and 
information technologies that can help grow their 
businesses.
The randomized controlled trial that is collecting 
baseline data is exploring in more depth many of 
the constraints affecting women entrepreneurs 
that were highlighted in this analysis and will 
identify ways to address them
The randomized controlled trial in East Java vil -
lages, which is still ongoing, is designed to ad -
dress, on the demand side, women’s access to a 
mobile savings product through branchless bank -
ing and information on how to access the prod -
uct, as well as why and how to save (financial 
literacy). By making mobile savings available to 
women entrepreneurs, the project hopes to re -
duce transaction costs and increase women’s pri -
vacy to manage accounts and save. On the supply 
side, the project may be able to modify any po -
tential bias of financial service providers against 
women clients through information dissemina -
tion (on the importance of reaching women) and 
financial incentives to bank agents for enrolling 
both women and men clients. The project is also 
exploring whether having women financial agents 
increases women’s uptake of formal financial 
services.
Stay tuned.19NOTES
1.B uvinic, M., and T. Jaluka, 2018, Mind -
ful Saving: Exploring the Power of Savings for
Women, Washington, DC: Center for Global
Development .
2.B
uvinic and Jaluka 2018, op. cit.
3.F
or more details on the study and the analysis,
see Knowles, J.C., April 2018, “Analysis of Im -
pact Evaluation Baseline Survey,” BackgroundPaper, Washington, DC: Center for GlobalDevelopment .
4.
E
ntrepreneurs’ characteristics or “endowments”
include attributes not dependent on choice,such as age and gender, as well as characteris -
tics that depend on previous decisions, such ashousehold and business assets and completedlevels of schooling.
5.
W
orld Bank, Finance and Markets Global
Practice, East Asia Pacific Region, April 2016,Women Entrepreneurs in Indonesia: A Pathwayto Increasing Shared Prosperity , World Bank
Indonesia.
6.
W
orld Bank 2016, op. cit.
7.M
elissa, E., A. Hamidati, M. Saraswati, and
A. Flor, 2015, “The Internet and IndonesianWomen Entrepreneurs: Examining the Impactof Social Media on Women Empowerment,” inA. Chib, R. Barrantes, and J.D. May, eds., Im -
pact of Information Society Research in theGlobal South, Berlin: Springer.
8.
C
ampos, F., and M. Gassier, 2017, “Gender
and Enterprise Development in Sub-SaharanAfrica: A Review of Constraints and EffectiveInterventions,” World Bank Policy ResearchWorking Paper 8239, Washington, DC: WorldBank; McKenzie, D., and C. Woodruff, 2015,“Business Practices in Small firms in DevelopingCountries,” NBER Working Paper 21505, Cam -
bridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Re -
search; Bardasi, E., S. Sabarwal, and K. Terrell,2011, “How Do Female Entrepreneurs Perform?Evidence from Three Developing Regions,”Small Business Economics  37(4): 417–441.9.World Bank 2016, op. cit.
10.World Bank 2016, op. cit.
11.World Bank 2016, op. cit.
12.For more detail, see K nowles 2018, op. cit.
13.These percentages of business types by gender 
may change somewhat in forthcoming issues 
in this Series on Women’s Economic Empow-
erment since all businesses are being recod-
ed to better capture the details of the “other” 
category.
14.Campos and Gassier 2017,op. cit.; McKenzie 
and Woodruff 2015, op. cit.; Bardasi et al. 2011, 
op. cit.
15.Knowles 2018, op. cit.
16.Knowles 2018, op. cit.
17.A rotating savings and credit association is 
a form of locally organized savings in which 
members pool their savings resources regularly 
and lend them to another member on a rotating 
basis.
18.As of April 2018, 1 million rupiah were equiv-
alent to $72.
19.The matched sample includes 4,764 entrepre-
neurs: 2,807 women entrepreneurs and 1,957 
men entrepreneurs. The sample size is 57 peo-
ple smaller than the original sample of 4,821 en-
trepreneurs because of the attrition of 7 women 
entrepreneurs and unreported values for some 
of the outcomes analyzed. The matching was 
done using the Stata user-developed program 
“psmatch2” with the sample limited to women 
entrepreneurs with estimated pscores in the 
same range as those of men entrepreneurs.
20.Interactions between age and currently mar-
ried, willingness to take risk, and household as-
sets were also included; see Knowles 2018, o p. 
cit., table 2.
21.The business practices index is the sum of eight 
indicators of reported adherence to recom-
mended business practices that are reported by 20  |   UNEQUAL VENTURES
almost all (4,820) entrepreneurs (with adher -
ence equal to 1 and nonadherence equal to 0): 
used special offers to attract customers during the past three months, used any form of adver -
tising during the past six months, attempted to negotiate with a supplier for a lower price during the past three months, kept written business records, knows the cost of main prod -
ucts, has a written budget for operating costs, sells goods on credit, and has the records need -
ed to apply for a bank loan. Information on the other recommended business practices is avail -
able in table 1 in Knowles 2018 , op. cit.  
22. The two groups are of unequal size 
because of the relatively large frequency of 
entrepreneurs reporting the median value of 
average month-l y profits of Rp. 1.0 million for 
women (145 women) and  Rp. 2. 0 million f or 
men (131 men).23.A gender difference in differences analysis stud -
ies the effect of gender on a particular outcome.
24.K
nowles 2018 , op. cit. , table 2.
25.K
nowles 2018 , op. cit. , table 2.
26.K
nowles 2018 , op. cit. , table 2.
27.K
nowles 2018 , op. cit. , table 3.
28.K
nowles 2018 , op. cit. , table 4; see also note 21.
29.H
owever, as with other findings, this is only an
association and not necessarily a causal relation -
ship. For example, entrepreneurs may allocatemore time to other activities if their primary orsecond businesses are less profitable for otherreasons.
30.
B
uvinic and Jaluka 2018, op. cit.
31.W
orld Bank 2016, op. cit.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge the pivotal role of our partners, the  ExxonMobil 
Foundation and Women’s World Banking in the creation of “She Counts.” We 
are grateful for the intellectual support of Principal Investigators Erika de Ser -
rano, Northwestern University, and Gianmarco Léon, Pompeu Fabra University. 
We especially wish to thank our colleagues Andrea Adhi, Nurzanty Khadijah, 
Chaerudin Kodir, Lina Marliani, Alexander Michael, Irwan Setyawan, and Poppy 
Widyasari of the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab Southeast Asia, for 
their care in coordinating the fieldwork; Mercy Corps, especially Britt Rosen -
berg at headquarters and Glory Sunarto and her team in Indonesia for their 
skill in implementing a challenging pilot program; and SurveyMETER, for their 
excellence in conducting the survey. Thanks also to Hillary Johnson and Eliza -
veta Perova, of the World Bank East Asia and the Pacific Gender Innovation 
Lab, for their support of this project. Many thanks also to Bruce Ross Larson, 
Meta de Coquereaumont, Elaine Wilson, and Debra Naylor, of Communications 
Development Incorporated, for their editorial and design work on the report, 
and to Kelsey Richardson and her colleagues at APCO Worldwide for their 
communications and outreach expertise. Lastly, our deep gratitude goes to the 
Indonesian entrepreneurs who participated in the survey. The Center for Global 
Development is an independent, nonprofit policy research organization ded -
icated to reducing global poverty and inequality and to making globalization 
work for the poor. The views expressed in CGD publications are those of the 
authors and should not be attributed to the board of directors, funders of the 
Center for Global Development, or the authors’ respective organizations.
The Center for Global Development is grateful for funding from the  ExxonMobil 
Foundation in support of this work.
Authors: Mayra Buvinic is Senior Fellow, Center for Global Development; James 
C. Knowles is a private consultant; and Firman Witoelar is Research Director, 
SurveyMETER.