 
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019  1 
 
Contract Number: 72044219C00001   
USAID/CAMBODIA 
ONE WINDOW SERVICE OFFICES – 
PLATFORM TO ENHANCE 
ACCOUNTABILITY (OWSO-PEA) 
LANDSCAPE REPORT OF ONE WINDOW 
SERVICE OFFICES AND CIVIC TECHNOLOGIES 
IN CAMBODIA 
 
13 January  2020 
 
This publication was produced for review by the United States Agency for International Development.  
It was prepared by Nickol Global Solutions LLC. Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019  i ONE WINDOW SERVICE OFFICES 
– PLATFORM TO ENHANCE 
ACCOUNTABILITY (OWSO-PEA) 
Landscape Report of One Window Service Offices 
and Civic Technologies in Cambodia 
December 2019 
 
 
 
Submitted to: 
USAID/Cambodia  
 
Prepared by: 
Nickol Global Solutions LLC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER : 
The authors’ views expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States 
Agency for International Development or the United States Government. 
  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019  ii Table of Contents 
Abbreviations ................................................................................................................................................ 1  
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................... 2  
1. Report Approach ....................................................................................................................................... 2  
2. The One Window Service Offices – Platform to Enhance Accountability Activity ................................. 3  
3. One Window Service Offices - A Brief History and Progress .................................................................. 3  
3.1. Background ........................................................................................................................................ 3  
3.2. Latest progress on OWSOs and the DO ............................................................................................. 5  
4. Relevant OWSO Governance and Reform Context .................................................................................. 7  
4.1. Decentralization reform progress ....................................................................................................... 7  
4.2. Social Accountability Framework ..................................................................................................... 9  
5.  Innovations, Civic Tech Innovations and Public Service Delivery in Cambodia .................................. 10  
5.1. Development trends and policy context ........................................................................................... 10  
5.2. Implementation and Challenges ....................................................................................................... 12  
6. A Mapping of Projects on OWSO and Civic Tech Innovations ............................................................. 14  
7. Key Lessons and Reflections .................................................................................................................. 18  
7.1. The Service Provision and Functioning of OWSOs ........................................................................ 18  
7.2. Citizen Needs, Engagement and the Role of District Ombudsman ................................................. 19  
7.3. Tech Innovations and Service Delivery ........................................................................................... 20  
Annexes ......................................................................................................................................................... i  
Annex 1: OWSO Organizational Chart for District/Municipal Level ....................................................... i  
Annex 2: Lessons from International Experiences – Developing an OWSO ........................................... ii  
Annex 3: List of Identified Governance Innovations in Public Service Delivery in Cambodia .............. iv  
Annex 4: List of Interviews ..................................................................................................................... xi   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   1  ACRONYMS  
 
   BSRS 
CCC Budget System Reform Strategy 
Cooperation Committee for Cambodia 
CCIM Cambodia Center for Independent Media 
DO District Ombudsman 
EU European Union 
GiZ The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit  
I4C Information for Citizens 
ICT 
ISAC Information and Communication Technology 
USAID Innovations in Social Accountability Cambodia 
ISAF Implementation of Social Accountability Framework 
JAPP Joint Accountability Action Planning 
MEF Ministry of Economy and Finance  
MFI Micro-finance institutions 
MOI Ministry of Interior 
MOInf Ministry of Information 
MPTC Ministry Post and Telecommunication 
NGS Nickol Global Solutions LLC 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NPAR National Public Administration Reform  
OWSO 
OWSO-PEA One Window Service Offices 
USAID One Window Service Offices – Platform to Enhance Accountability 
Activity 
RGC Royal Government of Cambodia 
T-ICT Tele-communications Development Policy 
TRANSMIT 
UK 
UNDP 
US 
USAID Tracking and Sharing Multi-Sector Issues with Technology 
The United Kingdom 
The United Nations Development Programme 
The United States of America 
United States Agency for International Development  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   2  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
Nickol Global Solutions (NGS) is a woman owned small business awarded the USAID-funded One 
Window Services – Platform to Enhance Accountability (OWSO-PEA) Activity. Commencing on 
October 1, 2019, the three-year project is to pilot and test civic technologies (herein called civic tech) 
to increase the capability of civilians to access and engage in the processes of providing feedback on 
government services.   
 
There has been significant donor engagement in the development of Cambodia’s One Window 
Service Offices (OWSO), and various civic tech solutions tested to improve citizen knowledge of 
government services offered at the OWSOs. Tasked with piloting approaches that can be sustainable, 
NGS’s first program activities were centered on understanding the OWSO landscape. NGS engaged a 
consultant from 21 November 2019 to 20 December 2019 to conduct and produce a final report on an 
analysis of the regulatory environment, technical/project support, and civic technology landscape. 
 
Key findings from the report include:  
 The demand for administrative services offered by OWSO has been increasing, especially in 
urban areas and among youth. 
 People still see village authority, commune/Sangkat officials, and schools (for young people) 
as the first places for them to get information about public services. 
 Despite the strong legal framework, the District Ombudsman has been found to not be very 
effective (as measured by the number of complaints received). In practice, the Ombudsman 
functions more as an information desk officer for citizens and ‘informal supervisor’ overseeing 
the staff performance at OWSO. 
 Despite the many awareness-raising campaigns, citizens usually do not pay attention to the 
availability of OWSO services or how to get them until they need the services. 
 Citizens face a few common issues when receiving OWSO services: (i) lack of information on 
the documents required, or how to fill them out, leading to extra trips to/from the OWSO; and 
(ii) lack of information on the status of their service application (especially if services are not 
completed within the posted time period).  
 
1. REPORT APPROACH  
The OWSO-PEA Activity was awarded under the Small Business Applied Research contracting 
mechanism and has been designed to engage active learning and adaptive research approaches.  
Looking to apply existing knowledge and lessons learned, NGS engaged a consultant with extensive 
experience in the citizen accountability and government decentralization spaces in Cambodia to 
provide an updated “landscape” on the following four related topics: 
 The history of the Royal Government of Cambodia’s One Window Service Offices, including 
relevant governance, institutional context, and recent developments;  
 An overview of present and planned initiatives by donor-funded and other projects engaged 
within the OWSO/civil service space; 
 A summary of key lessons learned from past OWSO focused projects, civic tech applications 
and from studies focusing on citizen engagement relating to OWSO-PEA’s scope and 
objectives; and 
 Based on the results of the landscape analysis, identification of key influencers for the project 
to engage with and how.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   3   
The findings presented are based on review of relevant documents (referenced in footnotes) and 
interviews with officials from the Royal Government of Cambodia, donor projects and actors in the 
civil society space (Annex 4 - Interview List). In its analysis, the report refers to the design, problem 
statement and objectives of the OWSO-PEA as its guide. 
 
 
2. THE ONE WINDOW SERVICE OFFICES – PLATFORM TO ENHANCE ACCOUNTABILITY 
ACTIVITY 
According to the USAID statement of work, the purpose of the OWSO-PEA Activity is to increase 
the capability of civil society to engage in political processes through a series of carefully planned and 
tested interventions, including design and implementation of civic tech tools, outreach/engagement 
activities, monitoring activities, and other complementary activities to support civilians’ access to 
information on government services provided at the OWSOs and provide feedback on the services 
received. The development hypothesis is illustrated as follows:  
 If citizens have real-time access to provide and receive reliable information about OWSO 
services through civic tech innovations; 
 And if they are engaged through meaningful processes; 
 Then they will more effectively hold government accountable to improved public service 
through the OWSO. 
 
Nickol Global Solutions is expected to provide services that aim to promote tech-enabled social 
accountability for OWSO services, comprising four primary components: 
 A civic tech platform, supported by several simple tools, to support transparency, efficiency, 
consistency, and increased accountability for the OWSO initiative; 
 A broad-based public outreach campaign to enhance public awareness about OWSO services 
as well as public participation and engagement of OWSO services; 
 Monitoring tools to enable citizens and businesses to report on efficiency/satisfaction of OWSO 
services and Cambodian authorities to better measure progress; and 
 Other complementary activities that aim to address both supply and demand of accountability. 
 
3. ONE WINDOW SERVICE OFFICES - A BRIEF HISTORY AND PROGRESS  
3.1. Background 
One Windows Service Offices – also referred to as single windows, one door, or one stop shops –  are 
a relatively common administrative reform implemented to increase efficiency and transparency in the 
issuance of common government permits, licenses and registrations and reduce the burden of 
regulatory compliance, thereby providing an incentive for business and property owners to formalize. 
They can exist at both the central and sub-national levels of government.1  
 
1 World Bank and Ministry of the Interior (2013). Lessons learned on OWSO and District Ombudsman. Phnom 
Penh, Cambodia.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   4   
In Cambodia, the impetus for the OWSO was primarily to improve service delivery for commonly 
required government permits or registrations by bringing the services closer to the people. This was 
done in recognition that the pre-existing licensing and registration processes – as is the case in many 
developing economies – was plagued by overlapping and obscure requirements, red tape, arbitrary 
processing times, and institutionalized payment of informal fees, all of which contribute to low 
compliance rates.2  
 
The OWSO and District Ombudsman (DO) Office were originally modeled upon “Citizen Service 
Centers” which exist at the municipal level in Germany. The reform comprises of three mutually 
supportive interventions:3  
 
1. The OWSO, which is a physical location where applications for a range of permits, licenses, 
and notarization (referred to as legalization in Cambodia) can be obtained.  
2. The DO who is physically present at the OWSO at least part-time and plays a mediation and 
oversight role. 
3. Public awareness and dialogue events to increase communication between officials and the 
public and advertise the services of the OWSO and DO.  
 
Box 1: History of OWSO and DO Offices in Cambodia 
2001 to 2007:  The OWSO and DO were initiated and piloted in Siem Reap and Battambang Municipalities 
with support from Germany, Italy, and the Konrad-Adenauer Foundation. In this period, the Ministry of the 
Interior adopted Prakas to establish the OWSO and DO in the two municipalities. The OWSO was an 
approach to provide administrative services to citizens and small businesses under a single roof and in a 
speedy, transparent, and corruption-free manner.4 
2008 to 2014 : The OWSOs and district ombudsmen were supported by the World Bank funded Demand for 
Good Governance Project. The support was provided to establish the OWSO/DO in one urban district in each 
province of the country. The intention was to significantly improve and strengthen the OWSOs through 
capacity building, improved equipment, enhanced competencies, more partnerships with other state 
institutions and non-state institutions, and wider outreach.  
2014 to 2017 : With the completion of the World Bank project, the OWSOs and district ombudsmen have 
been supported by the Royal Government of Cambodia, with the Department of Function and Resources of 
the Ministry of the Interior playing direct supporting and supervising roles. As of the end of 2017, 46 
OWSOs and district ombudsmen were established, twenty-six (26) at the municipal level, eight (8) at the 
district level, and eight (8) at the khan level. 
2017 to Present : Building on previous success, in 2017 the Royal Government of Cambodia adopted Sub-
Decree No. 18 on the establishment of OWSOs at the sub-national level and Sub-Decree No. 19 on the 
establishment of district ombudsmen at the sub-national level. According to the sub-decrees, the capital and 
provincial levels will also have an OWSO/DO (Please see Section 3.2 below).   
 
In the context of the government’s overall decentralization efforts, the OWSOs are the primary 
example of service delivery by the district, municipal and khan levels, which has historically had 
limited scope in Cambodia, where most responsibilities have been exercised at the capital and 
 
2 World Bank and Ministry of the Interior (2013). Lessons learned on OWSO-DO. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
3 Ibid. 
4 OWSO website: http://www.owso.gov.kh/en/ .  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   5  provincial levels and to a lesser degree at the commune/Sangkat (lowest) level. As laid out in the 
Royal Government of Cambodia’s (RGC) National Program for Sub-National Democratic 
Development, “the strategic intention of the decentralization reform process in Cambodia is to 
gradually but decisively transfer to district, municipal and khan levels and their constitutive 
communes the bulk of service delivery responsibilities.”5 In this context, the successes and challenges 
experienced by the OWSO may be indicative of overall growing pains as Cambodia experiments with 
decentralization implementation. 
 
3.2. Latest progress on OWSOs and the DO 
Since 2017, progress has been made to further expand and improve the OWSOs and district 
ombudsmen. The most positive among them is the continuous support from the highest level of the 
Ministry of Interior (MOI) to identify the OWSO as the best service delivery model and prioritizing 
its expansion. However, as discussed below, the OWSO/DO progress has been constrained by the 
slow progress in the broader decentralization and service delivery reforms (see Section 7.1’s lessons 
learned).  
 
Based on the success from the previous decade, in 2017 the Government adopted Sub-Decree No. 18,  
establishing the OWSO at the sub-national level and Sub-Decree No. 19 establishing the DO at the 
sub-national level.6 According to the sub-decrees, the following points are to be noted. 
 
While the idea is to aim to have all the sub-national administrations, especially the provincial, district, 
municipal and khan levels; to have one OWSO and DO, there are some conditions.  According to 
Sub-Decree No. 18, and confirmed by an interviewed MOI official from the OWSO office, only those 
districts/municipalities/khans that meet the following five criteria are eligible to establish and run a 
full OWSO:  
I. appropriate population size,  
II. economic potential,  
III. district/municipality that already has office space or at least land space for OWSO building 
construction,  
IV. district/municipality with enough staff to serve at both the front office (i.e. from 
district/municipality’s own staff) and back office (i.e. staff from line offices), and  
V. sufficient infrastructure including internet access.  
 
For those districts/municipality that do not meet these criteria, they are asked to establish a one 
window service mechanism. Basically, the OWSO and the one window service mechanism are similar 
in many ways, with a few exceptions. Firstly, both offer the same services, with the same provisions 
on fees, time requirement, documentary requirements, and even the incentive sharing schemes among 
staff members. However, what is different are the document flows and the authority to sign off. In an 
OWSO, there is the Chief of the OWSO who can sign off on the documents. Such a position does not 
 
5 National Committee for Sub-national Democratic Development, First Three Years Implementation Plan of NP-
SNDD (IP3), p. 4. 
6 Royal Government of Cambodia. Sub-decree n. 18 (2017) on the establishment of OWSO mechanism at the 
sub-national administration level. Phnom Penh, Cambodia; and Sub-decree n. 19 (2017) on the establishment of 
DO mechanism at the sub-national administration level. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   6  exist in a one window service mechanism7. Therefore, the authority to sign off is given to the Chief of 
Administration and Finance of the mainstream district/municipal administration office. 
 
As of November 2019, Cambodia has 115 OWSOs (with 32 being established within the last year). 
This presents 56% of the total 204 districts/municipalities/khans in the whole country.8  
 
The more significant change is the introduction of the provincial level OWSOs. According to Sub-
Decree No. 18, administrative services from 12 departments, plus two (2) of the salakhet services are 
transferred to the provincial OWSO. These services are bigger in size compared to those delegated to 
the district OWSOs, and target mainly bigger business enterprises. Provincial OWSOs have also 
generated a lot of revenue (estimated by the interviewed MOI official to be around USD 8 million 
dollars per month countrywide). New regulations are still needed to instruct the provincial level 
offices on how to manage these funds (including the incentive sharing scheme) as the Prime Minister 
recently approved that the revenue from the provincial OWSOs will be classified as provincial 
administration revenue and not belonging to the line departments. Because this is about non-tax 
revenue management, the role of the Ministry of Economics and Finance is of importance to push this 
work forward.  
 
Resistance and concerns from line departments have been noticeable given the scale of delegation to 
the provincial OWSOs. Not only is a large sum of revenue taken from line departments, but many 
have raised the concern that they no longer have work to do. According to the interviewed MOI 
official, this concern is a misunderstanding about how the OWSO works. What is expected is that line 
departments still provide the services through the OWSO back-offices as designed. Moreover, the 
management level of line departments at the provincial level have more authority to approve or 
disapprove on a service application process placed through the OWSO (whereas in the 
district/municipal/khan case, such authority is given to the line office staff assigned to sit at the back 
office of the OWSO).  
 
Sub-Decree No. 19 provides details on the set-up of the district ombudsman. The stated objective is to 
promote good governance in service delivery and local economic development at the sub-national 
level through the strengthening of sub-national administration in using out-of-court channels in 
receiving and solving complaints with regards to public service delivery.   
 
Box 2: Key Provisions of Sub-Decree No. 19 (2017) on the District Ombudsman 
 The sub-decree applies to all provincial, district, municipal, khan, commune and Sangkat levels with 
regards to public service delivery, except for issues that are required by Cambodia’s laws to be 
addressed through other channels;  
 At the provincial level, the district ombudsman’s office is to consist of one chief and a deputy chief 
(also referred to as an assistant). Both the chief and deputy are selected through an election process 
and recognized through a Prakas. Both are expected to serve a five (5) year term and can stand for 
reelection. 
 
7 According to the interviewed MOI official, all districts and municipalities that are not qualified to open an 
OWSO will operate as one window service mechanism instead.  
8 Interview with MoI Officer, OWSO Office of the Department of Functions and Resources, November 2019.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   7   The election committee to select the DO chief and deputy chief is composed of: (i) the chief to the 
provincial council, (ii) all members of the provincial council, (iii) the chief of the district/municipal 
or commune/Sangkat council association, (iv) one representative from provincial chamber of 
commerce, and (v) three representatives from non-government organizations.   
 At the provincial level, the DO has two sections: (i) complaint receiving, and (ii) the legal and 
investigation section. Both sections are headed by one chief and at most two (2) deputies. Those who 
serve in the sections are to be recruited from the existing civil servants.  
 The sub-decree details the procedures and principles on the receiving of complaints, investigations 
and compromising on complaints (Articles 22 to 28).  
 The DO operation is funded from the budget of the salakhet. The chief and deputy chief of the 
ombudsman office receive a regular monthly allowance at the same grade as that of the provincial 
council chief (for the DO chief) and provincial councilors (for the deputy).  
 At the district/municipal/khan level, the DO has only the chief and staff (there is no deputy). The 
provisions on the election of the DO and working arrangements are, however, similar to those of the 
provincial level (from Article 31 through Article 55). 
 Article 56 specifies that the DO at the provincial level and at the district/municipal/khan level are 
separate mechanisms and not subject to one another’s authority. They however can collaborate on 
their investigations and other related works.  
 Article 58 encourages the partnership and collaboration of the DO offices with non-state actors 
including private sector and NGOs in the areas of support, capacity building, awareness raising, 
collection of complaints, feedback provisions, and others.  
 
4. RELEVANT OWSO  GOVERNANCE AND REFORM CONTEXT  
The latest progress on OWSOs should be understood within the broader context of decentralization 
reform (including the budget aspects), public service delivery, and social accountability. Based on 
policy review and key informant interviews, it is suggested that there have been more conducive 
developments in the last two years which require attention from the project in order to identify 
appropriate entry points especially at the policy level. The following are the specific progress/changes 
worth noting.  
 
4.1. Decentralization reform progress 
According to interviews with the National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development 
and MOI, starting in late 2018 there has been little noticeable progresses on decentralization. 
After a long period of almost stalling, the RGC has recently pushed to transfer more authority, 
functions and resources to sub-national administrations, including: 
 A plan to create a more unified administrative structure at the district/municipal level by 
integrating line offices under the district/municipal administration. As indicated in Box 3 
below, from 2020 the district/municipal administration will have fewer offices. To be noted is 
that the OWSO is singled out as a separate and mandatory office for all the 
district/municipal/khan administration. This provision will have direct implication on the 
OWSO and its integration into the mainstream structure at the district/municipal/khan level.   
 The significant increase in the commune/Sangkat fund, together with the plan to use part of the 
budget increase to hire more contract staff (some of whom are expected to work on delivery 
administrative and social services). This will have an impact on the administrative services  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   8  delivery at the commune/Sangkat level which currently operates through a one window service 
mechanism9, and  
 The speedier transfer of primary education, health, solid waste management, childcare and 
other services to provincial, district/municipal/khan levels. This suggests that the 
district/municipality/khan will have more authority over line offices, which in turn will affect 
its human resource capacity in the back office of the OWSO.  
 
To be noted is the recent adoption of the Budget System Reform Strategy (BSRS) for the sub-
national level. This document has at least three significances: (i) it is the first policy of its kind 
which shows the roadmap for the future fiscal decentralization in Cambodia, (ii) more 
importantly, it is led by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) and not the National 
Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development or the MOI, which in terms of fiscal 
decentralization, indicates a more credible commitment from the RGC in the reform, and (iii) the 
budget reform strategy for sub-national administrations is guided by the national level budget 
reform which drives the whole government budgetary reform. 
 
The BSRS for sub-national administration can have a direct implication on the OWSO especially 
in relation to the management of service fees collected. This applies to the district/municipal/khan 
level, but even more to the provincial level where the fee revenues are more substantial. With this 
new strategy, it is expected the MEF will play more roles in shaping the served delivery 
arrangement at the OWSO.   
 
Box 3: The Re-structuring of District/Municipal Administrations10 
As key principles, the RGC seems to eliminate sectoral officials at the district/municipal level by integrating 
them into the management structure of the district/municipal administration. The integration will be done 
through office-clusters for a number of sectors as economic and social service activities, with priority sectors 
such as education, health, and land management remaining separate. 
The restructuring will be done differently between municipality and district. The district structure will be 
established based on the specific scope and potential of each district. The re-structuring will be done in line 
with the functional transfer process going on, along with the transfer of budget and personnel for each office.  
The expected 
organizational structure 
after the re-structuring is 
illustrated in the diagram 
to the right.  
 
9 Interview with National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development advisor/consultant, November 
2019. 
10 National Committee for Democratic Development (2019) presentation on the planned restructuring of the 
district/municipal administration. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
 
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   9   
4.2. Social Accountability Framework  
The Implementation of Social Accountability Framework (ISAF) is a part of the broader 
decentralization reform, with a focus on engaging the demand side to improve quality of public 
service delivery. The ISAF is relevant because it is essentially about strengthening civic engagement 
with civil society organizations playing a significant role. As discussed further, the use of civic tech 
innovation is also considered a key part of its methodology. 
 
The ISAF in Cambodia aims to empower citizens, strengthen partnerships between sub-national 
administrations and citizens, and leverage enhanced accountability of sub-national administrations to 
improve local service delivery. ISAF was introduced as a platform for coordinated action by 
government and civil society to operationalize the Strategic Plan on Social Accountability for Sub-
National Democratic Development adopted by the RGC on July 11, 2013. The Strategic Plan and 
ISAF are important elements of the RGC’s broader democratic development agenda, as implemented 
through the second (2015 - 2017) and third (2018 - 2020) 3-Year Implementation Plans.11  
 
During Phase I (2016 - 2018), ISAF’s four operational components of: (1) access to information and 
open budgets, (2) citizen monitoring, (3) capacity building and facilitation, and (4) program 
management, learning and monitoring were designed, tested, and refined. Partnerships with and 
between supply-side (state) and demand-side (civil society) actors were established, and ISAF 
activities were successfully rolled out to 75% (18 out of 24) of provinces, 62% (98 out of 159) of 
districts, and 56% (827 out of 1410) of communes across the country.12  
An assessment of the impact of the first phase of ISAF is currently underway. Preliminary findings 
from ongoing monitoring and evaluation indicate that some principal benefits of ISAF Phase I have 
included:13  
 Enhanced transparency of key public services through the public posting and dissemination 
of annually updated financial and performance (Information for Citizens – I4C) data for all 
primary schools, health centers and commune services in 827 target communes.  
 Raised awareness of citizen rights and service standards through the direct participation of 
more than 554,000 people in public outreach and awareness-raising events.  
 Strengthened citizen voice through the active involvement of more than 270,000 citizens in 
community scorecard assessments of communes, primary schools and health centers. 
 Improved relations and trust between citizens and public officials and service providers. 
 Strengthened capacity for local level social accountability through the recruitment, training 
and mentoring of approximately 3,700 volunteer community accountability facilitators. 
 Concrete improvements in local public service delivery as a result of the implementation of 
actions for improvement as collectively agreed in Joint Accountability Action Plans (JAAP).    
 
There is still much to be done to extend ISAF coverage, refine ISAF methodologies, and ensure that 
achievements to date are consolidated and integrated into sustainable systems, behaviors and practices 
 
11 National Committee on Sub-National Democratic Development (2019). Implementation of the Social 
Accountability Framework (ISAF): Phase II (2019 – 2023). Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
12 Ibid. 
13 World Vision.  An analysis of ISAF data from Phase 1. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   10  of sub-national service delivery and active citizenship. To continue the works, ISAF Phase II has been 
designed to focus on the following: 
 
 Expansion of ISAF coverage to all rural communes.  
 Expansion of ISAF coverage to all urban areas (and adaptation of ISAF methodologies for 
urban settings).  
 Extension of ISAF activities to district administrations and other selected services (such as 
water supply, sanitation and potentially agricultural extension services, referral hospitals 
and/or secondary schools). 
 Use of ICTs to involve a larger number of citizens in ISAF (I4C, citizen monitoring and JAAP) 
activities. 
 Measures to enhance government responsiveness to JAAPs and increase JAAP implementation 
(including “matching funds”).  
 Institutionalization and enhanced sustainability of ISAF processes (including the establishment 
of a national Community Accountability Facilitators volunteer community of practice. 
 Enhanced emphasis on measures to strengthen the inclusion of marginalized groups. 
 
According to an interview with an NGO official working on ISAF, the detailed plan on how to use 
ICT in implementing ISAF Phase II is yet to be developed. However, it is reported that such an idea is 
being discussed between the ISAF and the new award USAID-Funded Innovations in Social 
Accountability Cambodia Activity (ISAC) implemented by FHI360.14 Also, based on the ISAF Phase 
II document, the use of ICT is expected to be done for the submission of annual performance data by 
local service providers, citizen monitoring in urban settings, and the dissemination of the Information 
for Citizen materials.15 
  
5.  INNOVATIONS , CIVIC TECH INNOVATIONS AND PUBLIC SERVICE DELIVERY IN 
CAMBODIA  
5.1. Development trends and policy context 
Like many countries in the world, technology, especially ICT, has transformed the ways Cambodian 
citizens interact with their government. The latest data from the Ministry of Post and 
Telecommunication (MPTC) reveals that the rate of internet subscription in Cambodia has increased 
from 2.2% in 2010 to 71.3% in May 2018. As Figure 1 shows, the rate of increase happens not only in 
Phnom Penh, but also in other provinces. Exposure to almost real time information has also made 
citizens more informed and raised their expectations of the government, especially in the areas of 
public service delivery16. People’s attitude toward public sector corruption has already changed. 
Recent surveys suggest that overall, while experience with corruption with service providers has 
decreased, Cambodian people have shown less tolerance toward such misconduct.17  
 
 
14 Interview with ISAF official, 06 December 2019. 
15 National Committee for Democratic Development (2019). Implementation of the Social Accountability 
Framework (ISAF): Phase II (2019 – 2023). Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
16 UNDP. "Rapid mapping of governance innovation in public service delivery in Cambodia (Unpublished report)."  
17 Transparency International Cambodia (2016) Corruption Perception Survey.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   11  Certain key social and economic changes have also pressured the RGC to reconsider the types of 
public services it has to give more attention to and the ways it does that. Two of those changes are 
worth considering. First is the changing level and pattern of migration.  As Figure 2 shows, in the last 
years, rural-rural migration has much decreased in share (accounts for only 13%), while rural-urban 
migration has sharply increased (accounts for 56%), together with cross-border migration (31%). The 
other emerging phenomenon is the increasing number of Cambodian households, both rural and 
urban, who have borrowed loans from the bank and micro-finance institutions (MFIs). Around 60% of 
rural households owed money to MFIs, while 70% of migrant workers send their remittances through 
mobile banking.18 This suggests a sharp increase in integration into the formal financial sector, 
together with its related modern technology. 
 
Figure 1: # of Internet Subscribers in Phnom 
Penh and Other Provinces (2010-2018) Figure 2: Migration Destination Trends in 2013 and 
2018 
  
 
The need for more innovation in public service delivery also comes from the government itself. First, 
recent political events – especially since 2013 – have put more pressure on the RGC to improve public 
service delivery to enhance and maintain its domestic legitimacy. Innovation is one way to achieve 
that. Secondly, as a result of the Public Finance Management Reform Program, the government has 
paid more attention to ensure an operationally efficient national budget spending. As consistently 
indicated by key informants, while national revenue has increased and more budget has been allocated 
to priority sectors, more questions are being asked as to what has been achieved with such money.19 
Thirdly, innovation in public service delivery is also made necessary by the broader drive by the 
government to catch up with latest technological trends such as the Industrial Revolution 4.0.20  
 
Promoting technology and innovation in public service delivery is mentioned in a number of key 
policy documents including the Rectangular Strategy Phase 4, the National Public Administrative 
Reform (NPAR), the Tele-communication and ICT Development Policy (T-ICT) 2020 (adopted in 
2016), and the draft Cambodia E-Government Strategic Plan (2018-2023). All these policies 
encourage the adoption of new technologies, expansion of high-speed internet services, one-line 
information sharing, and computerized handling of business process as well as online interactions 
between service providers and users.  
 
18 Pak and Saing (2018). Migration Patterns and Trends in Cambodia. 
19 UNDP.  Commune Country Analysis (2018). Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
20 RGC (2018) Rectangular Strategy 4. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
 
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   12   
However, there are also specific regulations which seek to restrict online activities. One specific 
regulation is the joint Prakas No. 170 adopted in 2018 between MOI, the Ministry of Information 
(MoInf) and MPTC which seeks to fight and prevent the dissemination of information in words, 
voices, images, and videos on websites and social media within Cambodia which are considered as 
intentionally dangerous to national defense, national security and relationships with other countries. A 
technical unit was established by the MoI, MoInf, and MPTC to implement the Prakas.21 
 
A recent World Bank report22 found that while mobile penetration has surged in recent years, internet 
subscriptions remain low. Digital adoption rate at the firm level also remains low. Digital government 
is incipient, and efforts are siloed and fragmented. In a global comparison, Cambodia falls in the 
second quintile for online provision of government services. Several institutions are involved in 
digital government development with no clear leadership. Despite the recent establishment of a data 
center,23 Cambodia does not have a guiding framework and lacks security standards for websites and 
cloud services.  
 
For Cambodia to benefit from the digital economy, the World Bank report continues, it needs not only 
to invest in infrastructure, but also to develop complementary regulations, skills, and institutions. 
Priority areas to facilitate digital development include: (i) closing the digital gap by enhancing 
spectrum reallocation and mandating passive infrastructure sharing among telecom operators, (ii) 
elaborating on a digital skills readiness strategy, (iii) adopting laws in e-commerce, cybersecurity, and 
data protection and privacy, and (iv) aligning toward implementation of the Digital Government 
Strategy. 
      
5.2. Implementation and Challenges 
As is commonly found in other aspects of public sector reform in Cambodia, actual implementation 
around innovation in public service delivery tends to deviate significantly and unevenly from the 
policy intentions. On this matter, a few observations (and lessons learned) were made during a 
mapping report done by the UNDP.24 Firstly, it is noted that the use of technology, especially ICT, is 
the prominent feature of the many innovations identified. This is noticed throughout the whole 
process of public service delivery, ranking from targeting/registry, user engagement, service access, 
service processing, budget transfer, human resource management and monitoring and evaluation data 
management. The use of smartphone applications, creation and running of databases, and mobile 
banking are among the most common features. 
 
However, anecdotes also caution that technology/ICT is not always the best solution. The creation and 
functioning of various donor-installed databases, for instance, have had sustainability problems, 
which are in turn due to the government’s limited adoption and maintenance capacity. A few that have 
continued function have had much support from development partners who contracted private 
companies to provide regular support. 
 
21 MOI, et al. Inter-ministerial Prakas No. 170 (2018) on the management of the use websites and social networks 
in Cambodia. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
22 World Bank (2018). Benefiting from the Digital Economy: Cambodia Policy Note. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
23 https://www.datacenterdynamics.com/news/consortium-plans-cambodias-largest-data-center/ . 
24 UNDP (2019) Rapid Mapping of Governance Innovation in Public Service Delivery in Cambodia (Unpublished 
report).  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   13   
Noticeable innovations are also observed to involve private sector, especially those in the banking 
sector. The best examples include: transfer of the government budget from the national level to 
frontline service providers (i.e. schools) and the collaboration with the private sector in providing 
public transport services and urban services, such as solid waste management. Some innovations also 
emerge from partnerships between government agencies and NGOs such as the ISAF and New 
General School. However, this is noticed to be uneven, given the overall lack of innovations within 
the NGO sector itself.  
 
Innovations in management and delivery models, even the simple ones, can have a direct impact on 
public service delivery results if they are involved more in decentralization and de-concentration. The 
OWSOs, and the decentralization special operation agencies in health and education all involve higher 
levels of decentralization (here being more of delegation and de-concentration). This finding, 
however, is not surprising, as it is also in line with the well-established theory on decentralization.  
 
Another interesting observation is that the identified governance innovations involve youth in 
different capacities and at different stages of public service delivery process. In the education and 
labor sectors for instance, innovations have been initiated to ensure better services for young people 
(e.g. skill development, promotion of entrepreneurship, employment services). In the same sectors, 
young people are also engaged as volunteers to improve public services and to prepare them better for 
future employment. It is also common to see youth as key stakeholders in campaign activities 
regardless of issues and sector. In this sense, youth are both the ends and means of innovation. 
 
The more urban a service is, the more room for innovation there is, it is observed. This is expected, 
given that urban areas are the concentration of economic activities, technology, and popular demand 
for better public services to meet every-day practical challenges. However, it is noted that the kinds of 
innovations identified (e.g. solid waste management, public transportation, etc.) are very basic, 
implying the overall low level of Cambodia’s urban public service delivery. That said, the fast pace 
and potential of innovations associated with urban services also point to the concern of further rural-
urban divide, which contributes to the overall trends of inequality in the country. 
 
For context, it is observed that social media, especially Facebook, has played a very important role in 
identifying problems in public service delivery and, even more interestingly, in demanding rapid 
accountability, a still very uncommon trait of the Cambodian state in general. Equally important is the 
observation that the publicity and transparency brought about by Facebook has also played a role in 
discouraging subpar performance by individuals in the Government.25  
 
Lastly, it is observed that governance innovations in public service delivery in Cambodia, while 
reflecting the overall policy direction of the Government, have happened and progressed in a very 
fragmented manner. While this is partly a natural process of what an innovation is, there is a real gain 
in bringing them together to create synergy and maximize the collective impacts. The more 
coordination and synergy created, it is here hypothesized, the more likely they can overcome the issue 
of sustainability, a persistent challenge associated with most of the innovations identified in this 
research. 
 
25 It is learned from key informant interviews that Oxfam has commissioned a study on youth and social media. 
A preliminary report has been produced. However, it is not made available for this mapping exercise.   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   14   
6. A MAPPING OF PROJECTS ON OWSO  AND CIVIC TECH INNOVATIONS  
Based on the document review and key informant interviews, the tables below are produced to list the 
various projects relating to OWSOs, district ombudsmen, and/or civic tech innovations. The list 
includes mainly those funded/implemented by development partners, some of which are implemented 
in partnership with the OWSO office or the MOI.  
 
From the interview with the officials from OWSO office of the MOI, the OWSO is currently largely 
funded by the RGC and the national budget. In addition, the interviewed MOI official mentioned the 
following as partners providing technical and other support: GIZ through the Decentralization and 
Administrative Reform Project, the Konrad-Adenauer Foundation on DO capacity building, and 
Transparency International Cambodia on capacity building needs assessment. The OWSO-PEA 
project was also mentioned but was viewed as working only with the demand side, rather than 
providing direct support to the government. 
 
It should be noted that while this exercise focuses on donor-funded projects, some initiatives (and 
good cases) from within the RGC are also identified: (i) the case of the Battambang OWSO especially 
in using youth volunteers to help with service delivery, and (ii) the case of the Kampong Cham 
OWSO where the use of ICT (see box below) has been relatively advanced compared to the rest of the 
country.  
 
Box 4: Tech Innovations in the Kampong Cham OWSO26 
The Kampong Cham started OWSO opened in 2018 in line with the sub-decree adopted in 2017. It has 
adopted the same management structure and business process as in other OWSOs, which include awareness 
raising, application, fee payment, review and processing of applications, technical review and consultation, 
and approval and feedback.  
In addition, the office has adopted a number of ICT solutions to improve its operational efficiency, including: 
(i) a OWSO Management Information System, (ii) Kampong Cham’s salakhet website 
(www.kampongcham.gov.kh ), (iii) a smart phone app to check for information on administrative services, 
(iv) official Facebook page of the Kampong Cham OWSO (common with other OWSOs), (v) a computer-
based printing and provision of work-books for garment workers, and (vi) a website for online tracking of the 
progress of an application process and for online service application (available from 2020) 
(http://owsu.kampongcham.gov.kh ).  
Other initiatives being taken include: (i) the production and sharing of a service fee booklet, (ii) the use of a 
standard t-shirt for staff working at the OWSO, (iii) streamlining of the steps for processing land-ownership 
transfer, (iv) allowing/recruiting volunteers/interns to work at the OWSO.  
 
The MOI also has plans to expand the use of ICT with the long-term goal of providing an online 
service application. However, in the immediate term, the focus is to use ICT to improve the internal 
business processes in the OWSOs. The idea is to digitally record service applications and process 
them on a computer (e.g. using bar-codes, computer-generated information for payment receipts by 
the front-office). That way, the approval at each step can be done with less paperwork and 
information generation and reporting can be done electrically. This process is also expected to 
automatically generate real-time updates on several service application and revenue collection.  
 
26 Kampong Cham OWSO (2019) presentation on OWSO service delivery (12 December 2019).  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   15   
Please note that the idea of using computerization to improve business processes of an organization 
has also been attempted in other ministries, especially the Ministry of Economy and Finance to ensure 
better budget planning and execution. The system is called the financial management information 
system. Please see the Annex section for more examples.   
 
Table 1: Projects Relating to OWSO and DO 
Project Key Information Description and Notes 
Solid Waste Management 
and Social Accountability  Funder: UNDP 
Implementer: 
District/Municipal 
Administrations 
Period: 2020-2021 Purpose: 
(1) To promote better service delivery at the 
district/municipal level in Steng Treng, 
Kandal, and Kampung Chnang, using 
solid waste management as a case study. 
(2) To use the ISAF model to promote civil 
engagement and feedback 
The project is considering using ICT as indicated by 
the ISAF Phase 2 Implementation framework, 
however, detailed ideas are yet to be developed. 
Decentralization and 
Administrative Reform 
Project, Phase II Funder: Germany (with 
possible contribution 
from the EU in 2020) 
Implementer: GIZ 
Period: 2019-2022 Purpose:  
To link decentralization and public administrative 
reform (especially around performance-based 
management of OWSOs). 
The project is focusing on both supply side (i.e. 
capacity building of OWSO, human resource 
management) and demand side (awareness raising). 
Working in all districts in Battambang. 
European Union Project 
for Decentralization and 
Administrative Reform27 Funders: EU, Germany 
Implementer: GIZ 
Period: 2016-2019 This project focused on decentralization and public 
administration reforms.  Worked with three (3) 
selected partner districts in Kandal, ten (10) in 
Battambang, and four (4) other districts (called 
cooperation districts). 
Relevant outputs: various toolkits, including one on 
OWSO,28 one on the DO, and one on public service 
delivery at the district/municipal level. 
 
 
 
 
 
27 EU DAR (2019). Report on project closing event. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
28 http://ncdd.gov.kh/en/projects/eu-dar-eng/ .  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   16  Table 2: Civil Society Projects with Tech Innovations 
Innovation Name Key Actors Description and Notes 
Women and Youth 
Empowerment for 
Better Public Service 
Delivery29 Funder: EU 
Implementer: Transparency 
International Cambodia, 
Action Aid 
Period: 2020-2022 One component of the project is the OWSOs.  Working 
closely with MOI, the OWSO has three main activities:  
 Create a training of trainers and training manual for 
OWSO/DO on roles and function,  
 Using an App (under development), receive 
complaints and upload information to the MoI 
database, and  
 Public forums to be at provincial level 
Project will work in 10 provinces including: Battambang, 
Siem Reap, Kampot, Prey Veng, and Ratanakiri. 
Urban voices Implementer: Sahmakum 
Teang Thaut30 
App Developer: 
Angkordev.com App: Urban Voices https://urbanvoicecambodia.net/maps/  
A map-based visualization of developments in the urban 
space that allows anyone to contribute. Urban Voice is the 
place where people’s voices can be brought together. Urban 
Voice is a source of information as well as a site for civic 
engagement.  
Citizen News Wire Implementer: Cambodian 
Center for Independent Media 
(CCIM) 
App Developer: 
Angkordev.com App: Citizen News Wire ( https://app.ccimcambodia.org/ ) 
This tool was introduced to citizen journalists of CCIM to 
facilitate real-time filing of information using texts, photos, 
and videos directly to their smartphones and make it 
available to relevant stakeholders. 
Tracking and Sharing 
Multi-Sector Issues 
with Technology 
(TRANSMIT) Pilot Funder: USAID 
Development Innovations 
Implementers: Pact, 
AMARA, Village Support 
Group, Anakut Kumar, 
Phnom Srey Organization, 
My Village, Open Institute Web-browser platform to track citizen issues and 
government response online and tested the development of 
a digital tool to track and share information about citizens’ 
priorities at the commune level.  Did not reach project 
vision and is inactive.  For PACT’s reflection please see 
footnote.31 
Enabling Citizen 
Engagement with 
Technology 
(ECET)3233 Pilot Funder: USAID 
Development Innovations 
Implementer: Pact  Seen as an iterative design from TRANSMIT, Pact has 
designed a chatbot linked to Facebook messenger to enable 
citizen engagement. 
Still in testing stage and not yet rolled out due to fund 
shortage.  
 
29 The information is based on interview with a Transparency International Cambodia Program Officer (06 
December 2019). The Product was not made available.   
30 https://teangtnaut.org/about-stt/?lang=en . 
31 https://www.pactworld.org/blog/ghosts-user-centered-design . 
32 https://www.development-innovations.org/didashboard/pact-enabling-citizen-engagement-with-
technology-ecet/ . 
33 Interview with PACT Program Officer, 06 December 2019.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   17  Sevakhum34 Pilot Funder: USAID 
Development Innovations 
Implementer: Advocacy 
Policy Institute/ Open 
Institute Sevakhum is an app using Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR), 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=commune.ser
vice&hl=en/   
Provides information on services from (i) 
commune/Sangkat services and (ii) commune/Sangkat 
police services 
Status: Stopped due to changes in public service fees at the 
commune/Sangkat level.35  Funding not available to revise 
the related audio script.  
Transforming ICT 
Solutions for 
Improving Quality 
Services of Civil 
Society Pilot Funder: USAID 
Development Innovations 
Implementer: Cooperation 
Committee for Cambodia 
(CCC) Purpose: to equip CCC with the skills and capacity to 
deliver effective ICT related services to its members and 
other target customers through technical and capacity 
building support over 18 months. 
 
 
 
Table 3: Known OWSO and DO Tech Solutions/Applications 
Tech Name Address Key Actors Description 
OWSO website http://www.owso.gov.kh/en/  MOI National Level.  Provides latest 
updates and information on 
OWSO, including services, 
trainings, events 
Battambang 
Administration 
Website https://www.battambang.gov.kh/  Battambang 
Provincial 
Administration Links to information on One 
Window Services 
Kampong Cham 
OWSO http://owsu.kampongcham.gov.kh  
starting in 2020 MOI, Federation 
of Youth Automation initiative for One 
Window Services (see Box 4 
above) 
Cambodia Public 
Services App name: Cambodia Public 
Services.  A free application found 
in Android and Apple app stores. Ministry of Civil 
Service in 
collaboration with 
the National 
Institute of Posts, 
Tele-
communication 
and ICT. 
Supported by 
Transparency 
International 
Cambodia Includes information of more 
than 300 government services, 
including those available at 
OWSO/DO 
 
34 https://www.development-innovations.org/success-stories/hotline-mobile-app-improve-access-public-
service/. 
35 Confirmed with API, 07 December 2019.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   18  Promotional Videos 
on OWSO http://www.owso.gov.kh/en/video/  
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?li
st=PLsG4iBqs2okUPYnPpgcGEoF
QPZO_-gMPY   MOI 
Konrad-Adenauer 
Foundation Wide range of videos on OWSO 
work, including promotional 
videos 
Videos focused on promoting 
OWSO 
Promotional Video 
on DO https://www.youtube.com/playlist?li
st=PLsG4iBqs2okUPYnPpgcGEoF
QPZO_-gMPY  Konrad-Adenauer 
Foundation Videos focused on promoting DO 
Cambodia Best 
Hospitality http://cambodiabesthospitality.org/    Ministry of 
Tourism, National 
Committee on 
Clean Cities, and 
the Union of 
Youth Federation 
of Cambodia  Purpose:  
Receive feedback from the public 
in order to improve services 
relating to tourism, immigration, 
and government series in 
preparation for the 2023 
Southeast Asian Games hosted 
by Cambodia.  
Launched: 2018 
Database on 
commune services https://opendevelopmentcambodia.n
et/profiles/access-to-public-
service/identification-services/    Open 
Development 
Cambodia Web-based portal for information 
sharing.  Lists ‘identification 
services’ including those under 
the commune/Sangkat and the 
OWSO 
 
7. KEY LESSONS AND REFLECTIONS  
Based on the document reviews and key informant interviews, specific lessons have been derived and 
grouped into those relating to (i) the functioning of OWSO and its service delivery process, (ii) 
citizen engagement and the roles of district ombudsmen, and (iii) the use of tech innovations in 
promoting public service delivery.  
 
7.1. The Service Provision and Functioning of OWSOs 
The lesson learned report conducted for the World Bank (2013)36 and the recent key informant 
interviews point to several key lessons learned with regards to the effectiveness and challenges of the 
OWSO operation and management. 
 
Delegation of services to OWSO:  The current functional delegation of the OWSO at the 
district/municipal level have been done without a clear regulatory review on what services citizens 
need the most. This also applies to the delegation of bigger services from line departments to the 
OWSO at the provincial level. It is also reported that, for some services such as restaurant licensing, 
citizens are still required to request supplementary documents from various agencies before they can 
file the application to the OWSO. It is therefore encouraged that line ministries conduct a regulatory 
review of licenses/permits and examine the feasibility of delegating additional functions that would 
move the OWSO, especially at district/municipal level.37 
 
36 World Bank and MOI (2013). "Lessons learned on OWSO-DO." 
37 World Bank and MOI (2013). "Lessons learned on OWSO-DO."  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   19   
Staffing issues:  Compared to 2013, staffing shortages, especially of back office staff, has become less 
of an issue for many OWSOs (except for those in remote areas). It is expected that this staffing issue 
will be even better addressed when the district/municipal administrations become more unified and 
given more authority over personnel management including of those of the line offices. The fact that 
OWSOs have more younger staff (and volunteers, in some cases) is also a positive change in terms of 
operational efficiency.  
 
Office equipment upgrade:  Many OWSOs, including those in urban areas and with high revenue 
(fees) generation capacity, still face the problem of poor equipment (e.g. dated computers, printers, 
copiers). Based on an interview with an MOI official, the OWSO is allowed to allocate between 10% 
and 30% of its collected fee to improve their equipment. However, in practice, the fee is often used 
for incentive sharing among OWSO staff, while the office equipment upgrading is expected to be 
funded by the district/municipal regular budget. However, in practice, many district/municipal 
administrations and OWSOs have not included such budget needs in their annual budgeting process.38 
 
Potential of computerization:  As highlighted with the OWSO in Kampong Cham, the government 
has plans to introduce more computerization to improve the efficiency of OWSOs. There seems to be 
strong commitment from the national level to push this agenda forward. However, while setting up the 
system is relatively easy, its maintenance has usually been challenging. As such, budget and human 
resources need to be considered from the start for system maintenance and support.  
  
7.2. Citizen Needs, Engagement and the Role of District Ombudsman 
Trends in citizen demand . Partly due to more economic activities, demand for administrative 
services offered by the OWSOs has been increasing, especially those in urban areas and among youth. 
In urban areas, the need for business licensing of various sorts has increased, including those of 
medium sized business (some would need services from the provincial OWSO level). A similar trend 
is observed for land title transfer and construction permits. For young people, legalization of high-
school certificates is still high in demand, but increasingly (especially for areas close to borders) the 
legalization of family book copies is also needed for the preparation of passports, border passes and/or 
work permits especially in Thailand. This suggests that the needs for services among people are 
group-specific, i.e. urban population, students, youth looking for work, and business people.39   
 
Timing of demand, documentary requirements, and middlemen : Despite the many awareness 
raising campaigns, citizens usually do not pay attention to the availability of OWSO services and how 
to get them until when they actually need them (e.g. when they need to apply to universities, for 
passports, for employment). When they come to obtain services at the OWSO, they face a few 
common issues: (i) the complication of having to prepare documents before going to the OWSO (or 
being told to go back and re-prepare the documents), and (ii) the need to wait, for example, 3 days 
before they can get the processed papers. The first challenge is reported to be the main reason why 
people prefer to use middlemen to ‘run their documents’ instead.  
 
 
38 MOI official interview, 06 December 2019. 
39 This finding is also raised by PROCEED. Please see PACT (2017). "Proceed: 5 reflections on the way forward on 
civic engagement."  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   20  The  important role of officials at the village level, commune/Sangkat level and schools as 
referral agents . Based on anecdotes and the recent findings from the analysis of ISAF Phase I data, 
people still see the village authority, commune/Sangkat officials, and schools (for young people) as 
the first places for them to get information about public services. But they also raise complaints about 
commune/Sangkat staff not being in the office during working hours. As such, they usually contact 
those officials (councilors, clerks, teachers, school principals) by phone to seek more information.40 
This finding was also found in PROCEED project (see below). 
 
Combining a broad-based approach and a group specific approach:  Based on the experience 
from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency funded Promoting Citizen 
Engagement in Democratic Development (PROCEED), a broad-based approach to civic engagement 
brings value but is not sufficient to ensure impact. As such, pairing broad-based programming with 
interventions that dive deep into specific issues should be considered. This will likely mean 
identifying the issues where citizens have a will to pursue practical solutions, and then investing in 
research, technical support, sector-based networking and advocacy, and/or other interventions that are 
directly relevant to the issue in question.41  
 
The roles of the DO: Despite the strong legal framework, the DO has been found to be not very 
effective (as measured by the number of complaints received). This might be due not to a lack of 
awareness raising but people’s general attitude toward the practice of raising complaints to a 
government agency, especially when many see the DO as a part of the government structure. In 
practice, the DO plays more roles as an information desk for citizens and an ‘informal supervisor’ 
overseeing the staff performance at the OWSOs.      
  
7.3. Tech Innovations and Service Delivery 
Section 5.2 above already discussed some key generic findings around the use of technologies in 
improving public service delivery in Cambodia (i.e. policy directions, mobile apps, the importance of 
system maintenance for substantiality, the roles of youth, engagement of the private sector and the 
importance of social media). In this section, based on a review of international best practices42, key 
informant interviews and review of relevant projects in Cambodia43, specific additional lessons are 
presented as follows.  
 
It’s about people, not technology. International practice suggests that we keep the big picture in 
mind and be focused on the challenges that we try to help people solve. In the case of OWSO 
services, from key informant interviews, the intended technologies should seek to effectively inform 
potential clients of the following:  
 The importance of the services : For many local people, they do not seek the services until they 
actually need to use it (i.e. legalized document for a job application, etc.), 
 Availability of services and where : Many people are not aware of the services available at the 
OWSO, but they usually seek information from their local authority, police and schools,   
 
40 World Vision An analysis of ISAF data from Phase I. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
41 PACT (2017). P ROCEED: 5 Reflections on the Way Forward on Civic Engagement . 
42 The one that is used in this paper is by ICT work at https://www.ictworks.org/the-best-practices-in-the-use-
of-icts-in-development-are . 
43 The lessons learned reviewed are found at https://www.development-innovations.org/publications/ .  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   21   Needed documents to support the application:  For many people, the main headache for them is 
taking time to travel to the OWSO only to be informed that they need additional documents to 
support their application, 
 The expected fee and waiting times : Wrong expectations about the waiting time and fees has 
been the cause of some people’s frustration with the service provision, 
 Channels for their feedback : People need a safe space to raise complaints about bad service and 
to provide feedback so it can be improved.44  
 
Choose the right technology and platform. Best practices suggest that one should engage with the 
project participants who will use the technology, and with the community that will be served. For 
OWSO-PEA, this suggests the need to have a clear idea of what OWSO clients’ needs are, what 
mobile technology they might use to access information on the OWSO, the formats that are easily 
accessible to them, etc.  
 
Lessons from PACT’s TRANSMIT suggests further that it is not only the clients who should be 
consulted, but local authorities as well. For instance, one lesson learned under TRANSMIT is that 
using a website is not user friendly and not likely to be used by local authorities. Instead, social media 
such as Facebook and Telegram might be more popular and familiar to local authorities.45 This lesson 
was also learned in other projects.46  
 
The importance of appropriate content design . The materials to be disseminated or used should be 
attractive and easy to use. Using large amounts of text is usually not recommended, but more multi-
media (YouTube, voice) and comics are observed to be more effective, especially when shared 
through a popular platform such as Facebook. 
   
Iterative planning and learning by doing . It is less likely to get the design of a tech solution 
perfectly right from the beginning. Instead, the better way is to keep improving it by adopting the 
approach of learning by doing and adjusting overtime. This approach is even more necessary for tech 
solutions which are still new for the context of Cambodia and even more new for its public service 
delivery. 
 
Built-in monitoring & evaluation from the start . As international best practice suggests, 
monitoring can help establish a framework through which we can ask: What is my program trying to 
achieve, and what are the small steps I need to measure along the way to ensure I’m on the road to 
achieving my project goal? These questions are relevant to the case of Cambodia where many 
initiatives have been created but fell short when it came to measuring progress over time and 
documenting what had worked and not worked.  
 
Importance of maintenance and follow-up.  There have been many attempts to install ICT-based 
management systems to support public service delivery and management in the government. 
 
44 According to IDS (2018). Appropriating Technology for Accountability: Messages from Making all Voices 
Heard, this is one of the main areas that technology can help improve public service delivery.   
45 These lessons were also learned in other projects. Please see: https://www.development-
innovations.org/success-stories/digital-second-chance-helps-youth-organization-reach-more-cambodians/ . 
46 Ibid.   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   22  However, very often, the expensive systems tend to stop functioning when there is no support from 
the government to continue its regular maintenance and follow-up. As such, for sustainability, the 
budget needed for such tasks needs to be factored in from the beginning. 
   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   i  ANNEXES 
Annex 1: OWSO Organizational Chart for District/Municipal Level47 
 
 
 
  
 
47 World Bank and MOI (2013). Lessons learned on OWSO-DO. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
District Governor 
(A) 
Deputy Governor in 
Charge (B)  
Chief of OWSO (A)  
Deputy Chief of 
OWSO (A)  
Documentation 
Official 
Cashier 
 Official in charge of 
Legalization services  
Public Work 
& Transport  
Land Mgt  
 Tourism (A)  
Culture (B)  
 Commerce 
(B) 
Industry 
 Agriculture  
 Health 
 Education  
 
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   ii  Annex 2: Lessons from International Experiences – Developing an OWSO48 
 
In considering the Cambodian experience with the OWSO, it is useful to examine common practices in 
other parts of Asia and the world. In developing economies, One Windows or One Stops are commonly 
set up to improve the business environment. Models in Asia include Single Window Trade Facilitation 
Windows or Investor One Stops at the central government level (for example, in Indonesia, Malaysia, and 
Sri Lanka) and One Stop/One Window Business Licensing Centers at the local government level (in 
Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam). In transitioning and developing economies, One Stop Licensing 
Centers are cited by the International Finance Corporation as one of most common reforms to improve the 
investment climate. 
 
However, hybrid models are common at the sub-national level and One Stops can include “civil” 
registrations and act as a focal point for customer service and complaint mechanisms. In Indonesia, for 
example, local governments often create one stop services that issue both business and civil registrations 
and co-locate the one stop services with help desks to receive complaints. In Mongolia, One Window 
facilities focus on civil registrations and have only limited business applications. 
 
In OECD economies, One Windows more commonly serve as centralized points of contact for citizens. 
They process commonly needed services, reducing red tape and increasing convenience, and provide 
centralized information using various methodologies including online information or web-based 
applications, telephone information hotlines, and public counters. They are common at the sub-national 
level in countries that have had major deregulation pushes including the UK, the US, Canada, Australia, 
and are also common in northern Europe (Finland, Germany, etc.).49 
 
In developing economies, common challenges facing OWSO implementation include:  
 Most developing economies have not undergone the regulatory streamlining common in OECD 
countries. A tendency to “over-regulate” contributes to a large informal sector; 
 Resource constraints (financial and human resource capacity) complicate implementation and 
sustainability; 
 Institutional rivalries generate resistance to delegating authority; 
 Embedded rent-seeking exacerbates all of these tendencies; and 
 Cultural norms regarding “tipping” and “saving face” make it difficult to enforce accountability 
measures. 
To address these problems, it is recommended that program design be phased in such a way that 
regulatory streamlining takes place first, followed by the institutional set up of the OWSO. The table 
below illustrates the steps. While legal and regulatory reform is challenging in every country, beginning 
 
48 World Bank and MOI (2013). Lessons learned on OWSO-DO. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 
49 An examples of the piloting of One Window Services in Canada see: 
https://www.eia.gov.nt.ca/en/priorities/access-government-programs-and-services-through-single-window-service-
centres  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   iii  with this step when possible will facilitate the rest of the process. In the absence of such streamlining, 
studies have found that a One Stop can become one more stop. Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for 
reforms to focus on the institutional set up of the One Stop/One Window as this requires fewer legal 
changes and is not as threatening to the institutional interests of line ministries. 
 
 
 
Key aspects Key steps in developing a one stop shop – International experiences 
Legal • Conduct a legal review of the various steps involved in issuing the 
permit/license/service to identify (1) conflicting or overlapping authorities 
and (2) regulations that are archaic or unworkable in practice. 
• Facilitate multi-stakeholder discussions bringing together relevant line 
agencies to agree upon reforms to simplify the current regulatory framework 
and/or procedures. 
• Draft amendments or revisions to existing regulations to enact the agreed-
upon reforms.  
Institutional  • Facilitate multi-stakeholder discussions bringing together relevant line 
agencies to agree upon what functions can realistically be assigned to the 
OWSO. 
• Develop a proposed institutional framework for the OWSO including level of 
organizational authority, staffing proposals including civil service grade if 
relevant, and a budget. 
• Issue regulation or decrees to establish the OWSO as an administrative entity 
and make the necessary personnel and budgetary changes. 
Customer Service • Develop a citizen service charter that creates measurable, enforceable 
processing times. 
• Post fees publicly. 
• Set up customer service feedback mechanisms (e.g. complaint mechanisms). 
• Conduct a public awareness campaign to advertise the new service standards. 
 
   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   iv  Annex 3: List of Identified Governance Innovations in Public Service Delivery in Cambodia  
 
Sector Relevant Policy 
Focus Key Areas/Programs of 
Innovation Innovative Aspects 
Cross-cutting  
Rectangular 
Strategy 4 
(RS4) Human resource 
development 
(R1) -Education and 
technology,  
-Vocational training,  
-Health and nutrition,  
-Gender and social 
protection -Linking public services to broader 
economic formalization and modernization 
-Emphasizing strongly on digital economy 
and Industrial Revolution 4.0  
New sources of 
growth (R2) -Digital economy, 
Industrial Revolution 4.0 
-Banking and financial 
sector  
NPAR Improvement of 
public services -Promoting new ways of 
delivering services 
-More focus on feedback 
and M&E  -Public service gateway (a smartphone 
application)  
-Calling centers 
-Feedback and complaint mechanism 
-Service delivery with interlinkage  
HR management -Better system of working 
and performance 
management system 
-Capacity building  -HR MIS for selected sectors (starting with 
Health sector) 
Pay reform -Modernization of payroll 
system  -Salary payment through banking system 
-A budget forecasting system 
T-ICT/E-Gov  Improvement of 
public services 
through ICT Connecting and co-
creating with people -Social media engagement 
Higher Government 
efficiency (and 
coordination) -Increasing use of ICT in the government 
-Multiple service channels/portal platform 
Better targeting of 
vulnerable groups  -ID Poor Platform 
PFMRP Tax collection  Taxation awareness and 
better tax services  -Smartphone app on taxation (to raise 
awareness and assistance)   
-Tax payment through banking system  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   v  Expenditure 
management Budget transparency -Budget briefs 
-Open Budget Survey  
-Databases/mobile app on key regulations 
on public budgets  
Efficient budget 
monitoring  -The use of the Finance MIS 
-Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys 
Decentralization Promotion of 
local democratic 
development  Promoting social 
accountability and 
transparency (ISAF) -Posting of service fees and processing 
times at points of service delivery  
-Youth participation/volunteering by 
Community Accountability Facilitator  
Improving process of 
service delivery and 
coordination at the DM 
level -One Window Service Office/ 
Ombudsman Office 
-Administrative structure integration at 
DM level (ongoing)  
-Internet-based M&E at SNA level 
Improving other 
administrative services -Delegating ID services to 
commune/Sangkat post (from DM)  
-Creating 3 provincial offices to provide 
passport services50 
-Creating points of service delivery for 
passport at AEON Mall2  
Social 
protection Social assistance Better targeting of 
vulnerable groups -ID Poor Platform 
-Single registry system 
-Computerization of beneficiary list 
Efficient support to 
vulnerable groups -Cash transfer programs 
-Fund transfer via banking system  
- Universal health coverages expansion  
Social security Social security coverage 
for civil servants, 
employees in formal and 
informal sector -Utilization of sophisticated 
computerization system for NSSF 
-Cooperation with private sector 
-Promotion of association of informal 
workers 
 
50 The three provinces include: Battambang, Banteay Meanchey, and Koh Kong). The Government is planning to 
expand to other 6 provinces such as Kampong Cham, Prey Veng, Siem Reap, Svay Rieng, Kampong Thom, and 
Takeo.  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   vi  M&E and data 
work Better use of data 
to improve 
coordination and 
M&E Improving aid 
coordination  -The use of interactive ODA database 
Using data for better 
targeting of vulnerable 
people -ID Poor system 
-Single registry system (in plan) 
Data for resource 
allocation  -Commune Database for Community 
Social Fund allocation  
Using data for M&E  -Use of CamInfo (will change to StatSuit) 
to compile/track SDG related progress   
-Use of Commune Database  
Data storage and data 
management -Contracting a private company to run and 
maintain ID Poor data mgt 
-The storage of 30 + datasets on NADA 
Improving efficiency in 
data collection  -Use of tablet to collect and record survey 
data  
By sectors 
Education  New Generation 
Schools51 Partnerships with NGOs 
and private sector -Government funding to an NGO (KAPE)  
Modernizing learning 
environments -Transform classrooms and facilities to 
align with 21st Century standards  
Promoting innovation 
through the use of 
technology -Use technology to enhance teaching, 
learning, and assessment 
Promoting of STEM -Increasing use of modern equipment/ labs 
to promote learning  
Broader 
education reform 
(per Strategic 
Plan 2014-2018)  Capacity development and 
support program 
 -Decentralization/functional transfer SNA 
(for primary and lower) 
-Decentralization of EMIS to POEs 
Increasing enrolment and 
preventing drop-out 
(especially for the 
vulnerable groups) -Targeted scholarship programs 
-Loan scheme programs 
-The use of Real-Time Information 
Systems (PRISM) to identify vulnerable 
areas (working with WFP) 
 
51 New Generation Schools have been implemented in 165 schools (146 of which are primary schools and 19 are 
high schools). It is expected to roll out to other schools in the whole country in the future. MoEYS claims it has 
provided $1 million of funding to a local NGO, KAPE.   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   vii  Learning assessment and 
test -Improved national examination system for 
Grade 9 and Grade 12 
Improving education 
budget management -De-concentration of budget authority to 
POE 
-The Transfer of school budget through 
banking system 
-Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys 
(PETS)  
Financial literacy Promoting financial 
literacy among students -Integration of financial literacy in school 
curriculum 
-Various campaigns (involving youth) 
-Using smart app to promote financial 
literacy 
Health Improving access 
to health services Expanding health 
coverage and targeting -Use of Health Equity Fund (HEF) 
(through ID Poor system) 
-Use of smartphone app to help women in 
urban areas to assess health services 
(working with KHANA) 
Nutrition 
improvement Promoting nutritious foods 
for children -Collaboration with private sector to 
promote food fortification 
Improvement of 
heath governance 
system Improving health service 
delivery process and 
accountability -The use of new service delivery models 
including: Public Admin Enterprises 
(PAEs) and Special Operating Agencies 
(SOAs) 
-The Planned transfer of primary health 
functions to SNAs 
-Equip public health facilities with 
appropriate basic medical equipment and 
medical technology, ICT infrastructure 
Improving human resource 
management  -HR MIS for health services (also 
mentioned in NPAR)  
Improving Health 
Management Information 
System (HMIS) -The use of databases, including: Health 
Management Information System (HMIS), 
Patient Management Registration System 
(PMRS), Disease Surveillance Systems in 
Cambodia, Logistics Management 
Information System 
WASH Promoting more 
use of toilets  Public-private partnership 
to bring affordable water -Collaboration with private sector (through 
WaterShed project), e.g. HappyTap  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   viii  and sanitation products to 
rural Cambodia 
Child protection  Improving 
protection for 
vulnerable 
children 
(MoSVY 
Strategic Plan 
2014-2018) Improve capacity of state 
welfare services  
 -Development and increasing the number 
of social workers for the whole country 
Better tracking of 
vulnerable children -Use of case management and tracking 
databases to identify and follow up on 
vulnerable children 
Employment 
and youth 
services Promoting skills 
and vocational 
training (Labor 
and Vocational 
Training 
Strategic Plan 
2014-2018) Strengthening mechanisms 
of vocational training 
management -Development of the TVETMIS (an online 
platform that the public can access)  
-The ‘National Fund for Skills 
Development’ 
Strengthening mechanisms 
of employment service 
provision -(Planned) Delegation employment 
services and functions to SNA 
Improving services for 
(prospective) migrant 
workers - Three provincial offices to provide 
passport services and at AEON Mall2- 
-Mobile groups to provide necessary 
documentation to help legalize migrant 
workers in Thailand 
Strengthening 
dissemination and 
mainstreaming of labor 
market information -National career and productivity fairs 
-Job Centers 
Youth 
employment & 
entrepreneurship  Enhancement of labor 
market governance -Job Centers 
Promoting youth 
volunteerism for 
employability  -National Youth Volunteerism program 
through Youth Centers 
Promoting youth 
entrepreneurship  -The ‘National Fund for Entrepreneurship 
Support’ 
Information sharing on 
employment 
andscholarship -WeDuShare (Youth NGO based)  
Urban services Urban water 
supply Autonomous agency in 
urban water supply -The model of Phnom Penh Water Supply 
Authority (PPWSA)  
Improving bill payment 
method  -Payment of water bills through banking/ 
mobile banking (Wing) 
Electricity  Improving bill payment 
method -Check electricity bill online via EDC app  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   ix  -Payment of electricity bills through 
banking/mobile banking (Wing) 
Urban Transport Improving public 
transportation -Phnom Penh bus service 
-Train services to Phnom Penh 
International Airport 
-Trial of ferry service 
Urban solid 
waste 
management  Improving reporting and 
responses on waste 
management -Initiative by GoGreen App in reporting, 
requesting and monitoring the cleaning of 
solid waste with GPS system to authority 
-SmartBin initiative and others (under 
Youth Eco Lab)  
Public security  Quick reporting system on 
security issues -The use of hotlines of various institutions 
responsible for security issues (police, fire-
fighter, hospitals)  
Public works 
and 
transportation 
(urban services)  Ensuring road 
safety (Policy on 
Traffic 
Accidents) Promoting national-wide 
road safety -Using smartphone application for people 
to learn traffic laws 
Enhancement of road 
administration -Use of online application, ICT and/or new 
ways for obtaining driving licenses, 
registering vehicles, obtaining vehicle 
number plates, technical inspection, and 
driving lessons for heavy vehicles 
-The use of AEON Mall as one point of 
service delivery 
Urban public 
roads Improving road 
maintenance -Citizens encouraged to inform about road 
potholes 
-Bicycle riding to oversee/check road 
conditions 
Environment Climate changes   Strengthening climate 
information and early 
warning systems  -The use of Real-time Emergency 
Information System (in collaboration with 
WFP) 
-Using automatic hydrological stations, 
establish telemetry and data quality & 
control systems for centralized access by 
all climate information/early warning 
agencies  
Greenhouse gas emission 
invention and mitigation -Generate data on greenhouse gas 
emissions from vehicles in the city (in 
collaboration with Public Work Ministry 
and development partners)  
Industry waste 
management  Addressing solid waste 
management in garment 
sector -Partnership between the Government, 
donor agencies and private sector (buyers)  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   x  to convert garment factor waste into 
energy 
Promoting eco-
friendly 
innovation Promoting youth 
participation in addressing 
environmental challenges  -Youth eco labs (supported by Impact 
Hubs) 
Plastic issues Discouraging plastic usage -Additional charges on plastic bags 
(implemented in key retail shops) 
Land  Land 
administration Land title registration and 
other related services -New land titles with QR code 
-Land information system 
-Use of online platform for online service 
information management 
-Decentralization of housing/construction-
related services to OWSO 
Commerce OWSO and 
online feedback Business related 
registration and feedback -The use of OWSO and online webpage to 
facilitate the registration and get feedback 
on the performance of service delivery 
 
   
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   xi  Annex 4: List of Interviews 
Names Positions Institutions Date of interviews 
Eung Keo Ratannak Deputy Director of 
Department of 
Functions and 
Resources Ministry of the Interior 26 November 2019 
06 December 2019 
Socheat Lam  Director API 25 November 2019 
Chhin Tephirum Advisor/consultant NCDD-S 14 November 2019 
06 December 2019 
Phan Ratha Program Officer World Vision, ISAF 07 December 2019 
Sek Ratha Program Officer CCIM, VOD 26 November 2019 
06 December 2019 
Sok Samphosphalika Officer InSTEDD 05 December 2019 
Men Kunrath Program Officer GIZ, DAR 05 December 2019 
Boeung Chhork Program Officer PACT 03 December 2019 
06 December 2019 
Thy Try Director  Open Data Cambodia 06 December 2019 
Pich Pisey Program Officer Transparency International 
Cambodia 06 December 2019 
 
  
Landscape Report – OWSO-PEA – December 2019   xii   U.S. Agency for International Development/Cambodia 
U.S. Embassy, No. 1, Street 96, Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia 
www.usaid.gov 
 