http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          129                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  Virtual Classroom: To Create A Digital Education System in Bangladesh  
Faieza Chowdhury1 
1 Southeast Business School, Southeast University, Dhaka 1213, Bangladesh  
Correspondence: Faieza Chowdhury , Southeast Business School, Southeast University, Dhaka 1213, Bangladesh  
 
Received:  Febru ary 4, 2020             Accepted: March 10, 2020           Online Published: March 12 , 2020  
doi:10.5430/ijhe.v9n 3p129             URL: https://doi.org/10.5430/ijhe.v9n 3p129 
 
Abstract  
The use of web -based tools for educational purposes is a rapidly growing trend in Bangladesh. Most of the academic  
institutions  in Bangladesh have decided to develop academic portals where teachers can create online versions of 
their courses. This paper addresses students’ opinions on the use of virtual classroom from their own personal 
experiences and identifies features of virtua l classroom that are vital to create an interactive student -centered learning 
environment. W e try to understand whether the use of virtual classroom can bring improvement in student s’ learning  
and performance in the class . The results from binary logistic regression indicate that most of the participants have 
positive opinions regarding the usage of virtual classroom for learning purposes. As the present Government of 
Bangladesh  (GOB)  has urged all higher education instituti ons (HEIs)  to take effective measures in  order to 
implement ‘Integrated University Information Management Platform’, t he findings from this study will help 
educators and administrators to understand how to construct an interactive student -friendly academic  portal  that will 
fulfill all the needs of the customers and to assess whether the features  of the existing portals that they are  currently  
using  need any further improvement s. 
Keywords:  virtual classroom , e-learning , educational technology , student -centered learning , binary -logistic 
regression , Bangladesh  
1. Introduction  
Unlike USA and Europe, in Bangladesh there is still a tradition of teacher -centered repetitive pedagogy (Andersson, 
2008; Pagram & Pagram, 2006). The 2016 -17 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES), for the first time, 
provided poverty estimates at quarterly intervals and at the district level. Almost 1 in 4 Bangladeshis (24.3 percent of 
the population) live in poverty, and 12.9 percent of the population lives  in extreme poverty (World Bank, 2017).  
However,  the number of people using the internet technology  in Bangladesh  has increased rapidly over the last 
decade. As Bangladesh is gradually moving towards the goal of digitalizing the nation, the use of informat ion and 
communication technology (ICT) to create an active  learning environment at higher education institutions (HEIs) is 
vital. 
E-learning is often seen as a tool for supplying teaching materials and not for improving teaching methods by means 
of interac tivity (Jiang & Ting,  2000) . E-learning is better than the traditional mode of instruction as educators and 
students are not restricted to specific geographical location. According to Collis (1996), e -learning fosters 
development of group cohesion and a se nse of community, encourages discipline in learning and provides quick 
feedback and support consensus and decision -making.  
Virtual classroom is a form of online learning environment (Wang & Newlin, 2012). Other terminologies used to 
define the online deli very of instruction are network -based learning, tele -learning, web -based learning and e -learning 
(WCET, 2004). Virtual classrooms allow podcasting where teacher s can download videos and audio  files onto a 
digital media platform  via a computer. Students can  then watch these files when and where as per their own 
convenience (Evans, 2008). The use of virtual classroom  requires sophisticated end -user equipment s and internet 
access. In Bangladesh it is estimated that access to mobile phones at the household level is almost 90% in urban 
areas and 70% in rural sector (Rahman, 2007). Hence as the mobile phone usage  in Bangladesh is  rapidly increasing 
this has upgrad ed communication of every form. Students can easily access virtual classroom via their mobile phones 
and check uploaded teaching materials and messages posted by their teachers. Moreover, due to the advancement of 
ICT in Bangladesh, networks and internet a ccess have been upgraded in the last 10 years.  
However, to create an online learning environment at HEIs in Bangladesh it is imperative for academic institutions to 
strive for a low -cost approach by using the cheapest and widely available aids of technolo gy. While the technology http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          130                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  that we can currently use in Bangladesh is quite limited but it is possible to create a learner -centered environment 
with free online -education tools such as Google Classroom  and Moodle . Changing from one pedagogical tradition to 
another is not an easy fleet. Users must construct and arrange technology effectively; merits of the chosen aids must 
be communicated to all respective parties. Prior to using any new technological tools in the class, a prototype must 
be developed and teste d in real settings. It is also vital for educators and administrators to ensure that the chosen 
mode of technology fits the current teaching pedagogy.  
Although a wide research on virtual classroom have been conducted earlier but not many studies were perfo rmed in 
the context of Bangladesh. Nevertheless, there are some organizations which are trying to research and develop the 
virtual education system in Bangladesh such as a publishing company of technological magazines and news 
(www.comjagat.com ) and Jaago School which is an online school. Internet Classroom Assistant (ICA) is an online 
tool for web based managing scheduling, conferencing and sharing resources to different kinds of learning 
environment. In Bangladesh the first online classroom was ‘ CJ onlin e classroom’ developed by a la rge IT Magazine 
company called ‘Computer Jagat’ . 
The significance of this research lies in the fact that it contributes to the body of knowledge in a way that many 
stakeholders mainly; st udents, universities and system administrators will be benefited from the findings of this study. 
In this article we point out which characteristics and features of virtual classroom are more useful to the students so 
that university authorities and system  administrators will gain awareness about the matter and take appropriate 
actions while developing their own integrated university information management platforms.  
This paper addresses the following questions : (1) What are the key features of a virtual classroom to create a 
student -centered learning environment ? (2) What  is the perceived usefulness of a virtual classroom on students’ 
learning  at HEIs in Bangladesh ? (3) What  are the various benefits of using a virtual classroom  for the students, 
teachers and university management ? (4) In what  ways can we bring further improvements in the development and 
usage of virtual classroom  in Bangladesh ? 
The remainder of this article is divided into six sections. Section 2 summarizes the reviewed literature, Section 3 
highlights the main features and benefits of virtual classroom, Section 4 explains the research methodology, Section 
5 reveals the findings of the study and Section 6 provides the conclusion by giving appropriate recommendation.  
2. Literature Review  
Technology such as the virtual classroom is becoming increasing popular in today’s modern world (Flatley, 2007; 
Gilmore &  Warren, 2007; Arbaugh, 2000). A virtual classroom is an online learning environment (Wang & Newline, 
2012). Virtual classroom program was initially launched by AT & T in the fall of 1996. During the period of 1996 
through 2000, more than 19000 students fr om different countries around the world used virtual classroom to 
collaborate and learn via the internet (Hiltz, 1994). Although virtual education environment proceeded in a one way 
structure during the 1990s, it has been observed that virtual education ha ve presented bidirectional interaction and 
three dimensional study environments  by 2000. Arbaugh (2000) reveal that perceived usefulness and ease of 
technology influences one’s beliefs and attitudes towards the technology. According to Khan (2000), well -designed 
course interfaces can anticipate learners’ needs and satisfy their natural curiosity to explore the unknown. Khan and 
Ivy (2017) found in their study that digital environment lead to positive attitude because students felt there was no 
pressure of a ccuracy. Keeler (2014), suggest that virtual classroom such as ‘Google Classroom’ encourages 
collaboration between the students. Virtual classroom can also provide students with quick feedback in the form of 
‘just-in-time’ clarification and information. Mo reover, in a virtual classroom, students can easily interact with their 
peers in real time which is often not possible in other forms of communication (Pan & Sullivan, 2005). Tsui and Ki 
(1996) point out that online classroom allow students to enhance thei r interaction with classmates over the course of 
their study as they become more comfortable using different technologies. The interactivity in virtual classroom 
creates a mor e active learning environment and i nstructors can post various class discussion t opics using an 
electronic whiteboard in a virtual classroom.  
3. Features and Benefits of Virtual Classroom  
3.1 Main Features of Virtual Classroom  
Today e ducators can select from different types of virtual classrooms which are freely available online for the users 
such as Google Classroom, Moodle etc . However, educators must ensure that the virtual classroom that they have 
selected as aid to teaching has all the nece ssary features to support student activity and learning.  http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          131                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  It is important to create a virtu al classroom environment with robust fea tures that include audio, video and file  
sharing  tool, online grading and group chatting. Some virtual classrooms have features to promote interactions 
among the students such as easy -to-use interactive annotations a nd charting tools.  
Moreover, an integrated digital academic platform  can be utilized for various purposes including learning, 
communication, administration and teacher support. In this section we have listed down some of the key features of a 
virtual clas sroom which can assist course instructors to create an interactive learning environment.  
3.1.1 Teaching Purpose  
 Upload ing Files:  Virtual classroom can be used to upload word/pdf files, audios and videos. The system 
provides a dashboard available to the users where they can view the files uploaded by the course instructor and 
access these files from any electronic devices including c omputers and mobiles. Teachers can also upload recorded 
lectures for those students who have missed the classes due to some unavoidable  circumstances such as accident  or 
sickness.  
 Assignment Submission and Grading:  For the purpose of keeping the students a ctive in the class, teachers can 
upload home task and/or assignments in the virtual classroom. Students can easily access the files via the online 
platform and interact with their peers while trying to complete their home task. Teachers can view how many 
students have submitted the task in an online submission desk and grade the students quickly in the online platform . 
 Self-Assessment Exams:  After the instruct or has completed a chapter he/she can conduct an online examination 
to evaluate the students’ under standing of the concepts discussed in the class . For this purpose the teacher can create 
a database of questions f rom each chapter or lessons covered within  the class so that the system will automatically 
retrieve from the database and arrange the question s into different sets. These online examinations can be attempted 
from home and students will automatically get the scores after they complete the exams. The exams may be graded 
or non -graded depending on the instructo r’s preference of evaluating his/her  students.  
 Discussion Threads/Group Chats:  The teachers can post a message or upload video files seeking to obtain 
response from the students in an online interaction feed. The opinions of each student ar e displayed in a feedback 
box and  each student can see the response of their peers within  the interaction feed section and engage in online 
group discussions. Teachers can also give points to students for online class participation.  
 Messaging Box:  There is a message box where teachers and  students can post message s which can be viewed 
by all the students in the class . The message sharing option can  also be restricted to few numbers  of students  as per 
the preference of the course instructor . The messages can be arranged either by date or po sting order.  Hence, virtual 
classrooms can be used to facilitate communication among the students and between teacher and students.  
 Online Grading and Assessment:  Teachers can use virtual classrooms to conduct online exams. Different sets of 
questions fro m different chapters or lessons can be stored in the database. After completion of a lesson, students can 
sit for online exams which are automatically graded by the system. Students can also get immediate feedback from 
the course instructor  regarding their exams. The online system can also point out in whi ch specific areas of the 
lesson/chapter  they are weak hence require further improvement.  Students can get immediate feedback on the 
accuracy of their answers and conduct discussions on inco rrect answers with their peers in a live group chatting 
session.  The online examination system is also beneficial for the course teachers as they can identify the strengths 
and weaknesses of their class students. For instance , if most of the students in th e class got poor grades in a particular 
lesson /chapter  then the teacher may try to understand the reasoning behind it  and if necessary repeat the 
chapter/lesson in the class .  
3.1.2 Administrative Purpose  
Academic portals  can be used for various administra tive purposes. Instructors can use this to take online students’ 
attendance in the class. It can also allow students to monitor which students are irregular and inactive in the class so 
that corrective measures  can be taken accordingly. Academic portals  enable teachers to grade and publish students’ 
results in online  system . Hence, teachers can publish results which students can access easily from anywhere in the 
world. Moreover, t eachers can evaluate students’ performance in an online platform and give fee dback to each 
student on how to improve performance in the future. Virtual classroom also allow teachers to maintain a database of 
all students in various  classes so that teachers can continuously monitor students’ performance and grade them 
accordingly. S uch statistics also allow the teachers to formulate improvement plans for the students especially when 
some of the students in the class are retaking the course s. 
 http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          132                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  3.2 Benefits of Virtual Classroom  
Due to the advancement of ICT over the last decade  in Bangladesh , teachers are now forced to adopt technology in 
teaching. According to Martin and Parker (2014), many faculties today are using synchronous virtual classrooms that 
allow them to interact with students in real time. A widely used example of a  virtual classroom is the Google 
Classroom which is a learning management system launched by Google in May 2014.  
A teacher can open specific classrooms composing of sections and topics. Creating a virtual classroom is relatively 
easy as the user only need s an active email account to use the system. Users also need to provide some essential data 
to log into the system such as username, password, name of class/course, section etc. Generally it will take only 2 to 
3 minutes to create an account in a virtual c lassroom. For each virtual class created by the teacher, a unique class 
code is automatically generated by the system. Once the student gets access to the class code then they can easily log 
into the system and use all the features . 
A virtual classroom pro vides a set of features which can help educators  in various ways as listed below:  
 Saves Time:  It can enable educators  to keep their teaching resources and materials in an organized way thus 
saving  valuable work time. Hence a virtual classroom is an ideal tool to enhance teachers’ workflow  and 
productivity .  
 Widely Accepted:  Virtual classrooms such as Google Classroom are widely endorsed within the education 
community.  
 Costless : Most of the education management system s are free and readily available online for all the users with 
little to no cost.  
 Eco-Friendly:  The use of virtual classroom fosters the creation of an eco -friendly environment as teachers can 
collect assignment and materials online thus eliminating the need to use papers.  
 Accessibility:  Virtual classroom provides learner autonomy as students can use the tools available to them from 
any place, at any time and in any number of times. Most of the learning applications are easily usable and accessible 
from any portable electronic device s suc h as laptops and mobile phones . Virtual classroom is also beneficial to those 
students who come from remote areas and may find difficult at attend lectures regularly in a formal classroom 
setting s. 
 Wide Storage:  In most of the education management systems there is a wide unlimited storage facility which 
allows users to s tore their work in paperless form for a long period of time.  
 Online Tracking System:  Faculties can use the online tracking mechanism to identify which students in the class 
are struggling and in need of further assistance. By using the online grading tool it is possible to assess students’ 
work and submit the grades automatically within th e system. Hence virtual classroom also simplifies the grading 
system for the course instructor.  
 User Friendly:  In most of the cases, the virtual classrooms are user friendly hence both teachers and students 
can easily use the system without any formal tra ining however, if necessary video tutorials can be provided to the 
users.  
 Flipped Classroom: Virtual classroom can also enable teachers to use the flipped instructional mode of 
teaching.  
4. Methodology  
In this study we have conducted both quantitative and qualitative research . We want to investigate the opinions of 
120 undergraduate  students regarding the usage  of virtual  classroom on students’ learning at a higher academic 
institution  in Bangladesh. A structured questionnaire was designed and 120 undergraduate students at  a reputed 
private university in Bangladesh  were  surveyed . All the selected participants have attended at least  one course of 
study in which  the course instructor u tilized the  virtual classroom as an aid to teaching and learning. In addition, 
personal interviews were  conducted to determine students’ opinion of virtual classroom usage in the class . All 
feedback from the participants were evaluated, classified and disc ussed.  
This section is divided into f ive sub-sections:  1. target group, 2. sampling technique , 3. data collection, 4. data 
analysis and 5. regression model.  
 
 http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          133                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  4.1 Target Group  
The survey was conducted on 120 undergraduate students enrolled in BBA program at one of the private universities 
in Bangladesh.  
4.2 Sampling Technique  
The selection of the participants for the study was based on simple random sampling (SRS) technique. From a total 
population of 400 undergraduate BBA students, 120 students were selected as the final sample size using SRS 
technique. The sample size was determined using the online survey calculator considering 5% margin of error at 95% 
confidence level.  
4.3 Data Collection  
A questionnaire was administered to collect primary data on  students’ learning improvement due to the usage of 
virtual classroom by the course instructor. The opinion of 120 undergraduate students on the effectiveness of virtual 
classroom and awareness of course instructors on using modern technology in teaching w as further analyzed. 
Moreover, in qualitative study we have conducted interviews with 30 undergraduate students on the basis of 
purposive sampling.  
4.4 Data Analysis  
This study took the efforts to explore the different types of benefits t hat students gain  due to the usage  of virtual 
classroom as part of their learning process  in the class . Firstly, we followed the quantitative data analysis procedure 
to collect primary data using a structured questionnaire. The findings from quantitative analysis are divid ed into two 
parts . In part A [Table 1] , descriptive analysis (e.g. frequency and percentage) was used to collect information on 
nine close ended questions. The answers were analyzed in terms of frequency occurrences which were later 
converted to percentages. This procedure required us to follow the three steps: Step 1 , figuring out the absolute 
frequency by counting the total number of  occurrences. Step 2 , dividing the absolute frequency by the total cluster of 
responses to get the relative frequency and Step 3 , by multiplying the relative frequencies with 100 to calculate the 
percentages. In part B of the quantitative research  [Table 2 ], we have used the binary logistic regression to assess the 
opinion s of the students regarding the usage of  virtual classroom  on learning . Students were asked to provide their 
opinions on nine closed -ended questions . Five-point Likert scale was used to assess each of the statement s in the 
questionnaire  with five options which  were strongly agree (SA), agree (A), neutral (N), disagree (DA) and strongly 
disagree (SDA).  
4.5 Regression Model  
One of the prime objectives  of the stud y was to measure whether the usage of virtual classroom does  bring any 
improvement on students’ learning. The binary logistic regression is an appropriate technique to use when the 
dependent variable is d ichotomous (Mahmud et al., 2014 ). In this study, binary logistic regression  model  was applied  
because the dependent variable ‘improvement in students’ learning’  can have two outcomes: “ usage of virtual 
classroom does bring improvement in students’ lea rning” was coded as 1  and “usage of virtual classroom does not 
bring improvement in st udents’ learning” was coded as 0 .  
The model can be speciﬁed as:  
Pi / [1-Pi] = α + β 1X1 + β 2X2 + β 3X3 + β 4X4 + β 5X5 + β 6X6 + β 7X7 + β 8X8 + β 9X9 + µ 
where:  
Pi = probability that students lear ning will improve due to the usage  of virtual classroom  
[1-Pi] = probability that students learning  will not improve due to the usage  of virtual classroom  
X1 = enhanced accessibility to teaching materials ; 
X2 = regular  class updates on lectures and exams;  
X3 = easy contact with peers and teachers;  
X4 = enhanced communica tion; 
X5 = greater sharing of ideas ; 
X6 = availability of online lectures;  
X7= availability of online exams;  
X8= online assignment and grading system;  http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          134                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  X9 = easy videos , audios  and presentation sharing;  
α = is the constant for the equation ; 
β = c oefficie nt of the independent variable ; and  
µ  = is  the error term for the equation . 
5. Findings and Discussion  
5.1 Findings  from Quantitative Study  
In Table 1, we analyzed the responses of participants based on nine closed -ended questions constructed on a 5 -point 
Likert scale in order to measure the extent to which virtual classroom can influence students’ learning. In the first 
statement, 120 student s were asked about the accessibility feature of a virtual classroom. 85 students responded that 
they strongly agree that a virtual classroom enable them to access the learning materials easily and quickly while 2 
participants disagreed to this statement.  In the second item, 80% of  the respondents strongly agree that virtual 
classroom helps  to get regular updates about the class whereas less than 3% of the respondents disagreed to this 
statement.  In terms of easy interaction with course teachers and peers, 5 3% students strongly agreed, 37% agreed and 
less than 5% respondents disagreed. Students were asked whether use of virtual classroom enhance their learning due 
to the use of various teaching aids such as audio and video. 48% of the respondents strongly agreed, 37% agreed and 
only 3% students disagreed. In statement six, students were asked whether a virtual classroom enable them to share 
ideas easily with their peers. 23% responded with a strong po sitive note, 64% agreed while only  3% of the students 
stated that  this is not always the case. In statement seven, students were asked whether virtual classroom is useful for 
delivering online lectures. 67 out of 120 students strongly agreed, 41 agreed and  only 3 students disagreed. In 
statement eight , we asked the students whether virtual classroom is useful for conducting online exams. Here 46% 
strongly agreed, 38% agreed and only 3% disagreed. Finally, in statement nine we asked the students whether virt ual 
classroom is useful for online assignment submission and grading. As per the response s, 52% strongly agreed, 39% 
agreed and only 2% disagreed to th is statement.  
Table 1. Analysis of Closed -response Items  
Statements  Strongly 
Agree  Agree  Neutral  Disagree  Strongly 
Disagree  
Res % Res % Res % Res % Res % 
Virtual classroom helps you to 
access all materials easily and 
quickly.  85 71 26 22 7 6 2 1 0 0 
Virtual classroom helps you to 
get regular updates about the 
class.  96 80 19 16 1 0.7 3 2.5 1 0.8 
Virtual classroom helps you to 
easily contact the course teacher.  64 53 44 37 6 5 4 3.3 2 1.7 
Virtual classroom helps you to 
learn through various modes such 
as videos, audios etc.  58 48 44 37 14 12 4 3 0 0 
Virtual classroom helps you to 
easily share ideas with peers . 23 19 64 53 30 25 2 2 1 1 
Virtual classroom enhances 
communication among students 
in the class.  55 46 48 40 12 10 5 4 0 0 
Virtual classroom is useful for 
delivering online lectures.  67 56 41 34 9 8 2 1 1 1 
Virtual classroom is useful for 
conducting online exams.  55 46 46 38 16 13 3 3 0 0 
Virtual classroom is useful for 
online assignment submission 
and grading.  62 52 47 39 8 7 1 1 1 1 http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          135                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  In Table 2, we have shown the results from the binary logistic regression. The dependent variable is dichotomous 
and indicates the probability that students learning will or will not enhance due to the usage of virtual classroom. 
This was assessed using nine key indicators: greater accessibility to class materials (X 1), regular class updates (X 2), 
easy contact with course teacher and peers (X 3), enhanced communication (X 4), greater sharing of ideas (X 5), online 
lectures (X 6), online exams (X 7), online assignment and grading (X 8) videos, audios and presentation tools (X 9). It is 
expected that these nine f eatures of virtual classroom will improve students’ learning in the class. The results of the 
binary logistic regression indicate that easy contact with course teacher and online lecture; these two variables are 
positively and significantly related to the dependent variable “student learning”. Hence students’ learning will 
enhance if students are provided the opportunity to easily contact their course teacher and get instant feedback. 
Moreover, it also represents that students’ learning will improve if they  are provided online lectures by the course 
instructor. Other four independent variables such as idea sharing, online exams, online assignment and online 
grading are also positively related to the dependent variable though the results are not significant. Two of the 
independent variables mainly, class updates and enhanced communication with peers is negatively related to the 
dependent variable. This indicates that these two features of the virtual classroom do not contribute much to the 
enhancement of stude nts’ learning.  We have calculated the probability of the coefficients using the odd ratios from 
the binary logistic regression. In Table 2, the probability that greater access to teaching materials will enhance 
students’ learning is 82%.  Moreover, the prob ability of enhancement in students’ learning due to greater contact with 
course teacher and online exam features are 89% and 88%, respectively. Overall, the findings from the binary 
logistic model indicate that most of the features of virtual classroom do have a positive impact on students’ learning.  
Table 2. Results of Binary Logistic Regression  
Variables  Coefficient  Level of 
Significance  Odd 
Ratio  
Enhanced accessibility  1.518  0.267  4.566  
Regular class updates  -1.829  0.175  0.16 
Easy contact with teachers  2.084  0.045  8.043  
Other modes such as video, audio etc  0.264  0.821  1.302  
Greater sharing of ideas  0.821  0.584  2.273  
Enhanced communication with peers  -0.241  0.859  0.786  
Online lectures  1.998  0.025  7.381  
Online exams  1.611  0.246  5.006  
Online submission and grading  -1.512  0.346  0.221  
Pseudo R2: 0.6137  
Note: Probability = [Odd / (1+Odd)]  
5.2 Findings from Qualitative Study  
The key objective of this paper  is to analyze students’ opinion  regarding  the usage of virtual classroom  as a tool for 
learning. F eatures of the virtual classroom that students find more beneficial as well as suggestions on further 
improvements  will be explored . An interview was conducted where 3 0 undergraduate students were asked 10 
open -ended questions t o express their views on the usage  of virtual classroom.  All feedback gained from the 
participants were based on their own personal experience  who got the chance to use  virtual classroom in at least one 
previous course of study.  
Some examples of data obtain ed in the analysis of the response s are briefly listed below:  
“I think virtual classroom is very good for us because it allows us to get the study materials easily ” 
“Virtual classroom is fun because we can watch videos and presentation ” 
“In virtual classroom I gave an online quiz which was automatically graded by the system. This helped me to 
improve my performance in written exam”  
“I was out of the country but by using  virtual classroom I have submitted my assignment to my teacher t hrough  
online without any delay”  http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          136                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  When similar responses were obtained from different respondents, their opinions were considered as prominent. The 
three main find ings from the qualitative study were  as follows: [1] Virtual classroom is positively viewed as an 
effective teaching aid by most of  the respondents. [2] Most of the students like d the file sharing option  of virtual 
classroom  [3] Students also find the accessibility feature desirable as they can enter the virtual classroom any time 
from any place . 
6. Conclusion  
As Bangladesh is slowly moving towards achieving its dream of becoming a digitalized nation, the education sector 
needs to be revamped. Use of technological aids in teaching such as virtual classroom enables  teacher s to create a 
collaborative student -centered learning environment. However, t his will require considerable effort  from the teachers 
as they have to prepare lecture notes, question banks, learning lessons etc  to upload these materials in an online 
platform . Virtual classroom requires different pedagogical methods than  the repetitive and traditional ‘chalk and talk ’ 
teaching approach. Unfortunately the local educatio nal culture in Bangladesh, like  many other developing countries 
is focused on repetition  and memorization . To bring a chan ge in this norm is a huge challenge. While the process of 
change in pedagogy may be faster for developed countries due to the ir open -minded cultural aspect and 
technological advancements, one cannot expect the educational culture in a developing country such as Bangladesh 
to change overnight.  
Nonetheless, to  become a next -generation university , it is vital for all higher education  institutions  (HEIs)  in 
Bangladesh to make a significant  transition towards digital education . However,  as discussed earlier,  changing from 
one pedagogical tradition to another is not an easy fleet to achieve  and requires education institutions to overcome 
certain impediments . First of all, there is a need for appropriate teachers’ training to create awareness about the latest 
teaching developments and technologies practiced  around the world. Teachers should  be encouraged to adopt new 
pedagogies and shift from teacher -centered to student -centered teaching and learning approach es. Academic 
institutions should provide trainings to teachers on how to use various technological aids to create an active learning 
environment. Teachers should be encouraged to redesign their course s and incor porate virtual classroom  in all 
classes to create a more interactive  and collaborative  learning env ironment. It is also vital to ensure that any chosen 
educational online platform is compatible with the existing curriculum  and the institutional context . Moreover, an 
important aspect of using virtual classroom for teaching purpose s is that it must be eco nomically feasible, which 
means users  can get the facilities at little to no cost. As the development of a virtual classroom does not require 
major investments of money , hence it is a low cost scheme and affordable approach to foster interactive learning at 
HEIs i n Bangladesh.  It allows a holistic student learning experience by merging both physical and online modes of 
teaching.   
Currently most of the literatures on virtual classroom are  descriptive and the main emphasis is on practice. (Halper, 
Kelly & Ch uang, 2007; Gilmore & Warren, 2007; Grosjean & Sork, 2007; Mckinnie, 2008).The purpose of this 
study is to examine the students’ perception of the virtual classroom in an instructional course and identify which 
features and characteristics of virtual class room they find more useful more learning purposes.  The results  from this 
study indicate  that most of the features of virtual classroom were  positively received by the students who particularly 
mentioned easy access to the course teacher  and online lecture  features as the key advantages  of a virtual classroom . 
According to Mc Isaac & Gunawardena (1996 ), one major advantage of virtual classroom is that it provides a 
two-way interaction between students and instructors. Students can easily contact their cours e instructors via online 
portal  and get quick feedback on any queries raised by students related to the course content. This means that virtual 
classroom allow  students to gain ‘just-in-time feedback ’ from the course teacher. Another unique benefit of virt ual 
classroom is that it allows the students to learn at their own pace as students can stop, rewind, replay and fast forward 
recorded video lectures. Students who fail to attend formal classes due to illness or disabilities can watch the 
recorded lectures  in virtual classroom any time suitable to them. Virtual classroom allow students to repeat the 
materials until they gain mastery over  it. Moreover, most of  the respondents of this study also stated that virtual 
classroom allow them to share learning resou rces, communicate and engage in group discuss ions and watch  various 
educational videos. The findings from this study corroborates the previous works of researchers who proved that 
virtual classroom can play a significant role in enhancing students’ learnin g and achievements such as Miltiadou & 
Savenye, (2003 ); Riel & Harasim, (1994 ); Verduin & Clark, (1991 ); and Vrasidas & McIsaac, (1999). Although like 
any other teaching  aids, virtual classroom  do have some limitations but it is an instrumental tool to foster interactive 
students’ learning over a medium which is affordable and easily accessible to all.  
However like any other research, this study has some limitations. Firstly, the study was conducte d on respondents 
from a single academic institution and the sample size was restricted to 120 undergraduate students. Hence an http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          137                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  expansion of this study can examine the use of virtual classroom across a wider variety of population, academic 
programs and disc iplines. Secondly, this is a cross -sectional study hence further research can be conducted using 
longitudinal data to assess the perception of students regarding the usage of virtual classroom for learning over a 
period of time.  
References  
Andersson, A. (2 008). Letters from the field: e -Learning students change of learning behaviour in Sri Lanka and 
Bangladesh . Paper presented at the 7th European Conference on e -Learning (ECEL), Agia Napa, Cyprus.  
Arbaugh, J. (2000). Virtual classroom characteristics and student satisfaction with internet based MBA courses. 
Journal of Management Education,  24(1), 32 -54. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/105256290002400104  
Collis, B. (1996). Tele-learning in a digital world: T he future of distance learning.  London. International Thompson 
Computer Press.  
Evans, C. (2008). The effectiveness of m -learning in the form of podcast revision lectures in higher education. 
Computers & Education , 50(2), 491 –498 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.c ompedu.2007.09.016  
Flatley, M. E. (2007). Teaching the Virtual Presentation. Business Communication Quarterly, 70(3), 301 - 305. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1177/1080569907305305  
Gilmore, S.  & Warren, S. (2007). Themed article: Emotion online: Experiences of Teaching in a Virtual Learning 
Environment. Human Relations, 60 (4), 581 -608. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0018726707078351  
Grosjean, G.  & Sork, T. J. (2007). Going online: Uploading learning to the Virtual Classroom. New Directions for 
Adult and Continuing Education, 113 , 13-24. https://doi.org/10.1002/ace.243  
Halper, S., Kelly, K.  & Chuang, W. H. (2007). A Reflection on Course stream system: A Virtual Classroom streaming 
system designed for larg e classes. Tech Trends, 51 (2), 24 -27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528 -007-0022 -z 
Hartnett, M., St. George, A.  & Dron, J. (2011). Examining motivation in online distance learning environments: 
Complex, multifaceted, and situation -dependent. The International  Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning , 12, 20-38. https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v12i6.1030  
Hiltz, S. R. (1994). The virtual classroom: Learning without limits via computer networks . Intellect Books.  
Jiang, M.  & Ting, E. (2000). A study of fac tors influencing students’ perceived learning in a web -based course 
environment. International Journal of Educational Telecommunications,  6(4), 317 –338. 
Keeler, A. (2014). 15 More things you can do with Google Classroom.  
Khan, B. H. (2000). Discussion of Resources and Attributes of the web for the Creation of meaningful Learning 
Environments. Cyber Pyschology & Behavior, 3 (1), 17 -23. https://doi.org/10.1089/109493100316193  
Khan, R.  & Ivy, T. I. (2017). Exploring the Factor s Affecting Bangladeshi Tertiary Level Students’ Attitude towards 
L2 Writing, In Coombe,  C. & Khan,  R. (Eds):  BELTA  Bangladesh. Best  Practice  in ELT V oices  from  the 
Classroom (pp.  308). (Reprinted from online by TESOL Arabia, Dubai, UAE, Dubai: TESOL Arabia 
Publications).  
Martin, F.  & Parker, M. A. (2014).  Use of Synchronous Virtual Classrooms: Why, Who and How?  MERLOT Journal 
of Online Learning and Teaching,  10(2), 192 -210. 
McIsaac, M. S.  & Gunawardena C. N. (1996). Distance Education. In D. H. Jonass en (Ed.), Handbook o research for 
educational communications and technology: a project of the Association for Educational Communications and 
Technology (pp. 403 -437). New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.  
McKinnie, R. (2008). Best practices for delivering virtual classroom training . White Paper, Adobe Systems 
Incorporated.  
Miltiadou M.  & Savenye, W. C. (2003). Applying Social Cognitive Constructs of Motivation to Enhance Student 
Success in Online Distance Education. Educational Technology Review,  11(1). 
Pagram, P.  & Pagram, J. (2006). Issues in e -learning: A Thai case study. The Electronic Journal of Information 
Systems in Developing Countries, 26 (6), 1 –8.  
Pan, C. C.  & Sullivan, M. (2005). Promoting synchronous interaction in an eLearning environment. Technical 
Horizons in Education Journal, 33(2), 27 -30. 
Rahman, M.Z. (2007). Bridging the gap between rural students and the university: Alternative vision of student http:// ijhe.sciedupress.com   International Journal of Higher Education  Vol. 9, No.  3; 2020 
Published by Sciedu Press                          138                        ISSN 1927 -6044    E-ISSN 1927 -6052  support in Bangladesh  (Master Thesis). Faculty of Education, Deakin University, Geelong, Aus tralia.  
Riel, M.  & Harasim, L. (1994). Research Perspectives on Network Learning. Machine Mediated Learning,  4(2- 3), 
91-113. 
Tsui, A. B. M.  & Ki, W. W. (1996). An Analysis of Conference Interactions on Telenex - A Computer Network for 
ESL Teachers. Educational Technology Research and Development,  44(4), 23 -44. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02299819   
Verduin, J. R. J.  & Clark, T. A. (1991). Distance Education: The Foundations of Effective Practice.  San Francisco: 
Jossey -Bass.  
Vrasidas, C.  & McIsaac, M. S.  (1999). Factors Influencing Interaction in an Online Course. The American Journal of 
Distance Education, 13(3), 22 -35. https://doi.org/10.1080/08923649909527033  
Wang, A. Y .  & Newlin, M. H. (2012). Online Lectures: Benefits for the Virtual Classroom. T.H.E. Journal .  
WCET: Western Cooperative for Educational Telecommunications (2004). Distance education: A consumer's guide.  
World Bank , IBRD, IDA. (2017 ). Bangladesh Continues to Reduce Poverty but at Slower Pace . Retrieved 12, May 
2019   
 
 
 