VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      1VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      2Copyright (c) 2017 Persatuan Kesedaran Komuniti Selangor (EMPOWER)
 
Published in 2017 by:
Persatuan Kesedaran Komuniti Selangor (EMPOWER) 
No. 13, Lorong 4/48E, 
46050 Petaling Jaya,
Selangor, Malaysia.
Email: info@empowermalaysia.org
Website: www.empowermalaysia.org  
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher. 
ISBN Number: 978-967-10836-8-0
Researcher: Juana Jaafar
Editors: Angela M. Kuga Thas / Serene Lim (EMPOWER)
Design and layout by Ezrena Marwan
Printed by:
Vinlin Press Sdn Bhd
2 Jalan Meranti Permai 1,
Meranti Permai Industrial Park,
Batu 15, Jalan Puchong,
47100 Puchong,
Selangor, Malaysia
LOGO                      
FULL BLACK REVERSE WHITEFULL colour
VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      3ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS        4     
ABOUT THIS STUDY        5
ABOUT THE APC-IMPACT PROJECT      6  
 THE (VERY) BIG PICTURE       7
     THE SEAMLESSNESS OF LIFE, BUT NOT HUMAN RIGHTS   8
     THE TRAJECTORY OF LAWS AND INTERNET RIGHTS    9
     A CASE FOR “OTHER” EXPRESSIONS AND WOMEN’S RIGHTS ONLINE  10
 THE STUDY          13
     ABSTRACT         14
     METHODOLOGY        14
     PROFILES         18
 MAPPING CONNECTIONS        21   
     THE COST OF GETTING ONLINE      22
     SOCIAL MEDIA OF CHOICE        24
     ORDINARY ROUTINES OF GREAT IMPORTANCE     24
 EXAMINING AGGRESSIONS        27
     VOICE AS A POINT OF CONTENTION      28
     CONTENTION BETWEEN ‘PEOPLE LIKE US’     33                   THE PRICE OF VISIBILITY       34
     VICIOUS TACTICS TO SILENCE WOMEN     38
 APPRAISING REDRESS        41
     PLATFORM OWNERS                     43
     LAW ENFORCEMENT AND GOVERNMENT AGENCIES    43
RECOMMENDATIONS        45
 BIBLIOGRAPHY          49CONTENTSVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      4This study owes it to the fifteen women who generously shared their stories about life on social media. They 
are Daphne Iking, Faye, Hannah, Idora, Leslie, Maimuna Zikri, Maryam Lee, Nalisa Alia Amin, Que, Rihanna, 
Shida Amal, Siti, Venita, Yara Khoo and Yvonne Lam. Thanks also to Ezrena Marwan who thoughtfully designed 
this publication. 
Above all, this study would not have been possible without the dedication of Juana Jaafar in weaving the 
stories of women’s lives on social media into a compelling report so that their voices can be better amplified.
Appreciation also goes to the Association for Progressive Communications, especially Gayatri Khandhadai, 
for providing inputs and guidance during the research.
Finally, this study could not have been possible without the valued support provided by the European Union 
under the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR).ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      5This is the forth study on internet rights by Persatuan Kesedaran Komuniti Selangor (EMPOWER) under the 
APC-IMPACT Project. It builds on EMPOWER’s previous research on online freedom of expression, freedom 
of information as well as freedom of assembly and association. It is a feminist response to increased instances 
of bullying and harassment on social media, seeking better understanding of how these forms of technology-
related gender-based violence manifest in the Malaysian context. Importantly, it draws attention to the internet 
as a real living space for women where the harms of patriarchy are felt equally as they are offline. Insights 
gained from this study will aid in devising a more contextual response to the problems women face online 
including in laws and policies governing the internet. 
Furthermore, the study aims to broaden the Malaysian discourse on internet rights by providing gender 
analysis on “non-political” discourse or commentaries that are not directly about the government, national 
institutions or political parties. It also prioritises voices of ordinary citizens who are not part of any established 
political organisation. They include women from marginalised and minority communities whose lived realities 
are recorded in this study. This study thus may serve to inform future research on internet rights and women’s 
human rights in Malaysia. ABOUT THIS 
STUDY
VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      6ABOUT THE  
APC-IMPACT  
PROJECT
The APC-IMPACT (India, Malaysia, Pakistan Advocacy for Change through Technology) Project is a special 
initiative by the Association of Progressive Communications (APC). It aims to address internet restrictions by 
promoting and protecting internet rights. Specifically, it seeks to advance freedom of expression, freedom of 
information as well as freedom of assembly and association as enablers of democracy. Through awareness 
raising and capacity building, APC-IMPACT engages with activists, national human rights institutions, media 
rights advocates, the judiciary, legal sector, women’s human rights groups, other human rights defenders as 
well as civil society at large. The purpose of the initiative is to provide tools and networks so that violations 
of internet rights can be monitored, reported and addressed. 
Partners for the APC-IMPACT Project are Digital Empowerment Foundation (India), Persatuan Kesedaran 
Komuniti Selangor (EMPOWER) (Malaysia) and Bytes for All (Pakistan). Together they hope to impact how 
the internet is experienced in their respective countries in order for people to associate and express freely, 
and have open access to information that can improve their lives. VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      7THE   VERY 
BIG PICTURE [            ]VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      8THE SEAMLESSNESS OF LIFE ,,BUT NOT HUMAN RIGHTS
The line between offline and online is greatly blurred. 
In fact for many in Malaysia it does not exist. We 
are a nation where information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) have become integral to our 
everyday lives so much so what transpires offline 
and online are one and the same lived reality. As one 
respondent of this study said, “Being online is like a 
limb to me now. It’s so vital to my life.” But falling 
far behind this technological revolution is a political 
recognition of the internet as a key means by which 
people can exercise and enjoy their human rights.1 
Even though at least 78 percent of the country’s 
population is already connected, policy around 
access to the internet is still predominantly framed as 
economic infrastructure and opportunity. Issues such 
as political participation, human rights and gender 
equality remain reticent.
A false duality also occurs between a tangible “real-
world” (offline) where everyone exists, and an elusive 
“cyber” world (online) where some  people exist. In 
a society where internet access is not recognised as 
a right, compounded by the view that online spaces 
are not as “real,” events that occur in that realm are 
deemed to demand less accountability—especially 
personal events. This poses a great challenge for 
human rights standards to be observed online. 
Teaching Privacy, a group of cross-disciplinary 
researchers from Computer Science Institute 
and University of California-Berkeley, presents a 
compelling argument against this perception of 
duality: 
It is all too easy to think of the Internet 
as a separate world, and to assume our 
1  United Nations, Human Rights Council. Report of the 
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the 
right to freedom of opinion and expression , Frank La Rue. 
May 2011. A/HRC/17/27, accessed May 5, 2017, http:/ /www2.
ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/A.
HRC.17.27_en.pdf. online identities, actions and relationships 
are somehow walled off from our “real-
world” selves. This illusion of separation 
is created by the specialised, individually-
operated technology we use to access 
the Internet—but (almost) everybody 
else we interact with is using the same 
technology to access the same sites and 
services … Once information about us is 
shared online, it becomes part of what 
others know or can find out about us—
and people do not have a strict dividing 
line in their minds between information 
they got from the Internet and any other 
type of information. In other words, 
someone’s information footprint isn’t 
just the information about them that 
exists in digital form; it encompasses 
everything that every other person, 
entity, or database knows about them.2 
With population growth, along with the accelerated 
expansion of the Internet of Things (IoT), internet 
penetration in Malaysia is expected to increase to 
about 195 percent by 2025.3 In order words, we would 
virtually be a fully connected society in a matter of 
a few years. The government aims to achieve this 
through development initiatives such as the Economic 
Transformation Programme launched in 2010, which 
among other things commits to providing broadband 
internet for all.4 Given the current and projected 
2 “The online world is inseparable from the ‘real’ world,” 
Teaching Privacy , accessed May 10, 2017, http:/ /www.
teachingprivacy.org/online-is-real.
3 MIMOS Berhad, National Internet of Things (IoT) Strategic 
Roadmap  (Kuala Lumpur: MIMOS Berhad, 2014), 19, 
accessed May 13, 2017, http:/ /www.mimos.my/iot/National_
IoT_Strategic_Roadmap_Book.pdf.
4 “EPP 7: Ensuring Broadband for All,” Performance 
Management And Delivery Unit , accessed May 15, 2017, 
http:/ /etp.pemandu.gov.my/Communications,_Content_-_
Infrastructure-@-Communications_Content_and_
Infrastructure_-_EPP_7-;_Ensuring_Broadband_for_All.
aspxVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      9population on Malaysia’s internet, it is imperative for 
the government to recognise that universal human 
rights must also apply online. The United Nations 
Human Rights Council (UNHRC) affirms in 2016 
that the same rights people have offline must also 
be protected online and in accordance with articles 
19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR) and the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights (ICCPR).5 The UNHRC resolution is 
not something for Malaysia to ignore considering 
it was a two-term member of the very body from 
2006 to 2013. 
When Malaysia embraced the digital revolution in the 
1990s, it did so with a progressive vision to create 
an internet that provides “continuing enhancements 
to quality of work and life” and regulated “for the 
long-term benefit of the end user,” among other great 
aspirations.6 Arguably, the government envisioned 
a connected society where life is experienced 
seamlessly offline and online, hence the establishment 
of the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission (MCMC) in 1998 to facilitate that 
transformation. It is not unreasonable therefore to 
expect MCMC’s policy recommendations and public 
outreach in the last two decades to result in an online 
environment that is both open and upholds human 
rights. In the two decades of its existence, MCMC’s 
policy recommendations and public outreach should 
have resulted in an online environment that are both 
open and uphold human rights. Unfortunately, the 
MCMC has failed to deliver.
 
 
THE TRAJECTORY OF LAWS AND  
INTERNET RIGHTS
Instead of seeing positive reform to laws that govern 
the internet, we see outdated and repressive laws that 
violate basic freedoms offline being applied online.7 
Oftentimes these laws are used by the government 
to quell political dissent. In more recent years, and 
riding on global concerns of terrorism, new laws were 
created to give the government even more control 
5 United Nations, Human Rights Council. 32/… The promotion, 
protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet. 
June 2016. A/HRC/32/L.20, accessed May 13, 2017, 
http:/ /www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
HRC/32/L.20.
6 “History,” Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission , accessed May 5, 2017, https/ /www.mcmc.gov.
my/about-us/history.
7 EMPOWER, Status of freedom of expression online  (Petaling 
Jaya: EMPOWER, 2015), 10–11.on the internet. This includes authorising online 
surveillance and censorship under the pretext of 
national security.8 So while the online domain remains 
elusive to many, the government on the other hand 
draws clear perimeters in order to consolidate and 
protect its own power as well as commercial interests. 
Activists have fought for many years against the 
narrowing of Malaysia’s internet sphere, however the 
discourse remains largely concerned with political 
expression. The issue came into greater focus a few 
years ago when the government blocked a number 
of blog sites and news portals amidst allegations 
of a global corruption scandal involving senior 
members of the administration and government 
investment fund, 1MDB. Since then, there has been 
increased cases of investigations and arrests related 
to political comments expressed on social media.9 
More specifically, criticism against members of the 
ruling party or monarchy, and comments deemed 
as insulting Islam, the official religion of the state. 
Essentially, these are comments that challenge 
Malaysia’s official structures of power in a political 
environment where the government is under greater 
public scrutiny. 
It became evident that people’s expression and 
participation in online conversations about national 
politics were ever more surveilled and systematically 
censored by the government. In some cases the 
surveillance is aided by pro-government citizens 
who take it upon themselves to document and 
report comments they come across on social media. 
There have also been cases where comments made 
on obscure accounts, or even in closed channels, 
were not spared.10 Ultimately, the motivation to aid 
in surveillance is to shut down criticism at a time 
when public sentiment is increasingly against the 
government. This is not unlike tactics used by online 
bullies against individuals who challenge other kinds 
of status quo, which this study investigates further. 
8 Controversial national security laws established within 
the last five years include the Security Offences (Special 
Measures) Act 2012, Prevention of Terrorism Act 2015 and 
National Security Council Act 2016.
9 Suara Rakyat Malaysia, Human rights report Malaysia 2016 
overview: Civil and political rights  (Petaling Jaya: SUARAM, 
2016), 15, accessed May 13, 2017, https:/ /www.suaram.net/
wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Overview-2016-
Digital-Edition.pdf.
10 Mohd Fahmi Mohd Yusof, “Lelaki ditahan hantar mesej 
bergambar jelik hina PM,” Berita Harian , July 2, 2016, 
accessed May 15, 2017, https:/ /www.bharian.com.my/
node/170726.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      10A CASE FOR “OTHER ” 
EXPRESSIONS AND WOMEN ’S 
RIGHTS ONLINE
While political expression may dominate discussions 
about internet rights but in Malaysia, a great many 
other expressions are shared online everyday that 
escape the interest of government and perhaps even 
many champions of civil liberties. These expressions 
are not directly about the government, its institutions 
or any political entity. Rather, they are opinions 
about a variety of issues people encounter everyday. 
Nevertheless, these “non-political” expressions are 
equally important in the context of internet rights. 
The United Nations Human Rights Committee in 2011 
describes that freedom of expression and opinion as 
“indispensable conditions for the full development of 
the person” and “form a basis for the full enjoyment 
of a wide range of other human rights.” Importantly, 
the Committee d efines freedom of expression to 
include commentaries on one’s own affairs, religious 
discourse as well as cultural and artistic expressions.11  
It follows that any impediment to these freedoms 
must be ad dressed. 
This study seeks to explore this largely overlooked 
facet of online expression. In particular, when it 
concerns the voices of women. Women constitute 
at least 40 percent12 of Malaysia’s online population 
yet much is to be known about their experience 
in exercising their freedom of expression and 
participation. Thus, three main motivations propel 
this study: The first is to contribute to the Malaysian 
discourse on internet rights, looking specifically 
at expressions that are not typically considered 
political. Secondly, to analyse the issue of freedom 
of expression and participation online from a gender 
perspective. And thirdly, to better understand the 
challenges women face in exercising their freedom 
of expression and participation online. This is vital 
given the projected growth of internet penetration in 
the country and the increasingly sophisticated use of 
information and communication technologies (ICTs). 
11 United Nations, Human Rights Committee. General comment 
No. 34.  September 2011. CCPR/C/GC/34, accessed May 
7, 2017, http:/ /www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrc/docs/
gc34.pdf
12 Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission, 
Internet users survey 2016: Statistical brief number twenty. 
(Cyberjaya: Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission, 2016) accessed May 13, 2017, https:/ /www.
mcmc.gov.my/skmmgovmy/media/General/pdf/IUS2016.
pdfAt a conference held in 2016, the Malaysian Digital 
Association described Malaysia’s online population as 
“Internet addicts,”13 and according to MCMC’s internet 
users survey, it is in fact women who spend more 
time on the internet. Not only were women found 
to be “slightly more engaged with their internet in 
terms of intensity of use,” they are “savvier in getting 
things done online.” Besides banking and shopping, 
women are also likelier to seek information via 
the internet. Importantly, the survey revealed that 
women in Malaysia engage more in social networking 
compared to men with an adoption rate as high as 
81 percent while men at 78 percent.14 These figures 
tally with global trends of social network adoption 
among women. According to a 2016 Nielsen report, 
women are also spending increased amount of time 
on social networks.15 These trends alone warrant a 
closer look at women’s experiences in these spaces.
As a reasonably connected society arguably someone 
in Malaysia is expressing something online at any 
given time. Based on the above data, chances are she 
is a woman: a fun moment with friends on Instagram; 
a frustration about pop culture on Twitter; a series 
of sizzling sexts16 on Telegram; a dark confession on 
Tumblr; a parody video on YouTube, just to name 
a few. Whether in private or more public settings, 
women are also congregating in groups: a band 
of colleagues exchanging notes on WhatsApp or a 
network of hobbyists trading tips on Facebook. If, as 
it stands, the government is largely uninterested in 
such personal daily matters, does it follow that these 
expressions are completely free from surveillance and 
censure? What other forms of surveillance might then 
come into play? What other kinds of intimidation 
might occur, and who are the likely targets? What is 
being policed?
13 Malaysian Digital Association, “2016 Malaysia digital 
landscape: Exploring the digital landscape in Malaysia—
Boosting growth for a digital economy” (presented at 
the Digital Integration & Business Transformation Asia 
Conference, Kuala Lumpur, August 3–4, 2016), accessed 
May 31, 2017, http:/ /www.malaysiandigitalassociation.
org.my/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/Malaysia-Digital-
Landscape-August-2016.pdf
14 Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission, 
Internet users survey 2016: Statistical brief number twenty. 
(Cyberjaya: Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission, 2016) accessed May 13, 2017, https:/ /www.
mcmc.gov.my/skmmgovmy/media/General/pdf/IUS2016.
pdf
15 Sean Casey, “2016 Nielsen social media report,” Nielsen, 
January 17, 2017, accessed May 19, 2017, http:/ /www.nielsen.
com/us/en/insights/reports/2017/2016-nielsen-social-
media-report.html
16 “Sext” refers to a sexually explicit photograph or message 
sent via mobile phone according to the online Oxford 
Dictionaries.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      11Combined with the force of global capitalism, the 
advancement of ICTs and miniaturising of computing 
devices have decentralised control of information 
and content distribution from “Big Brother,” or the 
government, to ordinary individuals dubbed “Little 
Brother” (Charyk 1985, 43). Aided by technology 
“Little Brother” can now effectively mimic operations 
once monopolised by the government. That is, 
sophisticated ways of surveillance and disruption 
or dispersion of information. Today, ordinary 
individuals are able to use these powers to intimidate 
or silence others in the online sphere. Studies on 
gendered surveillance show time and again how it 
directly impacts women’s freedom of expression 
and participation. This study too notes surveillance 
as a modus operandi in bullying and harassment 
cases in Malaysia. Whether by the government or by 
Little Brother, surveillance remains a “historical tool 
of patriarchy, used to control and restrict women’s 
bodies, speech and activism.”17  
But while the advancement of internet-related 
technologies may have borne cutting-edge 
instruments that can be used to harm women, it 
has also provided tools for women’s empowerment. 
Where women’s voices used to be muted, they can 
now be heard online. Where women used to be 
invisible, they can now be seen online. That said, as 
more people occupy the online sphere, they bring with 
them patriarchal values and norms that perpetuate 
the unequal social, political and economic status 
of women. As such, gender-based violence occurs 
online too and takes on new forms. In their statement 
to the 57th Commission on the Status of Women, the 
Association for Progressive Communications (APC) 
noted that gender-based violence was on the rise and 
“becoming part of women’s experience of violence 
and their online interactions.” The statement further 
highlighted:
[Violence against women] that is 
committed, abetted or aggravated 
through the use of ICTs and in online 
spaces are part of the continuum 
of violence against women and is a 
significant barrier to women’s and 
girls’ ability to take advantage of the 
opportunities that ICT provide for the full 
realisation of women’s human rights and 
17 “Feminist Principles of the Internet-Version 2.0,” Association 
for Progressive Communications , accessed May 7, 2017, 
https:/ /www.apc.org/en/pubs/feminist-principles-internet-
version-20.development.18
Thus, this study inquires: How safe is it for women 
in Malaysia to have voice and visibility online? What 
forms of violence do they face in exercising their 
freedom of expression and participation, particularly 
on social media where they are most active? And as 
another respondent pointed out, it is one thing to 
worry about one’s safety against state oppression but 
what about safety against one’s own peers?
18 “APC Statement to the CSW 57th Session: Violence against 
women and information and communications technology,” 
GenderIT.org , accessed May 15, 2017, https:/ /www.genderit.
org/resources/apc-statement-csw-57th-session-violence-
against-women-and-information-and-communications-t.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      12VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      13THE STUDYVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      14These cases are also occurring within a larger shift 
of heightened political and religious conservatism in 
the public sphere as well as a climate of economic 
uncertainty. The seriousness of their occurrence 
however is often overshadowed by other concerns 
about internet rights related to violations perpetrated 
by the state. As a result, there is limited contextual 
information to inform effective remedies whether 
through policy reform or response by women 
themselves. Through a combination of ethnographic 
approach and discourse analysis, this study 
investigates the circumstances that lead to violence 
and analyses the tactical aspects of how violence 
is perpetrated in order to deconstruct the power 
dynamics at play. It also examines how women’s 
lives and their use of information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) are subsequently impacted by 
online violence. Taking into consideration the nature 
of intersectionality, this study focuses on the lived 
realities of Muslim women, queer and transwomen, 
indigenous women as well as women in the arts 
and entertainment. Combined, they form a range 
of women most visible to perpetrators as well as 
the most ignored by society. From the analysis of 
their experiences, we are able to assess current 
avenues for redress and make recommendations for 
improvements.
METHODOLOGY
In March 2015, Aishah Tajuddin, a video presenter for 
local online satirical programme ‘Kupas’ , received 
rape and death threats following an episode mocking 
the Kelantan state government for championing 
hudud  law (Muslim criminal law). Aishah faced intense 
condemnation and harassment online which led 
the programme owner to remove the episode from YouTube.19 Aishah herself left the programme and 
has not returned to ‘Kupas’ or any other online video 
shows. Hers was an extreme case of technology-
related violence involving a woman that received 
wide media coverage. 
Numerous cases have since been reported in the 
media. However, they mostly involve public figures 
while cases affecting ordinary people remain largely 
ignored. What these cases have in common is the 
gendered nature of the violence as they occur on 
social media, but media reports provide little insight 
on why and how this phenomenon is happening. 
This study therefore is designed to address that 
information gap by first recognising such cases 
as technology-related gender-based violence. It 
explores the influence of broader sociopolitical trends 
and examines the mechanics of how violence unfold 
particularly on social media. 
Women’s circumstances and experience of violence 
are often interpreted and subsequently trivialised 
by non-feminist observers. Therefore, it is crucial 
in studies such as this to apply feminist theory and 
methodology to understand women’s experience 
from their own point of view and not from the 
dominant perspective in society (Reinharz 1992, 
52). After all, the best way to understand the impact 
of technology-related gender-based violence is 
by listening to those who have experienced it 
themselves. Feminist communication theory is 
applied to look into power dynamics in social media 
engagement while allowing for individual stories to 
form multiple realities and interpretations (Rakow 
and Wackwitz 2004, 4).
19 Rashvinjeet S Bedi “Radio station removes hudud video 
after presenter threatened,” The Star Online , March 20, 2015, 
accessed June 3, 2017, http:/ /www.thestar.com.my/news/
nation/2015/03/20/bfm-radio-presenter-aisyah-tajuddin-
threatened-over-hudud-video/.ABSTRACT
In a patriarchal society, technology-related violence is known to greatly 
affect the lives of women as well as other marginalised and minority 
communities. Consequences include violations to their freedom of expression 
and participation on the internet. Malaysia has seen increased instances 
of technology-related gender-based violence especially in the form of 
bullying and harassment on social media involving private individuals. VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      15This study takes a qualitative approach to provide 
opportunity and flexibility for the respondents to 
describe their own experiences. It is also to guide 
the researcher to other aspects of the women’s lives 
that may contribute to their exposure to violence. The 
outcome is both a methodical feminist analysis as it 
is a documentation of Malaysian stories about life on 
the internet—a life of gendered events happening 
to a gendered bodily subject, therefore producing a 
narrative of that life (Järviluoma, Moisala, and Vilkko 
2003, 46). A combination of research methods 
are employed in this study, namely interviews, 
ethnographic observations on social media, discourse 
analysis as well as the use of secondary data. 
Social indicators such as ethnicity, sexuality, religion, 
age and economic class provide the basic framework. 
These are indicators that can be integrated and 
disintegrated, thus allow for closer observation of 
how women’s intersecting identities interact with 
power and ultimately, violence. Four categories of 
women are identified for research based on three 
broad considerations: Women impacted by national 
trends of political and religious conservatism; 
women from marginalised or minority communities; 
and women who rely on social media for income 
generation. Together they present a range of 
identities, motivations and social media behaviours 
for study. The four categories of women are as 
follows: 
• Muslim women
• Queer and transwomen
• Indigenous women
• Women in the arts and entertainment
In their study on Islamisation in Malaysia, Jason P. 
Abbotta and Sophie Gregorios-Pippas observed 
how religion has transformed society over the last 
three decades. “From banking to law, from dress 
to education policy, almost no sector of Malaysian 
society has escaped the growing inﬂuence of Islam 
upon the socioeconomic and political make-up of the 
country,” they said (2010, 135). The result is an ethnic 
and religious polarisation that Malaysian feminist 
activist Zainah Anwar described in her newspaper column as “gotten from bad to worse.”20  What does 
this mean for Muslim women? How does this national 
transformation impact the diversity of Muslim 
women’s expression online? These questions form 
the basis of selecting Muslim women as a category 
in this study.
Religion has also been used as a reason to victimise 
lesbian, gays, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) 
people in Malaysia. From film and broadcasting 
policies that only allow depictions of LGBTs if they 
“repent” at the end,21  to state-sanctioned boot 
camps for effeminate boys22  and numerous arrests 
of transwomen over the years. Homophobic and 
transphobic expressions have become normalised 
since sodomy charges were held against the then 
Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim in 1998. That 
said, social media has provided some space for LGBTs 
and their allies to speak out. Their voices are heard, 
but how are they received? As little is known about 
the day-to-day experience of Malaysian queer23 and 
transgender women on social media, this study thus 
seeks to uncover.
Indigenous women are a constituency that EMPOWER 
has been working closely with over the years on 
issues concerning civil and political participation. 
They are among the most marginalised groups in 
the country therefore this category of women is 
selected in order for their experiences to be recorded 
and taken into consideration for future advocacy 
and policy recommendations. Women in the arts 
and entertainment on the other hand is a category 
chosen to inform this study on the experiences of 
those whose livelihood depend on their personal 
and continued participation on social media. These 
are women who cannot simply decide to delete 
their social media accounts over cases of bullying 
and harassment without it affecting their income. As 
practitioners in the arts and entertainment, they are 
20 Zainah Anwar, “Into the future—together,” The Star   
Online,  February 5, 2017, accessed October 11, 2017, 
http:/ /www.thestar.com.my/opinion/columnists/sharing-
the-nation/2017/02/05/into-the-future-together-new-
developments-in-malaysia-amid-the-current-madness-in-
the-world-show-th/
21 Julie Bolcer, “Malaysia: Gay characters OK, if they go 
straight,” Advocate.com , March 22, 2010, accessed October 
11, 2017, https:/ /web.archive.org/web/20100324190945/
http:/ /www.advocate.com/Arts_and_Entertainment/
Entertainment_News/Malaysia_Gay_Film_Characters_OK,_
If_They_Go_Straight/
22 Tashny Sukumaran, “No to ‘sissy’ boot camp,” Free Malaysia 
Today,  April 20, 2011, accessed October 11, 2017, http:/ /www.
freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2011/04/20/no-
to-sissy-boot-camp/
23 The term “queer” in this study is used broadly, encompassing 
non-heterosexual and non-cisgender identities.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      16also expressive on social media and seek visibility for 
increase the value of their work. This study aims to 
better understand how their audience responds to 
them, and how they manage adversities.
Respondents were also selected to provide a span 
of social media following on any given platform, 
from those with less than 1,000 followers to those 
with more than 10,000 followers. In the marketing 
sector, individuals with large social media following 
may be considered “influencers” where they have 
the reach to popularise certain products or ideas. 
A social media influencer in this sense is defined as 
any individual who has “credibility and a niche” in 
their respective fields.24 There is no consensus on 
the number of followers to qualify as an “influencer” 
as the range varies from a minimum of 5,00025 to 
a minimum of 10,000.26 The number of followers is 
taken into consideration in this study to measure a 
respondent’s reach (or “influence”) and exposure 
to others, and if this might factor into the risk of 
encountering violence. 
The concept of gender-based violence follows the 
definition stated in the United Nations Declaration 
on the Elimination of Violence against Women to 
mean “any act of violence based on gender, which 
may result or actually results in physical, sexual or 
psychological harm, including threats, coercion or 
arbitrary deprivation of liberty, in either private or 
public life.”27 Furthermore, gender-based violence 
is recognised as a result of patriarchal culture and 
structures that value control and domination over 
femininity and feminine traits (Becker 1999, 24-25). 
This study is focused on two common forms of 
technology-related gender-based violence, namely 
bullying and harassment.
On explanations of gender, as noted by Mary Holmes, 
the definition has over the years shifted emphasis 
from the material and economic to the symbolic, 
24 Laura Forer, “The Lowdown on Social Media Influencers,” 
MarketingProfs , February 22, 2017, accessed June 5, 2017, 
https:/ /www.marketingprofs.com/chirp/2017/31547/the-
lowdown-on-social-media-influencers-infographic.
25 Alexandra Ma, “How To Make Money On Instagram,” 
HuffingtonPost , December 29, 2016, accessed June 5, 2017, 
http:/ /www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/make-money-on-
instagram_us_55ad3ad6e4b0caf721b3624c
26 “Are fake Instagram influencers deceiving brands?” 
Mediakix , accessed June 5, 2017, https:/ /www.mediakix.
com/2017/08/fake-instagram-influencers-followers-bots-
study/#gs.XzC1fYE.
27 United Nations, General Assembly. Declaration on the 
elimination of violence against women.  December 1993. 
A/RES/48/104, accessed Jun 11, 2017, http:/ /www.un.org/
documents/ga/res/48/a48r104.htm.or the sphere of meaning (2007, 63). In this study, 
gender is understood as “the set of roles, rights, 
representations, expectations and values assigned 
to each sex,” with established power relationships 
where women are deemed inferior and less valued.28 
Gender is also recognised as a continuum that 
includes identities other than male and female.29 To 
note, respondents here identify as women, though 
not all identify as cisgender.30
Interviews and observations on social media were 
conducted between March and July 2017. A total of 
fifteen women were interviewed, nine of whom have 
social media accounts viewable to the researcher. 
And while respondents were asked about their 
use of social media in general, this study is most 
interested in their experiences on Facebook, Twitter, 
Instagram and WhatsApp. The interviews, conducted 
in person and via online video and voice calls, were 
semi-structured with a set of standardised questions 
answered by all respondents and further questions 
asked during the interview process. Four main areas 
of questioning guided the process: 
• Ownership and use of information and   
 communication technologies (ICTs)
• Access to internet services
• Social media usage and engagement  
 behaviours
• Experience of bullying and harassment on  
 social media
Interviews were conducted individually with the 
exception of two respondents who attended a session 
together. With permission, some of the interviews 
were documented using a voice recorder while 
others by text notes. Respondents were given the 
option of anonymity to protect their privacy and 
security through a consent note that also provided 
background information on this study. Other ethical 
considerations include the option to withdraw 
from the interview process at any given time, or to 
28 Mar Camarasa and Daniela Heim, “Theoretical and 
methodological framework,” in Gender Violence Effects 
Indicators, September 2007, accessed Jun 7, 2017, http:/ /
www.surt.org/gvei/docs/theoretical_and_methodological_
framework.pdf
29 “Definition of ‘Gender Spectrum’” The Queer Dictionary , 
accessed June 5, 2017, http:/ /queerdictionary.blogspot.
my/2014/09/definition-of-gender-spectrum.html
30 “Cisgender” refers to a person whose sense of personal 
identity and gender corresponds with their birth sex, 
according to the online Oxford Dictionaries.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      17withhold certain information from being published. 
Respondents were also given the option to request 
for the voice recording to be discarded following 
the publication of this study. The average duration 
of interview was about 1 hour 15 minutes.
As it is for every study, this research has its limitations. 
The small sample size of fifteen respondents does 
not reflect the population of more than 9 million 
women31 who are online in Malaysia. Additionally, 
the geographical location of respondents during the 
course of research is disproportionate to the actual 
percentage of people accessing the internet in the 
different states. Up to 33 percent of respondents 
reside in Selangor which has a national access rate 
of 21 percent. Meanwhile, 20 percent of respondents 
are based in Kuala Lumpur where the population 
accounts for 9 percent of the national access rate. 
A further 20 percent of respondents reside in Pulau 
Pinang which accounts for less than 5 percent of the 
national access rate. 
Together, respondents from Selangor, Kuala Lumpur 
and Pulau Pinang make up the majority of the sample. 
That said, 40 percent of them were originally from 
other states where they grew up and this informs the 
research of other social aspects that may influence 
their online experiences. Among them are Daphne 
Iking (Sabah), Hannah (Terengganu), Que (Melaka), 
Yara Khoo (Kuala Lumpur) and Yvonne Lam (Perak). 
With the exception of Hannah, the women still return 
to their hometown to visit family. Faye on the other 
hand was raised abroad, but today visits her family 
in Sarawak. Maimuna Zikri is a Malaysian currently 
living abroad but was included in this study for two 
reasons. First, she has experienced online violence 
perpetrated by people in Malaysia. Secondly, she is 
candid on social media about being in a same-sex 
marriage with a partner who lives in Malaysia. 
The respondents are also mostly between ages 20 
to 40 which means the experience of adolescent 
girls and women above 40 are not fairly represented. 
Two adolescents approached for this study had to 
withdraw their participation over issues with school 
examinations and parental consent, reducing the total 
number of respondents from seventeen to fifteen. On 
other issues concerning representation, it should be 
noted that only one transwoman was interviewed 
31 Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission, 
Internet users survey 2016: Statistical brief number twenty. 
(Cyberjaya: Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission, 2016) accessed May 13, 2017, https:/ /www.
mcmc.gov.my/skmmgovmy/media/General/pdf/IUS2016.
pdfand her access and experience on social media may 
not reflect that of other transwomen in Malaysia. 
Additionally, not all of the respondents’ social media 
accounts were viewable in order to make thorough 
observations. Where the researcher had no access, 
she was dependent entirely on the respondents’ 
statements.
Finally, while this study is also meant to be a 
documentation of life stories, it recognises that they 
are a retelling of the respondents’ original stories, 
interpreted by the researcher and in her own words.  VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      18DAPHNE IKING, 39, is an independent presenter 
with experience working in broadcasting. She is 
an avid social media user with close to 130,000 
followers on Twitter and more than 170,000 
followers on Instagram as of August 2017. 
Daphne, who is Kadazan, depends on social 
media to promote her work, conduct research 
and connect with family. She currently lives in 
Petaling Jaya, Selangor.
FAYE,* 39, is a Kuala Lumpur-based educator 
who is also an advocate for right to sexuality. She 
uses social media to promote her programmes 
in performing arts and to build a solidarity 
network for lesbian women in Malaysia. About 
seven years ago, Faye created Facebook pages 
for these two interest groups which today has 
a membership of more than 3,000 and 1,000 
respectively.
 
 
HANNAH,* 28, is a queer artist, illustrator and 
writer. She started blogging anonymously in 
her teens as an avenue to express herself freely 
while living in a violent environment at home. 
As a known full-time artist today, she is reliant 
on social media, namely Instagram and Twitter, 
to showcase her work to potential clients. 
Hannah is currently based in Pulau Pinang. 
IDORA,* 29, works in small-town Bidor doing 
general clerical tasks for local businesses. 
She is active on Facebook where she belongs 
to a number of Orang Asli interest groups. 
She has only recently created an Instagram 
account. Idora is a Semai who still lives with 
her community. She alternates between staying 
with her parents’ families in Bidor and Tapah, 
Perak.LESLIE,* 40, is a Penang-based project 
freelancer who identifies as lesbian. She is 
active on social media where she meets and 
socialises with other lesbian women. Social 
media has allowed her to create spaces where 
she can be “out” among friends and openly 
share her views on all kinds of issues. For 
Leslie, the internet is crucial for her to live an 
authentic life.
MAIMUNA ZIKRI,* 36, works in a Malaysia-
owned company overseas while her partner 
and children are based in Malaysia, making 
the internet an important enabler for the 
family to stay in close touch. On social media, 
Maimuna shares stories about family life in 
hope to normalise the very idea of a queer 
family, specifically queer Muslim family, to her 
Malaysian followers. 
MARYAM LEE, 25, is a postgraduate student 
at a public university in Kuala Lumpur and 
freelances for projects promoting intercultural 
dialogue and human rights. She strongly 
identifies as a Muslim feminist and uses social 
media to talk about life experiences and current 
issues. Maryam’s posts are public to more than 
6,500 followers on Twitter and more than 5,500 
subscribers on Facebook as of August 2017.
 
NALISA ALIA AMIN, 28, is from Kuala Lumpur 
where she works in e-commerce. Social media 
has played an important role in helping her 
come to terms with her body image. Today 
she uses social media to share her thoughts on 
a variety of issues including promoting body 
positivity. Nalisa has a following of more than 
13,000 people on Twitter and more than 5,000 
on Instagram as of August 2017.PROFILES
This study is built on the lived realities of the following women. The brief 
overview below provides context to their individual profiles as social media 
users. Names marked with the asterisk (*) symbol have been changed to 
protect their privacy and security.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      19QUE,* 30, organises events to build a support 
network for queer women. Through blogging 
she is able to disseminate crucial information 
about living a healthy queer life, particularly 
to women seeking Chinese language material 
and support systems. While actively involved 
in empowering queer women, Que also does 
other human rights work in Pulau Pinang where 
she resides.
 
 
RIHANNA,* 22, is a transwoman studying at a 
private university in Malaysia. She belongs to a 
small group of students who use online social 
networks to organise LGBT rights awareness 
activities on campus. Social media enables her 
to access information and network with other 
transwomen in Malaysia and abroad. Rihanna  
currently lives with her family in Subang Jaya, 
Selangor.
SHIDA AMAL,* 26, is a blogger with a social 
media following numbering more than 79,000 
on Twitter and more than 36,000 on Instagram 
as of August 2017. Her large following gained her 
the status of “influencer” where she sometimes 
receive commissions from commercial brands 
to promote products to her social networks. 
She resides in Subang Jaya, Selangor.
SITI,* 38, is a Temuan woman from Shah Alam, 
Selangor. Married to an ethnic Malay, she is also 
a parent to school-age and adolescent children. 
She is active on Facebook and Instagram 
where she shares updates with family and 
close friends. Her primary reason for being 
online however is to receive information about 
school activities from her children’s teachers 
via WhatsApp. VENITA,* 24, is involved in community work in 
her village in the outskirts of Seremban, Negeri 
Sembilan. She is an eager Facebook user who 
often shares updates about her community 
work as well as her personal activities. While 
she is also on Instagram, most of her updates 
are on Facebook. Venita, a member from the 
Temuan tribe, also uses WhatsApp to keep in 
touch with family and friends.
YARA KHOO,* 41, is a single parent living 
in Kuching, Sarawak, where she works as a 
freelance writer. She used to be active on 
Twitter and Facebook but in more recent years 
decided to limit her usage to Instagram. Yara 
also offers feeding therapy advice to other 
parents with whom she keeps in regular contact 
through WhatsApp.
 
YVONNE LAM,* 34, works as a copy editor 
and social media manager producing content 
related to the arts. This includes moderating 
conversations on a variety of issues across 
multiple social media platforms. She was part 
of the early wave of social bloggers in Malaysia 
where she shared about her life as a young 
lesbian woman. Yvonne currently resides in 
Petaling Jaya, Selangor.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      20VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      21MAPPING 
CONNECTIONSVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      22THE COST OF GETTING ONLINE
Siti lives in a double storey link house in the suburban 
city of Shah Alam, Selangor. Her neighbourhood, 
where homes range between RM350,000 (about 
USD 87,500) to more than RM1,000,000 (about 
USD 250,000), was built on the ancestral land of the 
Temuan tribe, the original inhabitants of the area. 
Siti, who is Temuan herself, attained the house as 
compensation from the housing developer in a land 
acquisition process. The living room of her house, 
where she lives with her husband, five children and 
mother-in-law, is sparse. Her neighbours are mostly 
orang luar  (“outsiders,” mainly ethnic Malay) and 
many are more well-off. Located close to the city’s 
administrative centre and a royal palace, the middle-
class neighbourhood is equipped with internet 
infrastructure. Siti herself is connected to the internet 
via a smartphone purchased by her husband, which 
she shares with two of their adolescent children. 
This is the first smartphone for the 38-year-old and 
she has been using it for about three to four years. 
Prior to that she was using an analogue phone. Siti is 
subscribed to a pre-paid mobile internet plan where 
she pays RM10 (about USD 2.50) for each top-up. In 
a month, she spends an average of RM30 (about USD 
7.50) for connection but is unsure how much data she 
receives. Siti believes she gets up to 3GB for each 
top-up and says she rarely exceeds her quota despite 
sharing her phone with her children. When asked if 
she is paying a “fair amount” for internet connection, 
Siti laughed and said she does not know. But what 
she knows for certain is that internet connection is 
now a “necessity.”
Other respondents feel the same way but unlike 
Siti, they believe they are not paying a fair amount 
for internet connection. Hannah, who access the 
internet from a laptop, tablet and smartphone—all 
purchased for her by others—feels her broadband 
service is expensive. For about RM130 (about USD 
32.50) a month the home-based artist receives 25GB of data, which she says is not enough. With online 
meetings, transferring of large files, social media 
management and access to entertainment, Hannah 
and her partner find themselves having to purchase 
additional data by the end of each month. Worse 
yet, like many others who live in apartment buildings 
they have limited choices in broadband services. 
There is only one broadband service provider for 
their apartment in Pulau Pinang, so Hannah and her 
partner have no choice but to settle for one of the 
provider’s data packages. To circumvent the problem 
of insufficient data, Hannah sometimes works out of 
cafés that offer free WiFi. But this depends on her 
state of health and she also has to consider the cost 
of public transportation. There are also other costs 
involved when working out of a café, like food and 
beverages, free WiFi notwithstanding.
Daphne Iking finds herself with a similar frustration, 
however her problem is not so much about the lack of 
data, but the speed of it. Daphne, who left a career in 
television broadcasting, now runs a business venture 
with her husband. Together they operate from their 
apartment where they also raise three children. 
She recently started a YouTube channel which has 
proven to be a good business decision. However, 
this entails having to regularly upload videos online, 
which was when they discovered how slow their 
internet connection really was. It could take hours 
just to upload a ten-minute long video. But in a move 
to switch to a faster broadband service provider, 
they then discovered the burden was upon them 
to create customer demand. According to Daphne, 
the alternative service provider would not install the 
basic infrastructure required in the building unless 
more residents signed up. Unless she can make that 
happen, Daphne has no choice but to settle for the 
current and slow internet option. For a fast-paced 
business person like her, time is money.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      23Daphne herself is a heavy internet user. She is 
connected to the internet on three devices—a 
computer, tablet and smartphone—all of which 
she personally owns, with each device subscribed 
to its own internet service account. From banking 
to entertainment, her personal life is reliant on the 
internet. Each month she pays a minimum of RM340 
(about USD 85) which gets her about 74GB of data. 
During busy working months, she finds herself having 
to purchase additional data, but this is something she 
is prepared to do. It is expensive, she said, but she has 
factored the additional cost in her monthly budget. 
“I complain, I whine, but there’s nothing much I can 
do about it,” she added.
This is the sentiment expressed by most of the 
respondents no matter their level of affordability. 
Whether on pre-paid or post-paid services, using less 
than 10GB or more than 50GB of data, the women 
feel internet service is expensive and there is nothing 
they can do about it. They pay what they can for a 
data plan and have to put up with whatever quality 
of service they get in return. This is especially so 
for those who live in areas where there is only one 
internet service provider available. For Leslie, who 
uses two smartphones and a laptop to get online, 
being on a data plan is much cheaper for day-to-day 
text messaging compared to mobile short message 
service (SMS) where one is charged for each message 
sent. That said, she still feels she is paying a lot. 
For these women, their grievances about cost is a 
combination between getting insufficient amount 
of data and the speed of data itself. Blogger Shida 
Amal and Idora are the only ones who feel they are 
charged a fair price for internet access. Shida pays 
about RM30 (about USD 7.50) a month for 5GB of 
data on her smartphone while Idora does not spend 
more than RM50 (about USD 12.50) a month. Idora’s 
data plan offers weekly specials so the data she 
receives varies each month depending on whether 
she chooses to purchase during the offer period. In 
Shida’s case however, she also has internet access at 
home which is paid for by her brother. 
In terms of mobile reception, the women are generally 
able to connect from where they live and places 
they frequent. Idora is the only respondent who said 
she can go up to weeks in a month without internet 
connection when she stays with her father’s family 
in a village in Tapah, Perak. Not being connected 
does pose some challenges with work but Idora said 
her employers are sympathetic and show leniency. 
Some respondents say they lose connectivity when 
travelling to different parts of Malaysia. For example, 
Daphne complains about not having connection when visiting family in the more rural parts of Sabah. For 
Maimuna Zikri, who lives abroad, making voice calls 
to her partner using an internet-based application 
is impossible when her partner visits family in Kota 
Bharu, Kelantan. On these occasions, they can only 
be in touch by text message. Leslie on the other 
hand said she sometimes experiences connection 
problems on both her smartphones when in Bukit 
Mertajam in Pulau Pinang.
Yvonne Lam is the only respondent who cited blocked 
websites as a problem of cost, over and above slow 
data speed and inconsistent coverage. She would like 
to access websites hosted on Medium, a blogging 
platform which most internet service providers 
in Malaysia have blocked following a government 
restriction on Sarawak Report , a blog hosted on 
Medium.32 In her view, paying for internet service 
should entail having complete access to the internet. 
On the other hand, Que is the only respondent who 
said she should not have to pay for internet access at 
all. She believes the internet is today a fundamental 
part of every person’s right to access information 
and therefore, the service should not be charged. She 
also believes internet service providers in Malaysia 
exploit consumers by imposing expensive rates for 
limited services. If not for her partner who wants to 
be in touch via internet while on the go, as well as the 
convenience of using navigation applications, Que 
would rather not subscribe to mobile internet service. 
All of the women in this study access the internet 
by smartphone where they are most active. This 
corresponds with findings in various studies about 
internet access in Malaysia where at least 90 percent 
of people reportedly go online via smartphones. 
Prices of smartphones vary depending on brand and 
technical specifications, and a brand new one can 
cost anywhere between RM250 (about USD 62.50) 
to more than RM3,000 (about USD 750). The women 
interviewed generally said they are not the kind to 
upgrade to a new device every time a new model is 
launched. Instead, the devices are used until they 
reach their shelf life, which is usually between three 
to four years. With the exception of Siti and Venita, 
they also each own a computer which they use to go 
online. Only Daphne, Hannah, Maryam Lee and Yara 
Khoo own tablets. 
32 “Why has Malaysia blocked Medium?” Engadget , accessed 
June 7, 2017, https:/ /www.engadget.com/2016/01/28/
malaysia-medium-block-explainer.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      24SOCIAL MEDIA OF CHOICE
By definition social media is “a collection of internet-
based communities that allow users to interact with 
each other online.” Social media thus includes web 
forums, wikis, and user-generated content (UGC) 
websites.33 Text messaging applications such as 
Telegram, WhatsApp and WeChat are also as much 
social media as the more popular platforms such as 
Twitter, Instagram and Snapchat. In this era of so-
called sharing economy, text messaging platforms are 
considered the “dark social,” a term coined by Alexis 
C. Madrigal, where content is shared outside of what 
can be measured by web analytics programmes.34 In 
other words, activities and flow of information within 
the realm of online text messaging are still largely 
undetectable by marketers. Therefore, analytical data 
on demographics and types of content shared in this 
space is still largely unavailable in public domain.
In Malaysia, the most popular internet-based text 
messaging application is WhatsApp. In a 2014 report 
by global research company Kantar TNS, at least 70 
percent of those online in Malaysia are said to be 
communicating through WhatsApp.35 The research, 
which looks at digital behaviours across 50 countries, 
found those in Malaysia “among the most attached 
to their digital devices” and showing “high levels 
of engagement with content and a desire to stay 
connected with friends and family.” This is true for 
the women interviewed in this study. While a few 
may also use applications such as Telegram, WeChat 
and iMessage, all the women are on WhatsApp for 
everyday communications with friends, family or 
colleagues. The platform not only allows them to send 
text messages but also voice recorded messages, 
photos, videos and links to other content. 
All the respondents are also on Facebook. According 
to the Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission’s (MCMC) internet user survey 2016, 
more than 95 percent of Malaysia’s online population 
are on Facebook, making it the most popular social 
33 Per Christensson, “Social Media Definition,” TechTerms , 
August 7, 2013, accessed June 3, 2017, http:/ /www.
techterms.com/definition/social_media.
34 Alexis C. Madrigal, “Dark Social: We Have the Whole History 
of the Web Wrong,” The Atlantic , October 12, 2012, accessed 
June 7, 2017, https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/technology/
archive/2012/10/dark-social-we-have-the-whole-history-of-
the-web-wrong/263523/.
35 “Malaysian Internet users amongst the most socially 
engaged in the world” Kantar TNS , accessed June 1, 2017, 
https:/ /www.tnsglobal.com/press-release/malaysian-
internet-users-amongst-most-socially-engaged-worldmedia in the country.36 Some of the women have also 
downloaded the Facebook Messenger application 
to use as a text messaging platform. In the case of 
Maryam, she also makes voice calls through Facebook 
besides doing the same on WhatsApp. The lure of 
Facebook is also driven by a fear of missing out. As 
28-year-old Hannah said, “I only have it because 
other people have it. And I didn’t start getting jobs 
in Malaysia until I opened a Facebook [account].” 
While all the women interviewed use Facebook 
primarily to socialise and to keep up with popular 
content circulating within their network, being within 
those very networks may also widen their economic 
opportunities. Even if their accounts are set to private, 
direct referrals can be made by friends within the 
platform itself.
Instagram is the second most used social media 
among the respondents with 11 or 73 percent, of them 
on the platform. The third is Twitter where nine, or 60 
percent, of them are active. According to Nalisa Alia 
Amin, she prefers to use Twitter to express herself in 
a more public way. “I can type out what I’m currently 
feeling, my thoughts and my ideas. I prefer to write 
what I want to express instead of using visuals,” she 
said, comparing her usage between Twitter and 
Instagram. YouTube is a common social media the 
women access, mostly for entertainment, although 
Daphne, Que and Yvonne actively use the platform 
for work. Yara, who home schools her child, uses 
YouTube’s educational content in her lessons.
ORDINARY ROUTINES OF GREAT 
IMPORTANCE
When asked about their daily online routines, the 
respondents generally say their days often begin 
with checking on unread messages, either on text 
messaging platforms or other social media. So, before 
errands and other obligations get underway, the 
women usually respond to those who made contact 
since the last time they were online. Hannah, whose 
closest friends live in different time zones, makes it 
a point to prioritise replying to their messages over 
others. Her mornings provide a window to be in touch 
with friends in real time, which is very important 
to her. Hannah has a mental health condition that 
36 Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission, 
Internet users survey 2016: Statistical brief number twenty. 
(Cyberjaya: Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission, 2016) accessed May 13, 2017, https:/ /www.
mcmc.gov.my/skmmgovmy/media/General/pdf/IUS2016.
pdfVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      25sometimes causes extreme anxieties, and positive 
interaction with trusted people helps her get through 
the day. Social media thus plays a vital role in her life 
as it provides a channel to connect with her most 
trusted friends and start the day on a positive note. 
Likewise for Maimuna, who is based overseas on 
work assignment and only returns to Malaysia at 
most twice a year. Social media enables her to be in 
touch with her partner and two children throughout 
the day in an affordable way. Her primary use of the 
internet is to keep in touch with family and friends 
in Malaysia besides reading the news. But she also 
said, “I can do without reading the news for a day 
but I need to keep in touch with my partner so she 
knows I’m okay, and I know she’s okay.” Maimuna is 
the only respondent in this study who disclosed she 
is in a long-distance relationship. Her dependence 
on social media is not unlike many others in long-
distance relationships. In her case, she is also a parent 
and there is a sense of wanting to be present for her 
children in whatever way possible during this period 
where they are separated. 
The daily routine of keeping in touch and chatting 
with loved ones is something Rihanna also relates 
to, although in her case it is quite different. Rihanna 
is a transwoman in her early twenties who feels she 
is living an authentic life everywhere but home. She 
has forged close friendships with people online and 
offline and maintains these relationships through 
social media. The relationships are invaluable as 
they nourish her with affirmation and support. Like 
many others her age, she is frequently texting one 
friend or other on the internet and sharing updates 
on social media about daily happenings, including 
sharing photos. In doing so, she is conscious about 
normalising transwomen’s visibility online. At the 
same time, she needs to be very careful to avoid 
being detected by her family. For this reason, she 
adopts a semi-pseudonym on social media. 
This may be a common concern among queer women 
in this study who are not out to family. Although 
sexuality may be something one can hide from public 
view, it is hardly the case for gender expression. 
The queer women here are cisgender and, unlike 
Rihanna, do not really have to worry about how they 
come across in person to disapproving relatives. “My 
family is not accepting and are very conservative 
Christians,” she said, “so I live a double life where at 
home I have to bind my chest and dress like a boy.” 
It is only when away from family that Rihanna can be 
herself. It is crucial therefore that her family is kept 
out of her social media space. If discovered, she risks being disowned and cut off from financial support. As 
a full-time college student, this is a fate she cannot 
afford. “I have to pander to them for a couple more 
years until I graduate and get a job,” she said.
A United States-centred Pew study on the social 
impact of widespread use of social networking sites, 
or social media platforms, found that people with 
online social networks strongly feel they receive 
emotional support, companionship and instrumental 
(tangible) support from their online peers. They rate 
higher than those who are online but not on social 
media, and even more so compared to people who 
are not connected to the internet. The study found 
that those who use instant message on social media 
has an average of 12 percent more core confidants 
than those who are online but not on social media.37  
The women interviewed in this Malaysian study also 
indicate that social media is a significant enabler of 
solidarity and support.
Apart from building relationships and support 
networks, social media is also an important source 
of information. At least nine, or 60 percent, of 
respondents said they rely on social media for news. 
For women like Que and Leslie who have stopped 
reading newspapers or watching television news, 
social media is their main source of information for 
current events. “News” is therefore what gains the 
widest circulation within their social networks. The 
significance of an event or issue is thus determined 
by popularity and in some cases, like Facebook, the 
platform’s algorithm. Arguably this may mean they 
lose out on other important news that are not within 
their network’s interest. But at the same time, a 
national issue the government would rather suppress 
might gain enough attention on social media resulting 
in public pressure and positive action. 
The nature of affinity groups on social media also 
channels topical information. For example, women 
in the arts and entertainment may share content 
that are useful or interesting to those in their 
network. Updates on more localised news may also 
be shared in close-knit groups, such as a family or a 
neighbourhood group, where the information is most 
valued. Some may be critical information relating 
to safety and basic rights. In the case of Idora and 
Venita who are both indigenous women, Facebook in 
37 Lauren Sessions Goulet, Keith Hampton, Kristen Purcell, 
and Lee Rainie, “Social networking sites and our lives,” 
Pew Research Center , June 16, 2011, accessed June 5, 2017, 
http:/ /www.pewinternet.org/2011/06/16/social-networking-
sites-and-our-lives/.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      26particular is an important platform for them to receive 
news and share updates concerning the Orang Asli 
community in Malaysia. In this regard, social media is 
not a space where the women are mere recipients but 
are also active distributors of news and information. 
The reality of social media where people can post 
real-time updates to be shared with a wider audience 
also facilitates citizen journalism. Virtually any of the 
women in this study are empowered to be citizen 
journalists whenever the occasion necessitates.
To conclude, among the most common daily activities 
on social media, keeping in touch with friends and 
family as well as accessing and sharing news, have 
the most significant impact on the women’s lives. 
While the jury is still out on whether social media 
is “good” or “bad,” at least in these instances, the 
various platforms do contribute positively to the 
women’s lives.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      27EXAMINING 
AGGRESSIONSVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      28VOICE AS A POINT OF CONTENTION
18-year-old Cassandra Hsiao made headlines 
this year when her heartfelt college essay about 
learning English caught the attention of the world’s 
top universities. Cassandra then received offers 
from all eight Ivy League colleges and news of her 
success was widely shared in Malaysia, a country she 
identifies as home despite growing up in the United 
States since age five. A child of a Taiwanese father 
and Malaysian mother, Cassandra was attacked on 
social media for not being a “real” Malaysian.38 On 
Reddit, one commenter said, “Uh duh? She ain’t 
even Malaysian, also Oxford and Cambridge is no 
less prestigious than those Ivy League universities if 
not better.” Someone else said, “She was just born in 
Malaysia, then moved to US when she was 5 [years 
old]. She’s not even Malaysian to begin with.”39
Cassandra’s reaction to the comments she saw online 
also generated media interest. She reportedly wrote 
on her blog, “The questions still sting: do I even 
belong anywhere? Can I truly call anywhere home?” 
Some might argue the attacks against her were not 
gendered but a closer look at her essay, and her 
very being, may suggest otherwise. Cassandra’s 
winning story was about her mother, her mother’s 
native tongue and life journey.40 They are part and 
parcel of what makes Cassandra who she is today: 
the daughter of a migrant Malaysian woman who, 
against all odds, received offers from the most elite 
38 Nicholas Cheng, and Terence Toh, “Yale-bound but still 
stung by mean M’sians,” The Star Online , May 1, 2011, 
accessed June 17, 2017, http:/ /www.thestar.com.my/news/
nation/2017/05/01/yalebound-but-still-stung-by-mean-
msians-negativity-to-be-a-driving-force-in-arts-degree/.
39 “Sorry, Malaysia - You Don’t Get To Be Proud Of Cassandra 
Hsiao’s Success,” Reddit , accessed July 25, 2017, https:/ /
www.reddit.com/r/malaysia/comments/64hufh/sorry_
malaysia_you_dont_get_to_be_proud_of/.
40 Harry Shukman, “This first generation immigrant just got 
into all eight Ivies,” The Tab , April, 2017, accessed July 
25, 2017, https:/ /thetab.com/us/2017/03/31/got-into-all-
ivies-64085.of higher learning institutions in the Western world. 
The story of her complex identity is gendered, 
beginning with her own voice as a young woman and 
the maternal lineage she identifies with. When people 
deny her claim to identify as part “Malaysian,” they 
are essentially invalidating her gendered voice and 
delegitimising her gendered history. 
In their writing on feminist communication theory, 
Lana F. Rakow and Laura A. Wackwitz remind 
feminists that we must assume the world as we know 
it is unjust and requires change. They further say: 
[Feminist communication theory] 
assumes that we can and must look to 
the meanings and experiences of women 
and others who have been invisible or 
devalued in order to understand our 
subordination … Women’s voices are 
silenced in so many ways that the simple 
act of speaking may itself become a 
political act. (Rakow and Wackwitz 
2004, 6).
Rakow and Wackwitz identify three themes—
difference, voice and representation—to guide the 
feminist study of communication. In citing difference, 
they note that certain linguistic, material and 
political systems establish oppressive relationships 
within and between racial and ethnic groups, 
genders, sexualities, economic classes, and political 
orientations. They stress the need to acknowledge 
that women’s voice are too often denied access 
to communicative forums, or admitted only to 
have their ideas dismissed as deviant or irrelevant. 
Representation is also important, they argue, in order 
to avoid attempts to represent any group that is not 
one’s own, which can have detrimental material and 
political consequences (9). VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      29Applying Rakow and Wackwitz’s feminist framework 
in examining the case of Cassandra Hsiao, as well 
as the women in this study, all the different issues 
relating to power and oppression begin to present 
themselves. Let us consider the case of Idora. Idora 
belongs to multiple groups on Facebook, many of 
which are Orang Asli community groups with some 
more active than others. She recalled an incident in 
one of those groups where a young male member 
posted a photo of a young woman without her 
knowledge or consent. The young woman is from 
a different tribe whose village is located on the 
outskirts of Kuala Lumpur while the man who posted 
the photo is from a more rural part of Malaysia. Idora 
described the young woman in the photo as looking 
“urban” and said the caption was an offer by the 
young man to set up sexual encounters with her. 
It was unclear if he personally knew the woman in 
the photo but insinuations were made in his caption 
about urban young Orang Asli women being “loose” 
as they intermingle with city folk. The post was 
essentially a violent disapproval of Orang Asli women 
integrating into city life, being indistinguishable from 
city folk ( orang luar , or “outsiders”) or presenting 
themselves as having personal agency outside of 
the Orang Asli community. An explosion of reactions 
ensued on that post and lasted for days. According 
to Idora, many men agreed with the post although 
there were also many others, women and men, who 
defended the woman in the photo. Importantly, Idora 
and some others called for the post to be removed 
as it was slanderous and sexist. But despite the days 
of controversy it caused, the post was not removed.
Contrast that with Idora’s own experience of posting 
in the group. In 2013, Idora made a general comment 
about the need for Orang Asli people to develop 
personal leadership skills in order to be empowered 
to take on greater roles beyond their own tribes. It 
was a reminder meant to inspire members of the 
community but instead her comment drew in an 
angry mob. It was the weeks leading up to a hotly 
contested general election in Malaysia and some 
indigenous men had announced their candidacy. 
Idora’s comment was read as an attack on the 
candidates and she was labelled a traitor and agent 
of their challengers. She described the attacks as 
being relentless, going on for days and spiralling into 
personal insults. Some comments even made their 
way into her private Facebook inbox. Each time, she 
would defend herself and try to bring the discussion 
back to leadership skills and empowerment, but 
her attempts were futile. Few defended her and 
eventually, after a few days of attacks, Idora’s post was removed by the group’s administrator. 
The two cases recounted by the 29-year-old reveal 
the deep insecurities of the Orang Asli community 
who have been systematically marginalised and 
oppressed by the state for generations. On the one 
hand, concerns over assimilation, and on the other, 
their eligibility in national politics. But the cases also 
show how women, especially those who exercise 
their personal agency, ultimately bear the burden of 
these insecurities. As the powerless goes against the 
might of the state, they take it out on women in their 
own community, which suggests a strong perception 
that women in these Orang Asli communities are 
deemed to have an inferior status to men. For Idora, 
her experience was too much to bear. Following the 
intense harassment she faced, and after her post 
was taken down, Idora decided to deactivate her 
Facebook account. She only returned to Facebook 
in more recent months, but only to see that a young 
man can so proudly outrage a woman and do so 
with impunity.
In early 2014, a popular blog believed to be run 
by a group of Kuala Lumpur-based and mostly 
male lawyers found itself at the centre of social 
media controversy. An anonymously written article, 
originally published on a local news portal, was 
posted on the blog as a humorous response to a 
woman’s inquiry on what to get her boyfriend for 
Christmas. The following is an excerpt:
We would suggest you think out of the 
box (or dress, or negligee, whatever) 
and dispense with the usual Christmas 
shopping madness and instead consider 
doing him something, or simply just doing 
him good.
For example, you could do something 
unheard of by young urban women 
(which we assume you are instead of 
some 53-year old Bangsar cougar driving 
a BMW Z3), such as giving him a foot 
massage (or fellatio), then set out the 
deliciously cooked meal you have been 
slaving over throughout the day (or 
fellatio) and then cuddling with him while 
feasting on the latest X-Art video clips he 
downloaded throughout the whole of last 
week (or fellatio).41
41 Lord Bobo, “Ask Lord Bobo: What To Get Your Man For 
Christmas,” Loyar Burok , February 4, 2014, accessed 
July 1, 2017, https:/ /www.loyarburok.com/2014/02/04/
asklordbobo-christmas/.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      30Yvonne Lam recalled her reaction to the article. She 
said, “I called their fellatio article sexist, badly written 
and badly edited, [and] they took issue with that.” As 
a result, she was harassed on multiple social media 
platforms by members of the blog along with their 
friends. Through their personal accounts as well as 
organisational accounts, Yvonne saw comments 
across Facebook, Twitter and Instagram either bluntly 
denying the article was sexist or claimed she was 
unable to take a joke. They initially tagged her in their 
comments to indicate they were up for a meaningful 
discussion on the matter. After a while, as Yvonne 
stood her ground and as more people supported 
her view, they stopped tagging her altogether but 
continued to make comments about her. 
In contrast, cisgender men who took the same 
position as Yvonne did not experience the same fate. 
“Oddly enough [the men’s] comments were much 
better received,” she said.42 Asked if she thought her 
gender was a factor, Yvonne responded, “Of course!” 
She later discovered through private channels that the 
author of the article was indeed a man who was also a 
practicing lawyer and part of the blog’s membership. 
The popular blog, and lawyers associated with it, were 
otherwise known to champion human rights and civil 
liberties but the article and controversy following 
Yvonne’s comments unveiled the sexism that exists 
within the human rights-legal fraternity.43 The debacle 
tarnished the lawyers’ “progressive credentials” and 
caused those associated with the blog to defend 
themselves. But to Yvonne and others like her, the 
lawyers not only failed to redeem themselves but 
further proved their sexism in how they engaged 
differently with women compared to cisgender men.
42 At least one cisgender gay man responded to the article, 
taking the same view as Yvonne. He too received backlash, 
but unlike Yvonne, they were mostly contained within the 
author’s network of close friends. The harassers belittled 
him, questioned the man’s academic achievements and 
insinuated he should not take issue with the fellatio article 
as he was a gay man.  
43 A conference organised by the Association of Women 
Lawyers and the Malaysian Bar Council titled “Enhancing 
Leadership and Performance Skills for Women Lawyers”, 
scheduled to take place on 16 November 2017, received 
backlashes by fellow legal practitioners and people within 
the same network on social media. This took place despite 
responses by a member of the Association of Women 
Lawyers that male lawyers can still engage as participants. 
It was a backlash initiated by a male human rights lawyer. 
Most of the comments denied the existence of sexism 
within the legal fraternity and that the conference is “sexist” 
and “biased” against male lawyers, see: https:/ /m.facebook.
com/photo.php?fbid=10155934314518488&id=701443487&
set=a.10150140783638488.336287.701443487&source=57Maryam Lee is another respondent who is aware 
of the gendered attacks she encountered on social 
media. During the month of Ramadhan in 2016, 
Maryam decided to pose a direct challenge to 
society’s moral policing when she ate a meal at 
a restaurant during fasting hours. Maryam, who 
did not fast on that day due to menstruation, was 
reprimanded by the restaurant manager. By eating 
in public, she was accused of insulting Islam. The 
manager further said his restaurant could be fined 
under the state syri’ah law (Muslim law) for serving 
food to Muslims. One male customer then saw it fit to 
enter the exchange and told her she had no “ right ” to 
eat in public during the fasting month. She recounted 
the incident on social media saying women were 
unjustly punished for their biological makeup. She 
challenged the popular view that Muslims who are 
not fasting, for whatever personal reasons, should 
not be allowed to eat in public. The response she 
received was overwhelmingly hostile, especially from 
Muslims.44
She was condemned as a bad Muslim who behaved 
in an uncivilised manner. “I wish I’d been anonymous 
because anonymity would have created a safer 
environment for me online,” she said. Maryam felt the 
attacks were much more directed at her personhood 
when people knew her name and face. But at the 
same time she also believes it is important to reveal 
one’s identity when speaking up on issues. “A safe 
space that is meaningful is one where I can still 
show who I am, rather than hide myself in order to 
be safe.” Maryam believes it is important to speak 
up in public and said she is prepared for debates. 
What she cannot deal with is when people resort 
to personal attacks. She claims to self-censor not 
only in what she says but also in her approach. For 
example, her Facebook post about the restaurant 
incident was carefully written to address the issue 
of moral policing, a term she used deliberately and 
repeatedly throughout her post. Nevertheless, people 
were focused on the “audacity” of her action instead.
Milder comments often were often presented as 
advice, but laced with condescension. For instance: 
“Dik, tahulah adik in pandai dan bijaksana tapi 
janganlah melawan perintah Tuhan  (Young sister, 
I’m aware that you are clever and wise but don’t 
44 Maryam’s action was also condemned by the chairperson 
of a local Muslim civil society group usually known for 
their progressive approach to Islam. While he claims to be 
against moral policing, he disagrees that Muslims who are 
not fasting should eat in public. He said Maryam’s action 
was unnecessary and unethical, and trivialised her action as 
a mere social experiment.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      31challenge God’s command).” Even those who agree 
with her views sometimes resort to tone policing. 
“People have been telling me, ‘Maryam what you’re 
saying is okay, tapi cara kau cakap tu… ’ (but it’s the 
way you say it…),” she said. “People keep saying that 
to me no matter how I present my views. I’ve come to 
a point where I don’t care how I say things anymore,” 
she added. In more recent months, the 25-year-old 
took to Twitter to talk about her decision to stop 
donning the hijab. She knew her views would not be 
taken well but it was an important personal journey 
she wanted to share. She believes her decision to 
remove the hijab is right and based on research by 
progressive Muslim scholars. As expected, she was 
attacked and called a deviant. One young person 
likened her to a virus that needed to be destroyed. 
Others said she was a threat to the religion, and 
some went further to say “darah dia halal”  (killing 
her is permissible). 
In Shida Amal’s case, she was encouraged to kill 
herself. It all began about two years ago in 2015 when 
she started being harassed by a group of people on 
Twitter who called her “fat” and “stupid.” “Of course 
it was hurtful,” she said, “but I still thought it was 
harmless.” It was months later that she realised the 
harassment had a pattern and felt like an organised 
attack. Each time the harassment would start with 
one person tweeting an insult and then the others 
would chime in. There was no escape for Shida 
because they tagged her in their tweets. She started 
blocking some of them after numerous attacks, 
but they always found a way to get someone else 
who was not blocked to tweet her. The harassment 
happened on a daily basis for about a year and 
she managed to the core members as well as the 
motivation behind their attacks. With a Twitter 
following numbering tens of thousands, Shida was 
popular on the platform. The group was trying to 
discredit her and dampen her popularity.
Shida believes there are between five to ten people in 
the group. “They harassed me on everything I shared 
online to the point that I felt I couldn’t breathe,” she 
said. Besides blogging, Shida also ran a business 
and each time she posted updates about work, they 
would reply to say her work was “stupid.” When she 
launched a product, they would say the same thing. 
Worse yet, if she retweeted comments from people 
who bought her product, or read her writing, the 
same group would then harass those people too. 
Some among the harassers have large following, 
making attacks against Shida visible to many others. 
As a result, more people would participate in the 
harassment. Shida said, “It came to the point where [it felt like] ‘hating Shida’ was the new cool thing to 
do.” And the situation reached tipping point for her 
last year when she found out her own best friend 
was complicit. 
Behind the scenes, her best friend was sharing 
information about her to the group, including private 
photos. One was a photo of her showing her middle 
finger to the camera and another where her cleavage 
was visible. These were private photos from a holiday 
trip that were never meant to be shared with others, 
and certainly not to be shared in the public domain. 
The photos however were made public by the group, 
and during the month of Ramadhan. “You know how 
Malays can get on Twitter,” she said, in reference to 
a moralistic mob behaviour on the platform among 
many ethnic Malay Muslims. Shida herself is Muslim, 
so photos of her showing the finger, or having her 
cleavage visible, would make her an easy target for 
moral policing. The photos, coupled with rumours 
being circulated by the group, caused Shida to fall 
into depression—a condition she had been diagnosed 
with by a mental health professional. Within twenty-
four hours since the second photo was release, she 
became suicidal. 
Shida went public to say the harassment had gone 
too far and disclosed she was feeling suicidal. She 
begged for it all to stop. Claiming she was merely 
seeking attention, the group then encouraged her 
to go ahead and kill herself. The exchange between 
them went viral quickly and more people got 
involved. “I felt really ashamed,” she said, “I couldn’t 
even stand up for myself against online bullies.” Shida 
deactivated her Twitter and Instagram accounts that 
very day and was admitted into hospital where she 
received treatment for a week.
Religion influences the social media experience of 
many respondents in this study. Eight of the fifteen 
respondents in this study explicitly mentioned 
religion as a force they encounter on social media 
whether directly, like the case of Maryam, or indirectly 
through a public morality shaped by religio-cultural 
norms. This is not unlike the Malaysia experienced 
offline where religion and religious morality has 
encroached into almost every aspect of public life. As 
one news columnist said, Islam today even pervades 
into spaces that previously had no religious value.45  
The strongest drivers of this phenomenon are the 
45 Zurairi AR, “Why ‘creeping Islamisation’ is no joke,” Malay 
Mail Online , January 3, 2016, accessed July 3, 2017, http:/ /
www.themalaymailonline.com/opinion/zurairi-ar/article/
why-creeping-islamisation-is-no-joke.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      32government and political parties that weaponise 
religion for political gains. Issues that evoke feelings 
of insecurity, especially among Muslims, are played 
up to encourage communal affinity and political 
affiliations based on religio-ethnic identity.46
This phenomenon has negatively impacted the social 
media experience of women in this study. Based 
on the interviews, the most affected are those who 
identify as Muslim, and those who identify as queer 
or trans. With the exception of Daphne Iking and 
Faye, who is of mixed parentage, the three other 
indigenous women interviewed did not in any way 
mention religion as a factor in their experience of 
bullying or harassment. The queer and transwomen 
on the other hand are acutely aware of their 
vulnerability in this context. Not only are their gender 
(trans) and sexuality criminalised by law, they are 
also subjected to heightened online surveillance 
by anti-LGBT (an acronym that stands for lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender) Muslim groups and 
individuals. A recent example is an LGBT event that 
was exposed on social media resulting in individuals 
being identified and systematically attacked.47
Organised violence is part of the reason why Yara 
Khoo withdrew from social media. The 41-year-old 
used to be active on Facebook and Twitter, two 
platforms she used as a listening post to inform 
her work in communications as well as to engage 
in discussions as a private citizen. Yara recalled a 
particular experience in 2013 when she was attacked 
by cybertroopers.48 On the day it happened, Yara 
logged on to social media to find her timeline full 
of people criticising the Prime Minister’s leadership. 
Other conversations stemmed out of that including 
one she participated in about life in Malaysia. She 
did not consider these conversations “political” 
per se, rather they were about how people’s lived 
realities were impacted by poor public policy and 
services. Soon enough, Yara was swarmed by a 
group of cybertroopers who began to harass her 
46 Leo Suryadinata, “‘Islamization of Politics’ in Indonesia 
and Malaysia?: A Commentary by Leo Suryadinata” ISEAS-
Yusof Ishak Institute , January 12, 2017, accessed July 3, 
2017, https:/ /www.iseas.edu.sg/medias/commentaries/
item/4721-islamization-of-politics-in-indonesia-and-
malaysia-a-commentary-by-leo-suryadinata.
47 Aedi Asri, “Organiser defends ‘Gay Iftar’ breaking of fast 
event,” Free Malaysia Today , June 15, 2017, accessed July 
3, 2017, http:/ /www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/
nation/2017/06/15/sponsor-defends-gay-iftar-breaking-of-
fast-event/.
48 “Cybertroopers” is a Malaysian term that refers to an 
organised group of individuals on the internet who execute 
counter-propaganda on behalf of political parties and using 
various tactics including harassment.for expressing her views about quality of life in the 
country. When others came to her defence, they too 
became targets of harassment. The attacks went on 
overnight and the experience left her feeling angry 
because she knew it was an organised attempt to 
shut down an important public conversation. 
“To me, hostility is an inherent risk of being on 
social media,” she said, so the incident itself was not 
the reason she left Twitter. After all, she never felt 
inhibited from expressing her opinions online. Her 
reason was parenthood. The same year of the online 
harassment incident, Yara had a child. She realised 
that seeing organised violence on social media, as 
well as daily news about Malaysia, had a profound 
emotional and psychological impact on her. It was not 
a state of being she wanted for herself as a parent so 
she gradually phased out of Twitter, as well as from 
Facebook. “It’s toxic,” she said, “and it came to a point 
where I didn’t want to be exposed to it anymore.” 
Yara has since limited her social media to Instagram 
and WhatsApp where her account is private and 
she only sees updates from close friends and family. 
While the psychological and emotional impact she 
suffered was not resultant from any harassments or 
attacks made directly to her, Yara said it was due 
to seeing others being targeted by cybertroopers 
almost on a daily basis. So in this particular case, 
we see how one woman’s voice recedes from social 
media not so much due to her personal experience of 
being harassed, rather the general culture of violence 
occupying the space.
For Hannah, exposure to technology-related violence 
started at an early age. She was an active blogger 
in her teens and her site was accessible to public. 
Her blog was a personal journal where she talked 
about life and even shared photos of herself. In her 
interview, Hannah recalled a few occasions where 
people with male-named profiles left comments she 
described as “micro-aggressions.” The comments 
were a combination of racism and sexism without 
exactly using harsh language, but they affected 
her nonetheless. Unfortunately, Hannah was also 
facing violence at home so the experience of online 
aggression did not help at all. She eventually stopped 
blogging towards the end of secondary school when 
her family moved to a different city. By the time 
newer social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter 
and Instagram became popular, Hannah was already 
diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). Being aware of her condition, Hannah is 
more careful about her engagements on social media 
today. Her Facebook is private while her Twitter and 
Instagram are left public, but focused on promoting VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      33her work in the arts. 
She uses her art to raise awareness about mental 
health issues and so far her posts have not caused 
backlash from followers. That said, Hannah still sees 
violence unfold on social media despite adopting a 
deliberate content management strategy and careful 
curation of people she follows. When things she sees 
online start to affect her, Hannah takes social media 
breaks by going offline for a period of time. 
Like Hannah, Siti is also careful with how she engages 
with people on social media. She maintains a close 
network of friends and family thus making her 
Facebook and Instagram relatively safe spaces for her 
to share updates about her life. Siti said she personally 
has not experienced harassment on social media but 
has seen it happen to others. She has however seen 
racist remarks made against Orang Asli people in 
her neighbourhood. “Akak pernahlah nampak orang 
luar ni ejek-ejek Orang Asli kat Facebook, kata muka 
macam Sakai  (I have seen these outsiders teasing 
Orang Asli people on Facebook, saying we look like 
Sakai ),”49 she said, referring to the teenage children 
of her own neighbours. 
Siti, who is an indigenous woman from the Temuan 
ethnic group, said the comments do hurt her feelings. 
She has replied to some of them although for the 
most part she remained silent. On one occasion she 
replied to a post and said, “Orang Asli kacau korang 
ke? Mintak makan korang ke?  (Have the Orang Asli 
disturbed you? Are they asking for your food?)” It 
was her way of asking the people why they pick 
on Orang Asli when the community has not done 
anything wrong. Siti said people have a stereotypical 
view of Orang Asli lifestyle and associate them with 
poverty and errant behaviour. This perception offends 
her because in her words, “Orang Asli sekarang dah 
moden  (Today’s Orang Asli are modern).” But Siti is 
also reluctant to express too much on social media 
and would rather hurt in silence in order to maintain 
peace and avoid being perceived as a trouble maker. 
According to Siti, the attitude among the Orang Asli 
in her area is to simply let others say whatever they 
want. It is an approach to life she even teaches her 
children. She said: “Apa guna pun kita melawan? 
Kalau orang berpihak kepada kita, tak apa. Kalau 
orang tak berpihak kepada kita?  (What’s the point 
in fighting back? It’s okay if people side with us. But 
49 Sakai is an indigenous ethnic group whose name is 
sometimes used as a racist slur to insult someone on their 
appearance, usually to mean ugly or unkempt.what if they don’t?)” In her experience, she has seen 
others defend Orang Asli people when comments 
are made about them. But more often than not, the 
racism outweighs the support. 
Siti and Hannah are typical cases of women holding 
back from expressing their views in order to avoid 
getting themselves into a potentially hostile situation. 
Arguably, it is a way of self-preservation but at the 
same time there is also a sense of disempowerment. 
Both claim to be exposed to at least some form of 
violence on social media, but they feel unable to 
intervene. For Hannah, her PTSD does not permit 
exposure to aggression without it further affecting 
her health. In Siti’s case, some of her responses in 
the interview indicate she may have internalised the 
historical discrimination against her people. And 
while she is proud to identify as Orang Asli, she 
may not feel safe to defend them when they are 
discriminated against in a public forum. 
CONTENTION BETWEEN ‘PEOPLE  
LIKE US ’
The cases discussed in this study thus far involve 
women confronting violent patriarchal behaviours 
that impact their freedom of expression and 
participation on social media. The perpetrators are 
largely men or misogynists. During the process of 
interviews, however, at least two women talked 
about their experience of harassment involving 
other women. What is unique about their stories is 
that the encounters happen within closed-groups 
created specifically to provide safety and solidarity 
for queer women. The women have two intersecting 
identities they share with their harassers: gender and 
sexuality. Both are identities that already suffer from 
patriarchal attitudes under the patriarchal-feudalistic 
system in Malaysia. 
Leslie referred to a photo she shared on Facebook 
of her carrying the LGBT pride flag at a Bersih  550 
rally for free and fair elections in 2016. The photo 
was uploaded onto a personal Facebook account 
she created specifically to engage with LGBT people 
in the country whom she hopes she can mobilise 
on gender or sexuality issues, or seek support from 
in times of need. Her networks on that account are 
mostly lesbian women, many of whom she does not 
50 A peaceful assembly held on 19 November 2016 in Kuala 
Lumpur in response to the ongoing corruption scandal 
involving the Prime Minister.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      34know personally. She was flooded with comments 
when she shared the photo of her carrying the flag 
at the rally. 
“Bersih  is not for rainbow,” she said, referring to the 
general sentiment of those who commented on her 
Facebook. For context, the Bersih  rally, organised 
by the Coalition for Clean and Fair Elections, or 
more widely known as BERSIH 2.0, is a coalition 
of non-governmental organisations which seeks to 
reform the current electoral system in Malaysia to 
ensure free, clean and fair elections. BERSIH 2.0 has 
organised some of Malaysia’s largest public rallies and 
have faced violent opposition by the government. The 
stakes are high each time they mobilise civil society. 
To discredit them, the government has accused 
Bersih  of being foreign agents trying to cause 
instability in the country. Government supporters 
on social media will look for any “evidence” that can 
be used against them, including signs of “liberalism” 
which is a term the government uses on those they 
claim to have an anti-Islam agenda. There was fear 
among Bersih  supporters that the proud presence of 
LGBTs may be used against Bersih . 
Leslie, who also shared the photo in an LGBT 
Facebook group, was harshly criticised for her 
action. She received one comment after another 
of people saying the same thing, that she should 
not have brought the flag to the rally. When asked 
how she felt, Leslie said, “I was speechless! I was 
upset that the LGBT community was not standing 
up for themselves.” “LGBT people also pay tax,” 
she said, “so why can’t I represent myself there?” 
The comments were unceasing and where she was 
unable to respond, Leslie tagged her friends so they 
could help respond on her behalf. It was an important 
conversation she wanted to have, but it felt like she 
was being bullied. 
In a separate incident, Faye recalled being harassed 
by members of a lesbian group she started a 
number of years ago. While she is the group’s sole 
administrator, she described her role as being mostly 
hands-off and allowed members to share their own 
content. Much of the content is about lesbian pop 
culture with not many deep discussions on lesbianism 
or lesbian life in Malaysia. Faye admitted some of the 
content shared by members are “suspect” and “not 
feminist”, but she did not regulate the information 
shared or intervene in the conversations. Over time, 
a few members became the voice of the group 
by virtue of how frequent they share content or 
comments there. Their active participations therefore 
influenced the content and politics of the group itself. A few months before the interview, someone posted 
a photo of an advertisement that said women do not 
only have vaginas but also brains. The person who 
shared the post thought it was humorous but the 
few active members felt it was transphobic. A heated 
discussion ensued between members and Faye was 
subsequently tagged in a comment and urged to 
take action, which was something that had never 
happened in the years since she started the group. 
She asked on the comments thread what exactly they 
wanted her to do and that sparked “a land mine that 
became a mess.” As the group’s administrator, she 
was personally accused of transphobia and cisgender 
sexism for not immediately removing the post. They 
considered it hate speech and wanted her to take 
action. When she said the group needed to discuss 
if the content was indeed transphobic, she was then 
accused of enabling transphobia. 
Faye said in the interview, “You have to understand 
the context of the group. It is mainly used by lesbians 
and lesbian-identified women for a lot of reasons. 
There are transpeople in the group but I don’t think 
there are many.” The unabating exchange continued 
to a point where Faye felt overwhelmed and needed 
time-out. She subsequently suspended the group 
using Facebook’s Archive feature which meant the 
group and its content was visible to members, but no 
one could post new content or comments. She did not 
completely delete the group as she wanted people 
to be able to read the comments and understand 
what was happening in the discussion. The group 
was reactivated after a few days. 
These are cases of two respondents who felt they 
experienced online harassment within their safe 
networks of marginalised women. The incidents 
arose not out of ill-intent but concern for others 
who are also marginalised. However, the cases 
reflect attitudes where people are unable to 
have constructive discussions about differences. 
Importantly, they reveal a behaviour on social media 
where people believe it is acceptable to bombard an 
individual with repeated criticism in order to prove a 
point or achieve a desired outcome. 
THE PRICE OF VISIBILITY
One incident that took Malaysian Twitter by storm 
earlier this year was related to a peaceful rally on 
International Women’s Day which saw a group of 
about fifty young people taking the streets of Kuala 
Lumpur armed with slogans championing a range 
of issues affecting women in Malaysia. Photos of VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      35rally-goers carrying their placards were shared on 
social media in real time and quickly generated public 
interest. The exposure of the event on Twitter soon 
became far greater than the actual reach of the event 
on-ground, and the feedback was harsh.51 While many 
did express their support, many others condemned 
the event, the participants and the messages they 
carried. Their photos were used against them to hurl 
insults and individual participants were identified 
along with their social media accounts, which 
were then pounded with misogynistic attacks. The 
harassment went on throughout the day.
One participant, a 16-year-old girl, found out about 
the Twitter attacks when friends notified her about 
it. She then saw what was happening online, and 
what was said about her personally, and the young 
girl felt it was all too much for her to take in. She 
was harassed over a photo of her holding a placard 
that read: “I wish to be the next Prime Minister but I 
can’t. Do you know why? ‘Mana tudung???’ (Where’s 
your hijab???)”52 Her message was seen as a swipe 
on Muslim men who police Muslim women and girls 
on the internet, especially those who do not don 
the hijab . There have been countless cases of hijab -
related harassment in Malaysia targeting women from 
all walks of life. Even royalties are not spared. Tunku 
Amina, the eldest daughter of the Sultan of Johor, 
was harassed on her Instagram for the same reason. 
Unwilling to endure further harassment, the princess 
deactivated her account.53
The backlash against the young girl’s placard was 
ironic to say the least, as many agreed with her 
message. There were also those who said the young 
girl cannot become the country’s leader, even if 
she does one day wear the hijab , simply because 
she is a female. The barrage of comments about 
her photo left the young girl feeling battered and 
defenceless. At the time, she did not feel she could 
seek help from her parents for fear of repercussion. 
Instead, she reached out to a Malaysian feminist 
group on Facebook for advice. That one connection 
51 Anis Khalila, “Perarakan #WomensMarchKL Dikecam Orang 
Ramai Dan Dikatakan Mengikut Budaya Barat,” Says.com , 
March 14, 2017, accessed July 19, 2017, http:/ /says.com/my/
seismik/sempena-hari-wanita-sedunia.
52 Hijab” refers to a head covering worn in public by some 
Muslim women. Many Muslims believe the religion instructs 
Muslim women to wear the hijab when in public, around 
men who are not their immediate family or around non-
Muslims.
53 Mohd Farhaan Shah, “Johor princess quits Instagram,” 
The Star Online , October 1, 2015, accessed June 19, 2017, 
http:/ /www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2015/10/01/
johor-princess-quits-instagram-negative-tudung-remarks-
prompt-move/.on Facebook not only lead her to receive the initial 
help and support she needed, but also precipitated 
a series of communications between feminists and 
women’s rights organisations who then organised a 
pushback campaign on Twitter—where all hell had 
broken loose.54 Like Tunku Amina, the young girl 
paid a high price for having visibility online. She too 
retreated from her social media platforms, but only 
temporarily until the situation subsided. 
Daphne Iking is no stranger to the challenges of 
being a visible woman on social media. She is visible 
by virtue of her work as a professional presenter and 
needs to maintain that visibility to sustain her work. 
Her experience in television programmes made her a 
celebrity, and with that came a lot of attention on her 
personal life. The divorce of her marriage in 2009 not 
only made news but brought about a vicious round 
of rumours which took a few years to fizzle down. 
“When I went through a very public divorce, [the 
harassers] went after me,” she said. People would 
leave hurtful comments on unrelated social media 
posts. For example, on a post in support of an anti-
violence against women campaign, she would find 
comments such as: “ Ala, you’re a home wrecker, apa 
nak tolong-tolong orang pulak!  (Oh please, you’re a 
home wrecker, why would you help others!)”
After the divorce, Daphne decided to embrace Islam 
and she also married a Muslim. She disclosed in the 
interview that her decision to embrace Islam was 
separate from her decision to marry. Her husband 
and her had a choice to continue the relationship 
without entering into a marriage, so her decision to be 
Muslim was not a factor in their relationship. That said, 
when news got out that she had become Muslim and 
married a Muslim man, Daphne received comments 
such as, “Dia tu Muslim nama je sebab nak kahwin  
(She is only Muslim on paper because she wants 
to get married). The comments refer to the Islamic 
Family Law Act that necessitates both parties to be 
Muslim for their marriage to be legally recognised. 
“At first I felt I needed to explain [my decision about 
Islam], and I did, but then I thought, ‘Why do I need to 
justify this?’” She also received many “well intended” 
comments from Muslims who congratulated her, but 
then proceeded to ask what her adoptive Muslim 
name was and if she had converted her child from 
her first marriage. To Daphne, these were all very 
54 Verinia Khoo, “Women’s March KL receives backlash, 
some Malaysians think it’s a Western trend,” Elle Malaysia, 
March 13, 2017, accessed Jun 19, 2017, http:/ /www.elle.my/
life-and-love/News/Womens-March-KL-receives-backlash-
Malaysians-think-its-a-Western-trend.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      36presumptuous questions and about things that are 
extremely private. All of it combined beleaguered her.  
Like many other Muslim women, she also faced 
repeated questions about why she does not wear 
the hijab —a question that continues to perplex the 
39-year-old ethnic Kadazan. Besides her marriage 
and the way she presents herself as a Muslim woman, 
people on social media also attack her on other 
parts of her personal life. For instance, Daphne, who 
was born Christian, would post greetings on social 
media during Christmas. Each year, there would 
be comments saying she should not wish “Merry 
Christmas” as she is now a Muslim. And when she 
shared updates about Christmas festivities with her 
Christian family members, there will be those who 
said it is wrong for Muslims to celebrate Christmas. All 
these comments were directed to her on Instagram 
and Facebook. She said it does bother her greatly 
and the only thing she can do without resorting to 
deactivating her account, is to block the harassers. 
But when things get too overwhelming, Daphne 
would temporarily set her account on private.
The first time she was viciously harassed, Nalisa 
Alia Amin panicked and almost deactivated her 
social media accounts. It all started with a photo 
from a private party where she was seen wearing 
a large sweater and eating a burger. The photo 
was discovered by a group of harassers through a 
mutual connection on their network and then widely 
circulated along with fat-shaming comments. Nalisa 
is a plus-size young woman who for many years 
avoided posting full-bodied photo of herself on social 
media. “I’ve always had body issues,” she said in the 
interview, “and I only took photos of my face.” So it 
affected her deeply when the photo from the party 
made its rounds. Nalisa, like Daphne and Shida Amal, 
has a Twitter following of more than 10 thousand 
people, rendering her a highly visible woman among 
Malaysians on the platform. The thought of the photo 
being seen by so many people made her feel really 
low. It did not help that the harassers were using the 
photo to insult her body. 
Others joined in on the harassment. Not only was she 
receiving insults on Twitter, she was also seeing them 
on her Instagram. “Oh, muka kecik tapi gemok  (Oh, 
your face is small but you’re actually fat),” they would 
say. She then discovered the group had assigned her 
an insulting nickname. Things were said about her 
without tagging or mentioning her real name, but 
followers quickly recognised that the insults were 
directed at her. What saved Nalisa was the affirming 
feedback she received from other women. She said many among her followers stood up for her. Nalisa 
believes that her large following has to do with the 
fact that she often pushes back against sexism. “I 
feel like I have nothing to lose. Women are frustrated 
[with inequality] and if men don’t like me on Twitter 
[for speaking up], I don’t care.” She said many women 
like that she stands up to sexist men particularly, and 
it could be because they do not feel they can do the 
same. Nalisa believes that when these women do not 
feel they can use their own voices, they would simply 
retweet her. She does worry about backlash but is 
nonetheless determined to speak up. 
So when she was attacked for her body and feeling 
dispirited, women in her network stood up for her. 
Following the whole incident, Nalisa learnt to accept 
her body and in fact used social media to connect 
with other plus-size women who are body positive. 
She empowered herself through social media 
networks and today is a strong advocate for body 
positivity. She has also reclaimed her online space 
and now proudly shares full photos of herself, which 
consequently devalues and defuses the insults hurled 
by her harassers. 
Maimuna Zikri, a Malaysian working abroad, wanted 
to be more visible about her life as a queer woman 
and ended up paying a steep price for it. Maimuma 
is for the time being in a long-distance relationship 
with her partner and children. She is open about her 
sexuality and relationship on Twitter, so it felt natural 
for her to share news of her marriage on the platform. 
Unfortunately, the announcement and photo updates 
of their wedding, which took place overseas, 
attracted a lot of attention back home in Malaysia’s 
Twittersphere. While she did not receive any threats, 
Maimuna said many felt the need to flood her with 
their unsolicited “advice” on how to be a proper 
Muslim. Both Maimuna and her partner are Muslims 
and the wedding photos clearly showed her partner 
in a hijab . Some people said they “memalukan Islam  
(embarrass Islam)” and one commenter remarked, 
“Kau lesbian tu satu hal la, tapi kenapa pakai tudung 
(It’s one thing that you’re lesbian, but why do you 
have to wear the hijab )?”
Uncharacteristically, Maimuna was the only 
respondent who encountered comments where 
harassers objected to a Muslim woman wearing a 
hijab , and it is because the woman was in a same-sex 
marriage. In retrospect, she said the reactions would 
have been slightly different if she had not shared the 
photos. “It was the photos that got people riled up. If 
neither of us wore the hijab , it would still have been 
controversial, but not vicious,” she said. She believes VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      37that people were angry because her partner, who 
had made the “right” decision to don the hijab , had 
also made the “grave mistake” of living a queer life. 
For Maimuna, it was an important event in her life 
which she wanted to celebrate openly on her Twitter 
account. She thought, “Okay, orang lain kahwin pun 
share gambar  (when other people get married, they 
share their wedding photos). Is it a big deal if I shared 
my photos too?” Maimuna found out the hard way. 
With a tinge of regret, she said the photos could 
have been taken more discreetly as not to show her 
partner’s hijab . 
“I still have conflicting opinions about it,” she said, 
“because on the one hand I don’t like my privacy 
infringed and having strangers give their unsolicited 
opinions about me. But at the same time, I also feel 
it should not be a big deal.” Things became more 
complicated when her colleagues in Malaysia saw 
the wedding photos and shared it with others in the 
Malaysian office. Maimuna said she was “out” with 
some of her colleagues, but not yet with others. 
The circulation of her photos among colleagues 
made her feel as though people were doing the 
coming-out for her, which was something she did 
not like. Over and above that, she worried that her 
marriage announcement may impact the status of her 
employment. After all, even though she is working 
abroad, she is working for a Malaysian company. 
And while the company itself may not have explicit 
policies about same-sex marriages, the country does. 
The incident left Maimuna feeling very anxious about 
losing her job.
Unfortunately, that was not the first or only time 
Maimuna experienced harassment. In 2014, Maimuna 
and her partner participated in an international 
photography project documenting lives of LGBT 
people. They were photographed in their home in 
Malaysia and the photo was published on a specially 
created website for the project. Maimuna said a 
Qur’anic verse framed on their wall was visible in 
the photo and it caused outrage. “Kenapa ada ayat 
Qur’an kat belakang  (Why is there a Qur’anic verse 
in the background)!” said one commenter. Maimuna 
was boggled by the reactions she received. “Macam 
biasalah, semua rumah ada ayat Qur’an  (It’s normal, 
all homes have such Qur’anic verses),” she said in 
the interview, referring to the decor of many Muslim 
homes in Malaysia. Once again, this is an example of 
people objecting to Islamic religious symbols present 
and normalised in a queer environment. “Macam 
mana orang Islam, tapi gay  (How is it that they’re 
Muslims, but gay)?” said another commenter. The 
backlash was serious, and Maimuna acted on advice of a friend and requested for the photo to be removed 
from the project’s website. 
The worst case of harassment however happened in 
2013 when Maimuna spent a week as the personality 
behind a local curated Twitter account. She was 
threatened with rape when she openly spoke about 
being a queer woman. Interestingly, the anger among 
those who were harassing her raged when she started 
to retweet their comments, making them visible to 
thousands of the account’s followers. Many who saw 
the violent comments stepped in and confronted the 
individuals. This caused Maimuna to receive even 
more violent reactions from them. When asked how 
she felt, Maimuna said, “I felt upset mostly. I deal 
with rejection on a daily basis and it affects me to a 
certain level. But it’s a different feeling when so many 
hit you at the same time.” She said, these days, she is 
mostly afraid of being physically attacked since she 
has been quite visible online.
Rihanna has similar fears. Rihanna, who is a 
transwoman, is more careful today with whom she 
communicates on social media and generally avoids 
engaging with men. She said men feel they have the 
right to send private messages to “get to know her 
better.” But when she ignored the messages, they tend 
to get upset. “There’s that power dynamic, you know. 
I’m just terrified of guys,” she added. If they identified 
her as a transwoman, she then gets harassed even 
more. Based on her experience, Rihanna said she has 
grown to fear men on social media “because they’re 
violent and the state empowers them to be so.” She 
referred to cases of transwomen in Malaysia being 
attacked by law enforcement and religious officers. 
She added, “I know I’m not Muslim, but [even non-
Muslim] transwomen do get charged and sent to 
prison where they even get raped.” While Rihanna 
presents herself as a woman on her social media, it 
is not an identity that she announces. So while she 
feels relatively free to simply be herself online, she 
is also very careful and concerned. Rihanna said she 
has multiple identities that put her at risk, such as 
being transgender, a woman, Wiccan55 and living with 
a mental health condition.
She recalled a recent case on Facebook where a 
foreigner had created a travel video about Malaysia 
depicting the country in a way Rihanna felt was 
rather stereotypical. She left a long comment on the 
video to say Malaysia is more than just its forests 
and beaches, and that it is rich with other kinds 
55 “Wicca” is a modern form of witchcraft practised as a 
religion, according to the online Oxford Dictionaries.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      38of heritage and history. As a result, Rihanna was 
attacked by fellow Malaysians. While the debate was 
going on, one person suddenly found it appropriate 
to compliment her looks by saying she is pretty. From 
there, others began to click on her profile and browse 
her past posts where Rihanna said she still had photos 
of her living as a boy. People then started to say 
things like “Oh, it’s a dude!” and words like “tranny” 
and “shemale” were used to describe her on the 
video’s comments thread. “It was triggering and I’m 
not going to lie, I cried,” said the 22-year-old. “I tried 
to ignore the things said about me and kept talking 
about the video, but people were more interested to 
say very personal stuff,” she added. 
After a few days, Rihanna decided to delete her 
Facebook account. She said she had the account 
since she was about 14 years old and there were many 
old photos of her on it. Until the incident, she did not 
mind people knowing she once lived as a boy. But 
when people on the video comments thread used 
transphobic words to insult her, Rihanna decided 
it was too daunting a task to hide her entire visual 
history and so she deleted the account entirely. 
Unfortunately, the incident was also not the first 
time she experienced harassment. As a teenager 
who experienced violence at home, she took to 
social media for relief and to unload her emotions. 
However, her actions were met with condemnation by 
many who felt she should not speak ill of her family 
on such a public platform. So, for Rihanna, online 
violence is a lived reality whether living as a boy or 
as a young woman.
One respondent however, has gone out of her 
way to ensure her visibility is contained within a 
carefully selected network of friends. Venita does 
not even use her real name on social media. She is 
quite concerned about being stalked by unknown 
men even though she has never experienced it 
before. Additionally, as someone who does a lot of 
community work, Venita, who is Temuan, also feels 
having an online nickname helps protect her from 
politically motivated surveillance. Having put in so 
much care in shaping her social network, she felt 
more comfortable posting regular updates about her 
activities. However, concerning one particular photo 
of her doing a community project, Venita received 
private messages from a particular Facebook friend 
who criticised her for her involvement in Orang Asli 
community work.
She described the frequency of messages coming 
in as “bertubi-tubi”  (one after the another), all 
expressing disapproval of her activism. One message said, “Belajar tinggi-tinggi tak guna kalau kerja hanya 
jadi aktivis  (There is no point of having a higher 
education if you’re just going to be an activist).” 
Other messages were not so civil, she said. Venita said 
he also used “very harsh language” in his criticism. 
It came to a point where she could no longer take 
his bombardment, and so she blocked him. But the 
24-year-old then realised that they had many mutual 
friends on their network and she felt insecure that 
perhaps they might be surveilling her Facebook 
page on his behalf. Not too long after the incident, 
Venita decided to deactivate her account. That was 
the first time she experienced harassment on social 
media, which transpired via private direct messaging 
on Facebook. Asked how she felt about the incident, 
Venita said she felt disappointed as she hoped Orang 
Asli youth would support community actions but 
instead she discovered not only were some of them 
unsupportive, but would even resort to aggression. 
The cases above show how the visibility of women’s 
physicality on social media can also lead to bullying 
and harassment. On the one hand, there are cases 
where photos shared in good faith are used as 
material to perpetuate vicious attacks. And then there 
are photos shared privately which are then brought 
into a more public sphere to defame and insult. In 
other cases, even the visibility of a profile photo can 
lead to other visual histories that are then used for 
abuse. Women are objectified and their personal lives 
are judged based on what people literally see of them. 
In all of the cases above, the women are made to 
feel vulnerable and ostracised for being themselves. 
These are not “scandalous” photos, rather photos of 
women simply living their lives—whether at a party, 
a community event or at their own wedding.
VICIOUS TACTICS TO SILENCE 
WOMEN
There is no set definition for technology-related 
bullying and harassment, but both are generally 
understood to mean the same thing. Bullying is usually 
applied in cases between minors, while harassment 
is applied when it involves adults. It typically refers 
to the willful use of information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) for repeated “attempts to target 
a specific person by directly contacting them, or 
indirectly using or disseminating their personal 
information, causing them distress, fear or anger.” 
The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) for England 
and Wales also recognises “collective harassment,” to 
mean harassment directed at members of a particular VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      39group, including groups of a specific identity such 
as ethnicity, sexuality, disability or those engaged 
in a specific trade or profession. By this definition, 
it can be said that the earlier mentioned case of Siti 
encountering racist comments about the Orang Asli is 
a form of collective harassment. While the comments 
were not directed at her, they are about Orang Asli 
people—of which she is one—and specifically the 
Orang Asli in her neighbourhood. Naturally, Siti would 
feel affected when exposed to such comments. 
Stories collected in this study suggest that some 
members of Malaysian society have the intent to 
harm, and actively pursue this path. Whether the 
same people behave in the same hostile way towards 
others when it comes to face-to-face interactions 
remains questionable. Distinction has to be drawn 
between the primary perpetrator(s) and secondary 
perpetrators:
Firstly, the person initiating the violence, 
namely the author, or the person who first 
uploads the offending data or images. 
This is the primary perpetrator. Secondly, 
the person who purposefully, recklessly 
or negligently downloads, forwards, or 
shares the offending data or images.56  
In most of the cases, the bullying and harassment 
started with one or a group of primary perpetrators 
who generated the offending data or image. In 
Rihanna’s case where she was hurled all sorts of 
transphobic terms, the harassers did intend to hurt 
her. It was a misogynistic attack on her identity as a 
transwoman. Likewise, the case of Yvonne Lam, who 
was targeted by members and friends of the blog 
she called-out for their sexist article, and Daphne 
Iking, when she was going through a very public 
divorce. Daphne, Maryam Lee and Maimuna Zikri’s 
harassers opposed their lifestyle as Muslims and 
intended for the women to know about it. Similarly, 
Venita’s harasser opposed her community work and 
wanted her to know his views by flooding her with 
criticism via private messaging. The attack on Idora 
on the Orang Asli Facebook community group was 
also deliberate to paint her as an outcast. In the cases 
of Nalisa Alia Amin, Shida Amal, and Yara Khoo, the 
intent was undeniable. People organised themselves 
and executed what appeared to be well thought-out 
attacks on the women. 
56 “Due diligence and accountability for online violence against 
women”, Association for Progressive Communications , 
accessed August 2, 2017, https:/ /www.apc.org/sites/default/
files/DueDiligenceAndAccountabilityForOnlineVAW.pdf.What about the individual cases of Faye and 
Leslie who felt harassed by fellow queer women 
in wanting to protect a third party already at risk? 
This study finds that the repeated engagement 
with Faye and Leslie in a hostile manner in order to 
achieve a particular outcome, or win an argument, 
indicates intention to harass. Based on the women’s 
accounts of their experiences, not only were they 
outnumbered, the situation also would not have 
subsided unless they themselves retreated. The 
same can be said of the “well-intended” people who 
harassed Daphne, Maimuna and Maryam with their 
unsolicited “advice” on how Muslim women should 
behave, present themselves and live their lives. Some 
of the harassers clearly felt religiously and morally 
obliged to impart their advice in order to “save” 
the women, lending to the larger inclinations of a 
patriarchal society that seek to “rescue” and “protect” 
women while simultaneously discouraging their self-
empowerment and self-determination.
The bullying and harassment were then amplified by 
the secondary perpetrators who do not generate or 
produce any content, but took part by re-tweeting, 
downloading, forwarding, liking, sharing – all of 
which intensified the traumatic experience for the 
women. In these cases, intent, or more specifically, 
lack of intent, can be a challenge in holding secondary 
perpetrators accountable. Still, the legal system has 
long established that a person can be held liable 
despite the lack of intent to perpetrate harm. For 
instance, in the civil realm, the tort of negligence 
requires a person to exercise reasonable standard of 
care for the safety and wellbeing of those around you. 
A person who is negligent, who does not have the 
intention to deliberately cause harm, is responsible 
nonetheless because his or her careless actions result 
in harm for someone. Ignorance of the identity of 
the women or the malicious intention to cause harm, 
does not make the pain any less real or the negative 
experience any more bearable for the women. It is not 
unreasonable to expect that we exercise sensibility 
and due standard of care towards one another.
The study also identifies two ways the women were 
harassed. The first is by individuals acting on their 
own accord without conscious coordination with 
others. Based on their interviews, most of the women 
were harassed in this manner. The second is organised 
harassment. Nalisa, Shida, Maryam and Yara were four 
respondents who were attacked in a coordinated 
manner by a group of people. The women were also 
aware of the coordinated attacks on them. In Yara’s 
case, she believes that the cybertroopers were acting 
on behalf of the ruling party in government. She VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      40also believes that cybertroopers on social media are 
salaried to target people like her.
Some of the harassers are likely to be guilty of 
stalking. The cases of organised harassment would 
have required a considerable amount of stalking in 
order for the women to be attacked the way they 
were. In the case of Nalisa for example, her harassers 
would have had to stalk others in her close social 
networks in order to have access to the photo of 
her at the party. The nature of social media where 
people’s interactions and relationships can be linked, 
captured and traced, facilitates stalking activities. 
Stalking, however, is not an activity that is always 
visible to the women being stalked, and for most of 
these women who already have very visible footprints 
online, it may well be too difficult and too late to 
remove these traces except to be more vigilant about 
what they share online and with whom, or to increase 
their visibility even further. 
Most of the bullying and harassment cases in this 
study occurred on comments threads, either on the 
women’s posts or on others. These threads could be 
linked to a text, photo or video post. Only few received 
harassment via private messaging. Comments 
made on threads are more visible to others, which 
could encourage more people to participate in the 
harassment. Participation may not necessarily be in 
the form of comments but “gestured” reactions to 
existing comments. For instance, when people ‘like’ 
someone’s comment. When there are many ‘likes’ on 
a harasser’s comment, the women in all likelihood 
will receive such responses as a reinforcement of the 
harassment. Personal information shared on a thread 
also means that the information becomes accessible 
to others. In Rihanna’s case, she was “outed” as a 
transwoman on a thread which led others to make 
transphobic comments about her. 
Often, the harassment dispersed onto other channels. 
For example, in Yvonne’s case where people started 
talking about her on their own pages without 
tagging her. This is also something Maryam had 
experienced. Nalisa’s harassers even came up with 
a nickname as they continued to shame her. When 
this happened, the women were not notified, unless 
someone personally informed them about it. The 
intention to harm still exists, as this can mean that 
the attacks perpetuate without any form of defence 
on behalf of the victim, and it also means that the 
victim herself is unable to defend herself, an intended 
“crippling” effect. Another way of excluding the 
target from the harassment thread was by screen 
shots. Content by the women was screen-shot and then shared separately with the harassers’ own 
comments attached.
Another tactic is the acquisition and publication of 
photos without the women’s consent. Idora, Nalisa 
and Shida are among those whose photos were 
shared without their consent. Idora’s photo was 
taken from her Facebook account by someone in 
her network and then republished in a group by the 
same perpetrator. Nalisa’s photo was acquired from 
an account belonging to someone in her network 
and then shared publicly by the group of harassers. 
Shida was betrayed by her own friend who provided 
the group of harassers with private photos of her. 
Numbers matter. The more friends or followers a 
person has, the more visible the post becomes. 
The way visibility works may differ on Facebook, 
Instagram and Twitter—the most cited social media 
in this study. Facebook, for example, employs an 
algorithm system that prioritises popular content 
over others. The more people engage with a 
particular type of content or post, the more Facebook 
will promote it in the News Feed.57 On Twitter, a 
person who is tagged on a tweet may be made visible 
even to those who are not following her. Similarly, a 
tweet that is liked may be visible to others. Twitter, 
however, for the most part flows its content in real 
time, but this is also fast changing, with Twitter 
becoming more inclined to practices adopted by 
Facebook.58 Retweets and quote Tweets are also 
ways where harassers draw attention to the women. If 
the harassers themselves have large followings, then 
it becomes even more visible to others. 
57 “The stories that show in your News Feed are influenced 
by your connections and activity on Facebook. This helps 
you to see more stories that interest you from friends you 
interact with the most. The number of comments and likes 
a post receives and what kind of story it is (ex: photo, video, 
status update) can also make it more likely to appear in your 
News Feed.” – an excerpt from Facebook on “How News 
Feed Works”, accessed September 1, 2017, https:/ /www.
facebook.com/help/327131014036297/
58 “Twitter News’ Order”, Slate,  accessed September 1, 
2017, http:/ /www.slate.com/articles/technology/cover_
story/2017/03/twitter_s_timeline_algorithm_and_its_
effect_on_us_explained.htmlVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      41APPRAISING
REDRESSVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      42Social media has given women greater access to their 
freedom of expression and opportunities to enrich 
their lives with useful information and meaningful 
relationships. It provides visibility to women, a level 
of visibility that is not always enjoyed in the offline 
world. And where women feel isolated offline, they 
find association online. This is most clear among 
the queer women interviewed in this study. Social 
media has also enabled self-employed women to 
promote their work and make a living. At the same 
time, and to a considerable extent, social media also 
allows women to shape their own networks. They can 
choose to limit the size of their network or expand 
it to create a wider public sphere. Nevertheless, no 
matter how they try to shape their social media 
spaces and manage their interactions with others, 
the women still risk being exposed to violence, either 
as a witness to others’ experiences of violence or in 
experiencing it themselves. Both have a negative 
and lasting impact on their social media experience. 
This study has shown how having voice and visibility 
on social media can bring about some of the most 
traumatic experiences for women. The internet 
provides a fertile ground that amplifies the reach 
of bullies and harassers. While the bullying and 
harassment is transmitted digitally, they are received 
and experienced bodily with the same effect that 
anyone would have in the physical world. The 
cases also show the varied tactics employed and 
sometimes in the most deliberate and insidious ways. 
As demonstrated by some of these case studies, the 
perpetrators can be much more cruel with their words 
than in face-to-face encounters. From fat shaming to 
rape and death threats, the extreme extent of bullying 
and harassment were recounted by women in this 
study, with one having to urgently seek psychological 
help. This study shows that women, in all diversity, 
bear the brunt of Malaysia’s patriarchal interpretation 
of moral norms, culture and religion. Women who 
exercise agency and power on social media are 
deemed to have transgressed morally, culturally 
and religiously of what is touted to be appropriate 
behaviour for women and girls. 
The 2015 outcome document for Internet Governance 
Forum (IGF): Best Practice Forum on Online Abuse 
and Gender-Based Violence Against Women 
highlighted that “tensions around multiple rights 
are often raised in discussions to address abuse 
of women and gendered violence against women online.”59 Eight of the fifteen women in this study have 
either logged out for a period of time, temporarily 
deactivated or completely deleted their platform 
as a result of bullying and harassment. Two others 
had considered to do the same. Clearly, the violence 
has direct and negative impacts on their freedom 
of expression and participation online when women 
feel that they need to leave a space due to violence. 
Additionally, when women see the impunity 
with which violence is perpetrated against other 
women on social media, they may also refrain from 
expressing themselves or avoid being too visible. It is 
important to balance multiple rights, including right 
to participate in public life, freedom of expression, 
safety, bodily autonomy and privacy; and to take 
into account the context in which these rights are 
recognized and protected:
However, the fact that online abuse and 
gender-based violence acts to impede 
women’s right to freedom of expression 
by creating environments in which they 
do not feel safe to express themselves 
needs to be included in these debates. 
Many forms of online abuse, like gender-
based hate speech, for example, chill 
women’s online interaction by compelling 
them to self-censor or refrain from using 
certain platforms where they might be 
susceptible to online abuse.60 
What is extremely important to keep in mind is that 
the emotional and psychological impact on the 
women does not disappear upon exiting the platform. 
It is an experience of bodied individuals, and will 
therefore have a lasting effect on them beyond the 
internet. Shida Amal’s case of having to be admitted 
into hospital for a week is a prime example of how 
technology-related gender-based violence affects 
lives offline. Maimuna Zikri’s fear of one day being 
physically assaulted for being openly queer on social 
media is yet another example. 
59 “Internet Governance Forum (IGF) 2015: Best Practice 
Forum (BPF) on Online Abuse and Gender-Based Violence 
Against Women”, Internet Governance Forum , accessed 
August 1, 2017, http:/ /intgovforum.org/cms/documents/
best-practice-forums/623-bpf-online-abuse-and-gbv-
against-women/file.
60  “Internet Governance Forum (IGF) 2015: Best Practice 
Forum (BPF) on Online Abuse and Gender-Based Violence 
Against Women”, Internet Governance Forum , accessed 
August 1, 2017, http:/ /intgovforum.org/cms/documents/
best-practice-forums/623-bpf-online-abuse-and-gbv-
against-women/file.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      43When asked how she overcame her experience of 
being bullied and harassed through the years, Yvonne 
Lam said, “I’ve been subjected to them so many times 
that I’ve built a mechanism to forget them when they 
happen. The mechanism is defensive. Some choose 
to leave the platform, but I can’t because I do social 
media managing, so I learnt to ignore it.” This is not 
a solution. Women should not have to bear the brunt 
of attacks to begin with. They should not have to 
feel unsafe and suffer alone. And they should not 
have to teach themselves to be numb to violence, 
because violence is not normal, and should not ever 
be normalised. The respondents in this study however 
feel there is nothing much they can do other than to 
take minor actions on their side.
Platform owners
No matter how public a social media space, the 
general perception is that it is a “private space” by 
virtue of it being owned by private corporations 
within a free market system. The corporations 
therefore determine the rules of engagement and 
play a role as the arbiter of conflict. The most popular 
social media 61 among the women in this study all 
have internal reporting systems where people can 
report harassers to the platform owners for them to 
take action. However, the standards differ between 
the platforms. All the women interviewed are aware 
of this internal reporting mechanism but few actually 
use it to report harassers. Instead, the women 
“unfriend” or block them. This however does not 
solve their problem because mutual connections may 
allow the harasser to still gain access to the women 
or view their content. Blocking is only effective when 
they do not have mutual contacts. Daphne Iking was 
the only respondent who feels confident that her 
reports to platform owners bear results, although 
she is unsure if any action was actually taken by the 
platform owners. 
In 2015, Facebook’s Community Operations team 
spoke to The Independent, a United Kingdom-based 
online newspaper, on how much they have improved 
in managing abuse on platform and went out of 
their way to disclose that each report is reviewed 
by a human being, and not a computer system 
as many believed. A media exposé of Facebook’s 
internal guidelines this year, however, reveal a lack 
of understanding on the experiences of people who 
face violence. A total of 23 civil society and activists 
61 Facebook, Twitter and Instagramfrom different part of the world responded to the 
exposé as follows: 
The details of Facebook’s content 
moderation corroborate precisely what 
women – be they cishet, LGTBQI – and 
gender-nonconforming people tell 
us they experience on the platform. 
Abuse, particularly nonconsensual image 
sharing, is rampant, and reports are 
often rejected with an explanation that 
the abuse did not violate Facebook’s 
community guidelines even though 
these leaked documents show they are 
clear violations. For many users, this 
is tantamount to being told the abuse 
experienced did not take place.62
The same concerns apply to other social media 
including Instagram, which Facebook owns, and 
Twitter. The respondents of this study who do report 
harassers on Twitter do so as a matter of principle and 
action. As Rihanna said in her interview, “every small 
action counts.” But Rihanna herself does not think 
enough is done by the platform owner to stop the 
harassers. There are also concerns that only certain 
offending posts are asked to be removed, which does 
not quite end the harassment itself. Posts in local or 
colloquial language may also escape the censors. 
Some of the women said bullies and harassers should 
be removed from the platform completely. 
Law enforcement and 
government agencies 
Daphne was the only respondent whose report to 
government agencies resulted in action. However, the 
case concerned a Malaysian blog that contained child 
pornography, and had no relation to the harassment 
she had personally faced. Despite the fact that such 
a blog violate the rights of the child, and Malaysia 
has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child (CRC), Daphne had to go through a “tedious” 
process with the Malaysian Communications and 
Multimedia Commission (MCMC) which finally led 
to the blog being taken down. Daphne’s experience 
points to how difficult it is to address human rights 
62 “Joint Statement on Facebook Internal Guidelines for 
Content Moderation”, Take Back the Tech , accessed 
September 6, 2017, https:/ /www.takebackthetech.net/
news/joint-statement-facebooks-internal-guidelines-
content-moderationVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      44violations online even though it affects the well-being 
of children, universally accepted as morally wrong. 
Shida’s experience with law enforcers was the total 
opposite. Shida went to the police when she received 
a comment on social media that said, “Shida ni patut 
kena rogol je  (Shida should just be raped).” Instead 
of investigating the case and taking action against 
the threat, the police told her there was nothing they 
could do. They said if she was bothered by the threat, 
she should delete her account. 
Besides Daphne and Shida, the other women have 
never taken their cases to law enforcement or 
government agencies. Stories from others who seek 
help from state agencies on matters concerning 
gender-based violence, whether it is online or offline, 
have caused women in Malaysia to feel discouraged 
from doing the same. Like Shida, women are often 
turned away, causing them to feel that the state 
will not protect them from harm. This is especially 
so if the incident is a “mere” threat on the elusive, 
not-real space called the internet.  There may also 
be the arguably faulty perception by law enforcers 
and government agencies that the threat or danger 
is not imminent.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      45RECOMMENDATIONSVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      46Malaysian laws are far from adequate to protect 
women from all the various forms of violence. In 
some cases, the laws do not even exist. In others, 
the burden is upon women to prove that they have 
been harmed, with “harm” and the “extent of harm” 
likely interpreted on the basis of still inadequate 
laws in Malaysia. What can worsen the situation 
for women is that some judges may adopt a sexist 
and patriarchal lens when it comes to women’s 
testimonies and voices. A study by Women’s Centre 
for Change (WCC) reveals that the “culture of 
skepticism” is still present in the Malaysia’s criminal 
justice system, where “victims [of sexual assault and 
rape] can be viewed with suspicion at any juncture 
of the criminal justice system. In the courtroom, the 
centre of attention is again on the victim’s credibility, 
and the defence arguments are likely to focus on 
reasons why this credibility should be questioned.”63  
Where might Nalisa Alia Amin and Shida Amal find 
justice for the fat-shaming public torment they 
faced, when the dominant narrative in pop culture 
normalises “pretty skinny” as the standard of 
beauty? Or Rihanna, for the transphobic comments 
she received, like getting called a “shemale”, when 
Malaysian laws and the larger society adopts a binary 
understanding of sex and gender? In fact, Rihanna 
risks being dragged to the Islamic religious court 
for being transwoman, and in effect, does not enjoy 
“equality before the law”, a constitutional guarantee 
for all Malaysians. Furthermore, making bullies and 
harassers accountable for their harmful behaviour can 
be extremely difficult when accounts can be easily 
deleted, or when they claim that their accounts have 
been hacked or when they do not use their actual 
names. 
A research by the Association for Progressive 
Communications (APC) on domestic legal redress 
for cases of technology-related violence against 
women, found that there is a culture of impunity 
within the legal system, which “raises questions of 
legitimacy and credibility around the legal system 
as an institution accountable for violations against 
women.”64 From the cases reported, mistrust and 
lack of confidence among the women towards the 
criminal justice system form the first barrier in women 
63 “Seeking A Better Judicial Process for Sexual Crimes. 
Background Paper for Dialogue with Penang Judiciary”, 
Women’s Centre for Change , acessed August 4, 2017, http:/ /
www.wccpenang.org/files/docs/Judiciary_Background_
Paper.pdf.
64 “From impunity to justice: Domestic legal remedies for 
cases of technology-related violence against women”, 
Association for Progressive Communication , accessed 
August 1, 2017, https:/ /www.genderit.org/sites/default/
upload/flow_domestic_legal_remedies.pdf. seeking legal redress. Even in cases where they do, 
instances of gender-based violence, more so when it 
happens online, are often triviliased as “not real”. The 
perception of gender-based violence as a private act 
remains prevalent, especially when it happens within 
private messages or the women’s own social network. 
To ensure effective legal redress and access to justice 
for women in all spheres of life, the government must 
first recognise gender-based violence as a form of 
targeted violence that has its roots in discriminatory 
treatment against women based on their gender. 
Government must also recognise that gender-
based violence online brings about the same, if not 
greater, harmful effect and impact on women, and 
perpetrators cannot be allowed such impunity. As a 
way forward:
Specific laws on online violence as well 
as specialised mechanisms with trained 
and skilled personnel are required to 
confront and eliminate online violence. 
However, merely criminalising online 
violence does not provide the remedy 
required by online violence victims/ 
survivors. Experience has shown that 
women’s access to justice should be a 
mix of criminal, civil and administrative 
processes and include the areas of 
all the 5 P’s, namely in prevention of 
online violence, protection of victims/
survivors, prosecution and punishment 
of perpetrators and provision of redress 
and reparation for the victims/survivors.65 
The government and lawmakers should consult with 
relevant civil society groups to ensure existing and 
proposed laws are in accordance with international 
human rights standards, to ensure, among other 
things, women’s freedom of expression and 
participation online. This should also be the spirit in 
which laws are then read and implemented by the 
judiciary.
That said, as it stands, the women interviewed in 
this study may not even be able to afford pursuing a 
legal case against their harassers. This is thus another 
aspect of justice to consider; that justice is expensive. 
Economic consideration poses a significant barrier 
to women’s access to justice. Getting access to a 
65 “Due diligence and accountability for online violence against 
women”, Association for Progressive Communications, 
accessed August 2, 2017, https:/ /www.apc.org/sites/default/
files/DueDiligenceAndAccountabilityForOnlineVAW.pdf.VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      47legal representative and to the court, which are often 
located in the capital or larger cities, are costly. The 
time taken to travel and to go through the long and 
extensive litigation process translates to loss of work 
opportunities and income for these women. Even 
with women who are financially stable, it should not 
be assumed that they would be able to afford access 
to justice. The court processes are often tedious, 
time-consuming and costly to pursue. There is also 
an inherent risk of “losing the case” and hence having 
to bear the legal cost of the other party. While the 
domestic legal system needs reform to uphold and 
protect women’s human rights online, efforts must 
also be channeled into making avenues for legal 
recourse more accessible and affordable to women. 
This effort should be regarded as a holistic approach 
towards upholding and protecting women’s human 
rights in Malaysia.
Social media platform providers are increasingly 
taking a more proactive role in mediating content 
hosted on their platforms. The most viable and 
immediate remedy for women’s grievances on social 
media lies with platform owners who are responsible 
for the very space they provide for people to engage 
with one another. The platform owners are placed in 
a unique situation where they have the capacity to 
moderate content, rendering it more cost-effective 
to seek redress from them, i.e. request to remove 
a certain violating material. Platform owners must 
immediately update their community operations 
protocols and standards to comply with human rights 
standards and recognise gender-based violence as a 
form of violence that occur on their platforms on a 
daily basis. Reports of bullying and harassment must 
be prioritised for strict and swift action. And in cases 
where the removal of selected posts does not resolve 
the problem of harassment, platform owners must 
recognise that harassment involves repeated actions 
against a target and consider account termination 
as a remedy. 
All the major platform owners are made aware of 
recommendations by women’s human rights groups 
from all over the world when they participate in 
dialogues such as the Internet Governance Forum 
(IGF) and Global Network Initiative (GNI). These 
are important conversations and must be continued 
and expanded to include more women from diverse 
backgrounds, especially women who faced multiple 
forms of discrimination. Women are the most active 
social media users and platform owners owe it to 
them to make social media spaces safe from violence. 
It is, however, not enough for platform owners 
alone to secure this safe environment. Other private sector technology actors must also play their part as 
stakeholders that makeup the online communications 
ecosystem. This includes telecommunication 
companies and internet service providers. 
The government, working closely with the private 
sector and civil society, must look to forming a long-
term plan to shape a Malaysian online citizenry that 
is respectful of human rights. It is time for Malaysia 
to have rights-based digital literacy programmes 
in schools as information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) have become an integral part of 
young people’s lives. The curriculum must go beyond 
teaching technical skills to educating young people 
that girls too must be able to participate in society 
and make life choices using technology without 
fear of violence. It is also crucial that content in the 
curriculum directly addresses issues of bullying and 
harassment in Malaysia, including that experienced 
by transgenders and other marginalized groups.
Finally, the Malaysian government should consider 
that being online is a public good as this relates to 
access to information and knowledge, and should be 
provided at minimal cost to all. 
The most difficult issue to tackle is the problem that 
many women in this study face, that is the imposition 
of religious morality on their lives. This is a problem 
that the Malaysian government cannot afford to shy 
away from, and can only be resolved with political 
will. For as long as the country’s ruling party and 
its contenders use religion as a vehicle to advance 
their political agenda, people’s lives will continue 
to be impacted and women, Muslim and others, 
will continue to face violence on the internet while 
perpetrators continue to enjoy their impunity. Civil 
society must therefore demand the government and 
political parties to end the politicisation of religion in 
Malaysia as its effects are felt in all aspects of every 
day life. VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      48VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      49BIBLIOGRAPHYVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      501.  “APC Statement to the CSW 57th Session:     
  Violence against women and information and  
  communications technology.” GenderITorg.  
  https:/ /www.genderit.org/resources/apc-  
  statement-csw-57th-session-violence-against-  
  women-and-information-and     
  communications-t. 
2.  A.R., Zurairi. 2016. “Why ‘creeping Islamisation’  
  is no joke.” Malay Mail Online. http:/ /www.  
  themalaymailonline.com/opinion/zurairi-ar  
  /article/why-creeping-islamisation-is-no-joke.
3.  “Are fake Instagram influencers deceiving  
  brands?” Mediakix. https:/ /www.mediakix.com/  
  2017/08/fake-instagram-influencers-followers-  
  bots-study/#gs.XzC1fYE.
4.  Asri, Aedi. 2017. “Organiser defends ‘Gay  
  Iftar’ breaking of fast event.” Free Malaysia  
  Today. http:/ /www.freemalaysiatoday.com/  
  category/nation/2017/06/15/sponsor-defends-  
  gay-iftar-breaking-of-fast-event/.
5.  Becker, Mary. Patriarchy and Inequality:  
  Towards a Substantive Feminism. University of  
   Chicago Legal Forum: Vol. 1999: Iss. 1, Article 3.
6.  Bedi, Rashvinjeet S. 2015. “Radio station  
  removes hudud video after presenter  
  threatened.” The Star Online. March  
  20, 2015. http:/ /www.thestar.com.my/news/  
  nation/2015/03/20/bfm-radio-presenter-  
  aisyah-tajuddin-threatened-over-hudud-  
  video/.
7.  Bobo, Lord. 2014. “Ask Lord Bobo: What To  
  Get Your Man For Christmas.” Loyar Burok.  
  https:/ /www.loyarburok.com/2014/02/04/  
  asklordbobo-christmas/.
8.  Camarasa, Mar, and Daniela Heim. 2007.  
  “Theoretical and methodological framework,”  
  in Gender Violence Effects Indicators.  
  www.surt.org/gvei/docs/theoretical_and_  
  methodological_framework.pdf
9.  Casey, Sean. 2017. “2016 Nielsen social media  
  report.” Nielsen. http:/ /www.nielsen.com/us/  
  en/insights/reports/2017/2016-nielsen-social-  
  media-report.html.
10.  Charyk, Joseph V. 1985. “Introduction  
  to Information Technologies and Social    Transformation, by National Academy  
  of Engineering. Washington, D.C.: National  
  Academy Press. https:/ /books.google.  
  com.my/books?id=0Z-EsR8lU-oC&pg=PA  
  43&dq=%22+little+brother%22+orwell&hl=e  
  n&sa=X&ei=ZuaeUdC_  
  No3OigKrwYGQDg&redir_  
  esc=y#v=onepage&q=little%20brother&f=false
11.  Cheng, Nicholas, and Terence Toh. 2011.  
  “Yale-bound but still stung by mean M’sians.”  
  The Star Online. http:/ /www.thestar.com.my/  
  news/nation/2017/05/01/yalebound-but-still-  
  stung-by-mean-msians-negativity-to-be-a-  
  driving-force-in-arts-degree/.
12.  Chris, Green. 2015. “What happens when you  
  ‘report abuse’? The secretive Facebook  
  censors that decide what is—and what isn’t  
  abuse.” The Independent. http:/ /www.  
  independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-  
  tech/features/what-happens-when-you-  
  report-abuse-the-secretive-facebook-censors-  
  who-decide-what-is-and-what-isnt-10045437.  
  html.
13.  Christensson, Per. 2013. “Social Media  
  Definition.” TechTerms. http:/ /www.techterms.  
  com/definition/social_media.
14.  “Definition of ‘Gender Spectrum’” The Queer  
  Dictionary. http:/ /queerdictionary.blogspot.  
  my/2014/09/definition-of-gender-spectrum.  
  html. 
15.  “Due diligence and accountability  
  for online violence against women.”  
  Association for Progressive Communications.  
  https:/ /www.apc.org/sites/default/files/  
  DueDiligenceAndAccountabilityForOnlineVAW.  
  pdf.
16.  EMPOWER. Status of freedom of expression  
  online. Petaling Jaya: EMPOWER, 2015.
17.   “End violence: Women’s rights and  
  safety online” Association for Progressive  
  Communications. https:/ /www.genderit.org/  
  sites/default/upload/domestic_legal_  
  remedies_for_technology-related_violence_  
  against_women_review_of_related_studies_  
  and_literature.pdfVOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      5118.  “EPP 7: Ensuring Broadband for All.”  
  Performance Management And Delivery  
  Unit. http:/ /www.etp.pemandu.gov.my/  
  Communications,_Content_-%E2%97%98-_  
  Infrastructure-@-Communications_Content_  
  and_Infrastructure_-_EPP_7-;_Ensuring_  
  Broadband_for_All.aspx.
19.  Forer, Laura. 2017. “The Lowdown on Social  
  Media Influencers,” MarketingProfs. https:/ /  
  www.marketingprofs.com/chirp/2017/31547/  
  the-lowdown-on-social-media-influencers-  
  infographic.
20.  “Feminist Principles of the Internet-Version  
  2.0.” Association for Progressive  
  Communications.  https:/ /www.apc.org/en/  
  pubs/feminist-principles-internet-version-20.
21.  Hampton, Keith, Lauren Sessions Goulet,  
  Kristen Purcell, and Lee Rainie. 2011. “Social  
  networking sites and our lives.” Pew Research  
  Center. http:/ /www.pewinternet.  
  org/2011/06/16/social-networking-sites-and-  
  our-lives/.
22.  “History.” Malaysian Communications and  
  Multimedia Commission. https/ /www.mcmc.  
  gov.my/about-us/history.
23.  Holmes, Mary. 2007. What is gender?:  
  Sociological approaches. Patriarchy and  
  Inequality: Towards a Substantive Feminism.  
  London: Sage Publications Ltd.
24. “ Internet Governance Forum (IGF) 2015:  
  Best Practice Forum (BPF) on Online Abuse  
  and Gender-Based Violence Against Women.”  
  Internet Governance Forum. http:/ /  
  intgovforum.org/cms/documents/best-  
  practice-forums/623-bpf-online-abuse-and-  
  gbv-against-women/file.
25.  Järviluoma, Heli, Pirkko Moisala, and Anni  
  Vilkko. 2003. Gender qualitative methods.  
  London: Sage Publications Ltd.
26.   “Joint Statement on Facebook Internal  
  Guidelines for Content Moderation.” Take Back  
  the Tech. https:/ /www.takebackthetech.  
  net/news/joint-statement-facebooks-internal-  
  guidelines-content-moderation
27.  Julie Bolcer, “Malaysia: Gay characters OK, if  
  they go straight,” Advocate.com,    March 22, 2010. https:/ /web.archive.org/  
  web/20100324190945/http:/ /www.advocate.  
  com/Arts_and_Entertainment/Entertainment_  
  News/Malaysia_Gay_Film_Characters_OK,_If_  
  They_Go_Straight/
28.  Khalila, Anis. “Perarakan #WomensMarchKL  
  Dikecam Orang Ramai Dan Dikatakan  
  Mengikut Budaya Barat.” Says.com. March 14,  
  2017. http:/ /says.com/my/seismik/sempena-  
  hari-wanita-sedunia.
29.  Khoo, Verinia. “Women’s March KL receives  
  backlash, some Malaysians think it’s a Western  
  trend.” Elle Malaysia. March 13, 2017. http:/ /  
  www.elle.my/life-and-love/News/Womens-  
  March-KL-receives-backlash-Malaysians-think-  
  its-a-Western-trend.
30.  Ma, Alexandra. 2016. “How To Make Money  
  On Instagram,” HuffingtonPost. http:/ /www.  
  huffingtonpost.com/entry/make-money-on-  
  instagram_us_55ad3ad6e4b0caf721b3624c.
31.  Madrigal, Alexis C. 2012. “Dark Social: We  
  Have the Whole History of the Web Wrong.”  
  The Atlantic. https:/ /www.theatlantic.com/  
  technology/archive/2012/10/dark-social-  
  we-have-the-whole-history-of-the-web-  
  wrong/263523/.
32.  Malaysian Communications and Multimedia  
  Commission. 2016. Internet users survey  
  2016: Statistical brief number twenty.  
  Cyberjaya: Malaysian Communications and  
  Multimedia Commission. https:/ /www.mcmc.  
  gov.my/skmmgovmy/media/General/pdf/  
  IUS2016.pdf.
33.  Malaysian Digital Association. “2016 Malaysia  
  digital landscape: Exploring the digital  
  landscape in Malaysia—Boosting growth  
  for a digital economy” (presented at the  
  Digital Integration & Business Transformation  
  Asia Conference, Kuala Lumpur, August 3–4,  
  2016). http:/ /www.malaysiandigitalassociation.  
  org.my/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/  
  Malaysia-Digital-Landscape-August-2016.pdf. 
34.  “Malaysian Internet users amongst the most  
  socially engaged in the world.” Kantar TNS.  
  https:/ /www.mcmc.gov.my/skmmgovmy/  
  media/General/pdf/IUS2016.pdf. VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      5235.  MIMOS Berhad. 2014. National internet of  
  Things (IoT) Strategic Roadmap: A Summary.  
  Kuala Lumpur: MIMOS Berhad. http:/ /www.  
  mimos.my/iot/National_IoT_Strategic_  
  Roadmap_Book.pdf.
36.  Mohd Yusof, Mohd Fahmi. 2016. “Lelaki ditahan  
  hantar mesej bergambar jelik hina PM.” Berita  
  Harian. https:/ /www.bharian.com.my/  
  node/170726.
37.  “Online Harassment & Cyberstalking.” Privacy  
  Rights Clearinghouse. https:/ /www.  
  privacyrights.org/printpdf/67531. 
38.  Phillips, Gregory John. Culturally Relevant  
  Cyberbullying Prevention. PhD. thesis,  
  University of California, 2017.
39.  Phneah, Jeraldine. 2017. “3 Important  
  Updates To Facebook Algorithm in  
  January 2017.” Socialbakers. https:/ /www.  
  facebook.com/notes/socialbakers/3-  
  important-updates-to-facebook-algorithm-in-  
  january-2017/10155032524044744/. 
40.  Rakaw, Lana R., and Laura A. Wakwitz, ed.  
  2005. Feminist communication theory:  
  Selections in context. London: Sage  
  Publications.
41.  Reinharz, Shulamit. 1992. Feminist methods in  
  social research. New York: Oxford University  
  Press.
42.  “Seeking A Better Judicial Process for Sexual  
  Crimes. Background Paper for Dialogue with  
  Penang Judiciary.” Women’s Centre for  
  Change. http:/ /www.wccpenang.org/files/  
  docs/Judiciary_Background_Paper.pdf.
43.  Shah, Mohd Farhaan. 2015. “Johor princess  
  quits Instagram.” The Star Online. http:/ /  
  www.thestar.com.my/news/nation/2015/10/01/  
  johor-princess-quits-instagram-negative-  
  tudung-remarks-prompt-move/. 
44.  Shukman, Harry. 2017. “This first generation  
  immigrant just got into all eight Ivies.” The Tab.  
  https:/ /thetab.com/us/2017/03/31/got-into-all-  
  ivies-64085.
45.  “Sorry, Malaysia - You Don’t Get To Be Proud  
  Of Cassandra Hsiao’s Success.” Reddit. https:/ /  
  www.reddit.com/r/malaysia/    comments/64hufh/sorry_malaysia_you_dont_  
  get_to_be_proud_of/.
46. “ Stalking and Harassment.” The Crown  
  Prosecution Service. http:/ /www.cps.gov.uk/  
  legal/s_to_u/stalking_and_harassment/#a02a. 
47.  Suara Rakyat Malaysia. 2016. Human  
  rights report Malaysia 2016 overview: Civil  
  and political rights. Petaling Jaya: SUARAM.  
  https:/ /www.suaram.net/wordpress/wp-  
  content/uploads/2016/12/Overview-2016-  
  Digital-Edition.pdf.
48.  Suryadinata, Leo. 2017. “‘Islamization of  
  Politics’ in Indonesia and Malaysia?: A  
  Commentary by Leo Suryadinata.” ISEAS-Yusof  
  Ishak Institute. https:/ /www.iseas.edu.sg/  
  medias/commentaries/item/4721-islamization-  
  of-politics-in-indonesia-and-malaysia-a-  
  commentary-by-leo-suryadinata.
49.  Tashny Sukumaran, “No to ‘sissy’ boot  
  camp,” Free Malaysia Today. April 20, 2011.  
  http:/ /www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/  
  nation/2011/04/20/no-to-sissy-boot-camp/
50.  “The online world is inseparable from  
  the  ‘real’ world.” Teaching Privacy. http:/ /www.  
  teachingprivacy.org/online-is-real.
51.  “Twitter News’ Order.” Slate. http:/ /www.slate.  
  com/articles/technology/cover_story/2017/03/  
  twitter_s_timeline_algorithm_and_its_effect_  
  on_us_explained.html
52.  United Nations, General Assembly. Declaration  
  on the elimination of violence against women.  
  December 1993. A/RES/48/104. http:/ /www.  
  un.org/documents/ga/res/48/a48r104.htm.
53.  United Nations, Human Rights Council. 32/…  
  The promotion, protection and enjoyment  
  of human rights on the Internet. June 2016.  
  A/HRC/32/L.20. http:/ /www.un.org/ga/search/  
  view_doc.asp?symbol=A/HRC/32/L.20.
54.  United Nations, Human Rights Committee.  
  General comment No. 34. September 2011.  
  CCPR/C/GC/34. http:/ /www2.ohchr.org/  
  english/bodies/hrc/docs/gc34.pdf. 
55.  United Nations, Human Rights Council. Report  
  of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion  
  and protection of the right to freedom of  VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      53  opinion and expression, Frank La Rue. May  
  2011. A/HRC/17/27. http:/ /www2.ohchr.org/  
  english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/17session/A.  
  HRC.17.27_en.pdf.
56.  “What is Cyber Harassment: Dealing with  
  Unwanted Attention.” NoBullying.com. Last  
  modified December 22, 2015. https:/ /  
  nobullying.com/what-is-cyber-harassment/. 
57.  “Why has Malaysia blocked Medium?”  
  Engadget. https:/ /www.engadget.  
  com/2016/01/28/malaysia-medium-block-  
  explainer.
58.  Zainah Anwar, “Into the future—together,”  
  The Star Online, February 5, 2017.  http:/ /  
  www.thestar.com.my/opinion/columnists/  
  sharing-the-nation/2017/02/05/into-the-  
  future-together-new-developments-in-  
  malaysia-amid-the-current-madness-in-the-  
  world-show-th/VOICE, VISIBILITY AND A VARIETY OF VICIOUSNESS   A MALAYSIAN STUDY OF WOMEN’S LIVED REALITIES ON SOCIAL MEDIA      54
LOGO                      
FULL BLACK REVERSE WHITEFULL colour
